# language_name_wals:	Persian
# language_name_glotto:	Western Farsi
# iso639_3:	pes
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2016
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	non-fiction
# genre_narrow:	prepared_speeches
# writing_system:	Arab
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	OpenSubtitles2018
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-OpenSubtitles/v2018/raw/fa.zip
# copyright_short:	http://www.opensubtitles.org/
# copyright_long:	http://www.opensubtitles.org/ P. Lison and J. Tiedemann, 2016, OpenSubtitles2016: Extracting Large Parallel Corpora from Movie and TV Subtitles. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2016)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

[Tearing, growl] (پارگی تصویر، صدای خرناس کشیدن)
[Snarl] (دندان قروچه کردن و خشمگین ساختن)
[Growl] (صدای خرناس کشیدن)
[Clang] (صدای بهم خوردن)
[Electronic distortion] (صدای نامفهموم الکترونیکی)
Ah!

اگه حتی محبت مادر و فرزندی از بین بره، تو نور به سمت آب انبار دنبال کن و آب های زندگی پس از مرگ را بنوش.

دریاچه ترس آور
Well...

Here we are.

It's not perfect, عالی نیست،
but what a deal, right?

Lots of potential.

[Door creaks, slams] (صدای لولای روغن نخورده ی در ، محکم به هم زدن)
[Glass shatters] (صدای شکسته شدن شیشه)
I know this is your house, now, hon, من می دونم این خونه ی توئه، اکنون، عزیزم،
but you don't have to slam the door امّا تو نباید در رو محکم به هم بزنی
and frighten me to death.

I didn't, it must've been a draft.

Really?

There shouldn't be any windows open, that's odd.

Are you all right?

Yeah, it's quite all right.

I'm sorry about the broken glass, though.

I can bring by a replacement if you need it.

Um, no...

Do you happen to know who that is in the picture?

No, I don't.

Sure was a handsome man, though, whoever he was.

Too bad we're probably 40 years too late to snag him.

- [Laughs]

I'll be right back.

I'm going to see if I can find a broom and a dustpan.

Found it.

I'm surprised to find a broom and a dustpan in this old place.

Usually, I bring my own, معمولا من برای خودمو می آرم،
but today my assistant took mine.

[Voice echoing] She always does that, (منعکس شدن صدا) اون همیشه کارشه،
then texts me to tell me that she took it.

Drama can come in any form, کُمِدی می تونه در هر شکل و فرمی اتفاق بیفته،
even in the form of a broom and a dustpan.

[Indistinct whispers] (صدای پچ پچ های نامفهوم و آهسته)
- Did you hear what I said, hon?

Oh, I guess we're even then.

Boo!

Oh, I'm just kidding, hon.

You're such a serious Sally.

Lighten up, would ya?

You need to be all loosy, goosey and free as a bird.

This is your house by the lake این خونه ی توئه کنار دریاچه.
that you said you always wanted.

Yes, it's wonderful.

Oh, look at the time.

I have an appointment in an hour, من یک کار دارم یه ساعت دیگه
so I need to get going.

Are you sure you'll be all right out here all alone?

Yes, I'll be fine.

Of course you will.

If you need anything, I left my card on the table.

Oh.

I know an honest car salesman in the next town over.

Oh, I like to walk.

Right.

Good for you.

Oh.

and a food store by the Marina, و یه غذاخوری کنار تفرج گاه ساحلی هستش
in case you get hungry.

Here are your keys.

Best wishes, hon.

Please feel free to tell your friends لطفا راحت باش به دوستات بگو
about my firm and our services in real estate, درباره ی شرکتم و خدماتمون در زمینه ی نظافت ساختمون
and I'll make sure to get the, uh... "for sale" sign و من حتما از قاب فروشی تهیه می کنم
taken down as soon as possible.

Thank you.

Okay.

"We make it worry-free." ما نگرانی رو از بین می بریم
Good grief.

Well, it's just you and me, handsome.

Let's get to work.

(Ragtime music playing) (موسیقی ضربی (نوعی موسیقی) در حال نواختن )
[Music speed slowing down] (سرعت موزیک در حال کند شدن است)
[Door creaks] (صدای در)
[Music speed playing normally] (سرعت موریک به طور معمولی در حال اجرا شدن است)
[Gasps] Oh!

Well, hello.

May I help you, little girl?

- I've lost Mr. peppers.

He's my kitten and we're getting ready to go and I can't find him.

- Have you seen him?

But I'll keep a lookout for him.

Would you like to come in and look for him yourself?

Why not?

Is it because I'm a stranger?

What is it?

[Cat meows] (میو میو کردن گربه)
[Meow] (میو میو کردن گربه)
Oh, poor little guy.

Oh, come here, little guy.

- Come on, baby.

Shh.

Here, come here.

Okay, buddy.

God.

Oh, come on, baby.

Poor little guy.

Mr. peppers!

Mr. peppers.

Here you go.

- [Meow]

Thank you very much for finding Mr. peppers.

[Whispering] You're not alone.

What?

- [Woman] Are you injured?

I cut myself on a nail, I think it'll be all right.

May I help you, dear?

Um, thank you, but I can manage it.

You know, it's not wise for a single woman تو می دونی، این برای یه زن تنها عاقلانه به نظر نمی رسه
to live out here alone on lake eerie, که اینجا کنار درجای ترس آور تنها زندگی کنه
and not associate kindly with her neighbors.

Excuse me?

I said, it's...

- to live out here alone on lake eerie.

and I'm...

I'm not used to people wanting to help me.

You know, I do apologize.

I've not been myself lately.

Uh, let's start over, shall we?

- Ooh.

Let's try the other hand.

Well, my name's Eliza.

May I come inside?

I don't even think there are bandages inside, من حتی فک نمی کنم باندی داخل وجود داشته باشه
um, the house, or not.

Eliza?

I know where he kept them.

You know where he kept them?

Harrison, and bandages.

What?

Come on.

Sit right over here, please.

Oh, okay.

Well, take off your pants too, please.

[Gasps] (صدای نفس کشیدن)
I wonder if rubbing alcohol expires.

[Sniffs]
Woo!

[Sniffs] (صدای بو کشیدن)
This has probably been here for 40 years, or so.

I'll be right back.

How did you know that was under there, Eliza?

I knew the former owner of this house...

Very well.

You did?

Was it that man in the photo there?

Yes.

That was him.

He was such a handsome young man, اون مانند یه مرد جوان خوش قیافه بود
was he not?

I have lived by this lake since I was a little girl, من کنار این دریاچه زندگی می کنم از زمانی که یه دختر کوچیک بودم
and he and I were very good friends.

His name was Harrison Perseus Lloyd.

You know, I never thought anyone would ever move back تو می دونی، من هرگز فک نمی کردم کسی هرگز برگرده
into this house again.

It's been vacant since the summer of 1969.

- [Winces]

What happened to him...

Well, he fell into a coma خُب، اون به اغما رفت
and died.

How?

No one knows.

He was a great explorer and archaeologist.

Oh, he loved history and artifacts.

In fact, he was close to a grand discovery در واقع اون شبیه یه کاشف معروف بود
at the time of his sudden coma.

My niece, she wrote a paper on him دختر خواهرم اون نوشت یه کاغذ راجع به اون
for Oxford university.

Isn't that something?

Oh, I'm so proud of her.

She's such a sweet girl.

Was he married?

No.

No, he never married.

Although, I think there was a special someone in his life.

She was a very pretty young woman.

[Clears throat] (صدای صاف کردن گلو)
But she was quite independent, امّا اون کاملا مستقل بود
like you, Kate.

- Like me?

I know we've just met, من می دونم ما چند دقیق س همدیگه رو ملاقات کردیم
but anyone who moves way out here in a big house امّا هر کسی حرکت می کنه بیاد اینجا در این خونه به این بزرگی
is definitely independent.

Why did the house stay vacant for so long, چرا این خونه برای این مدت طولانی خالی مونده
and why did...

Well, because in his will, خب، به خاطر وصیتش
Harrison requested that all of his belongings هرسن خواسته بود هرچی متعلق به اونه
remain right here in the house.

And that the house remain in his name.

And then his cousin take care of it, و پسر عموش ازش مراقبت می کرد
while the bank account could afford to pay all the taxes.

Well, and then they transferred the house to his cousin's name خب، و بعد از آن ها این خونه رو به نام پسرعموش انتقال دادند
and he kept care of it, و اون ازش مراقبت می کرد
until he died a few years ago.

Since then, the house has been on the market از اون زمان به بعد این خونه برای فروش بوده
and finally the county auction.

And now you have come into the picture.

Have you not?

So, where do you come from, Kate?

Iowa.

My husband and I worked on my father's farm there.

Why'd you leave?

Um, we always planned to retire here on lake eerie.

My husband, John, he used to spend شوهرم، جان اون می گذرونده
his summers as a boy with his grandma here.

How lovely.

Where's your husband?

I'm sorry.

I don't suppose that's any of my business, is it?

Well, there you are.

That's perfect.

You know, my niece is coming for a visit تو منی دونی، دختر خواهرم برای دیدن من داره می آد اینجا
in about a week, or so.

She'd love to take just a peek inside the house, اون عاشق اینه به درون خونه یه نگاه کوچیک بندازه
if that would be all right with you, Kate?

Yeah.

She...

Yes, yes.

Actually, she's my sister's granddaughter.

Well, that would make her my...

Grand-niece, wouldn't it?

Who says that?

This is terrific.

I can't wait to tell her.

She's a huge fan of Harrison.

Look, I have got to go نگا کن، من خودمو باید آماده ی رفتن کنم
and take my medicine.

You don't want an old woman falling down dead و نمی خای یه پیرزن بیفته بمیره
in your house, do you?

[Giggles] (با خنده خداحافظی کردن)
Do you know these men, Kate?

Yes, they're my movers.

Oh, of course they are.

[Laughing]
[Man] Kate Ryan?

Hi.

We have 20 boxes for you, is that correct?

- Yes, that's correct.

No, the house came furnished.

- You need me to sign somewhere?

Here and here, if you would.

Thank you very much.

Thank you.

You guys almost done?

Hello?

[Buzzing] (صدای وزوز)
- [Loud buzzing]

[Clanking] (صدای زنجیر)
[Indistinct whispers] (صدای پچ پچ های نامفهوم و آهسته)
Oh!

You all right?

Yeah, I'm fine.

You seem frightened.

I just thought I saw something من فقط فک کردم چیزی شنیدم
in the other room there.

I think the fan came on by itself.

Typical woman, afraid of her own shadow.

What did you say?

Nothing.

Are you guys almost done?

One more box and that'll be it.

- Okay, thanks.

[Indistinct whispers] (صدای پچ پچ های نامفهوم و آهسته)
May I help you?

Eliza, it's me, Kate.

Your new neighbor down the street.

Who?

Kate.

You bandaged my leg, when I cut myself.

I fooled you.

I was just playing a friendly joke.

Of course I remember you, dear.

I haven't lost all my marbles yet.

You need something?

I was wondering if I may use your phone.

I suppose so.

It's an old phone and I rarely use it.

I hope it works.

Come on in, dear.

Thank you.

Here you go, my dear.

[Dials phone] (صدای شماره گرفتن تلفن)
[Phone rings] (صدای تلفن زنگ خوردن)
Hello.

Pop, it's me.

I made it safe.

Hey.

So how do you like the place?

Um, it needs some work, اوم، یه مقدار کار داره
but the views and location make everything worth it.

Well, that's good news.

So, you didn't make a mistake, then.

Pop, do you think I made a mistake by leaving?

No, you've been through a lot lately.

And I'm fine.

Yeah.

I just want you to be healthy, wealthy, and wise.

Pop, I need to go.

I'm using a neighbor's phone.

What happened to your cell phone?

I don't get reception up here.

I don't like the sound of that one bit.

Pop, it'll be fine.

Listen, I gotta go.

I'll call you soon.

You know, we've been on the phone, like, less than a minute, تو می بینی ما پشت تلفن کمتر از یه دقیقه حرف زدن دوباره همدیگر رو دوست داریم
and you already have to go?

Yes, but I'll call you soon.

- Pop?

Yeah, I understand.

I'll set up my phone next week.

But I gotta go.

- All right, good night.

Good night.

Thanks, Eliza.

Oh, it's not a problem, dear.

Do you live up here alone, too?

Oh, no, I'm not that crazy.

I mean, not that you're crazy.

[Nervous laugh] (از روی دستپاچگی خندیدن)
I live with my sister.

She's upstairs asleep.

Well, I'll let myself out, خُب، اجازه می دی من برم
if it's all right.

Good night, Eliza.

Guess I'll see you soon, Kate.

Good night.

Don't let the bedbugs bite.

[Cackles] (خنده شبیه صدای غد غد)
[Door opens, closes] (در باز شد، بسته شد)
Ugh.

Damn it.

[Sighs] ( آه کشیدن)
[Electrical zap]
Oh, no.

[Groans] (نالیدن)
Ugh.

You've got to be kidding me.

- [Wind blows]

Well, I brought back up this time, little candle.

[Creaking] (صدای لولای روغن نخورده در)
[Clock ticking] (صدای تیک تیک ساعت)
[Indistinct whispers] (صدای پچ پچ های نامفهوم و آهسته)
[Pounding on door] (صدای کوبیدن به در)
Pounding صدای کوبیدن
[pounding] (صدای کوبیدن)
Good morning, dear.

I thought you might want a couple.

Thank you.

Thank you.

Rough first night?

Yeah, a little rough.

What happened, dear?

Um...

Oh.

So sorry about that.

Ooh.

Mm.

You hungry?

I was so busy yesterday trying to get the house together, من دیروز خیلی سرم شلوغ بود تلاش می کردم تا این خونه رو سر و سامون بدم
I didn't eat much.

Well, don't choke trying to tell me about it.

[Eliza laughs] (اِلایزا در حال خندیدن است)
However, I am curious هرچند که من کنکاوم
as to why there was a big old knife که چرا اینجا یه چاقوی بزرگ قدیمی بود
by your side the first night.

I thought I saw someone.

Someone?

I think my eyes were just playing tricks on me.

I was upstairs closing a window, من طبقه ی بالا در حال بستن یه پنجره بودم
and I saw a man.

I had a candle in my hand, and I couldn't see very well.

It was only for a split second.

And then the candle blew out, و شمع در اثر وزیدن باد خاموش شد
and I ran downstairs to get a knife.

[Scoffs] Well, why were you using candlelight, dear?

Oh, one of the lights blew a fuse, اوه، یکی از لامپ ها فیوز و پروند
and I didn't know where the fuse box was kept.

Do you need to come down to my house and call an electrician?

Yeah, that's a good idea.

And if it's not too much trouble, و اگه من براتون زیاد مزاحمت ایجاد نمی کنم
may I take a shower while I'm there?

Oh, of course, dear.

Oh, and Autumn, my niece, اوه، و آدِم(نام شخص)، دختر خواهرم
she's ecstatic about coming to the house.

She caught me this morning and I told her اون به من امروز صبح گفت و من به اون گفتم
about you moving in در بارهی تو که اومدی اینجا
and she screamed with excitement.

She said she'd be down this weekend, if not sooner.

Why is she so excited about seeing inside the house again?

Well, Autumn spent years, you know, خب آدم سال های زیادی رو گذزوند تو می دونی؟
doing research on Harrison's findings as an archaeologist.

For her to be able to get into this house, برای اون که قادره بیاد به این خونه
and see if maybe there were some notes or artifacts و شاید اگر بعضی یادداشت ها و چیزهای قدیمی رو ببینه
that were left behind, که اینجا گذاشته
oh, I'm sure that would help her research greatly.

Oh, but there are so many lovely things here.

It's like your own, private museum.

If I didn't have my sister to tend to, اگه من یه خواهر نداشتم که ازش پرستاری کنم
well, I'd help you go through everything myself.

That's very kind, but I can manage on my own.

Come.

You can call an electrician and get cleaned up.

[Taps on door] (صدای ضربه ی آهسته به در زدن)
Are you decent?

- Yes, Eliza.

Come in.

Well, bad news.

The electrician called back and he won't be able to come by متخصص برق تماس گرفت که نمی تونه بیاد
- till tomorrow afternoon.

There's no one else who could come today?

[Laughing] Oh, I'm afraid not, dear.

La Salle is a small community, آدم های کمی در لِسَله (نام) هستند
and most people have left already for the winter.

Everyone is leaving la Salle and headed home.

You get here, and everybody leaves, I dare say.

[Cackles] (خنده شبیه صدای غد غد)
Well, that sounds like a bad omen for me.

Well, I'm not leaving, deary.

That's why my niece "calls me, "one tough bird.

'Cause I can manage through anything.

Well, I need to learn that then.

[Eliza] Is that your husband?

May I see, dear?

What's his name again?

[Crying] John.

[Eliza] Well, John...

Is a handsome man, I dare say.

Well, I'm off, dear.

It's almost lunchtime.

And I have to tend to my sister.

You sure you're all right?

Yes, I'm fine.

Stop asking me that.

Oh.

Well, I'll leave you to it then.

[Cries] (صدای گریه)
Hmm.

What were you hiding?

[Harrison's voice] March 14th, 1957," (صدای هرسن) چهاردهم ماه مارچ سال 1957
Edinburgh castle, Scotland.

First archaeological survey نخستین بررسی باستان شناسانه
traveling with Thomas gray, با تامس گری (نام) مسافرت کردم
professor at Princeton, university.

April 5th, 1965.

In Egypt.

Found a locket in a tomb یه لاکِت (قوطى کوچکى براى يادگارهاى خيلى کوچک به گردن مي اويزند) در یه قبر پیدا کردم
belonging to the daughter of a pharaoh.

Her name was Anandi.

Portions of the inscriptions in the tomb قسمتی از سنگ نوشته ها که در قبر بودند
were damaged, and cannot be translated.

However, the preserved inscription described اگرچه، بقیه ی سنگ نوشته های دیگر شرح می دادند
a treacherous crime Anandi committed یه جنایت خیانت آمیزی که اِناندی مرتکب شده بود
and her punishment required her to travel to another realm.

Thomas gray believes the locket is known as 'the locket of light.

the locket was shown to open portals to other dimensions.

June 10th, 1969...

I plan to go against Thomas' warnings من برنامه ریزی کردم بر خلاف اخطار تامِس برم
and perform the first experiment و اولین آزمایش رو انجام بدم
using a human test subject.

I will perform experiment 19 on myself من آزمایش نوزدهم رو روی خودم انجام خواهم دادم
that mimics the procedures depicted in the hieroglyphics که از روشی پیروی می کرد که سنگ نوشته ها توصیف شده بود
shown in Anandi's tomb.

"Results to be determined.

[Electrical surge] (صدای تغییر ولتاژ ناگهانی برق)
- John!

Why did you leave me?

I'm here, my love.

- Why did you leave?

It's all right.

- Kate.

I want you to do something for me.

Anything.

I brought someone for you to meet.

And I brought her for you.

I want you to...

Let me watch.

Will you do that for me?

You know, تو می دونی
it's always been a fantasy for me.

Come on.

Will you, my love?

[Screams] (صدای جیغ)
[Gasping] (صدای نفس نفس)
[Panting] Ugh.

[Sighing] (صدای آه)
[Distant laughter] (صدای خنده ی بلند از دور)
[Laughter] (صدای خنده ی بلند)
[Laughs and giggles] (صدا ی خنده و با خنده چیزی رو اظهار داشتن)
[Door creaking] (صدای لولای روغن نخورده ی در)
[Door shuts] (صدا بسته شدن در)
[Pills rattle] (صدای تلق تلق کردن قرص)
[Snaps] (صدای عو عو)
[Creaking] (صدای لولای روغن نخورده ی در)
[Gasping] (صدای نفس نفس)
[Pills rattle] (صدای تلق تلق کردن قرص)
[Scanning radio stations] (صدای جستجوی ایستگاه های رادیویی)
[Scanning radio stations] (صدای جستجوی ایستگاه های رادیویی)
[Whispering voice on radio] Help?

Can you hear me, please?

Oh, god.

Help me.

Help me.

[Growls] (صدای خرناس)
[Radio] T.J. Mclain rounds out the lineup, for Denver.

Steve Louis averaging 24 points...

He is not one to be pushed around.

His guards, Jerry Mason and Eddie Ellis, Ellis leading the...

[clinking]
[Growls] (صدای خرناس)
- Aah!

[Gasps] John?

Look at me.

No, it isn't real.
You're not real.

What are you doing?

Shh.

- [Kate cries]

No.

Run!

Look, baby, no one's there.

It's all in your imagination.

I'm not crazy.

I saw a man with a knife.

[Cries] (صدای گریه)
Kate.

Yes, John?

[Gasping] (صدای نفس نفس)
[Knocking on door] (صدای کوبیدن به در)
[Knocking] (صدای کوبیدن)
Ms. Ryan, I presume.

Yes?

I'm the electrician you called.

Oh.

do you have I.D. Or something?

[Chuckles] (با دهان بسته خندیدن)
Listen, lady...

I've been banging at this door half the morning.

My truck out there...

Clearly says that I'm a power company.

And if you don't want to let me in to fix your issue, اگه شما نمی خواهید به من اجازه بدید که مشکلتون رو برطرف کنم
I have no problem backing out of here, من هیچ مشکلی ندارم از اینجا می رم
and going to the next job.

Okay then.

Thank you.

That'll do her.

You're all set.

and you may want to re-wire the house eventually.

But you have electricity again.

Take care.

Thank you.

[Eliza] Yoo-hoo!

Anyone home?

Eliza, you scared me.

Oh, sorry, dear.

You want me to go back out and knock?

No, that's all right.

Come in.

Oh.

I'm very impressed.

Purple is my favorite color.

Are you all right, dear?

I haven't been sleeping well.

Oh, dear.

I'm going to bring you some chamomile tea من می رم برای تو مقداری چای بابونه بیارم
so you can sleep tonight.

Or whiskey, if you want to be out like a light.

[Laughs] (صدای خنده)
You know, I was thinking about going up to the store, تو می دونی من دارم فک می کنم در باره ی رفتن به مغازه
in a little while, and get a few things.

I may buy some chamomile tea.

Yes, indeed.

makes me sleep like a baby bear in the wintertime.

You know, I found Harrison's journal تو می دونی من دفتر وقایع روزانه ی هِرِسِن رو پیدا کردم
in a drawer upstairs, and some sketches.

Oh, what did you do with them, dear?

Oh, they're still up there.

I'm sure Autumn will want to look through those.

She should be here, uh...

Three, wow.

Oh, Autumn's a lovely girl.

I cannot believe it.

I am finally walking through the house من سرانجام راه می رم تو خونه ی
of Harrison Perseus Lloyd.

[Gasps] Oh god, صدای نفس نفس) او، خدا)
I'm so amazed that you get to live here, Kate.

Uh...

Oh, yes.

He was a man truly ahead of his time.

He had theories of ancient Egypt اون در مورد مصر کهن نظریه داشت
that I still cannot fully wrap my brain around.

And he was only 29 at his death.

Imagine what that man would have accomplished تصور کن اگه اون مرد کارشو به انجام می رسوند
if he had only lived a full life.

Wow, he was so young.

His last exploration was in Egypt.

And I have some theories, myself, و منم یه کمی نظریه دارم، خودم،
on what may have happened to him.

- [Kate] Really?

His good friend and colleague Thomas gray دوست خوب و همکارش تامس گِری
wrote this article on him and his research.

And the article references this artifact و این مقاله به این چیزهای قدیمی اشاره می کنه
that Harrison found in a tomb.

- [Kate] Was it a locket?

How do you know about the locket?

I had found Harrison's journal من دفتر وقایع روزانه ی هرسن رو پیدا کرده بودم
and some sketches of a locket upstairs.

Where?

In the bedroom, on the desk.

May I see them, please?

- Yeah, sure.

[Laughing] (صدای خنده)
Well, that will keep her busy for a while.

Didn't you say you needed to go to the store تو نگفتی که تو احتیاج داری به مغازه بری
for some things?

Yes, but I don't want to leave her here alone.

Oh, she can handle herself.

She is very respectful of other people's things.

Especially Harrison's.

She'll be fine.

Well, okay.

- How far is it again?

Only about a mile or so to the Marina.

Autumn!

Kate and I are gonna run to the Marina کیت و من به سمت تفرجگاه ساحلی می ریم
for some food.

Okay.

Auntie Eliza, you should see it up here.

Can I stay the night?

Kate is nodding her head, کیت سرش رو به علامت توافق تکان داد،
so you are one lucky lady, I suppose.

Thank you, Kate!

You're welcome, Autumn.

It'll be nice to have some company here anyway.

[Waves crashing] (صدای بلند شکستن موج ها)
Found any good stuff?

Oh, my goodness, اوه، من شگفت زدم
yes.

I can't believe all these notes and sketches من نمی تونم باور کنم همه ی این یادداشت ها و طرح ها
have been hidden in this house all these years, در این خونه همه ی این سال ها پنهان شده باشه
and no one has been able to view them until now.

- Where's my aunt?

she needed to get back to see about her sister.

I told her you could borrow some clothes من به اون گفتم تو می تونی یه مقداری لباس از من قرض بگیری
and anything else you may need while you're here.

Wow, that's really nice of you.

I can't thank you enough, Kate.

No, no problem.

If you would just share the wealth if you find اگه تو فقط به اشتراک بزاری ثروتی رو اگه تو پیدا کردی
anything from Harrison, that'd be nice.

[Laughs] For sure.

Well, this locket of light would be worth خب این گردن آویزی نوری با ارزش خواهد بود
a pretty penny, indeed.

So, what does this locket do, anyway?

I'm not totally sure.

It'd be nice if we could find it.

You haven't come across it by any chance, have you?

No, not yet.

Harrison believed it would be worth more than just money.

Harrison believed it would open portals هرسن معتقد بود اون می تونه باز کنه دروازه ها رو
to other dimensions.

And if that's the case and we find it, و اگه این همون چیزی باشه که هرسن گفته و ما اونو پیدا کنیم
I'm pretty certain that would change everything من کاملاً مطمئنم اون همه چی رو تغییر خواهد داد
for the pioneers in those research fields.

Do you have any theories about the locket آیا تو هیچ نظریه ای در باره ی گردن آویز نوری داری؟
and Anandi?

You know about Anandi?

The Egyptian Princess?

I read some of Harrison's journal من بعضی از صفحات دفتر وقایع روزانه ی هرسن رو خوندم
and I caught on to some of the storyline, و من بعضی از خطوط داستان رو گرفتم
but the jargon was pretty much over my head.

Well, to answer your question, yes, I do have a theory.

I think the locket, "or the "locket of light من فک می کنم گردن آویز یا گردن آویز نوری
as some would like to call it, یا بعضی ها که دوست دارند اونو به این نام صدا کنند
sent the spirit to a purgatory-like place, روح رو به یه مکان برزخ مانند می فرسته
for all eternity.

What did Anandi do اِناندی (نام) چی کار انجام داد
that would make them want to punish her in this way?

Them?

who wanted to punish her in this way.

The pharaoh.

He was a really stubborn leader.

He demanded perfection in everything, اون خواستار کمال و برتری در هرچیزی بود
and Anandi fell in love with a thief و اّناندی عاشق یه دزد شد
who raided the tomb of the pharaoh's mother.

And basically used Anandi to get what he wanted.

And when Anandi wouldn't give up the thief's name, و وقتی اناندی از گفتن نام دزد منصرف شد
the pharaoh was so angered by this, فرعون برای این کار دخترش خیلی عصبانی شد
he lost his mind.

The tombs report that the pharaoh قبرها گزارش می دن که فرعون
went to the Heka priest for a fitting punishment.

Heka, is black magic used against the gods.

Real evil stuff.

Anyway, the hieroglyphics that I studied به هر حال سنگ نوشته هایی رو که من بررسی کردم
showed the creation of the locket of light نشون می داد گردن آویز نوری به وجود اومده
by the Heka priest.

And the pharaoh using it و فرعون از اون استفادهخ می کرده
to send his daughter to the prison realm برای فرستادن دخترش به منطقه ای که در آنجا زندان بوده است
for all eternity.

The pharaoh was depicted as going mad shortly after, فرعون همون طور که در سنگ نوشته ها نشان داده شده است یه کمی بعدش دیونه می شه
which makes me believe that he truly loved Anandi.

But he was just too stubborn to forgive her.

Well, if he sends her to this place, this prison, خِب، اگه اون فرستاده باشه دخترش رو به این مکان، به این زندان
isn't there a way he can bring her back هیچ راهی وجود نداشته اون که بتونه اونو برگردونه
if he changed his mind?

[Sighs heavily] (صدای آه کشیدن زیاد)
Just by my research, فقط در تحقیقاتی که به وسیله ی خودم انجام شده نشون می ده
the locket of light is depicted as a device, گردن آویز نوری به عنوان یه دستگاه توصیف شده است
so I'm thinking my answer would be yes.

Especially considering the hieroglyphics showed مخصوصاً اگه سنگ نوشته هایی رو که نشان داده شده است ملاحظه کنی
that Anandi didn't die right away.

- What?

The holy men that buried her مرد مقدسی که اونو به خاک می سپرده
said that she was buried alive, (گفته که او زنده دفن شده (زنده به گورش کردن
that, "her cheeks "were red with life.

Whoa.

And then Harrison found her tomb.

Yep.

Did you read the last entry of Harrison's journal?

No, I haven't.

[Sighs]
I will perform" experiment 19 on myself من آزمایش نوزدهم رو روی خودم انجام خواهم داد
that mimics the procedure depicted in the hieroglyphics که از روشی پیروی می کرد که سنگ نوشته ها توصیف شده بود
found in Anandi's tomb.

"Results to be determined.

- Holy shit, Kate.

that the locket had something to do with his death, is it?

[Sighs] No.

He didn't have the ending hieroglyphics اون تحقیقاتش رو بر روی سنگ نوشته ها تموم نکرده بود
to know how the locket functions.

I bet he believed that the locket would stay on his physical body, من شرط می بندم که باور دارم اون گردن آویز نوزی در بدنش باقی خواهد ماند
and he would be able to get back that way.

[Sighs] (آه)
I don't know what he was thinking.

But we, or...

Pioneers in exploration, rather get caught up و مهدسان اکتشاف می کنیم برای سریع تر به دست آوردنش
in the excitement of the discovery...

And foolish mistakes can be made.

Are you saying that Harrison accidentally killed himself, پس تو داری می گی که هرسن اتفاقی خودشو کشته
and is now stuck in a hell-like prison?

Listen, Kate, I'll keep looking through the notes گوش کیت، من به نگاه کردم به این یادداشت ها ادامه می دم
and see what else I can find.

Maybe it's all a coincidence ممکنه همه ی این ها اتفاقی باشه
and he was one of those unlucky people that fell into a coma.

But don't worry, I'll figure it out.

I'm sorry.

How about some tea?

Excuse me?

Would you like some tea?

Yes, please.

Still working?

Yes.

He's such a fascinating man.

I can almost hear his voice through his writing.

[Giggles] (با خنده به چیزی اظهار داشتن)
That probably sounds silly, but, god...

I wish I could have known him.

It doesn't sound silly.

[Electricity surging] (صدای تغییر ولتاژ ناگهانی برق)
I feel like I'm intruding in on his home.

I can see his face everywhere.

And what beautiful eyes he had, too.

You can't really tell in these black and whites, تو نمی تونی واقعاً رنگ چشمش رو در این برگه های سیاه و سفید بگی
but I wonder what color they were.

If I didn't know any better, اگه من هیچی بیشتری ندونم
I'd say you have a crush on Harrison Lloyd.

Ah, well, I'm amazed by him in almost every way.

He gave to charities, and he donated his artifacts.

He wasn't one of those selfish archaeologists.

He was a brilliant painter.

Did you see the murals above the garage?

My aunt says it's extraordinary.

You're a painter, right?

You two have something in common, then.

I haven't seen over the garage yet, من هنوز به گاراژ نگا ننداختم
but I'll do that tomorrow, for sure.

Um, and I made a bed for you upstairs, من برای تو طبقه ی بالا یه رختخواب انداختم
but you're welcome to sleep anywhere you feel comfortable, امّا من خواهشم می کنم هرجا احساس راحتی می کنی بخوابی
and there's some comfy clothes on the couch over there.

Thank you, Kate.
I feel as though I have known you forever already.

Yeah, me too.

It's nice to have you here.

Well, good night then.

Good night.

[Electricity surging] (صدای تغییر ولتاژ ناگهانی برق)
[Electrical zapping] (صدای رفتن برق)
[Laughter, indistinct whispers] (صدای خنده، صدای پچ پچ های نامفهوم و آهسته)
[Indistinct maniacal laughter, growls] (صدای خنده های دیوانه گونه ی آهسته، صدای خرناس)
[Roars, snarls] (صدای خروش و غریدن، صدای دندان قروچه و خشمگین بودن)
[Birds chirping] (صدای جیک جیک پرنده ها)
Ugh!

[Laughs] (صدای خنده)
I have to get back to work, من دارم به کارم بر می گردم
and you're making it really difficult for me.

I'm trying.

[Giggles] (با خنده اظهار داشتن)
The farming life suits you.

Even those boots look good on you, city boy.

[Chuckles] Think so?

Yep.

Hey, Kate.

Thank you for loving me.

Don't mention it.

- [Kate screaming] No!

- No!

John!

[Gasps] John!

[Static] (صدای نویز وسایل الکترونیکی)
[Scanning stations] (صدای جستجوی ایستگاه ها)
[Static] (صدای نویز وسایل الکترونیکی)
[Man on radio] He restores my soul.

He leads me in paths of righteousness, for his name sake, اون منو برای نام گذاریش (مسیح) به سمت اسمی که به معنای عدالت و نیکو کاری است هدایت کرد
even though I walk through the shadow of death, آره، من به هر حال به روستایی که سایه ی مرگ بر اون افکنده شده رفتم
I will fear no evil.

Your rod and your staff, they comfort me.

You prepare a table before me, in the presence of my enemies.

[Together] You anoint my head with oil, my cup overflows.

Surely, goodness and mercy shall follow me مسلماًخوبیومهربانیتورحم و بخششت ادامه خواهد داشت...
- all of the days of my life

Is someone there?

Answer if you can hear me.

I could hear you praying with me just now.

I haven't heard the voice of a woman in so long.

Please, speak again if someone is there.

- Hello?

You sound like an angel.

Who are you?

- My name is Harrison.

Yes.

but it may not last long.

Please, listen to me carefully.

You must find a locket.

It is in a room over the garage اون تو یه اتاق بالای گاراژه
of my house in la Salle, Michigan, تو خونه ام در لِسَله (نام)، میشیگان
do you know where that is?

Yes, I'm in the house.

Who are you?

Kate.

- Kate?

I don't have much time.

Please, go to the room over the garage.

The locket possibly fell near the window.

That locket is the way that I got here, اون گردآویز نوری دلیل اومدن من به اینجا بود
therefore, it must be the way out.

Are you in the house?

It is a different realm, but it is linked to my house, اینجا یه مکان متفاوته امّا این مکان به خونه ام پیوند و اتصال داده شده است
the same as they are.

Who are they?

They are the guardians of this place.

They exist to torture lost souls who are trapped here.

There is only darkness.

[Cries] There's no light at all?

There is a light out in the distance, اینجا فقط یه نور و روشنایی خارج از اینجا در فاصله ای دور وجود داره
past the dark water, بعد از دریای تاریک
but there's no way to get to it.

You need to get out of the house, Kate.

They are linked to the house through me.

- [Radio cutting out]

[Rumbling, crackling] (صدای چیزی پر سر و صدا، صدای ترق و تروق)
Kate, they're here.

Kate, no!

Harrison?

- [Static]

Harrison?

- [Sports announcer on radio]

[Radio] 25, 20, 25, 10, 5.

Harrison, can you hear me?

- [Radio buzzing]

Harrison.

Autumn.

Autumn?

[Rattles] (صدای تلق تلق کردن)
[Banging] (صدای بلند)
Kate?

- Pop?

What are you doing here?

What the hell are you doing?

I'm looking for something.

Looking for something?

It's hard to explain.

What are you doing here anyhow?

Well, I got worried about you, so I tried calling and...

[coughs] I just thought I'd come up and check on you.

It's a quick 11-hour drive.

- 11 hours?

Man, you must have left early this morning, then.

I did.

Can I trouble you for a cup of coffee?

Yeah.

Here, wait.

Watch it.

- You got a bunch of nails.

I think I got some coffee in the house.

You know that Asian soybean rust تو اون دسته گیاهان آسیایی رو می شناسی
was just a bunch of crap.

It just made the leaves look bad.

It's the herbicide resistant weeds اون مقاومت علف های هرزه رو از بین می بره
that's breaking our backs.

We know what it looks like.

We're just gonna break even again this year, ما دوباره امسال می خواهیم بریم اون ها رو بِبُریم
and I'm about ready to pack it in, و من تقریباً حاضرم اون ها رو بسته بندی کنم
my heart is just not as strong as it used to be.

What the hell are you doing here?

I mean, there's papers everywhere من منظورم اینه کاغذ ها همه جا هستند
and furniture tipped over, و مبل ها برعکس اند
and you're tearing up boards.

What am I supposed to think?

Are you taking your medicine?

- Pop, I'm taking my...

I'm taking my pills.

if that's what you're thinking.

I know you've been through a traumatic experience.

You living in this house, this old house, تو داری تو این خونه زندگی می کنی این خونه ی قدیمی
all alone, کاملاً تنها
you sure making an old man worry.

Are you staying a while?

No.

And I would like you to come back with me.

- Pop, I can't leave him.

Leave him...

No, Harrison.

Thank god, who the hell's Harrison?

Harrison...

Autumn and Eliza were explaining everything to me, آدم و اِلایزا همه چیه به من توضیح دادند
and Autumn was trying to figure it out last night.

And then I heard his voice over the radio, (و من بعد صدای اونو (هرسن رو از طریق رادیو شنیدم
- and I could communicate with him.

You have to believe me, pop.

Oh, sweetheart, listen to me.

You've got to stop punishing yourself.

Are you talking about John, now?

Is that who you want to talk about?

Can you...

Do you know what you just said?

Some guys trapped in a radio, and he's talking to you.

And who the hell is Autumn and Eliza, by the way?

Eliza lives down the street, and Autumn is her niece.

I thought you said that people don't live here in the winter, من فک کنم تو گفتی که مردم تو زمستون اینجا زندگی نمی کنند
that you'd have to be crazy to live here in the winter.

So you do think I'm crazy?

I think you're having a breakdown, sweetheart.

That's why I want you to come home with me, it's a safe place.

You can get all the treatment you need.
Do you want to meet him?

Well, hell yes, if they're real, خُب، بله حتماً، اگه اون ها واقعی هستن
I'd like to meet them.

- Now?

Eliza!

It's me, Kate.

Eliza!

Come on, honey.

Everybody's gone for the winter.

Eliza!

Come on.

Pop, this is the house.

This is the...

I was just here.

And the boards weren't there.

[Sighs] (صدای آه)
This is all real, pop.

Yeah?

Yeah, we all yearn for something real.

Especially when we're hurting inside.

- [Rattling]

Hah.

Why don't we call it a night?

All right?

Pop?

Yeah?

Will you just leave it all as it is?

- Sure.

Yeah.

- Night, bunny.

[Male spirit] Kate.

Kate.

Kate.

- Harrison?

Oh.

It's nice to meet you, Kate.

Am I dreaming?

Yes.

But you're real, right?

I'm not crazy?

You're not crazy, but this is a dream.

It's the only way I could see you.

[Thunderclap overhead] (صدای صاعقه مانند از بالای سر)
What's happening?

They're planning a way to kill you, Kate, اون ها دارن نقشه می کشن از یه راهی تو رو بکشن، کیت
and they're building their strength to actually do it.

What?

The longer you stay here, هر چی بیشتر تو اینجا بمونی
the weaker you will become.

They can invade your thoughts, اون ها می تونند حمله کنند به افکارت
and your dreams, و رویاهات
it's not safe for you here.

Why do you they want to kill me?

Because they know you're a threat.

They exist to keep me in this place, اون ها وجود دارند تا منو در این مکان نگه دارند
do you understand?

[Thunder cracks] (صدای ناگهانی صاعقه)
Walk with me.

They're here.

I'm frightened.

It's too late now.

Kate, wake up!

Wake up!

[Crying] Pop, how could you do that to me?

How could you do that to me, pop?

Listen, I know I crossed the line a little bit, گوش کن، من می دونم که پام رو از گلیمم یه ذزه بیشتر دراز کردم
but what I was doing was what's good for you.

- What's good for me?

[Sighs] Can you bring back my husband while you're at it?

No, I cannot.

If it's not too much trouble, since you think you can turn water into wine (این کار شما رو زیاد به زحمت نمی انداره (برگردوندن شوهرم از زمانی شما فک می کنید می تونید آب رو تبدیل به شراب کنید
and sand into grain, و شن و ماسه رو به دانه ی گیاه
and make everything as right as rain.

Can you make it so we have those grandkids you always wanted, too?

No, I can't, honey.

Is that asking too much?

- [Cries]

Listen, this is my final plea, honey.

If you refuse to come back home, اگه تو برگشتن به خونه رو نپذیری
and get the treatment you need, و معالجاتی رو که تو نیاز داری نبینی
then I...

I know I've done everything in my power من می دونم هر آنچه در توانم بود انجام دادم
to help you, که بهت کمک کنم
and I have to surrender, honey.

Just go home, pop.

I'm staying here.

[Keys jingle] (صدای جرینگ جرینگ کلید)
These are yours.

You know, the only reason they're ever gonna remember me تو می دونی تنها دلیلی که اون ها همیشه به یاد من می آن
is because of you.

Bye.

[Sniffles] (با فن فن و تو دماغی نفس کشیدن)
Bye, bye, bunny.

[Screams] (صدای جیغ)
[Whispers] Kate!

Kate!

[Crying] (صدای گریه)
[Door creaks] (صدای لولای روغن نخورده ی در)
[Crying] (صدای گریه)
Kate?

Autumn.

[Autumn] Kate?

- Autumn?

What happened?

Oh my god, Kate, it's real.

This is the house that encompasses where Harrison is.

I got attacked by one of them.

- What?

I went into town to find answers, من به شهر رفتم تا جواب سوال ها رو پیدا کنم
so I called my professor.

Are you all right?

What was it?

I'm okay.

scratched my face and my chest while it was strangling me.

And then it's grip weakened and I fell on the floor.

Oh!

- [Kate whimpers]

Autumn, what happened to Eliza?

Right.

She had to take my grandmother to the hospital, اون مادر بزرگم رو به بیمارستان برد
she left me a message while I was in town.

So I went to the hospital to check in on them من رفتم به بیمارستان تا یه سری به اون ها بزنم
and I got bandaged up, and I came straight back here to tell you what I found out.

I feel like I'm losing my mind, Autumn.

[Floorboards creaking] (صدای غژ غژ کردن چوب های کف اتاق)
- Oh my god!

You're not crazy, Kate.

I thought I was losing it there for a moment too, منم فک کردن همچنین یه لحظه مغزمو از دست دادم (دیونه شدم)
but I know I didn't put these scratches on myself.

Well, what do we do now?

My professor called me last night.

He told me a story depicted in the hieroglyphics اون به من گفت داستانی روی که روی سنگ نوشته ها شرح داده است
that shows a silver cord that connects که نشون می ده یه ریسمان نقره ای رو که
our spiritual being to our physical body, که بعد روحانی و معنوی غیر مادی رو به بدن فیزیکی مان وصل می کنه
and apparently the silver cord و ظاهراً اون ریسمان نقره ای
leads us into the afterlife after we die.

A silver cord?

Yes.

A consciousness thread.

It links our spiritual being to our physical body بعد روحانی و معنوی غیر مادی رو به بدن فیزیکی مان پیوند می ده
and our spiritual being to the afterlife.

It's also known as a life thread by the Egyptians.

And the hieroglyphics show و سنگ نوشته ها نشون می ده
the in-between realm as a midway point, فی ما بین این حوزه ناحیه به عنوان نقطه ی میان راه
that prevents the spirits from going into the afterlife.

So in layman's terms...

Basically, it's like a prison اساساً، شبیه یه زندانه
that's guarded by this malicious entities.

Yeah, Harrison said something about them بله، هرسن چیزهایی درباره ی اون ها گفت
Wait a minute.

Yes.

But I turned the radio on to try to comfort myself after a bad dream اما من پچ رادیو رو چرخوندم و سعی کردم به خودم بعد از یه خواب بد دلداری بدم
and I heard someone praying.

- Praying?

And I thought it was a late night radio announcer.

So I started praying along with him.

It ended up being Harrison and he could hear me, اون کسی که دعا خونذن رو تموم کرد هرسن بود و اون می تونست صدای منو بشنوه
and we could somehow communicate through the radio.

Fascinating!

Groundbreaking for my research.

Not to mention, I'm crazy jealous you got to speak to Harrison Lloyd.

[Laughs] (صدای خنده)
I'm just glad you don't think I'm crazy.

Look at this bandage, Kate.

Thank you, Autumn.

I don't know what I would have done if you weren't here.

- Okay.

My professor has a theory about water.

- Water?

This diagram is the only one my professor found این اشکال هندسی تنها چیزی که استاد م پیدا کرده
that shows a glimpse of the realm where Harrison is.

This diagram was buried with a Heka priest.

This is the path to the realm of the gods.

This middle one is where Harrison is.

My professor believed these to be doors, or gates.

This text translates into this.

For the worthy few," برای تعداد کمی از آدم های شایسته
the doors of heaven open by the water for thee.

The doors of the cool place open to the light.

Thou shall find the water of life.

Drink as a god از آب زندگی می نوشی و مانند خدا ابدی می شی
among the eternals "on the imperishable star.

Do you understand that?

Oh!

Okay.

Mm, the old testament, اوم، یه وصیت نامه ی قدیمی
my professor found استادم پیدا کرده
the book of Ecclesiastes, 12:

If the silver cord be lost," اگه سیم نقره ای گم شد
follow the light to the cistern and drink the waters of the afterlife.

Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was.

And the spared shall return "onto god who gave it.

Light!

That's the way out, that's how he can escape.

We have to tell Harrison.

[Radio crackling] (صدای ترق و تروق رادیو)
It's worth a try I guess.

Harrison?

Can you hear me?

Harrison?

Harrison?

We don't have much time, Kate.

My professor suggested contacting Harrison استادم پیشنهاد داد با هرسن ارتباط برقرار کنیم
in a different way.

How?

We cause a diversion.

A diversion?

With you, Kate.

With me?

I know this sounds crazy.

But my professor studied thousands of hieroglyphics امّا استادم هزاران سنگ نوشته رو مطالعه کرده
and he says the locket of light و اون گفت گردن آویز نوری
can bring a soul back into its body می تونه برگردونه روح رو به بدن اون
in a certain amount of time.

What are you talking about, Autumn?

I'm talking about you going to the in-between realm من دارم صحبت می کنم درباره ی اینکه تو بری درمیان مکان و قلمرو
to cause a diversion to help Harrison escape.

That is totally insane.

You want me to go to a hell like place تو از من می خای به مکانی که شبیه دوزخ و جهنمه برم
on a hunch and a theory by your professor?

Have you fucking lost your mind?

Kate.

Have you ever lost someone close to you?

And if you could go back and change the past, would you?

Would you save him?

I know you can do this, Kate.

You really think so?

Come on, Kate.

You can save him!

Okay.

[Laughs]
You're the bravest woman I know!

And you say you can bring me back?

According to Harrison's notes and my professor's theory, yes.

I can bring you back.

Well, what are we waiting for?

Harrison told me where it may be.

Then lead the way!

He said it may have fell off by a window.

[Rustling] (صدای خش خش کردن)
[Kate] Autumn?

Oh, Kate.

It's beautiful.

I know what to do.

This is what activates it.

And then the legs wrap around like this, and...

Will it be painful?

I'm not sure.

How will I get back?

This is the other lever that will bring your spirit back into your body.

Well, the depictions on the tomb خُب، ترسیمات روی قبر
show the Heka priest performing this.

And according to that we have 24 hours و بر طبق آن ما 24 ساعت وقت داریم
until the silver cord, or life thread, تا زمانی که ریسمان نقره ای یا نخ زندگی
will be severed from your physical body.

I cannot believe I'm actually gonna do this.

How do you know 24 hours?

Just trust me, Kate.

If you're gonna do this, just trust me.

I will set the clock for 23 hours and 45 minutes, من ساعت رو برای 23 ساعت و 45 دقیقه تنظیم می کنم تا زنگ بزنه و به من خبر بده
and then I will hit the button and pull you back.

And how will I know if Harrison gets to the light and drinks the water?

It will be a bright flash of light.

And then I just wait for you to bring me back?

Just get in and help Harrison find the door by the dark water.

And remember to tell him to go through the door و به خاطر بیار که بهش بگی از میان در بره
and find the fountain and drink from it.

And I will do the rest.

Why don't you do it, Autumn?

You know more about this stuff than I do.

And I'm gonna get in there and I'm gonna panic و من خودم رو به اینجا برسونم و من وحشت زده می شوم
and I'm gonna forget what I'm supposed to do.

Kate, you're gonna be all right.

And I'm gonna do everything I can to get you back safely.

Wouldn't you want someone to save you from a place like that?

When do we do this?

- Now.

We can't let Harrison be in a place like that for another minute.

Come sit on the sofa, please.

[Sighs] I can't believe I just met you, آه) من نمی تونم باور کنم) که من تو رو دوباره می بینم
and now I'm trusting you with my eternal soul.

I won't let you down, Kate.

You just focus on Harrison.

Do whatever you need to do to save him.

[Metallic buzzing]
Are you ready?

[Sighs] (صدای ]ه)
Good luck.

[Groans] (صدای ناله و فریاد)
[Faint maniacal laughter] (صدای ضعیف خنده ی دیوانه گونه ی یک زامبی)
[Faint laughter continues] (صدای خنده ی ضعیف ادامه دارد)
[Scratching] (صدای خراش کشیدن روی یه آدم)
[Maniacal laughter] (صدای خنده ی دیوانه گونه)
[Snarling] (صدای غرولند )
[Laughs] (صدای خنده)
[Slurping] (با صدا غذا خوردن)
[Laughs] (صدای خنده)
[Growls] (صدای خرناس کشیدن)
[Snarling] (صدای غرولند کردن)
[Growls] (صدای خرناس کشیدن)
What the hell are you doing here, Kate?

Have you lost your mind?

I came here to save you.

That's the thing.

Now you've condemned yourself.

The door.

That will take you to the light.

There's no way, that door's guarded by them, always.

How safe are we in this closet?

We're not.

We need to move in a few minutes.

They don't know you're here yet, اون ها نمی دونند تو هنوز اینجایی
but it won't take them long to figure it out.

What will they do if they find me here?

It'll be like Christmas morning for them.

They will tear you apart.

And jackhammer, the one you just witnessed و اون مته دستی مخصوص سوراخ سنگ اونی که تو خودتم دیدیش
carving that woman's face off, صورت اون زن رو بریدند
will cut holes all over your body for fun تمام بدنت رو با اون مته برای تفریحشون سوراخ می کنند
just because he thinks it looks pretty.

Who was that woman, is she dead?

She's a lost soul, like me.

Now you.

We are immortal in this place, ما تو این مکان تا ابد هستیم
but we feel pain and agony.

Our bodies are regenerative so we can be torn apart بدنمون دوباره زنده می شه و دوباره تکه تکه می شیم
again, and again.

Look, we don't have time.

The plan is that I will distract them...

Listen, and you'll have a brief moment to make it to the door, گوش کن، و تو زمان کمی برای رسیدن به اون در داری
find the light, drink from the water, نور رو پیدا کن، از آب (زندگی) بنوش
and go on your way.

That's your plan, Kate?

Yes, and you said when they find me, درسته، و تو گفتی اگه اون ها منو پیدا کنند
they'll want to take turns playing with their new toy, right?

Shh.

[Growling] (صدای خرناس کشیدن)
[Groaning] (صدای ناله و فریاد)
- [Man screams]

[Bludgeoning] (صدای با چماق زدن)
[Man screaming] (صدای مرد در حال جیغ کشیدن)
[Growls] (صدای خرناس کشیدن)
[Panting] (صدای نفس نفس زدن)
I believe you've met the countess.

Why do I smell sulfur?

It's them.

And I'm so thirsty.

Yes.

And just when you think it can't get any worse, و زمانی که تو فک می کنی که بدتر از این نمی تونه بشه
it starts all over again.

How have you not lost your mind?

I don't know.

Because I've never totally lost hope.

I don't know how I'm gonna make it 24 hours.

What do you mean, 24 hours?

Autumn says she'll bring me back in 24 hours.

Kate, time's not linear here.

We need to exert if we're gonna give this plan of yours a go.

[Panting] (صدای نفس نفس)
I still cannot believe you're here, من نمی تونم باور کنم تو اینجا هستی
risking your life for me.

I couldn't save my husband, من نتونستم جون شوهرم رو نجات بدم
as god as my witness, I can save you.

Enjoy your castle in the sky Harrison Perseus Lloyd.

Don't forget me.

Go!

[Kate screams] (صدای کیت در حال جیغ زدن)
Hurry up!

[Screams] (صدای جیغ)
[Creaking] (صدای لولای روغن نخورده ی در)
[Wind whistling] (صدای سوت باد)
Yahh!

[Growls] (صدای خرناس)
[Sizzles] (صدای جلز و ولز)
[Growling] (صدای غر غر کردن و خرناس کشیدن)
Thank you, Kate.

He did it!

[Screams] (صدای جیغ)
[Panting] ( صدای نفس نفس زدن)
[Whimpering] (صدای ناله و گریه کردن)
- [Snarling]

[Screaming] (صدای جیغ)
No!

[Crying] (صدای گریه)
[Screaming] (صدای جیغ)
[Scratching] (صدای خراشیدن)
[Whimpers] (صدای جیغ و ناله و گریه کردن)
[Snarling] (صدای دندان قروچه کردن و غرولند کردن)
- [Screaming]

[Maniacal laughter] (صدای خنده ی زامبی)
[Gasps] (صدای نفس نفس زدن)
- Kate?

Please god, let it be you.

Autumn!

[Buzzes] Oh!

Yeah, let's take that off, shall we?

This may hurt a little.

- [Groans]

I'm fine.

Autumn, we have to destroy the locket.

Destroy it?

That would be detrimental for my research.

Autumn, we have to destroy it!

[Panting] (صدای نفس نفس)
So what happened?

What was Harrison like?

Oh, he was just as we both pictured he'd be.

He finally made it to his castle in the sky.

Wow.

You have to tell me everything.

Thirsty?

Oh, yeah.

And I'm so tired, too.

Well, get some sleep.

And you're gonna figure out how to dispose of the locket, right?

Yep, sounds good.

Oh, and Autumn.

Yes?

Harrison's eyes were blue.

Hello, Kate.

- This must be a dream.

What do I owe this honor of seeing you so soon, Mr. Lloyd?

I wanted to give you a thank you gift من می خواستم به تو هدیه ی سپاسگزاریم رو بدم
- for saving me.

Did you bring me roses from heaven?

No.

Something better.

John!

I thought I'd never see you again.

I'm here, my love.

John, I'm so sorry.

It was all my fault.

No, Kate.

It was just my time.

- Oh, John.

This is only the beginning.

A little taste of heaven, Kate.

[Buzzes] (صدای وز وز)
[Booms] (صدای غرش)
(Music playing) (صدای موزیک در حال اجرا شدن)
* ghostly figures in the night * هیکلی روح مانند در شب
* calling out my name به من اعلام خطر می کنه
* I search for something more من به دنبال چیزهای بیشتری می گردم
* what am I searching for?

* candles turn to flames شمع ها به زبانه های آتش تبدیل می شوند
* and burn inside of me و درونم را می سوزانند
* nothing feels the same هیچ چیز دیگری شبیه این حس نیست
* is this a dream?

* I no longer know what to feel * من نمی دونم الان چه احساسی دارم
* is this a dream?

* or is it real to me?

* the river...