# language_name_wals:	French
# language_name_glotto:	French
# iso639_3:	fra
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDEdoc
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDEdoc/v1/raw/fr.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDEdoc.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDEdoc.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

L'environnement de bureau KDE
Permission est accordée de copier, distribuer et/ou modifier ce document selon les termes de la Licence de Documentation Libre GNU (GNU Free Documentation License), Version 1.1 ou toute version ultérieure publiée par la Free Software Foundation avec aucune section invariante, avec aucun texte de devant de couverture, et avec aucun texte d'arrière de couverture.
Une copie de la licence est fournie dans.
Ceci est le guide utilisateur de KDE, une documentation complète du bureau KDE destinée à l'utilisateur.
Les aspects liés à la programmation seront couverts dans une documentation séparée, qui paraîtra bientôt.
L'environnement de bureau KDE est une collection d'outils qui vous rendra la vie plus facile et plus agréable sous UNIX.
Introduction
Bienvenue au guide de l'utilisateur de KDE.
Ce manuel a été écrit pour être une introduction à KDE en général, avec une large explication de l'interface graphique, des exemples pratiques sur la façon d'utiliser KDE pour votre travail quotidien, et des astuces sur la façon de personnaliser le bureau de KDE.
Ce manuel comprend une liste de raccourcis, et des trucs et astuces conçus pour vous aider à vous frayer un chemin de façon rapide et efficace.
Ce manuel n'est pas un guide d'utilisation des applications individuelles, car chacune à son propre manuel de l'utilisateur.
Toutefois, KDE est un environnement de bureau intégré tout ce que vous apprendrez dans ce manuel et par votre propre exploration de l'interface de KDE s'applique aussi aux autres applications KDE.
Ce manuel traite également de la philosophie derrière KDE et de son histoire, et fait le tour des sources où vous trouverez plus d'informations, si vous en aviez besoin.
A Short Guided Tour of KDE 's History
640KB ought to be enough for everybody
Before KDE
Since the beginning of UNIX development, there has been one great problem:
There were stable kernels, and good, powerful software.
Unfortunately, only a few people could use UNIX, because it was written mainly for those students and professionals who had studied the system for a long time.
For example, the standard method for reading USENET news was:
Although fast and relatively efficient, this couldn't be called user friendly.
Today, there are many good front ends available, such as tin and KNode, which provide easy-to-use, intuitive graphical user interfaces (GUI s).
Unfortunately, the GUI s lack a common look-and-feel.
Commercial libraries for programmers like Motif promised a solution to this, but these libraries remained, until recently, far too expensive and far too slow.
The configuration of programs is also often difficult.
In most cases, you must edit text configuration files yourself.
It often happens that a misplaced period ruins the whole file, forcing you to restart the configuration process.
Whenever you need to change your settings or reconfigure a program, the whole mess comes up again.
All this contributes to the fact that Linux and other UNIX 's fail to reach a wider audience.
At the same time, many people are not satisfied with their current operating system, often because of the lack of stability and performance found in those operating systems.
Other people hate to buy a new computer each time a new version of the program they cannot live without comes out, because it needs more RAM and more disk space.
Often the new version provides functions few people really need.
KDE is different.
Although we do not try to replace the standard UNIX shell, we are working on a tool that will make using UNIX easier.
We also want to attract more users to the UNIX environment.
Simple things will be made easy, yet complex things will still be just as possible.
A single interface will be provided, instead of the dozens currently required.
What KDE Can Do For You
KDE is designed for everyone.
Those new to UNIX, or those who simply have no interest in learning to use new technologies and commands not found in their previous operating systems don't need to face the intricacies of the command line unless they want to.
Yet there is much KDE offers that is of value to experienced UNIX users, with GUI tools to make simple what were previously complex tasks, and the command line just a mouse click away if you want it.
No matter what your level of experience with UNIX or any other operating system, KDE brings you:
A good looking, easy to use desktop environment.
A powerful, easy to use file manager
An equally powerful and easy to use web browser
A simple, centralized configuration
A comprehensive list of applications, so you can be productive within minutes of your first KDE login.
Online help to support you in every situation.
Consistency of interface.
Menus are in the same place across applications, keybindings behave the same way, toolbar icons, once learnt, always work the same.
The Background Of KDE
In October 1996, German LyX developer Matthias Ettrich initiated the development of KDE with a USENET posting.
Soon after, a couple of interested developers began planning and programming parts of the new project.
One year later, the window and file managers, the terminal emulator, the help system and the display configuration tool were released for Alpha and Beta testing and proved to be relatively stable.
In July 1998, KDE 1.0 was released.
It was the stable version for the next six months, while developers continued work on improving KDE without stability constraints.
In January 1999, their improvements were consolidated and integrated to produce KDE 1.1, the new standard, stable version.
Development continued from there with KDE 2.0, an almost complete rewrite of the desktop, being released on October 23rd 2000.
The KDE 2.x version evolved through six minor releases over the period of a year, each bringing an already impressive desktop further features and stability.
At the time of writing, KDE 3.0 is in preparation for release, introducing a broad range of improvements over the 2.0 series.
Although the GUI didn't change as dramatically as it did during the move from KDE 1 to KDE 2, many refinements like a completely new printing system, vastly improved SSL support (for secure Internet transactions) or full support for languages which are written right-to-left (like Arabic or Hebrew) found their way into the desktop.
You can find more information about this exciting development at http ://www.kde.org/.
The developers and users communicate primarily via several mailing lists, as described in the Mailing Lists section.
If you would like to help, please do, KDE is driven by volunteer contribution, and you are always welcome to take part.
Legal Notices
KDE is open source software, and all of KDE is released under free licenses such as the GPL.
How To Get New Components
The main web site for KDE is http ://www.kde.org/.
Here you can find all important information regarding KDE, including announcements, bugfixes, developer information and much more.
For software upgrades, please visit our FTP site, ftp ://ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/, or use a mirror if one exists near you.
You can find an up to date list of mirrors at http ://www.kde.org/ftpmirrors.html.
On the FTP servers, the directory unstable always contains brand new software, but it is often untested and may not even compile.
If you are looking for more reliable components, please take a look in the stable directory, where we put Beta and release versions.
If you are interested in developing KDE applications of your own, you should visit http ://developer.kde.org/ "where you will find a wealth of information, including tutorials, API guides to the KDE libraries, and much more.
You should also visit Troll Tech's server (http ://www.trolltech.com) which features a great deal of information concerning the Qt library used by KDE.
Installation
Core dumping fsck's tend to make me nervous
Don't worry!
Although the use of some Beta software can cause considerable grief, it is unlikely that the installation of KDE will trash your hard disk.
In fact, this chapter is designed to guide you through the installation process, so that you can take a look at your new desktop as quickly (and with as little grief) as possible.
As with all new Window Manager installs, it is recommended that you back up all your X11-specific configuration files before you begin the install.
If you do not know the exact location of them, try all the hidden (.*) files in your home directory and the directory /usr/X11/lib/X11/xdm.
Requirements
Before installing KDE, ascertain that your system fulfills the following requirements:
A running POSIX compatible UNIX system.
UNIX's that are known to work with KDE include:
Linux, FreeBSD, Solaris, HP-UX, and MkLinux.
We are working to make KDE available for more platforms soon.
Some free hard disk space on the partition where /opt/kde will be created.
We recommend that you reserve about 50MB if your system supports shared libraries, and considerably more if it does not.
If you need or want to build KDE from the source tree, please remember to reserve about 100MB in /usr/src.
A running X11 system with or without xdm.
If you have not installed the X Window System yet, first check your UNIX installation media for an installable version.
If you cannot find any version working, visit the XFree86 web site for more information on how to get and install the X Window System, or contact your UNIX vendor support.
The Qt libraries, version 3.0.2.
You can obtain these at Troll Tech's FTP Server in tgz format.
A warning before you start:
Before upgrading from a previous version of KDE, we recommend that you do the following:
Linux:
Installing RPMs for RedHat, Caldera and SuSE.
Using RPMs is the easiest method to get KDE up and running.
Just visit your favorite KDE mirror and visit the directory /pub/kde/stable/distribution/rpm.
There, you can see directories for different operating systems.
Currently, the i386, alpha and sparc architectures are supported.
The RPM packages can also be found on the Red Hat contrib sites like sunsite.unc.edu or ftp.redhat.com.
After getting the base distribution, feel free to download any other RPMs that you think may come in handy.
Next, start installing with the base package.
If you are installing KDE for the first time, use
It is important that these components are installed in the order listed, and that they are installed before any other KDE component.
Once again, the order given above should be preserved, and the given components should be installed before any other KDE components.
This will unpack the base distribution and install it by default in /opt/kde.
If the installation of the base packages has been successful, you can install the remaining packages (use -Uvh instead of -i once again to update an existing version) the same way.
Linux:
Installing DEB s for debian
The installation for a Debian system is also rather straightforward.
You will only find KDE 2.0 packages for Debian 2.2 (Potato) and 3.0 (Woody).
We describe here how to install packages for Debian 2.2, the stable version, since Debian 3.0 is still in development.
However, the installation for both versions, is almost identical.
The main difference is that KDE is officially included in Debian 3.0 and you do not need to specify any special location to find the deb packages for KDE.
The first step is to tell your system where it can find the deb packages for KDE.
A list of locations for the Debian packages is kept on your hard disk in /etc/apt/sources.list.
You should add to that file the following line: http ://kde.tdyc.com/ stable kde2
Then you have to update your local package database so that your system knows that there are new packages available.
Type the following command:
Finally you should install the KDE base components.
This is accomplished by typing:
If you want to install other components you should try some, or all of these options:
You may also be interested in installing your language.
where xx has to be substituted by the country code.
The control files for some KDE applications will be placed at /etc/kde2, the executables will go in /usr/bin and most of the auxiliary files in /usr/share under different directories.
If you are upgrading from a previous version of KDE you should perform the following steps.
First, update file /etc/apt/sources.list by changing the line with the location of KDE packages with line: http ://kde.tdyc.com/ stable kde2.
Second update your package database:
Finally install the KDE base system:
If you want to install more KDE components try some, or all of these options.
Using Source Compilation to Install on Top of Other Systems
If your Linux distribution did not come with an RPM or DEB archive format, or you are not using Linux at all, you must compile KDE on your own.
In the future, we are planning to provide a binary distribution which includes its own installation program.
In order to compile and install KDE properly, you need to have the following items installed on your hard disk:
An ANSI-C compiler, e.g. the GNU C compiler.
An ANSI-C++ compiler, e.g.
The make utility.
Qt development version 2.2 or higher.
X11 development version (include files are often missing)
kdesupport- version.tar.gz
kdelibs- version.tar.gz
kdebase- version.tar.gz
any other packages you wish to install.
We advise you to get at least kdeutils.
In all cases above, version stands for the current version number.
Once you have downloaded all you need, extract these files to /usr/src.
This process should yield the following directory structure:
/usr/src/kdesupport
/usr/src/kdelibs
/usr/src/kdebase
/usr/src/... (any other packages)
Make sure you have write permissions to /opt/kde.
Next you must compile and install the packages using the following:
cd into the directory of the package, you want to install (see above)
./configure (with the options you want to apply)
make
make install
Apply the above steps to every package you want to install.
These instructions can be used for almost every source package available, not just KDE packages.
Every configure script has several options available.
Some are common between the packages while others are specific to an individual package.
Several options are not required and are only useful as work arounds for known problems (e.g. --disable-FEATURE).
Since some are important options, for instance --with-shadow, you should always check the available options.
An important option is --prefix.
This option specifies the path where configure should install (for kdesupport and kdelibs) or where to look for libraries (for the other packages).
By default, configure will look in /opt/kde.
By default configure looks in the most common places for Qt before it gives up.
If you have problems that you are not able to solve, send a copy of the config.log file to the address given in the offending package's README file.
You must install KDE in the following order: kdesupport, kdelibs, then the application packages (for example kdebase).
All the application packages should only depend on kdelibs, so you can compile them at the same time (if you have a powerful machine).
Platform Specific Building Notes
Linux
For Linux, most of the utilities needed to build KDE can be found either at ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/GCC or ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/GNU.
The Qt libraries can be found at ftp://ftp.troll.no/pub/qt/source, available as source code.
Detailed instructions on how to install them are provided.
Include files for X11 programs should be available at ftp://ftp.xfree86.org in the xdevel section.
Required Changes To Your Configuration Files
After you have placed the KDE binaries into their destination directory, there are a few adjustments you must make to your startup scripts.
The following procedure was tested on SuSE Linux 5.0, and should be compatible with the other popular UNIX's as well.
Always make backups of configuration files before changing them!
Add the following to the end of your /etc/profile:
export PATH=$PATH:/opt/kde/bin export KDEDIR=/opt/kde
Next, edit the .xinitrc file in your home directory.
Look for the line that calls your window manager and replace it with startkde.
Now that everything needed to run KDE has been installed, you can go on to chapter 4 where you will start KDE for the first time.
If something goes wrong, you may need to compile KDE on your own.
Read Using Source Compilation to Install on Top of Other Systems for more information.
We have made the installation as bulletproof as possible, so you should not encounter any serious problems unless your configuration is exotic.
If you do experience difficulties feel free to use the KDE mailing lists
Premières impressions
Les premières impressions sont très importantes - ce n'est pas vrai que pour La souricière, le fameux roman à suspense d'Agatha Christie - mais également pour KDE.
Comme nous l'avons déjà mentionné, KDE est censé être l'interface la plus intuitive et facile à apprendre qui soit disponible.
En fait, nous aurons atteint ce but quand les utilisateurs n'auront plus besoin de ce texte pour travailler avec KDE, ce qui ferait que ses auteurs perdront leur travail (volontaire et non payé) de rédacteurs techniques.
Démarrage de KDE
Si une invite graphique est proposée, alors tout ce qui est nécessaire est votre nom d'utilisateur ainsi que votre mot de passe.
En supposant que l'installation de KDE a réussi, KDE devrait démarrer sans autre intervention nécessaire.
Composants du bureau
Lorsque tout s'est mis en place, prenez un peu de temps pour explorer le nouvel environnement.
Le s trois partie principales du bureau de KDE sont le bureau lui-même, le tableau de bord, et la liste des tâches.
Le tableau de bord
Quand vous démarrez KDE pour la première fois, le tableau de bord se trouve en bas de l'écran.
Depuis ce tableau, vous démarrez vos programmes et basculez entre les écrans virtuels.
Le bouton K
Le bouton K est l'un des emplacements les plus importants de votre bureau KDE.
Vous pouvez vous en servir pour démarrer toutes les applications KDE installées.
Par la suite, quand vous aurez appris à utiliser l'ééditeur du menu K, vous pourrez également y ajouter également d'autres programmes.
Pour démarrer un programme, cliquez simplement sur ce bouton.
Une liste de catégories différentes apparaîtra, plus certains éléments à part.
Chaque fois que le pointeur de la souris survole un élément qui a une flèche sur la droite, un nouveau menu apparaîtra.
Quand vous avez trouvé le programme que vous souhaitez démarrer, cliquez simplement dessus avec le bouton gauche de la souris.
Aperçus des bureaux virtuels
Quand vous démarrez KDE pour la première fois, veuillez remarquer les quatre boutons nommés, fort à propos, 1, 2, 3 et 4.
Ils représentent vos quatre bureaux.
Cliquez simplement sur l'un d'entre eux.
Ne vous inquiétez pas, bien que des fenêtres éventuellement ouvertes au préalable aient disparu, toutes les fenêtres ouvertes sont toujours actives (vérifiez-le simplement grâce à la liste des tâches).
L'utilisation de bureaux multiples est l'une des caractéristiques les plus puissantes de KDE et de X Window System.
Sur le second bureau je vais lancer le compilateur sgml2latex et voir le résultat tandis que sur le troisième bureau je compilerai mon noyau linux, et que je lirai mon courrier sur le quatrième.
Barre d'icônes
La date et l'heure
À l'extrême droite du tableau de bord de KDE se trouvent toujours la date et l'heure.
La liste des tâches
Dans une autre section du tableau de bord, se trouve un bouton pour chaque fenêtre ouverte.
Cliquez simplement sur le bouton correspondant à la fenêtre que vous désirez ouvrir.
Un autre clic rédira cette fenêtre.
Un clic avec le bouton droit de la souris fera apparaître un menu vous permettant de déplacer la fenêtre vers un autre bureau, de manipuler sa taille, ou de fermer l'application.
Utilisation des fenêtres
Le menu de manipulation de la fenêtre
Déplacer
Vous permet de déplacer la fenêtre à la souris.
Cliquez avec le bouton gauche de la souris quand la fenêtre est à l'emplacement souhaité.
Redimensionner
Vous permet de rendre la fenêtre plus grande ou plus petite.
Déplacez la souris et cliquez quand vous êtes satisfait de sa nouvelle taille.
Réduire
Cache la fenêtre en ne laissant apparente qu'une icône dans la barre de tâches.
Remarquez que le titre de la fenêtre est maintenant entre (parenthèses).
Pour ramener la fenêtre sur le bureau, cliquez sur cette icône.
Maximiser
Cette option agrandit la fenêtre jusqu'à la taille la plus grande taille possible.
Veuillez remarquer que KDE utilisera la taille de votre bureau virtuel, ce qui signifie que la fenêtre pourrait devenir plus grande que l'écran.
Enrouler/Dérouler
Enroule la fenêtre, en ne laissant que sa barre de titre visible.
Vous pouvez obtenir le même effet en double-cliquant sur la barre de titre.
Pour afficher à nouveau la fenêtre dans son intégralité, choisissez Enrouler/Dérouler à nouveau, ou double-cliquez dans la barre de titre.
Toujours visible
Cette option permet de garder la fenêtre au sommet de toutes les autres fenêtres, même si elle n'est pas active.
Enregistrer la configuration
Enregistre les réglages courants pour cette fenêtre (position, taille, toujours visible, etc....).
Cette configuration sera chargée la prochaine fois que la fenêtre sera ouverte.
Configurer...
Vous permet de changer l'apparence, et dans certains cas la position, de toutes les fenêtres de KDE.
Les éléments graphiques de décoration comme les boutons de la barre de titre, mais également les cases à cocher et les boutons au sein des boîtes de dialogue, les barres de défilement, la barre de titre elle-même, etc., peuvent être changés.
L'apparence par défaut est celle de KDE 2.
Vers le bureau
Vous permet de placer une fenêtre sur un autre bureau.
Choisissez le bureau où vous désirez placer la fenêtre.
La fenêtre disparaîtra dans la foulée.
Pour la faire réapparaître, choisissez le bouton de bureau approprié dans le tableau de bord de KDE.
Si vous choisissez Tous les bureaux, la fenêtre sera clouée - elle apparaîtra sur tous les bureaux en même temps, de manière à être toujours visible.
Fermer
Ferme la fenêtre.
Parfois l'application vous permettra d'enregistrer votre travail auparavant, mais dans certains cas (par exemple pour les vieilles applications X11) ça ne fonctionnera pas.
Il vaut mieux fermer une application grâce à sa propre interface, et n'utiliser cet élément de menu qu'en dernier ressort.
Bouton de clouage
Ce bouton ressemble à une punaise.
Il accomplit la même fonction que Tous les bureaux dans le menu de manipulation de la fenêtre, mais de manière plus immédiate.
Barre de titre
La barre de titre contenant le nom de la fenêtre peut être double-cliquée pour l'enrouler.
Utilisez le bouton droit de la souris Le menu de manipulation de la fenêtre réapparaîtra, vous permettant de la (dé)maximiser, de la réduire, de la déplacer, de la redimensionner, de la (dé)clouer, ou de la déplacer veers un autre bureau (ce qui est plus rapide que de la clouer).
Quand un programme ne réagit plus, vous pouvez fermer sa fenêtre (en vous permettant parfois d'enregistrer votre travail).
Les boutons Réduire, Maximiser et Fermer
Sur la droite de la barre de titre se trouvent deux boutons permettant également de réduire ou de maximiser la fenêtre (plus rapidement qu'en utilisant le menu de manipulation de la fenêtre).
Le fenêtres réduites peuvent être ramenées en cliquant dans la barre de tâches.
Sur la gauche de la barre de tâches (du moins avec la décoration par défaut), se trouve un bouton permettant de fermer la fenêtre.
Pour déplacer une fenêtre, placez le curseur sur la barre de titre et maintenez le bouton gauche de la souris appuyé.
Sans relâcher le bouton de la souris, déplacez la fenêtre vers l'emplacement de votre choix, puis relâchez le bouton de la souris.
Si vous voulez redimensionner la fenêtre, déplacez le pointeur de la souris vers le bord de la fenêtre que vous désirez modifier.
Lorsque vous avez atteint ce bord, le pointeur cesse d'être une flèche et devient une double flèche.
Maintenez le bouton gauche de la souris et faites glisser le bord en question vers la position désirée, puis relâchez le bouton.
Veuillez remarquer que vous pouvez faire glisser ainsi aussi bien des bords que des coins (ce qui permet d'ajuster la taille dans deux directions à la fois).
Comment obtenir de l'aide
Getting Started
Using only what you see, can you get from A to B?
So far, you may be thinking that KDE is little more than another window manager.
Relax, and read this chapter, and we'll introduce you to some features that will assure you that KDE is very much more than a window manager it's a full fledged environment.
Editing Files
Since you do not only have KDE applications installed on your system, you probably know the mess of editing ASCIIstyle configuration files.
But in fact, there are a lot of other file types that need to be edited this way.
For example, the raw XML source for this guide was written ASCII style, as was the source code for the KDE programs themselves.
We will now show you how you can use the KWrite facility in KDE to edit ASCII files of your own.
Opening a Window Containing Your Home Directory
Click on the application starter and choose Home Directory.
A window showing the contents of your home directory will pop up.
To see a more detailed listing of files in your home directory, select Show Hidden Files from the View menu.
On the left hand of the window, a tree view of your file system structure should appear, while on the right hand side, you can see icons for each file in your Home directory, including any hidden files files or directories beginning with a period.
The File Manager Screen
We tried to make the File Manager as easy as possible to use, and if you know other window managers (including those built into other Operating Systems) with integrated file management, many of the following concepts should be familiar to you.
On the top, there is a Location menu which contains functions to open and close file manager windows.
You can also print the current contents.
Want to visit the Internet?
There are several paths you can take.
The simplest way however, is to simply type in the address you want to go to in the location bar itself.
For example, if you want to visit the KDE homepage, enter http://www.kde.org.
You can also quickly transfer files over FTP using this method.
KDE is Internet ready, which means that you can load and save files not only on your local hard disk, but also on remote FTP and other remote servers that you have write access to.
While other operating systems and desktops make a distinction between local and remote file systems, KDE does not.
The Edit menu offers functions to select, copy and move files.
We will use them later.
Already having used the View menu, you have probably seen that you can view the content in many different ways.
Just play around a bit and see what happens.
You will undoubtedly find the Bookmarks to be extremely useful:
Now you can remember virtually any link, be it on the local machine or somewhere on the Internet.
KDE's network transparency works both ways, allowing you to treat files and directories on your hard drive as if they were Internet bookmarks.
The Tools menu helps you find the notorious file-that-I-put-somewhere-I-do-not-remember-anymore.
Navigating Through Directories
We will now pick one of your configuration files and edit it.
First, we must change the directory in the File Manager.
Konqueror started with your home directory as the top of the tree.
For most day-to-day purposes, this is where you are likely to be working, so it's a practical default.
Sometimes you need to see the broader picture though, so the rest of your file system is not far away.
You can quickly display the / or root directory several ways: click the small folder icon beside the navigation pane to switch to a full filesystem tree, use the Up arrow on the toolbar above to go to the top of your filesystem in the right hand pane, or type in / in the location bar.
For the purpose of following this guide, press the small blue folder icon beside the navigation pane, so that the navigation pane switches to a full filesystem view.
Notice that part of the tree is expanded, and your home directory is still selected.
Now you can see how your home directory fits into the whole hierarchy, and your home directory files are still visible in the right hand pane.
Scroll down the navigation pane on the left side of the window until you find the directory /etc.
Double-click on etc.
You will see a long list of files in the right window.
Opening A File
Some of the files you see here are at the heart of your operating system, so making permanent changes to them require you to be the root or superuser.
We're going to practise on a file that won't hurt anything if a mistake is made, called motd.
Scroll down until you find the file motd and click on it with the right mouse button.
In the context menu, select Open With.
A new menu will pop up.
Choose KWrite.
Voila!
There are many ways to open a file, and this is just one of them.
KWrite is an editor with a simple and probably familiar interface.
You could also have navigated down the small tree in the popup dialog to the Editors section, and chosen another editor, or simply double click the file to open it in the default editor.
In the meantime, you have the file /etc/motd open in KWrite and we're ready to do some editing.
The Editor Screen
The more you work with KDE, the more you will notice that most screens and applications look and feel the same.
The KWrite File menu is a great example of this.
Almost every other KDE program has the same menu, allowing you to create new files, open existing files from your local file system or (coming soon) even the web, save them (soon even on the web, too!), print it or mail it to somebody else.
The Edit menu can also be found in most KDEapplications, allowing you to cut and paste information between programs.
You can also search and replace text.
Using the Settings Menu, you can customize the editor in many different ways.
For example, you can increase the font size to suit your monitor resolution and your eyes.
Of course, as in any other KDE application, you find a Help Menu, offering you on-line help whenever you need it.
Using the Editor
Most motd files contain useless stuff like Do not forget to back up your data or Do not annoy the system manager.
Boring.
Let's change the text so that users logging in get the really important information.
Use the Edit Menu to cut and paste text.
Enter whatever you want, or use the following (great) example:
Saving Your Work
Now that you have changed the motd file, it is time to save the file, putting the changes into effect.
To do this, you can use either the File Menu, or you can use the Save Icon on the toolbar.
At this point, reality hits us.
You need to have root permission to save the changes to this file.
KDE handles this by asking you for the root password.
You probably don't really want to save this file, so you can press Cancel in the password dialog and Cancel again in the save dialog.
Finally, finish your work by closing the editor and file manager window.
Simple and elegant, isn't it?
Creating New Files
A s with everything in KDE, there are several ways to create a new file.
A new empty file will appear, which you can open just like any other.
You can even do this right on the desktop itself.
More often you are already in an application and want to start a new file.
A new empty document will appear that you can immediately begin working in.
Both these approaches have advantages, so use the one that is most practical at the time.
Moving Files With Drag and Drop
As you have seen in the previous section, working with files is as easy as 1-2-3.
However, when you want to copy and move files, the whole copy-and-paste business can get annoying.
Don't worry a procedure called drag and drop allows you to copy and move files more quickly and easily.
Opening Two File Manager Windows
Before you can start, you will need to open two file manager windows.
The simplest way to open a new window is to press the gear wheel button on the right of the icon bar.
Dragging a File From One Window To Another
In the first window, open the /etc folder and scroll until you see the motd file we modified in the previous section.
In the second window, open your home directory.
Click on the motd file.
Hold your left mouse button and drag your file into your home directory.
Release the left mouse button (this is called dropping the file).
You will be presented three options: copy, move and link.
Link will create a symbolic link to the file, while copy and move do exactly what they say.
Select copy.
You should now have a copy of the motd file in your home directory.
Using Command Line And Terminals
So far, you have only worked with the tools and programs KDEprovides.
Undoubtedly, you will want to use other UNIX programs as well.
There are two ways of running them:
The quick command line and the terminal.
Quick Command Line
Please note that you will not see any text output generated from a program started in this manner!
This method is only recommended for starting X Window System programs or for running tools where you do not need to see or type anything.
For other programs, you will still need to use the terminal.
The UNIX Terminal Emulator
A terminal window will open.
Here you can use regular UNIX shell commands: ls, cat, less, and so forth.
Using the Options menu, you can customize the terminal emulator to suit your needs.
Finding Your Lost Files
Everyone has undoubtedly encountered the following problem:
You start ftp, log into a great site like ftp.kde.org and start downloading files.
It is late in the evening and you shut down your machine after completing the transfer.
The next morning, you are at the keyboard again, and you start wondering into which directory you placed the recently transferred files.
Using KDE's KFind utility makes finding those lost files a snap.
Starting KFind
Starting KFind is simple:
Choose Find Files in the Application Starter.
KFind uses an interface part you probably have not yet met in KDE: tabs.
When KFind starts, you see that Name/Location is selected.
When you click on Date Range, the tab content changes.
Since you have never run a search before, most of the icons on the toolbar and most of the menu entries are disabled.
We will change this now.
Finding a File by Knowing Parts of Its Name
As long as you know a bit of the file name, searching is easy.
Select the Name/Location tab, and enter the file name in the Named field.
Wildcards may be used as needed.
As a test, type *.tar.gz.
By default, the search begins in your home directory, but you can select any starting directory you wish by clicking on the Look in or Browse....
To start searching, press the Find button.
After a moment, a list of files will appear in the search results window.
If they do not appear, you started the search in the wrong directory, made a spelling mistake in the Named field, or no files ending with a .tar.gz extension are located on your machine.
Finding a File by More Complex Criteria
There are many categories you can use to make your search more precise.
The more you know about the file, the better are your chances of finding it.
Date Range
Here, you can specify that you only want to see files which were last touched in a given period of time.
You can also specify that you only want to see files that were touched since a specified number of months or days ago.
Of type in the Advanced tab.
If you know that the file was of a special type (e.g., a tar/gzip archive or a jpeg picture), you can tell KFind to find only this type of file.
Containing text in the Advanced tab
You can specify text that the file must contain.
Size is, also in the Advanced tab
If you know the file size, you can limit your search in this regard, as well.
KFind has many more options to refine searches, explore them all!
Using Multiple Desktops
Using multiple desktops helps you organize your work.
You can place your programs on different desktops, and name the desktops so you know what you do there.
This increases and optimizes your workspace.
It also helps you when you are surfing the net instead of doing your work and your boss comes in.
But, of course, this is rare at least in the office where I work.
You can switch between desktops by clicking the desktop buttons on the Kicker panel.
If you want to rename them, you can do so by double-clicking on them.
You can use windows on multiple desktops.
If you want to have a window present everywhere, just click the sticky button on the top-left of the window.
To send a window to another desktop, click on the title bar with the right mouse button, choose To Desktop, and select the desktop where you would like the window moved.
Quitting KDE
To quit working with KDE, you can use the Logout entry in the application starter menu.
You will be asked if you really want to quit KDE.
Quitting will close all windows and return you to your console or display manager.
For information on how programs can save your work during logout, please read the notes for logging out.
All About Your Desktop
The better to see you!
The Autostart Folder
Before I discovered the Autostart folder, my daily startup routine with KDE consisted of the following:
Start KDE, start KEdit, start Konsole, start Netscape, and start Kscd.
This took time I could have spent better.
Native KDE programs left open at the end of a session will save their state and reappear when you login again, but there are some programs (like Netscape) that will not.
You can use the Autostart folder for these programs.
To launch programs when KDE is started, do the following:
Open the Autostart folder.
Open a Konqueror window and browse to the program you want to add.
If you don't know how to do this, it was covered in
Drag and drop the desired program from the Konqueror window on to the autostart folder.
When asked, choose Link to create a symbolic link rather than a full copy, as this saves a great deal of disk space.
Repeat the above steps for every program you want started when KDE is launched.
Remember, you don't need to add native KDE applications, just leave them open when you log out, and they will open up again as if nothing had happened, the next time you log in to KDE.
Restart KDE if you want to see the autostart function in action.
Your programs should have launched automatically when KDErestarted.
If you want to add something special (e.g., you want to see a certain web site when your system goes up), read Using templates.
The procedures described there work for any folder, so you can also apply them to the Autostart folder, as well.
Adding Programs and Shortcut Icons to Your K menu and Panel
Adding menu entries
KDE comes with a great many applications already in the menu.
Depending on your operating system and distribution, this could include many non- KDE applications.
KDE also includes an application that will search your hard drive for more applications, and add them to the menu for you.
Kappfinder is clever enough, but it doesn't know about every application there is.
Or perhaps you simply don't want to have all those applications in the menu, and just want to add a single extra program.
To add your favorite programs to the KDE menu, you can use the KDE Menu Editor.
A window will open showing the existing K Menu on the left, and an empty menu entry dialog on the right
For this example, we will be adding an entry for the Gimp under the Graphics submenu.
If you already have a Gimp entry there and don't want a new one, you can still follow through this example, but just don't click the Apply when you are done.
Navigate down the left hand tree to the Graphics entry.
Click on it once with the left mouse button to expand the entry.
In the dialog box that pops up, enter the name you want your new menu entry to have.
For this example, enter Gimp.
Then press OK in the dialog.
Click on the new Gimp menu entry that was created for you under the Graphicssubmenu.
The menu entry dialog to the right will now change to be mostly empty, except for the name you already gave.
Fill in an optional Comment.
You might like to put An image editor for the example.
Text entered here will be shown as a tool-tip in the Application Starter
Enter in the box labeled Command, the command you would type on the command line to open your application.
For this example, this is gimp.
You may also enter any optional command line parameters if you wish.
You can use this to make a menu entry that always opens a particular document or image, for example.
Check the application's documentation to find out more about command line parameters.
If you want the application to operate from a particular directory (for example, for Gimp to begin it's Load Image dialog in a particular place) enter this path in the box labeled Work Path.
This is optional.
If you wish to change the icon from the default unknown, click on the icon to the right of the dialog, to open a standard KDE icon chooser.
Some applications must be run in a terminal window (for example Pine).
If this is the case, check the appropriate check box.
If you want to run your application as a different user, check the box labeled Run as a different user and enter the appropriate user name in the text box.
If you're happy with your menu entry, press Apply.
If you would like to start over, press Reset.
And that's all.
You now have a new menu entry.
Shortcut Icons
To create a shortcut on the Kicker panel, you have some choices:
Drag-and-drop, or via a menu.
Adding a shortcut icon with the menu
You will see the top level of the application starter again.
Go through the menus to find the entry for which you want to create the shortcut, such as Home directory or Konqueror.
Click on the program you want.
A new icon will appear on the panel.
Click on it, and the program will start.
What happens when you drag an item to your panel depends on what kind of item it is:
If you drag a directory...
A menu will pop up giving you a choice of Add as a File Manager URL or Add as a QuickBrowser.
Choosing the first will create an icon that opens a Konqueror window, starting at this directory, while choosing the latter will open that directory as a menu from the Panel.
If you drag a shortcut from your desktop...
It will be copied to the panel.
If you drag a document...
A link will be made on the panel, leaving the original in place.
Clicking on the resulting icon will open that document in the default application.
In any case, if you want to move the icon, click on it using the right mouse button and choose Move.
Move the icon to the position you want and press the left mouse button.
If you wish to remove the icon, click on it using the right mouse button and choose Remove.
You can also move the icon by clicking with the middle mouse button, and dragging it to it's new location.
Creating New Files On Your Desktop
Your desktop can be an efficient place to work.
Every time you start KDE, you can see the complete files, folders and URLs which you often use.
There are two ways to create and edit files on your desktop.
In any application, you can say that you want to save your work in the Desktop subfolder of your home directory.
For example, my home directory is /home/stupiddog, so my Desktop directory is /home/stupiddog/Desktop.
Everything you save there will be put on your desktop.
If you want to move existing files to your Desktop, the best way to achieve this is to use Konqueror.
Open a file manager window and drag the files you need to your desktop.
You can choose to copy them if you want to keep all your common stuff on the desktop now, or you can create symbolic links to the real files.
Everything you change in the link files will be automatically updated in the originals.
For more information on how to use drag & drop and the file manager, see the chapter Moving files with drag & drop.
Placing Links on Your Desktop
Using Templates
Templates provide a convenient mechanism for performing tasks such as those outlined above.
Templates can also be used to associate particular file extensions with a specific application.
When a file ending in a known extension is double-clicked, the application associated with that extension is automatically started.
In short, templates help you get the most out of KDE.
Example:
You want to put an icon for visiting the KDE web site on your desktop.
Right click on an empty space in the desktop.
A dialog box will open where you can type in the address you are making a shortcut to.
A new icon will be created on your desktop.
Your new Internet shortcut can be customized like any other shortcut icon.
Right click on the icon and choose Properties, and you can change the icon, or the name of the shortcut as you wish.
Using MIME Types
Although MIME types are very powerful, they are not without dangers.
Playing around with MIME types as the system administrator (root) can damage a KDEsystem so severely that it cannot be restarted!
In this example, you will create your personal MIME style, which is only relevant for you.
Make sure the application you want to start this file type has an entry in the K menu.
In Konqueror find or make a file with the extension you wish to link.
Add file masks for the application by clicking the Add button, and entering the file pattern you want.
Remember that UNIX is case sensitive, so you may need to add variations - *.mp3 may need *.MP3 added as well, for example.
Add as many masks as you like in this way.
Add a description if you like.
This is optional.
In the section labeled Application Preference Order, press the Add button.
A miniature copy of the Application Starter menu will open, where you can choose the application you want files of this type to be opened with.
Sometimes, you may want to use a different application to open this file type.
For example, you might like to use Kate to open text files you wish to edit, and KEdit for text files that you just want to take a quick peek into.
You can add more applications in the same way as you did in the last step, and you can change the preferred order using the Move Up and Move Down buttons.
If you're satisfied with your choices, you can click the Apply button to save your changes without closing the dialog box.
This gives you the opportunity to test in the Konqueror window that your file association is correct.
You can choose OK to save your changes and close the dialog box, or Cancel if you have changed your mind and just want to close the dialog box.
MIME types are a way of describing the contents of files.
You may be used to using file extensions for that purpose, and you may know that on UNIX systems the file extension often bear little or no relation to the contents of the file.
On the other hand, it may be vital - for example, some implementations of gunzip won't operate on files that aren't named .gz.
MIME types naturally make use of filename patterns, but not necessarily the extensions - you can set up any filename pattern you like.
Then any files that have clientname at the beginning (the ^ character means starts with...) and without any regard to the rest of the filename.
Using the Trash Can
Under normal circumstances, deleting a file under UNIX is something which cannot be undone.
However, with KDE, you can choose Move to Trash instead of Delete.
This will move the file into the Trash Folder, which, by default, is accessible as an icon on your desktop.
In the Trash Folder, you can always recover deleted files.
Remember to empty the trashcan now and then by clicking on it using the right mouse button, then choosing Empty trashcan, otherwise you might run out of disk space because the files still need space.
Note, however, that once you empty the Trash Folder, the files contained therein are lost forever.
Tips & Tricks for Your Daily Work
Everyone can make an omelet with eggs.
The trick is to make one with none.
Nearly everyone can use KDE; this is why the developers made it.
There are no cryptic switches with which to cope, and few configuration files you need edit in ASCIIstyle.
However, there are some ways you can do your work more elegantly, saving you time for the truly important things, like KSirtet.
Shortcut Table
Cycle through the windows
Cycle through your desktops
Alt F2
Mini Command line
Alt F3
Window Menu
Alt F4
Close the current window
Ctrl F{1..8}
Switch to a specific desktop
Ctrl Alt Esc
Window destroyer (every window you click on will be destroyed.) Press this key combination again to cancel the killer cursor.
Ctrl Alt Backspace
This exits KDE (without saving!) Use this as a last resort
Ctrl Alt Numpad +
Cycles to the next screen resolution.
You need to configure this in your X-Server configuration for it to work.
Ctrl Alt Numpad -
Cycles to the previous screen resolution.
You need to configure this in your X-Server configuration for it to work.
Mouse Techniques
Clicking on the border or the titlebar
Left
Activates and raises the window.
Middle
Lowers the window
Right
Shows the Window menu if the window is active, otherwise activates the window.
Doubleclick on the window title
Shades the window (rolls it up so only the titlebar is visible).
Drag on the titlebar
Moves the window around.
Drag on corners or edges
Resizes the window.
Moves the window around.
Raises the window.
Resizes the window in the direction you drag the mouse.
Click on the Icon on the top left
Close the application
Click on the Sticky Button
toggles sticky
Clicking on Maximize
Left
Maximizes the window
Middle
Maximizes only vertically
Right
Maximizes horizontally
Frequently Asked Questions About KDE
I'm your worst nightmare...
There are some questions that are always raised on the KDEmailing lists.
To keep the traffic as low as possible (making the lists more readable), we have included them in this section.
So please be kind and do not ask them in the mailing lists anymore - think of the quote above!
What does KDE stand for?
KDE stands for the K Desktop Environment which itself is intended to be a collection of small tools, a window manager, a file manager and tools that bring all this together.
It is created to make your life with UNIXeasier.
I cannot compile package xxx
Always be sure that you have the newest version of the KDElibraries installed.
The software is in constant development, so the dependencies can change from one day to another if you are using CVS.
For most users, using a released version is much more practical.
What version of KDE should I use for a stable desktop?
One can, in general, obtain KDE in many ways.
Obtaining pre-compiled binaries in a package format (rpm,deb,tgz) labeled with a particular version (e.g.
3.0) is the best way to encourage stability on your KDE desktop.
I want to get my hands on the new features, why shouldn't I try CVS?
The price of stability is that one must wait for each release to get new features.
Conversely the price of being the first to see new features, is that you risk stability.
KDE has a fairly frequent release schedule, and stability of released versions is a particular focus.
For the majority of KDE users, unless you are planning to help develop KDE, there is little advantage to running development versions of KDE.
These are daily snapshots of whatever the developers are working on, and some things are guaranteed to be broken.
You will get burned eventually!
Aide supplémentaire
Autres sources d'aide
Consultez le Site web de KDE pour les dernières informations disponibles à propos de KDE sur le web.
Vous pouvez aussi vous abonner à nos listes de diffusion.
Epilogue
She had her moments, she had some style, the best show in town was the crowd, outside the Casa Rosada crying 'Eva Peron'; but that's all gone now...
We hope that you found this documentation useful, informative and perhaps even entertaining.
The following things are not necessary to understand the KDE Desktop Environment, but you still may want to read it.
The K Documentation Staff
This User Guide has been updated for 3.0, and is currently maintained by Lauri Watts lauri@kde.org
Others who have contributed to this guide.
Pablo de Vicente vicente@oan.es, who updated the section regarding installing on Debian for KDE 2.0
Andreas Buschka andi@circe.tops.net
Robert D.
Williams rwilliam@kde.org
Poul Gerhard
John Waalkes
Vernon Wells
Kay Lutz
Stephan Kulow
We still need people!
KDE is a huge project, and every KDE supporter has already realized that.
All of us are trying very hard to create a user interface that is easy to use and maybe also has the potential to make UNIX ready for the desktop PC.
You have the chance to participate in this project too, and we would be thankful if you did.
Developers and interested users communicate via several mailing lists described in.
If you would like to help, please do so!
We are still looking for helpers in the following departments:
Development (Libraries and Applications)
Documentation
Graphics
Beta-Testing
and everywhere else, too :-)
Legal notices
This document contains copyrighted material from Andreas Buschka, Gerhard Poul and Robert David Williams.
All trademarks and branded names mentioned are properties of their legal owners.
Sources of information used during the creation of this book
During the creation of this documentation, the authors used the following sources for information:
The KDE Mailing lists
Various README and HTML help files that came with the KDE components
License
Cette documentation est soumise aux termes de la Licence de Documentation Libre GNU (GNU Free Documentation License).
Applications de base
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
KWin
Le gestionnaire de fenêtres propre à KDE
Konqueror
Surfez sur le web, parcourez votre disque dur ou un site FTP avec la même facilité d'utilisation.
Kicker
Le tableau de bord KDE, qui comprend la barre de tâches, l'aperçu des bureaux virtuels, l'horloge et le menu K.
Konsole
Un émulateur de terminal hautement paramétrable.
Kate
Un éditeur de textes puissant et complet, avec coloration syntaxique, gestion de projets, et bien plus.
KWrite
Un éditeur de texte plus léger, mais quand même la coloration syntaxique dans son intégralité et bien d'autre fonctionnalités.
Klipper
Un utilitaire de gestion du presse-papiers amélioré - vous pouvez associer des actions à ce que vous copier.
KDesktop
Le bureau lui-même.
KHelpcenter
kdm
Le gestionnaire de connexions de KDE
KControl
Presque tout ce que vous pouvez configurer dans KDE peut y être paramétré - et presque tout ce qui constitue KDE peut être paramétré selon vos préférences.
KWrite
(décrit plus haut)
Kappfinder
Un programme utilitaire vous permettant d'ajouter des applications non- KDE à votre menu K, vous évitant de le faire à la main.
KScreensaver
Tout le monde aime les économiseurs d'écran, et KDE en propose une offre généreuse.
KSysguard
Un application de surveillance du système pouvant fonctionner en réseau, qui incorpore en plus la fonctionnalité offerte par top
Ktip
Kandalf le sorcier est à votre disposition avec ses conseils utiles et des informations intéressantes.
kmenuedit
Réarrangez votre menu K avec cet utilitaire.
Applications d'administration
Vous trouverez les applications suivantes dans les distributions de kdeadmin.
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/stable/latest/distribution/stable
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/unstable/CVS/snapshots/current
Kcron
KDE donne un visage sympathique et convivial aux capacités de planification de tâches de Cron
Kuser
Un gestionnaire d'utilisateurs graphique (requiert les privilèges du superutilisateur)
KPackage
Conservez votre système à jour avec le gestionnaire de paquetages propre à KDE.
Kdat
Un utilitaire de sauvegarde pour les possesseurs de lecteurs de bandes.
ksysv
Un éditeur de SysV-Init pour conserver un démarrage organisé de votre ordinateur.
kwuftpd
Une interface graphique pour configurer le démon FTP wuftpd.
Applications de divertissement
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
Kenolaba
Un jeu de plateau que vous pouvez jouer contre l'ordinateur ou contre un autre joueur de votre réseau.
KAsteroids
Un petit jeu d'arcade dans l'espace.
KAtomic
Un casse-tête dans lequel vous devez contruire vos propres molécules.
KBlackbox
Un portage pour KDE du jeu de boîte noire classique de Emacs.
KBackgammon
Le backgammon revisité par KDE.
KJumpingCube
Un jeu de tactique pour un ou deux joueurs qui est plus dur qu'il n'y paraît.
KMahjongg
Le jeu classique d'association de tuiles (dominos chinois).
KMines
Trouvez les mines sans les faire exploser.
Konquest
Lancez votre empire interstellaire à la conquète de la galaxie, en pulvérisant au passage vos rivaux.
KPatience
Aucun ordinateur n'est complet sans un jeu de réussite.
KPoker
La version pour KDE de ces bandits manchots dont on n'arrive pas à se détacher.
KReversi
La version pour KDE du jeu classique d'Othello.
KSame
Un petit jeu de logique prenant.
KShisen
Un autre jeu d'association de tuiles (dominos chinois).
KSirtet
Vous avez le choix entre une version de Tetris et le jeu bien connu (au Japon) nommé Puyo-Puyo.
KSmiletris
Une version divergeant légèrement des clones habituels de Tetris.
KSnake
Le jeu de serpents classique est actualisé et accéléré ici.
KSokoban
Déplacez les caisses pour les mettre là où vous devez.
KSpaceDuel
Relevez le défi de descendre votre adversaire dans ce jeu d'arcade à deux joueurs.
KTron
Jeu d'évitement classique - évitez votre adversaire, les murs, et même votre propre traînée.
KTuberling
Lskat
Un jeu de cartes plein d'astuce.
Applications de productivité personnelle
Vous trouverez les applications suivantes dans la distribution de kdepim.
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/stable/latest/distribution/stable
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/unstable/CVS/snapshots/current
KOrganizer
Organisez votre temps avec ce calendrier, agenda et planificateur de tâches pratique.
KPilot
Un utilitaire pour synchroniser votre PalmPilot avec votre pc.
KAlarm et KAlarmd
Un démon surveillant les rendez-vous de votre calendrier, et le client pour faire en sorte que vous ne les oublierez pas.
Applications graphiques
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
KuickShow
Un afficheur d'images rapide et puissant
KSnapshot
Un utilitaire pour prendre des captures d'écran.
KFract
Un petit générateur de fractales
KView
Un puissant afficheur d'images, capable de gérer une multitude de formats.
Kghostview
L'afficheur de PostScript propre à KDE.
kfax et Kfaxview
Utilitaires pour afficher et gérer les images fac-similé.
kdvi
Un afficheur de DVI.
KRuler
Une règle pour mesurer sur votre écran, très utile pour travailler avec des pages HTML.
Applications multimédia
Les applications suivantes sont disponibles dans les distributions de kdemultimedia.
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/stable/latest/distribution/stable
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/unstable/CVS/snapshots/current
KMix
Une table de mixage
aKtion
Un lecteur pour les films et les animations supportant de nombreux formats.
Noatun
Un lecteur pour les fichiers multimédia supportant de nombreux formats, listes, et même vidéos.
Kaboodle
Kscd
Un lecteur CD pour KDE avec un support CDDB.
KMid
KMidi
Un lecteur MIDI rendant un beau son, mais quelque peu gourmand en temps processeur
Applications réseau
Les applications suivantes sont disponibles dans les distributions de kdenetwork.
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/stable/latest/distribution/stable
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/unstable/CVS/snapshots/current
KMail
Un client de courrier électronique très complet et permettant plusieurs serveurs et plusieurs identités simultanés.
KNode
Un client de forums de discussion usenet puissant et permettant plusieurs serveurs NNTP.
Kit
Un client AOL Instant Messenger, basé sur le protocole TOC
KSirc
Un client de discussion IRC
KOrn
Une applet de notification.
Korn regarde si vous avez reçu du courrier, et vous indique s'il y a du courrier à télécharger depuis certains serveurs.
kppp
Un logiciel d'appel sortants Internet
KTalkd
Les utilisateurs de votre système qui utilisent la commande talk classique peuvent continuer à attirer votre attention même lorsque vous êtes sous KDE grâce à ktalkd;.
Applications utilitaires
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
kcharselect
Sélecteur de caractères (montre tous les caractères disponibles dans une police donnée, y compris ceux qui n'ont pas de touche sur votre clavier)
kdepasswd
Une interface KDE à la commande UNIX passwd.
kdessh
Une interface KDE à la commande ssh.
kdf
Une interface KDE à l'utilitaire df, avec des fonctionnalités supplémentaires
Kfloppy
Un formateur de disquettes
KEdit
Un petit éditeur de texte simple, comme le très connu Bloc-notes.
Il convient à toutes les petites tâches d'édition, où comme simple afficheur de fichiers texte.
KArm
Un traqueur de temps.
Vous pouvez saisir une liste de tâches, démarrer l'horloge de KArm, et il va compter le nombre de minutes que vos avez passé sur la tâche sélectionnée.
KHexEdit
Un éditeur hexadécimal pleinement fonctionnel
KJots
Un petit programme de prise de notes.
klaptopdaemon
Permet une gestion et une surveillance des batteries pour les ordinateurs portables
KLjettool
Un panneau de contrôle HP LaserJet
Klpq
Klpq est une interface à lpq, lprm et lpc.
KNotes
Un utilitaire de notes beau et utilisable.
Kpm
Un utilitaire incluant les fonctionnalités de top et de ps
Applications éducatives
Les applications suivantes sont disponibles dans les distributions de kdeedu.
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont fournies sous forme de sources et de binaires.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/stable/latest/distribution/stable
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
ftp.kde.org/pub/kde/unstable/CVS/snapshots/current
KLettres
Les enfants en bas âge peuvent apprendre l'alphabet en utilisant des indications sonores et/ou visuelles.
KMessedWords
Un simple jeu pour faire fonctionner les méninges, dans lequel vous devez deviner le mot proposé par le programme.
KTouch
Un programme pour vous aider dans l'apprentissage de la dactylographie.
KEduca
Un projet éducatif permettant la création et la modification de questionnaires à choix multiples.
KStars
Mettez un planétarium sur votre bureau.
KStars contient une quantité impressionnante de données de référence material, et permet de télécharger des photographies des objets célestes.
KGeo
Même la géométrie devient amusante avec KGeo.
kvoctrain
Apprendre une autre langue devient plus facile grâce à kvoctrain qui permet de pratiquer et d'exercer votre vocabulaire.
Petits outils de KDE
Les applications stables sont relativement exemptes de bogues et sont disponibles à la fois sous forme de sources et de binaires.
Les versions instables changent tous les jours et ne sont fournies que sous forme de sources, c'est-à-dire que vous devrez les compiler pour avoir une version qui fonctionne.
N'oubliez pas qu'ils sont instables, et peuvent même ne pas se laisser compiler.
Si vous avez un problème avec une application instable, reportez le problème, et il sera très certainement corrigé dans un prochain instantané des sources.
Taquin et Yeux
De petites applets pour afficher un jeu de taquin ou des yeux curieux dans votre tableau de bord.
KAphorism
À chaque jour de l'année, des paroles sages.
Moon Phase
Affiche la lune avec ses phases dans votre tableau de bord.
KOdometer
Ce "sourimètre" vous permet de savoir de combien votre souris voyage dans un journée.
KScore
Les fans de sport peuvent rester informés des derniers scores de leur équipe favorite grâce à KScore.
KTeaTime
C'est l'application la plus indispensable aux développeurs de KDE.
Elle vous rappelle à quel moment la boisson qui permet au projet KDE d'exister est prête à être bue.
KWeather
Tenez-vous au courant des prévisions météo en provenance de la station météo la plus proche de vous, où que vous soyez sur la planète.
Ou alors tenez-vous au courant de votre prochaine destination de vacances.
KWorldClock
Admirez la progression du jour et de la nuit sur la planète grâce à cette sympathique applet.
KTux
Le pingouin de Linux s'élance vers l'espace interplanétaire dans cet économiseur d'écran.