# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
INVANZ 1 g powder for concentrate for solution for infusion.
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each vial contains 1.0 g ertapenem equivalent to 1.046 g ertapenem sodium.
Excipients: each 1.0 g dose contains approximately 6.0 mEq of sodium (approximately 137 mg).
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Powder for concentrate for solution for infusion.
White to off-white powder.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Treatment
Treatment of the following infections when caused by bacteria known or very likely to be susceptible to ertapenem and when parenteral therapy is required (see section 4.4 and section 5.1):
• Intra-abdominal infections • Community acquired pneumonia • Acute gynaecological infections • Diabetic foot infections of the skin and soft tissue (see section 4.4)
Prevention
INVANZ is indicated in adults for the prophylaxis of surgical site infection following elective colorectal surgery.
Consideration should be given to official guidance on the appropriate use of antibacterial agents.
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Adults and adolescents (13 to 17 years of age):
The dose of INVANZ is 1 gram (g) given once a day by the intravenous route (see section 6.6).
Prophylaxis of surgical site infection following elective colorectal surgery in adults:
To prevent surgical site infections, the recommended dosage is 1 g administered as a single intravenous dose to be completed within 1 hour prior to the surgical incision.
For Infants and children (3 months to 12 years of age):
The dose of INVANZ is 15 mg/ kg given twice daily (not to exceed 1 g/ day) by the intravenous route (see section 6.6).
INVANZ is not recommended for use in children below 3 months of age due to a lack of data on safety and efficacy (see sections 4.4; 5.1 and section 5.2).
Intravenous administration:
INVANZ should be infused over a period of 30 minutes.
2 The usual duration of therapy with INVANZ is 3 to 14 days but may vary depending on the type and severity of infection and causative pathogen(s).
When clinically indicated, a switch to an appropriate oral antibacterial agent may be implemented if clinical improvement has been observed.
Renal insufficiency:
INVANZ may be used for the treatment of infections in adult patients with renal insufficiency.
In patients whose creatinine clearance is > 30 ml/ min/ 1.73 m2, no dosage adjustment is necessary.
There are inadequate data on the safety and efficacy of ertapenem in patients with advanced renal insufficiency to support a dose recommendation.
Therefore, ertapenem should not be used in these patients.
(See section 5.2.) There are no data in children and adolescents with renal insufficiency.
Patients on haemodialysis:
There are inadequate data on the safety and efficacy of ertapenem in patients on haemodialysis to support a dose recommendation.
Therefore, ertapenem should not be used in these patients.
Hepatic insufficiency:
No dosage adjustment is recommended in patients with impaired hepatic function (see section 5.2).
Elderly:
The recommended dose of INVANZ should be administered, except in cases of advanced renal insufficiency (see Renal insufficiency).
4.3 Contraindications
• Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients • Hypersensitivity to any other carbapenem antibacterial agent • Severe hypersensitivity (e. g., anaphylactic reaction, severe skin reaction) to any other type of beta-lactam antibacterial agent (e. g., penicillins or cephalosporins).
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Serious and occasionally fatal hypersensitivity (anaphylactic) reactions have been reported in patients receiving therapy with beta-lactams.
These reactions are more likely to occur in individuals with a history of sensitivity to multiple allergens.
Before initiating therapy with ertapenem, careful inquiry should be made concerning previous hypersensitivity reactions to penicillins, cephalosporins, other beta-lactams and other allergens (see section 4.3).
If an allergic reaction to ertapenem occurs, discontinue the therapy immediately.
Serious anaphylactic reactions require immediate emergency treatment.
As with other antibiotics, prolonged use of ertapenem may result in overgrowth of non-susceptible organisms.
Repeated evaluation of the patient's condition is essential.
If superinfection occurs during therapy, appropriate measures should be taken.
Antibiotic-associated colitis and pseudomembranous colitis have been reported with nearly all antibacterial agents, including ertapenem, and may range in severity from mild to life-threatening.
Therefore, it is important to consider this diagnosis in patients who present with diarrhoea subsequent to the administration of antibacterial agents.
Discontinuation of therapy with INVANZ and the administration of specific treatment for Clostridium difficile should be considered.
Medicinal products that inhibit peristalsis should not be given.
Seizures have been reported during clinical investigation in adult patients treated with ertapenem sodium (1g once a day) during therapy or in the 14-day follow-up period.
Seizures occurred most commonly in elderly patients and those with pre-existing CNS disorders (e. g., brain lesions or history of seizures) and/ or compromised renal function.
Similar observations have been made in the post- marketing environment.
3 The efficacy of INVANZ in the treatment of community acquired pneumonia due to penicillin- resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae has not been established.
There is relatively little experience with ertapenem in children less than two years of age.
In this age group, particular care should be taken to establish the susceptibility of the infecting organism(s) to ertapenem.
No data are available in children under 3 months of age.
Experience in the use of ertapenem in the treatment of severe infections is limited.
In clinical studies for the treatment of community-acquired pneumonia, in adults, 25% of evaluable patients treated with ertapenem had severe disease (defined as pneumonia severity index > III).
In a clinical study for the treatment of acute gynaecologic infections, in adults, 26% of evaluable patients treated with ertapenem had severe disease (defined as temperature ≥ 39°C and/ or bacteraemia); ten patients had bacteraemia.
Of evaluable patients treated with ertapenem in a clinical study for the treatment of intra- abdominal infections, in adults, 30% had generalized peritonitis and 39% had infections involving sites other than the appendix including the stomach, duodenum, small bowel, colon, and gallbladder; there were limited numbers of evaluable patients who were enrolled with APACHE II scores ≥ 15 and efficacy in these patients has not been established.
Efficacy of ertapenem in the treatment of diabetic foot infections with concurrent osteomyelitis has not been established.
Based on the data available it cannot be excluded that in the few cases of surgical interventions exceeding 4 hours, patients could be exposed to sub-optimal Ertapenem concentrations and consequently to a risk of potential treatment failure.
Therefore, caution should be exercised in such unusual cases.
This medicinal product contains approximately 6.0 mEq (approximately 137 mg) of sodium per 1.0 g dose which should be taken into consideration by patients on a controlled sodium diet.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Interactions caused by inhibition of P-glycoprotein-mediated clearance or CYP-mediated clearance of medicinal products are unlikely (see section 5.2).
Penem and carbapenem antibacterial agents may decrease the serum levels of valproic acid.
Monitoring of serum levels of valproic acid should be considered if ertapenem is to be co- administered with valproic acid.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Adequate and well-controlled studies have not been performed in pregnant women.
Animal studies do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects with respect to pregnancy, embryo-foetal development, parturition or post-natal development.
However, ertapenem should not be used during pregnancy unless the potential benefit outweighs the possible risk to the foetus.
Ertapenem is excreted in human milk.
Because of the potential for adverse reactions on the infant, mothers should not breast-feed their infants while receiving ertapenem.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
INVANZ may influence patients' ability to drive and use machines.
Patients should be informed that dizziness and somnolence have been reported with INVANZ (see section 4.8).
4.8 Undesirable effects
Adults 18 years of age and older:
4 The total number of patients treated with ertapenem in clinical studies was over 2,200 of which over 2,150 received a 1 g dose of ertapenem.
Adverse reactions (i. e., considered by the investigator to be possibly, probably, or definitely related to the medicinal product) were reported in approximately 20% of patients treated with ertapenem.
Treatment was discontinued due to adverse reactions in 1.3% of patients.
An additional 476 patients received ertapenem as a single 1 g dose prior to surgery in a clinical study for the prophylaxis of surgical site infections following colorectal surgery.
For patients who received only INVANZ, the most common adverse reactions reported during therapy plus follow-up for 14 days after treatment was stopped were: diarrhoea (4.8%), infused vein complication (4.5%) and nausea (2.8%).
For patients who received only INVANZ, the most frequently reported laboratory abnormalities and their respective incidence rates during therapy plus follow-up for 14 days after treatment was stopped were: elevations in ALT (4.6%), AST (4.6%), alkaline phosphatase (3.8%) and platelet count (3.0%).
Children and adolescents (3 months to 17 years of age):
The total number of patients treated with ertapenem in clinical studies was 384.
The overall safety profile is comparable to that in adult patients.
Adverse reactions (i. e., considered by the investigator to be possibly, probably, or definitely related to the medicinal product) were reported in approximately 20.8% of patients treated with ertapenem.
Treatment was discontinued due to adverse reactions in 0.5% of patients.
For patients who received only INVANZ, the most common adverse reactions reported during therapy plus follow-up for 14 days after treatment was stopped were: diarrhoea (5.2%) and infusion site pain (6.1%).
For patients who received only INVANZ, the most frequently reported laboratory abnormalities and their respective incidence rates during therapy plus follow-up for 14 days after treatment was stopped were: decreases in neutrophil count (3.0%), and elevations in ALT (2.9%) and AST (2.8%).
For patients who received only INVANZ, the following adverse reactions were reported during therapy plus follow-up for 14 days after treatment was stopped:
Common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10); Uncommon (≥ 1/ 1000 to < 1/ 100); Rare (≥ 1/ 10,000 to < 1/ 1000); Very rare (< 1/ 10,000)
Adults 18 years of age and older
Children and adolescents (3 months to 17 years of age)
Infections and infestations:
Blood and lymphatic disorders:
Metabolism and nutrition disorders:
Uncommon:
Oral candidiasis Rare:
Neutropenia, thrombocytopenia Uncommon:
Anorexia Rare:
Hypoglycaemia
Nervous system disorders:
Common:
Headache Uncommon:
Dizziness, somnolence, insomnia, confusion, seizure (see section 4.4) Rare:
Agitation, anxiety, depression, tremor
Uncommon:
Headache
Cardiac Disorders:
Uncommon:
Sinus bradycardia Rare:
Arrhythmia, tachycardia
Vascular Disorders:
Common:
Phlebitis/ thrombophlebitis Uncommon:
Hypotension Rare:
Haemorrhage, increased blood pressure 5
Uncommon:
Hot flush, hypertension, petechiae
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders:
Uncommon:
Dyspnoea, pharyngeal discomfort Rare:
Nasal congestion, cough, epistaxis, pneumonia, rales/ rhonchi, wheezing
Gastrointestinal disorders:
Common:
Diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting Uncommon:
Constipation, pseudomembranous enterocolitis, acid regurgitation, dry mouth, dyspepsia Rare:
Dysphagia, faecal incontinence
Common:
Diarrhoea Uncommon:
Faeces discoloured, melaena
Hepato-biliary disorders:
Rare:
Cholecystitis, jaundice, liver disorder
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders:
Common:
Rash, pruritus Uncommon:
Erythema, urticaria Rare:
Dermatitis, dermatomycosis, desquamation, postoperative wound infection
Common:
Diaper dermatitis Uncommon:
Erythema, rash
Musculoskeletaland connective tissue disorders:
Renal and urinary disorders:
Rare:
Muscle cramp, shoulder pain Rare:
Urinary tract infection, renal insufficiency, acute renal insufficiency
Reproductive system and breast disorders:
Uncommon:
Vaginitis Rare:
Abortion, genital bleeding
General disorders and administration site conditions:
Laboratory test findings:
Common:
Infused vein complication Uncommon:
Extravasation, abdominal pain, candidiasis, asthenia/ fatigue, fungal infection, fever, oedema/ swelling, chest pain, taste perversion Rare:
Allergy, injection-site induration, malaise, pelvic peritonitis, scleral disorder, syncope
Common:
Infusion site pain Uncommon:
Infusion site burning, infusion site pruritus, infusion site erythema, injection site erythema, infusion site warmth
Chemistry:
Common:
Elevations in ALT, AST, alkaline phosphatase Uncommon:
Increases in total serum bilirubin, direct serum bilirubin, indirect serum bilirubin, serum creatinine, serum urea, serum glucose Rare:
Decreases in serum bicarbonate, serum creatinine, and serum potassium; increases in serum LDH, serum phosphorus, serum potassium
Common:
Elevations in ALT and AST
Haematology:
Common:
Elevation in platelet 6
Common:
Decreases in
count Uncommon:
Decreases in white blood cells, platelet count, segmented neutrophils, haemoglobin and haematocrit; increases in eosinophils, activated partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin time, segmented neutrophils, and white blood cells Rare:
Decrease in lymphocytes; increases in band neutrophils, lymphocytes, metamyelocytes, monocytes, myelocytes; atypical lymphocytes
neutrophil count Uncommon:
Increases in platelet count, activated partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin time, decreases in haemoglobin
Urinalysis:
Uncommon:
Increases in urine bacteria, urine white blood cells, urine epithelial cells, and urine red blood cells; urine yeast present Rare:
Increase in urobilinogen
Miscellaneous:
Post Marketing Experience:
Uncommon:
Positive Clostridium difficile toxin
Immune system disorder:
Anaphylaxis including anaphylactoid reactions
Psychiatric disorders:
Nervous system disorders:
Altered mental status Hallucinations
4.9 Overdose
No specific information is available on the treatment of overdose with ertapenem.
Overdosing of ertapenem is unlikely.
Intravenous administration of ertapenem at a 3 g daily dose for 8 days to healthy adult volunteers did not result in significant toxicity.
In clinical studies in adults inadvertent administration of up to 3 g in a day did not result in clinically important adverse reactions.
In paediatric clinical studies, a single IV dose of 40 mg/ kg up to a maximum of 2 g did not result in toxicity.
However, in the event of an overdose, treatment with INVANZ should be discontinued and general supportive treatment given until renal elimination takes place.
Ertapenem can be removed to some extent by haemodialysis (see section 5.2); however, no information is available on the use of haemodialysis to treat overdose.
7 5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
General properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group: carbapenems, ATC code:
J01D H03
Mode of action Ertapenem inhibits bacterial cell wall synthesis following attachment to penicillin binding proteins (PBPs).
In Escherichia coli, affinity is strongest to PBPs 2 and 3.
Pharmacokinetic/ Pharmacodynamic (PK/ PD) relationship Similar to other beta-lactam antimicrobial agents, the time that the plasma concentration of ertapenem exceeds the MIC of the infecting organism has been shown to best correlate with efficacy in pre- clinical PK/ PD studies.
Mechanism of Resistance For species considered susceptible to ertapenem, resistance was uncommon in surveillance studies in Europe.
In resistant isolates, resistance to other antibacterial agents of the carbapenem class was seen in some but not all isolates.
Ertapenem is effectively stable to hydrolysis by most classes of beta- lactamases, including penicillinases, cephalosporinases and extended spectrum beta-lactamases, but not metallo-beta-lactamases.
Methicillin-resistant staphylococci and enterococci are resistant to ertapenem, owing to PBP target insensitivity; P. aeruginosa and other non-fermentative bacteria are generally resistant, probably owing to limited penetration and to active efflux.
Resistance is uncommon in Enterobacteriaceae and the drug is generally active against those with extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs).
Resistance can however be observed when ESBLs or other potent beta-lactamases (e. g.
AmpC types) are present in conjunction with reduced permeability, arising by the loss of one or more outer membrane porins, or with up-regulated efflux.
Resistance can also arise via the acquisition of betalactamases with significant carbapenem-hydrolysing activity (e. g.
IMP and VIM metallo-beta-lactamases or KPC types), though these are rare.
The mechanism of action of ertapenem differs from that of other classes of antibiotics, such as quinolones, aminoglycosides, macrolides and tetracyclines.
There is no target-based cross-resistance between ertapenem and these substances.
However, micro-organisms may exhibit resistance to more than one class of antibacterial agents when the mechanism is, or includes, impermeability to some compounds and/ or an efflux pump.
Breakpoints
The EUCAST MIC breakpoints are as follows:
• Enterobacteriaceae:
S≤ 0.5 mg/ l and R > 1 mg/ l • Streptococcus A, B, C, G:
S ≤ 0.5 mg/ l and R > 0.5 mg/ l • Streptococcus pneumoniae:
S ≤ 0.5 mg/ l and R > 0.5 mg/ l • Haemophilus influenzae:
S ≤ 0.5 mg/ l and R > 0.5 mg/ l • M. catarrhalis:
S ≤ 0.5 mg/ l and R > 0.5 mg/ l • Gram negative anaerobes:
S ≤ 1mg/ l and R > 1 mg/ l • Non species related breakpoints:
S≤ 0.5 mg/ l and R > 1 mg/ l (NB:
Susceptibility of staphylococci to ertapenem is inferred from the methicillin susceptibility)
The prescribers are informed that local MIC breakpoints, if available, should be consulted.
8 Microbiological Susceptibility
The prevalence of acquired resistance may vary geographically and with time for selected species and local information on resistance is desirable, particularly when treating severe infections.
Localized clusters of infections due to carbapenem-resistant organisms have been reported in the European Union.
The information below gives only approximate guidance on the probability as to whether the micro-organism will be susceptible to ertapenem or not.
9 Commonly susceptible species:
Gram-positive aerobes:
Methicillin-susceptible-staphylococci (including Staphylococcus aureus)* Streptococcus agalactiae* Streptococcus pneumoniae*† Streptococcus pyogenes Gram-negative aerobes:
Citrobacter freundii Enterobacter aerogenes Enterobacter cloacae Escherichia coli* Haemophilus influenzae* Haemophilus parainfluenzae Klebsiella oxytoca Klebsiella pneumoniae* Moraxella catarrhalis* Morganella morganii Proteus mirabilis* Proteus vulgaris Serratia marcescens Anaerobes:
Bacteroides fragilis and species in the B. fragilis Group* Clostridium species (excluding C. difficile)* Eubacterium species* Fusobacterium species* Peptostreptococcus species* Porphyromonas asaccharolytica* Prevotella species* Species for which acquired resistance may be a problem:
Methicillin-resistant staphylococci +# Inherently resistant organisms:
Gram-positive aerobes:
Corynebacterium jeikeium Enterococci including Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium Gram-negative aerobes:
Aeromonas species Acinetobacter species Burkholderia cepacia Pseudomonas aeruginosa Stenotrophomonas maltophilia Anaerobes:
Lactobacillus species Others:
Chlamydia species Mycoplasma species Rickettsia species Legionella species * Activity has been satisfactorily demonstrated in clinical studies. † The efficacy of INVANZ in the treatment of community acquired pneumonia due to penicillin- resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae has not been established. + frequency of acquired resistance > 50% in some Member States # Methicillin-resistant staphylococci (including MRSA) are always resistant to betalactams.
10 Information from clinical studies
Efficacy in Pediatric Studies Ertapenem was evaluated primarily for pediatric safety and secondarily for efficacy in randomized comparative, multicenter studies in patients 3 months to 17 years of age.
The proportion of patients with a favorable clinical response assessment at posttreatment visit in the clinical MITT population is shown below:
Ertapenem
Ceftriaxone
Disease Stratum †
Age Stratum
n/ m
% n/ m
n/ m% n/ m
%
Community Acquired Pneumonia (CAP)
3 to 23 months
31/ 35
88.6
13/ 13
100.0
2 to 12 years 13 to 17 years
55/ 57 3/ 3
96.5 100.0
16/ 17 3/ 3
94.1 100.0
Ertapenem
Ticarcillin/ clavulanate
Disease Stratum
Age Stratum
n/ m
% n/ m
n/ m% n/ m
%
Intraabdominal Infections (IAI)
2 to 12 years
28/ 34
82.4
7/ 9
77.8
13 to 17 years
15/ 16
93.8
4/ 6
66.7
Acute Pelvic Infections (API) †
13 to 17 years
25/ 25
100.0
8/ 8
100.0
.
This includes 9 patients in the ertapenem group (7 CAP and 2 IAI), 2 patients in the ceftriaxone group (2 CAP), and 1 patient with IAI in the ticarcillin/ clavulanate group with secondary bacteremia at entry into the study.
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Plasma concentrations Average plasma concentrations of ertapenem following a single 30 minute intravenous infusion of a 1 g dose in healthy young adults (25 to 45 years of age) were 155 micrograms/ ml (Cmax) at 0.5 hour postdose (end of infusion), 9 micrograms/ ml at 12 hour postdose, and 1 microgram/ ml at 24 hour postdose.
Area under the plasma concentration curve (AUC) of ertapenem in adults increases nearly dose- proportionally over the 0.5 to 2 g dose range.
There is no accumulation of ertapenem in adults following multiple intravenous doses ranging from 0.5 to 2 g daily.
Average plasma concentrations of ertapenem following a single 30 minute intravenous infusion of a 15 mg/ kg (up to a maximum dose of 1 g) dose in patients 3 to 23 months of age were 103.8 micrograms/ ml (Cmax) at 0.5 hour postdose (end of infusion), 13.5 micrograms/ ml at 6 hour postdose, and 2.5 micrograms/ ml at 12 hour postdose.
Average plasma concentrations of ertapenem following a single 30 minute intravenous infusion of a 15 mg/ kg (up to a maximum dose of 1 g) dose in patients 2 to 12 years of age were 113.2 micrograms/ ml (Cmax) at 0.5 hour postdose (end of infusion), 12.8 micrograms/ ml at 6 hour postdose, and 3.0 micrograms/ ml at 12 hour postdose.
Average plasma concentrations of ertapenem following a single 30 minute intravenous infusion of a 20 mg/ kg (up to a maximum dose of 1 g) dose in patients 13 to 17 years of age were 170.4 micrograms/ ml (Cmax) at 0.5 hour postdose (end of infusion), 7.0 micrograms/ ml at 12 hour postdose, and 1.1 microgram/ ml at 24 hour postdose.
11 Average plasma concentrations of ertapenem following a single 30 minute intravenous infusion of a 1 g dose in three patients 13 to 17 years of age were 155.9 micrograms/ ml (Cmax) at 0.5 hour postdose (end of infusion), and 6.2 micrograms/ ml at 12 hour postdose.
Distribution Ertapenem is highly bound to human plasma proteins.
In healthy young adults (25 to 45 years of age), the protein binding of ertapenem decreases, as plasma concentrations increase, from approximately 95% bound at an approximate plasma concentration of < 50 micrograms/ ml to approximately 92% bound at an approximate plasma concentration of 155 micrograms/ ml (average concentration achieved at the end of infusion following 1 g intravenously).
The volume of distribution (Vdss) of ertapenem in adults is approximately 8 litres (0.11 liter/ kg) and approximately 0.2 liter/ kg in paediatric patients 3 months to 12 years of age and approximately 0.16 liter/ kg in paediatric patients 13 to 17 years of age.
Concentrations of ertapenem achieved in adult skin blister fluid at each sampling point on the third day of 1 g once daily intravenous doses showed a ratio of AUC in skin blister fluid:
AUC in plasma of 0.61.
In-vitro studies indicate that the effect of ertapenem on the plasma protein binding of highly protein bound medicinal products (warfarin, ethinyl estradiol, and norethindrone) was small.
The change in binding was < 12% at peak plasma ertapenem concentration following a 1 g dose.
In vivo, probenecid (500 mg every 6 hours) decreased the bound fraction of ertapenem in plasma at the end of infusion in subjects administered a single 1 g intravenous dose from approximately 91% to approximately 87%.
The effects of this change are anticipated to be transient.
A clinically significant interaction due to ertapenem displacing another medicinal product or another medicinal product displacing ertapenem is unlikely.
In-vitro studies indicate that ertapenem does not inhibit P-glycoprotein-mediated transport of digoxin or vinblastine and that ertapenem is not a substrate for P-glycoprotein-mediated transport.
Metabolism In healthy young adults (23 to 49 years of age), after intravenous infusion of radiolabelled 1 g ertapenem, the plasma radioactivity consists predominantly (94%) of ertapenem.
The major metabolite of ertapenem is the ring-opened derivative formed by dehydropeptidase-I-mediated hydrolysis of the beta-lactam ring.
In-vitro studies in human liver microsomes indicate that ertapenem does not inhibit metabolism mediated by any of the six major CYP isoforms:
1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1 and 3A4.
Elimination Following administration of a 1 g radiolabelled intravenous dose of ertapenem to healthy young adults (23 to 49 years of age), approximately 80% is recovered in urine and 10% in faeces.
Of the 80% recovered in urine, approximately 38% is excreted as unchanged ertapenem and approximately 37% as the ring-opened metabolite.
In healthy young adults (18 to 49 years of age) and patients 13 to 17 years of age given a 1 g intravenous dose, the mean plasma half-life is approximately 4 hours.
The mean plasma half-life in children 3 months to 12 years of age is approximately 2.5 hours.
Average concentrations of ertapenem in urine exceed 984 micrograms/ ml during the period 0 to 2 hours postdose and exceed 52 micrograms/ ml during the period 12 to 24 hours post-administration.
Special Populations
Gender The plasma concentrations of ertapenem are comparable in men and women.
12 Elderly Plasma concentrations following a 1 g and 2 g intravenous dose of ertapenem are slightly higher (approximately 39% and 22%, respectively) in healthy elderly adults (≥ 65 years) relative to young adults (< 65 years).
In the absence of advanced renal insufficiency, no dosage adjustment is necessary in elderly patients.
Paediatric Patients Plasma concentrations of ertapenem are comparable in paediatric patients 13 to 17 years of age and adults following a 1 g once daily intravenous dose.
Following the 20 mg/ kg dose (up to a maximum dose of 1 g), the pharmacokinetic parameter values in patients 13 to 17 years of age were generally comparable to those in healthy young adults..
To provide an estimate of the pharmacokinetic data if all patients in this age group were to receive a 1 g dose, the pharmacokinetic data were calculated adjusting for a 1 g dose, assuming linearity.
A comparison of results show that a 1 g once daily dose of ertapenem achieves a pharmacokinetic profile in patients 13 to 17 years of age comparable to that of adults.
The ratios (13 to 17 years/ Adults) for AUC, the end of infusion concentration and the concentration at the midpoint of the dosing interval were 0.99, 1.20, and 0.84, respectively.
Plasma concentrations at the midpoint of the dosing interval following a single 15 mg/ kg intravenous dose of ertapenem in patients 3 months to 12 years of age are comparable to plasma concentrations at the midpoint of the dosing interval following a 1 g once daily intravenous dose in adults (see Plasma concentrations).
The plasma clearance (ml/ min/ kg) of ertapenem in patients 3 months to 12 years of age is approximately 2-fold higher as compared to that in adults.
At the 15 mg/ kg dose, the AUC value and plasma concentrations at the midpoint of the dosing interval in patients 3 months to 12 years of age were comparable to those in young healthy adults receiving a 1 g intravenous dose of ertapenem.
Hepatic Insufficiency The pharmacokinetics of ertapenem in patients with hepatic insufficiency have not been established.
Due to the limited extent of hepatic metabolism of ertapenem, its pharmacokinetics are not expected to be affected by hepatic impairment.
Therefore, no dosage adjustment is recommended in patients with hepatic impairment.
Renal Insufficiency Following a single 1 g intravenous dose of ertapenem in adults, AUCs of total ertapenem (bound and unbound) and of unbound ertapenem are similar in patients with mild renal insufficiency (Clcr 60 to 90 ml/ min/ 1.73 m2) compared with healthy subjects (ages 25 to 82 years).
AUCs of total ertapenem and of unbound ertapenem are increased in patients with moderate renal insufficiency (Clcr 31 to 59 ml/ min/ 1.73 m2) approximately 1.5-fold and 1.8-fold, respectively, compared with healthy subjects.
AUCs of total ertapenem and of unbound ertapenem are increased in patients with advanced renal insufficiency (Clcr 5 to 30 ml/ min/ 1.73 m2) approximately 2.6-fold and 3.4-fold, respectively, compared with healthy subjects.
AUCs of total ertapenem and of unbound ertapenem are increased in patients who require haemodialysis approximately 2.9-fold and 6.0-fold, respectively, between dialysis sessions, compared with healthy subjects.
Following a single 1 g intravenous dose given immediately prior to a haemodialysis session, approximately 30% of the dose is recovered in the dialysate.
There are no data in paediatric patients with renal insufficiency.
There are inadequate data on the safety and efficacy of ertapenem in patients with advanced renal insufficiency and patients who require haemodialysis to support a dose recommendation.
Therefore, ertapenem should not be used in these patients.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
Non-clinical data reveal no special hazard for humans based on conventional studies of safety, pharmacology, repeated-dose toxicity, genotoxicity and toxicity in reproduction.
Decreased neutrophil counts, however, occurred in rats that received high doses of ertapenem, which was not considered a significant safety issue.
13 Long-term studies in animals to evaluate the carcinogenic potential of ertapenem have not been performed.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Sodium bicarbonate (E500).
Sodium hydroxide (E524) to adjust pH to 7.5
6.2 Incompatibilities
Do not use solvents or infusion fluids containing dextrose for reconstitution or administration of ertapenem sodium.
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal products.
6.3 Shelf life
2 years.
After reconstitution:
Diluted solutions should be used immediately.
If not used immediately, in use storage times are the responsibility of the user.
Diluted solutions (approximately 20 mg/ ml ertapenem) are physically and chemically stable for 6 hours at room temperature (25°C) or for 24 hours at 2 to 8°C (in a refrigerator).
Solutions should be used within 4 hours of their removal from the refrigerator.
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Do not store above 25°C.
For storage instructions after reconstitution:, see section 6.3.
Do not freeze solutions of INVANZ.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
20 ml Type I glass vials with a grey butyl stopper and a white plastic cap on a coloured aluminium band seal.
Supplied in packs of 1 vial or 10 vials.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal and other handling
Instructions for use:
For single use only.
Reconstituted solutions should be diluted in sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution immediately after preparation.
Preparation for intravenous administration:
INVANZ must be reconstituted and then diluted prior to administration.
Adults and adolescents (13 to 17 years of age):
14 1.
Reconstitution:
Reconstitute the contents of a 1 g vial of INVANZ with 10 ml of water for injection or sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution to yield a reconstituted solution of approximately 100 mg/ ml.
Shake well to dissolve.
(See section 6.4.) 2.
Dilution:
For a 50 ml bag of diluent:
For a 1 g dose, immediately transfer contents of the reconstituted vial to a 50 ml bag of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution; or For a 50 ml vial of diluent:
For a 1 g dose, withdraw 10 ml from a 50 ml vial of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution and discard.
Transfer the contents of the reconstituted 1 g vial of INVANZ to the 50 ml vial of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution.
3.
Infusion:
Infuse over a period of 30 minutes.
Children (3 months to 12 years of age):
1.
Reconstitution:
Reconstitute the contents of a 1 g vial of INVANZ with 10 ml of water for injection or sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution to yield a reconstituted solution of approximately 100 mg/ ml.
Shake well to dissolve.
(See section 6.4.) 2.
Dilution:
For a bag of diluent:
Transfer a volume equal to 15 mg/ kg of body weight (not to exceed 1 g/ day) to a bag of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for a final concentration of 20 mg/ ml or less; or For a vial of diluent:
Transfer a volume equal to 15 mg/ kg of body weight (not to exceed 1 g/ day) to a vial of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for a final concentration of 20 mg/ ml or less.
3.
Infusion:
Infuse over a period of 30 minutes.
Compatibility of INVANZ with intravenous solutions containing heparin sodium and potassium chloride has been demonstrated.
The reconstituted solutions should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discolouration prior to administration, whenever the container permits.
Solutions of INVANZ range from colourless to pale yellow.
Variations of colour within this range do not affect potency.
Any unused product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Merck Sharp & Dohme Limited Hertford Road, Hoddesdon Hertfordshire EN11 9BU United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 02/ 216/ 001 EU/ 1/ 02/ 216/ 002
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
Date of first authorisation:
18 April 2002 Date of latest renewal:
18 April 2007
15 10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) web site: http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/.
16 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
17 A.
MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturer of the biological active substance
Merck & Co.
Inc.
Merck Manufacturing Division:
Cherokee (Danville) Plant 100 Avenue C Riverside, Pennsylvania, USA 17868
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release
Laboratoire Merck Sharp & Dohme – Chibret (Mirabel), Route de Marsat.
F-63963 Clermont-Ferrand Cedex 9, France.
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable.
• OTHER CONDITIONS
The Marketing Authorisation Holder will continue to submit yearly PSURs, unless otherwise specified by the CHMP.
18 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
19 A.
LABELLING
20 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
OUTER CARTON
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
INVANZ 1 g Powder for concentrate for solution for infusion Ertapenem
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each vial contains:
1.0 g ertapenem equivalent to 1.046 g ertapenem sodium.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Sodium bicarbonate (E500); sodium hydroxide (E524) to adjust pH to 7.5.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
1 vial 10 vials
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
Intravenous use after reconstitution and dilution.
For single use only.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 25°C
21 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Merck Sharp & Dohme Limited Hertford Road, Hoddesdon Hertfordshire EN11 9BU United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 02/ 216/ 001 1 vial EU/ 1/ 02/ 216/ 002 10 vials
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
22 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS
VIAL LABEL
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
INVANZ 1 g Powder for concentrate for solution for infusion Ertapenem Intravenous use.
2.
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
For single use only.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch
5.
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT
6.
OTHER
23 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
24 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
INVANZ 1 g powder for concentrate for solution for infusion (ertapenem)
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine.
- Keep this leaflet.
You may need to read it again.
- If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or your pharmacist.
- This medicine has been prescribed for you.
Do not pass it on to others.
It may harm them, even
if their symptoms are the same as yours.
- If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet,
please tell your doctor or your pharmacist.
In this leaflet:
1.
What INVANZ is and what it is used for 2.
Before you take INVANZ 3.
How to take INVANZ 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store INVANZ 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT INVANZ IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
INVANZ is an injectable antibiotic which will always be prepared and given to you by a doctor or another healthcare professional.
INVANZ contains ertapenem which is an antibiotic of the beta-lactam group.
It has the ability to kill a wide range of bacteria (germs) that cause infections in various parts of the body.
Treatment:
Your doctor has prescribed INVANZ because you have one (or more) of the following types of infection: • Infection in the abdomen • Infection affecting the lungs (pneumonia) • Gynaecological infections • Skin infections of the foot in diabetic patients.
• Prevention: Prevention of surgical site infections following surgery of the colon or rectum.
2.
BEFORE YOU ARE TAKE INVANZ
Do not take INVANZ
- if you are allergic to the active substance (ertapenem) or any of the other ingredients of
INVANZ
- if you are allergic to antibiotics such as penicillines, cephalosporins or carbapenems.
Take special care with INVANZ Tell your doctor about any medical condition you have or have had including:
- Kidney disease (see Patients with kidney disease)
- Allergies to any medicines, including antibiotics
- Colitis or any other gastrointestinal disease.
- Central nervous system disorders, such as localized tremors, or seizures.
25 Patients with kidney disease
It is particularly important that your doctor knows if you have kidney disease and whether you undergo dialysis treatment.
Children and adolescents (3 months to 17 years of age) INVANZ can be given to children 3 months of age and older.
Experience with INVANZ is limited in children less than two years of age.
In this age group your doctor will decide on the potential benefit of its use.
There is no experience in children under 3 months of age.
Elderly INVANZ works well and is well tolerated by most older and younger adult patients.
The recommended dosage of INVANZ can be administered without regard to age.
Taking other medicines Always tell your doctor about all medicines that you are taking or plan to take, including those obtained without a prescription.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding It is important that you tell your doctor if you are pregnant or are planning to become pregnant before receiving INVANZ.
INVANZ has not been studied in pregnant women.
INVANZ should not be used during pregnancy unless your doctor decides the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
It is important that you tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding or if you intend to breast-feed before receiving INVANZ.
Women who are receiving INVANZ should not breast-feed, because it has been found in human milk and the breast-fed baby may therefore be affected.
Driving and using machines Do not drive or use any tools or machines until you know how you react to the medicine.
Certain side effects, such as dizziness and sleepiness, have been reported with INVANZ, which may affect some patients ’ ability to drive or operate machinery.
Important information about some of the ingredients of INVANZ:
This medicinal product contains approximately 6.0 mEq (approximately 137 mg) of sodium per 1.0 g dose which should be taken into consideration by patients on a controlled sodium diet.
3.
HOW TO TAKE INVANZ
INVANZ will always be prepared and given to you by a doctor or another healthcare professional.
INVANZ is given intravenously (into a vein).
The normal dose of INVANZ for adults and adolescents 13 years of age and older is 1 gram (g) given once a day.
The normal dose for children 3 months to 12 years of age is 15 mg/ kg given twice daily (not to exceed 1 g/ day).
INVANZ is not recommended in children under 3 months of age, as no data are available.
Your doctor will decide how many days ’ treatment you need.
For prevention of surgical site infections following surgery of the colon or rectum, the recommended dose of INVANZ is 1 g administered as a single intravenous dose 1 hour before surgery.
It is very important that you continue to receive INVANZ for as long as your doctor prescribes it.
If you take more INVANZ than you should
26 If you are concerned that you may have been given too much INVANZ, contact your doctor or another healthcare professional immediately.
If you forget to take INVANZ
If you are concerned that you may have missed a dose, contact your doctor or another healthcare professional immediately.
4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, INVANZ can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.
Adults 18 years of age and older:
The most common (more than 1 in 100 patients and less than 1 in 10 patients) side effects are: • Headache • Diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting • Rash, itching • Problems with the vein into which the medicine is given (including inflammation, formation of a lump, swelling at the injection site, or leaking of fluid into the tissue and skin around the injection site).
Less common (more than 1 in 1,000 patients and less than 1 in 100 patients) side effects are: • Dizziness, sleepiness, sleeplessness, confusion, seizure • Low blood pressure, slow heart rate • Shortness of breath, sore throat • Constipation, yeast infection of the mouth, antibiotic-associated diarrhoea, acid regurgitation, dry mouth, indigestion, loss of appetite • Skin redness • Vaginal discharge and irritation • Abdominal pain, fatigue, fungal infection, fever, oedema/ swelling, chest pain, abnormal taste.
Side effects reported rarely (more than 1 in 10,000 patients and less than 1 in 1,000 patients) are: • Decrease in white blood cells, decrease in blood platelet count • Low blood sugar • Agitation, anxiety, depression, tremor • Irregular heart rate, increased blood pressure, bleeding, fast heart rate • Nasal congestion, cough, bleeding from the nose, pneumonia, abnormal breathing sounds, wheezing • Inflammation of the gall bladder, difficulty in swallowing, faecal incontinence, jaundice, liver disorder • Inflammation of the skin, fungal infection of the skin, skin peeling, infection of the wound after an operation • Muscle cramp, shoulder pain • Urinary tract infection, kidney impairment • Miscarriage, genital bleeding • Allergy, feeling unwell, pelvic peritonitis, changes to the white part of the eye, fainting.
There have also been reports of changes in some laboratory blood tests.
27 Children and adolescents (3 months to 17 years of age):
The most common (more than 1 in 100 patients and less than 1 in 10 patients) side effects are: • Diarrhoea • Diaper rash • Pain at the infusion site
Less common (more than 1 in 1,000 patients and less than 1 in 100 patients) side effects are: • Headache • Hot flush, high blood pressure, red or purple, flat, pinhead spots under the skin • Discoloured faeces, black tar-like faeces • Skin redness, skin rash • Burning, itching, redness and warmth at infusion site, redness at injection site • Increase in platelet count,
There have also been reports of changes in some laboratory blood tests
Since the drug has been marketed, severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis), hallucinations, and altered mental status have been reported very rarely.
The first signs of a severe allergic reaction may include swelling of the face and/ or throat.
If these symptoms occur you must inform your doctor or nurse immediately.
If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
5.
HOW TO STORE INVANZ
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
Do not use INVANZ after the expiry date which is stated on the container.
The first 2 numbers indicate the month; the next 4 numbers indicate the year.
Do not store above 25°C
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What INVANZ contains The active ingredient of INVANZ is ertapenem 1g.
The other ingredients are: sodium bicarbonate (E500) and sodium hydroxide (E524).
What INVANZ looks like and contents of the pack INVANZ is a sterile, white to off-white, freeze-dried powder.
Solutions of INVANZ range from colourless to pale yellow.
Variations of colour within this range do not affect potency.
INVANZ 1 g powder for concentrate for solution for infusion is supplied in packs of 1 vial or 10 vials.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
Marketing Authorisation Holder Merck Sharp & Dohme Limited Hertford Road, Hoddesdon Hertfordshire EN11 9BU United Kingdom
Manufacturer Laboratoires Merck Sharp & Dohme – Chibret Route de Marsat - Riom F-63963 Clermont-Ferrand Cedex 9 France
28
For any information about this medicinal product, please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder:
Belgique/ België/ Belgien Merck Sharp & Dohme B. V.
Succursale belge/ Belgisch bijhuis Tél/ Tel: +32 (0) 2 373 42 11 MSDBelgium_info@merck. com
Luxembourg/ Luxemburg Merck Sharp & Dohme B. V.
Succursale belge Tél: +32 (0) 2 373 42 11 MSDBelgium_info@merck. com
България Мерк Шарп и Доум България ЕООД Тел.: +359 2 819 3740 info-msdbg@merck. com
Magyarország MSD Magyarország Kft..
Tel.: +361 888 53 00 hungary_msd@merck. com
Č eská republika Merck Sharp & Dohme, IDEA, Inc.
Tel.: +420 233 010 111.. msd_cr@merck. com
Malta A. M. Mangion Ltd.
Tel: +356 2397 6100 medinfo_mt@merck. com
Danmark Merck Sharp & Dohme Tlf: +45 43 28 77 66 dkmail@merck. com
Nederland Merck Sharp & Dohme B. V.
Tel: +31 (0) 23 5153153 msdbvnl@merck. com
Deutschland MSD SHARP & DOHME GMBH Tel: +49 (0) 89 4561 2612 Infocenter@msd. de
Norge MSD (Norge) A/ S Tlf: +47 32 20 73 00 msdnorge@msd. no
Eesti Merck Sharp & Dohme OÜ Tel.: +372 613 9750 msdeesti@merck. com
Österreich Merck Sharp & Dohme G. m. b. H.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 26 044 msd-medizin@merck. com
Eλλάδα BIANEΞ Α .Ε Τηλ: +3 0210 80091 11 Mailbox@vianex. gr.
Polska MSD Polska Sp. z o. o.
Tel.: +48 22 549 51 00 msdpolska@merck. com
España Merck Sharp & Dohme de España, S. A.
Tel: +34 91 321 06 00 Invanz@msd. es
Portugal Merck Sharp & Dohme, Lda Tel: +351 21 4465700 informacao_doente@merck. com
France Laboratoires Merck Sharp & Dohme – Chibret Tél: +33 (0) 1 47 54 87 00 contact@msd-france. com
România Merck Sharp & Dohme Romania S. R. L.
Tel: + 4021 529 29 00 msdromania@merck. com
Ireland Merck Sharp and Dohme Ireland (Human Health) Limited Tel: +353 (0)1 2998700 medinfo_ireland@merck. com
Slovenija Merck Sharp & Dohme, inovativna zdravila d. o. o.
Tel: + 386 1 5204201 msd_slovenia@merck. com
29 Ísland Merck Sharp & Dohme Ísland ehf.
Sími:: +354 520 8600 ISmail@merck. com
Slovenská republika Merck Sharp & Dohme IDEA, Inc.
Tel.: +421 2 58282010 msd_sk@merck. com
Ι talia Merck Sharp & Dohme (Italia) S. p. A.
Tel: +39 06 361911 doccen@merck. com
Suomi/ Finland MSD Finland Oy Puh/ Tel: +358 (0) 9 804650 info@msd. fi
Κύπρος Merck Sharp & Dohme (Middle East) Limited.
Τηλ: +357 22866700 info_cyprus@merck. com
Sverige Merck Sharp & Dohme (Sweden) AB Tel: +46 (0) 8 626 1400 medicinskinfo@merck. com
Latvija SIA “ Merck Sharp & Dohme Latvija”.
Tel: +371 7364 224 msd_lv@merck. com.
United Kingdom Merck Sharp and Dohme Limited Tel: +44 (0) 1992 467272 medinfo_uk@merck. com
Lietuva UAB “ Merck Sharp & Dohme”.
Tel.: +370 5 278 02 47 msd_lietuva@merck. com
This leaflet was last approved in
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) web site: http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/. --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- The following information is intended for medical or healthcare professionals only:
Instructions of how to reconstitute and dilute INVANZ:
For single use only.
Preparation for intravenous administration:
INVANZ must be reconstituted and then diluted prior to administration.
Adult and adolescents (13 to 17 years of age):
1.
Reconstitution:
Reconstitute the contents of a 1 g vial of INVANZ with 10 ml of water for injection or sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution to yield a reconstituted solution of approximately 100 mg/ ml.
Shake well to dissolve.
2.
Dilution:
For a 50 ml bag of diluent:
For a 1 g dose, immediately transfer contents of the reconstituted vial to a 50 ml bag of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution; or For a 50 ml vial of diluent:
For a 1 g dose, withdraw 10 ml from a 50 ml vial of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution and discard.
Transfer the contents of the reconstituted 1 g vial of INVANZ to the 50 ml vial of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution.
3.
Infusion:
Infuse over a period of 30 minutes.
30 Children (3 months to 12 years of age):
1.
Reconstitution:
Reconstitute the contents of a 1 g vial of INVANZ with 10 ml of water for injection or sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution to yield a reconstituted solution of approximately 100 mg/ ml.
Shake well to dissolve.
2.
Dilution:
For a bag of diluent:
Transfer a volume equal to 15 mg/ kg of body weight (not to exceed 1 g/ day) to a bag of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for a final concentration of 20 mg/ ml or less; or For a vial of diluent:
Transfer a volume equal to 15 mg/ kg of body weight (not to exceed 1 g/ day) to a vial of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for a final concentration of 20 mg/ ml or less.
3.
Infusion:
Infuse over a period of 30 minutes
The reconstituted solution should be diluted in sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution immediately after preparation.
Diluted solutions should be used immediately.
If not used immediately, in use storage times are the responsibility of the user.
Diluted solutions (approximately 20 mg/ ml ertapenem) are physically and chemically stable for 6 hours at room temperature (25°C) or for 24 hours at 2 to 8°C (in a refrigerator).
Solutions should be used within 4 hours of their removal from the refrigerator.
Do not freeze the reconstituted solutions.
The reconstituted solutions should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discolouration prior to administration, whenever the container permits.
Solutions of INVANZ range from colourless to pale yellow.
Variations of colour within this range do not affect potency.
Any unused product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.
31