# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
CELSENTRI 150 mg film-coated tablets.
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each film-coated tablet contains 150 mg of maraviroc.
Excipients Each 150 mg film-coated tablet contains 0.84 mg of soya lecithin.
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Film-coated tablet.
Blue, biconvex, oval film-coated tablets debossed with “ Pfizer” on one side and “ MVC 150” on the other.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
CELSENTRI, in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products, is indicated for treatment- experienced adult patients infected with only CCR5-tropic HIV-1 detectable (see section 4.2).
This indication is based on safety and efficacy data from two double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in treatment-experienced patients (see section 5.1).
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Therapy should be initiated by a physician experienced in the management of HIV infection.
Before taking CELSENTRI it has to be confirmed that only CCR5-tropic HIV-1 is detectable (i. e.
CXCR4 or dual/ mixed tropic virus not detected) using an adequately validated and sensitive detection method on a newly drawn blood sample.
The Monogram Trofile assay was used in the clinical studies of CELSENTRI (see sections 4.4 and 5.1).
Other phenotypic and genotypic assays are currently being evaluated.
The viral tropism cannot be safely predicted by treatment history and assessment of stored samples.
There are currently no data regarding the reuse of CELSENTRI in patients that currently have only CCR5-tropic HIV-1 detectable, but have a history of failure on CELSENTRI (or other CCR5 antagonists) with a CXCR4 or dual/ mixed tropic virus.
There are no data regarding the switch from a medicinal product of a different antiretroviral class to CELSENTRI in virologically suppressed patients.
Alternative treatment options should be considered.
Adults: the recommended dose of CELSENTRI is 150 mg, 300 mg or 600 mg twice daily depending on interactions with co-administered antiretroviral therapy and other medicinal products (see Table 2 in Section 4.5).
CELSENTRI can be taken with or without food.
Children:
CELSENTRI is not recommended for use in children due to lack of data on safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetics (see section 5.2).
2 Elderly: there is limited experience in patients > 65 years of age (see section 5.2), therefore CELSENTRI should be used with caution in this population.
Renal impairment: dosage adjustment is only recommended in patients with renal impairment who are receiving potent CYP3A4 inhibitors such as: • protease inhibitors (except tipranavir/ ritonavir) • ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, telithromycin.
CELSENTRI should be used with caution in patients with renal impairment (CLcr < 80ml/ min) who are taking potent CYP3A4 inhibitors (see sections 4.4 and 5.2).
Table 1 below provides dose interval adjustment guidelines based on simulations of increasing renal impairment in patients being coadministered potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.
The safety and efficacy of these dose interval adjustments have not been clinically evaluated.
Therefore, clinical response to treatment should be closely monitored in these patients.
Table 1.
Dose interval adjustments based on simulations of increasing renal impairment (for dose recommendations, see Section 4.5 Table 2) Recommended CELSENTRI dose interval
Creatinine clearance (CLcr) (ml/ min)
50- 80 ml/ min
< 50 – 30 ml/ min
< 30 ml/ min
Without potent CYP3A4 inhibitors or co- administered with tipranavir/ ritonavir If coadministered with potent CYP3A4
No dose interval adjustment required
inhibitors, e. g. lopinavir/ ritonavir, darunavir/ ritonavir, atazanavir/ ritonavir, ketoconazole (see also section 4.5)
Every 24 hours
If coadministered with saquinavir/ ritonavir Every 24 hours
Every 48 hours
Every 72 hours
Hepatic impairment: limited data are available in patients with hepatic impairment, therefore CELSENTRI should be used with caution in this population (see sections 4.4 and 5.2).
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to peanut or soya or to any of the excipients.
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
CELSENTRI should be taken as part of an antiretroviral combination regimen.
CELSENTRI should optimally be combined with other antiretrovirals to which the patient's virus is sensitive (see section 5.1).
CELSENTRI should only be used when only CCR5-tropic HIV-1 is detectable (i. e.
CXCR4 or dual/ mixed tropic virus not detected) as determined by an adequately validated and sensitive detection method (see sections 4.1, 4.2 and 5.1).
The Monogram Trofile assay was used in the clinical studies of CELSENTRI.
Other phenotypic and genotypic assays are currently being evaluated.
The viral tropism cannot be predicted by treatment history or assessment of stored samples.
Changes in viral tropism occur over time in HIV-1 infected patients.
Therefore there is a need to start therapy shortly after a tropism test.
Background resistance to other classes of antiretrovirals have been shown to be similar in previously undetected CXCR4-tropic virus of the minor viral population, as that found in CCR5-tropic virus.
Dose adjustment: physicians should ensure that appropriate dose adjustment of CELSENTRI is made when CELSENTRI is co-administered with CYP3A4 inhibitors and/ or inducers since maraviroc concentrations and its therapeutic effects may be affected (see sections 4.2 and 4.5).
Please also refer to the respective Summary of Product Characteristics of the other antiretroviral medicinal products used in the combination.
3 Information for patients: patients should be advised that antiretroviral therapies including CELSENTRI have not been shown to prevent the risk of transmission of HIV to others through sexual contact or contamination with blood.
They should continue to use appropriate precautions.
Patients should also be informed that CELSENTRI is not a cure for HIV-1 infection.
Postural hypotension: when CELSENTRI was administered in studies with healthy volunteers at doses higher than the recommended dose, cases of symptomatic postural hypotension were seen at a greater frequency than with placebo.
However, when CELSENTRI was given at the recommended dose in HIV infected patients in Phase 3 studies, postural hypotension was seen at a similar rate compared to placebo (approximately 0.5%).
Caution should be used when administering CELSENTRI in patients with a history of postural hypotension or on concomitant medicinal products known to lower blood pressure.
Potential effect on immunity:
CCR5 antagonists could potentially impair the immune response to certain infections.
This should be taken into consideration when treating infections such as active tuberculosis and invasive fungal infections.
The incidence of AIDS-defining infections was similar between CELSENTRI and placebo arms in the pivotal studies.
Cardiovascular safety: limited data exist with the use of CELSENTRI in patients with severe cardiovascular disease, therefore special caution should be exercised when treating these patients with CELSENTRI.
Immune reconstitution syndrome: in HIV infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of institution of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic pathogens may arise and cause serious clinical conditions, or aggravation of symptoms.
Typically, such reactions have been observed within the first few weeks or months of initiation of CART.
Relevant examples are cytomegalovirus retinitis, generalised and/ or focal mycobacterial infections, and pneumonia caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii).
Any inflammatory symptoms should be evaluated and treatment initiated when necessary.
Osteonecrosis: although the etiology is considered to be multifactorial (including corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe immunosuppression, higher body mass index), cases of osteonecrosis have been reported particularly in patients with advanced HIV-disease and/ or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
Patients should be advised to seek medical advice if they experience joint aches and pain, joint stiffness or difficulty in movement.
Hepatic safety: the safety and efficacy of CELSENTRI have not been specifically studied in patients with significant underlying liver disorders.
A case of possible CELSENTRI-induced hepatotoxicity with allergic features has been reported in a study in healthy volunteers.
In addition, an increase in hepatic adverse reactions with CELSENTRI was observed during studies of treatment-experienced subjects with HIV infection, although there was no overall increase in ACTG Grade 3/ 4 liver function test abnormalities (see section 4.8).
Patients with pre-existing liver dysfunction, including chronic active hepatitis, can have an increased frequency of liver function abnormalities during combination antiretroviral therapy and should be monitored according to standard practice.
Discontinuation of CELSENTRI should be considered in any patient with signs or symptoms of acute hepatitis, in particular if drug-related hypersensitivity is suspected or with increased liver transaminases combined with rash or other systemic symptoms of potential hypersensitivity (e. g. pruritic rash, eosinophila or elevated IgE).
Since there are very limited data in patients with hepatitis B/ C co-infection, special caution should be exercised when treating these patients with CELSENTRI.
In case of concomitant antiviral therapy for hepatitis B and/ or C, please refer also to the relevant product information for these medicinal products.
4 There is limited experience in patients with reduced hepatic function, therefore CELSENTRI should be used with caution in this population (see sections 4.2 and 5.2).
Renal impairment: the safety and efficacy of CELSENTRI have not been specifically studied in patients with renal impairment, therefore CELSENTRI should be used with caution in this population.
In the absence of metabolic inhibitors, renal clearance accounts for less than 25% of total clearance of maraviroc and hence renal impairment is not expected to significantly alter maraviroc exposures.
In the presence of metabolic inhibitors, renal clearance may account for up to 70% of total clearance of maraviroc, hence renal impairment may result in increased maraviroc exposures in this case.
Therefore, CELSENTRI should be used with caution in patients with renal impairment (CLcr < 80 ml/ min) who are also taking potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.
Table 1 provides dose interval adjustment guidelines based on simulations of increasing renal impairment in patients being coadministered potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.
The safety and efficacy of these dose interval adjustments have not been clinically evaluated.
Therefore, clinical response to treatment should be closely monitored in these patients (see sections 4.2 and 5.2).
Soya lecithin:
CELSENTRI contains soya lecithin.
If a patient is hypersensitive to peanut or soya, CELSENTRI should not be used.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Maraviroc is a substrate of cytochrome P450 CYP3A4.
Co-administration of CELSENTRI with medicinal products that induce CYP3A4 may decrease maraviroc concentrations and reduce its therapeutic effects.
Co-administration of CELSENTRI with medicinal products that inhibit CYP3A4 may increase maraviroc plasma concentrations.
Dose adjustment of CELSENTRI is recommended when CELSENTRI is co-administered with CYP3A4 inhibitors and/ or inducers.
Further details for concomitantly administered medicinal products are provided below (see Table 2).
Studies in human liver microsomes and recombinant enzyme systems have shown that maraviroc does not inhibit any of the major P450 enzymes at clinically relevant concentrations (CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4).
Maraviroc had no clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, the oral contraceptives ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel, or urinary 6β -hydroxycortisol/ cortisol ratio, suggesting no inhibition or induction of CYP3A4 in vivo.
At higher exposure of maraviroc a potential inhibition of CYP2D6 cannot be excluded.
Based on the in vitro and clinical data, the potential for maraviroc to affect the pharmacokinetics of coadministered medicinal products is low.
Renal clearance accounts for approximately 23% of total clearance of maraviroc when maraviroc is administered without CYP3A4 inhibitors.
As both passive and active processes are involved, there is the potential for competition for elimination with other renally eliminated active substances.
However, co-administration of CELSENTRI with tenofovir (substrate for renal elimination) and Cotrimoxazole (contains trimethoprim, a renal cation transport inhibitor), showed no effect on the pharmacokinetics of maraviroc.
In addition, co-administration of CELSENTRI with lamivudine/ zidovudine showed no effect of maraviroc on lamivudine (primarily renally cleared) or zidovudine (non-P450 metabolism and renal clearance) pharmacokinetics.
In vitro results indicate that maraviroc could inhibit P- glycoprotein in the gut and may thus affect bioavailability of certain drugs.
Table 2.
Interactions and dose recommendations with other medical products Medicinal product by therapeutic areas (dose of CELSENTRI used in study) ANTI-INFECTIVES Antiretrovirals NRTIs
Effects on drug levels Geometric mean ratio (range) if not stated otherwise
Recommendations concerning co- administration
5 Lamivudine 150 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Lamivudine AUC12: ↔ 1.13 (0.82, 2.09) Lamivudine Cmax: ↔ 1.16 (0.46, 2.55) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
No significant interaction seen/ expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and NRTIs can be co- administered without dose
Tenofovir 300 mg QD (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12: ↔ 1.03 (0.83, 1.19) Maraviroc Cmax: ↔ 1.03 (0.68, 1.45) Tenofovir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
adjustment.
Zidovudine 300 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID) NNRTIs
Zidovudine AUC12: ↔ 0.98 (0.45, 1.88) Zidovudine Cmax: ↔ 0.93 (0.38, 2.70) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
Efavirenz 600 mg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12: ↓ 0.55 (90% CI:
0.49, 0.62) Maraviroc Cmax: ↓ 0.49 (90% CI:
0.38, 0.63) Efavirenz concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be increased to 600 mg twice daily when co-administered with efavirenz in the absence of a PI or other potent CYP3A4 inhibitor.
For combination with efavirenz + PI, see below.
Nevirapine 200 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg Single Dose) PIs
Maraviroc AUC12: ↔ compared to historical controls Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ compared to historical controls Nevirapine concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
Comparison to exposure in historical controls suggests that CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and nevirapine can be co-administered without dose adjustment.
Atazanavir 400 mg QD (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 3.57 (2.55, 4.45) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 2.09 (1.31, 4.19) Atazanavir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with a PI; except in combination with
Atazanavir/ ritonavir 300 mg/ 100 mg QD (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 4.88 (3.28, 6.49) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 2.67 (1.52, 3.90) Atazanavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
tipranavir/ ritonavir or fosamprenavir/ ritonavir where the dose should be 300 mg BID.
Maraviroc does not significantly
Lopinavir/ ritonavir 400 mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 3.95 (2.32, 5.52) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 1.97 (1.26, 2.70) Lopinavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
affect PI drug levels.
Saquinavir/ ritonavir 1000 mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 9.77 (5.42, 20.5) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 4.78 (2.11, 9.88) Saquinavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
Darunavir/ ritonavir 600 mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 150 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 4.05 (2.10, 21.2) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 2.29 (0.74, 17.8) Darunavir/ ritonavir concentrations were consistent with historical data.
Nelfinavir
Limited data are available for co- administration with nelfinavir.
Nelfinavir is a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor and would be expected to increase maraviroc concentrations.
Indinavir
Limited data are available for co- administration with indinavir.
Indinavir is a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor.
Population PK analysis in phase 3 studies suggests dose reduction of maraviroc when coadministered with indinavir gives appropriate maraviroc exposure.
Fosamprenavir/ ritonavir
Fosamprenavir is considered to be a moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor.
Population PK studies suggest that a dose adjustment of maraviroc is not required.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and tipranavir/ ritonavir or fosamprenavir/ ritonavir can be co- administered without dose
6
Tipranavir/ ritonavir 500 mg/ 200 mg BID (maraviroc 150 mg BID) NNRTI + PI
Maraviroc AUC12 ↔ 1.02 (0.65, 1.87) Maraviroc Cmax: ↔ 0.86 (0.37, 3.20) Tipranavir/ ritonavir concentrations were consistent with historical data.
adjustment.
Efavirenz 600 mg QD + lopinavir/ ritonavir 400mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID) Efavirenz 600 mg QD + saquinavir/ ritonavir 1000 mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 100 mg BID) Efavirenz and atazanavir/ ritonavir or darunavir/ ritonavir Antibiotics
Maraviroc AUC12: ↑ 2.53 (1.71, 3.15) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 1.25 (0.87, 2.82) Efavirenz, lopinavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect expected.
Maraviroc AUC12: ↑ 5.00 (3.04, 6.31) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 2.26 (0.68, 4.09) Efavirenz, saquinavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect expected.
Not studied.
Based on the extent of inhibition by atazanavir/ ritonavir or darunavir/ ritonavir in the absence of efavirenz, an increased exposure is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with efavirenz in the presence of a PI (except fosamprenavir/ ritonavir where the dose should be 300 mg twice daily).
Sulphamethoxazole/ Trimethoprim 800 mg/ 160 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12: ↔ 1.11 (0.84, 1.53) Maraviroc Cmax: ↔ 1.19 (0.69, 1.73) Sulphamethoxazole/ trimethoprim concentrations not measured, no effect expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and sulphamethoxazole/ trimethoprim can be co-administered without dose adjustment.
Rifampicin 600 mg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC: ↓ 0.37 (90% CI:
0.33, 0.41) Maraviroc Cmax: ↓ 0.34 (90% CI:
0.26, 0.43) Rifampicin concentrations not measured, no effect expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be increased to 600 mg twice daily when co-administered with rifampicin in the absence of a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor.
This dose adjustment has not been studied in HIV patients.
See also section 4.4.
Rifampicin + efavirenz
Combination with two inducers has not been studied.
There may be a risk of suboptimal levels with risk of loss of virologic response and resistance development.
Concomitant use of CELSENTRI and rifampicin + efavirenz is not recommended.
Rifabutin + PI
Not studied.
Rifabutin is considered to be a weaker inducer than rifampicin.
When combining rifabutin with protease inhibitors that are potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 a net inhibitory effect on maraviroc is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with rifabutin in the presence of a PI (except tipranavir/ ritonavir or fosamprenavir/ ritonavir where the dose should be 300 mg twice daily).
See also section 4.4.
Clarithromycin, Telithromycin Antifungals
Not studied, but both are potent CYP3A4 inhibitors and would be expected to increase maraviroc concentrations.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with clarithromycin and telithromycin.
Ketoconazole 400 mg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUCtau: ↑ 5.00 (2.40, 9.62) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 3.38 (1.11, 7.68) Ketoconazole concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with ketoconazole.
Itraconazole
Not studied.
Itraconazole, is a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor and would be expected to increase the exposure of maraviroc.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with itraconazole.
Fluconazole Antivirals
Fluconazole is considered to be a moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor.
Population PK studies suggest that a dose adjustment of maraviroc is not required.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily should be administered with caution when coadministered with fluconazole.
HCV agents
Pegylated interferon and ribavirin have not been studied, no interaction is expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and pegylated interferon or
7
ribavirin can be coadministered without dose adjustment.
DRUG ABUSE Methadone
Not studied, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and methadone can be coadministered without dose adjustment.
Buprenorphine LIPID LOWERING MEDICINAL PRODUCTS
Not studied, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and buprenorphine can be coadministered without dose adjustment.
Statins
Not studied, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and statins can be coadministered without dose adjustment.
ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES Ethinylestradiol 30 mcg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Ethinylestradiol.
AUCt: ↔ 1.00 (0.79, 1.20) Ethinylestradiol.
Cmax: ↔ 0.99 (0.61, 1.32) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily. and ethinylestradiol can be co- administered without dose adjustment.
Levonorgestrel 150mcg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID) SEDATIVES
Levonorgestrel.
AUC12: ↔ 0.99 (0.70, 1.31) Levonorgestrel.
Cmax: ↔ 1.01 (0.66, 1.51) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and levonorgestrel can be co- administered without dose adjustment.
Benzodiazepines
Midazolam 7.5 mg Single Dose (maraviroc 300 mg BID) HERBAL PRODUCTS
Midazolam.
AUC: ↔ 1.18 (0.68, 1.77) Midazolam.
Cmax: ↔ 1.21 (0.51, 2.97) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and midazolam can be co- administered without dose adjustment.
St John’ s Wort
Coadministration of maraviroc with St.
John's wort is expected to substantially decrease maraviroc concentrations and may result in suboptimal levels and lead to loss of virologic response and possible resistance to maraviroc.
Concomitant use of maraviroc and St.
John's wort (Hypericum Perforatum) or products containing St.
John's wort is not recommended.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
No meaningful clinical data on exposure during pregnancy are available.
Studies in rats and rabbits showed reproductive toxicity at high exposures.
Primary pharmacological activity (CCR5 receptor affinity) was limited in these species (see section 5.3).
CELSENTRI should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
Studies in lactating rats indicate that maraviroc is extensively secreted into rat milk.
Primary pharmacological activity (CCR5 receptor affinity) was limited in these species.
It is not known whether maraviroc is secreted into human milk.
Mothers should be instructed not to breast-feed if they are receiving CELSENTRI because of the potential for HIV transmission as well as any possible undesirable effects in breast-fed infants.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
CELSENTRI may cause dizziness.
Patients should be instructed that if they experience dizziness they should avoid potentially hazardous tasks such as driving or operating machinery.
8 4.8 Undesirable effects
The safety profile of CELSENTRI is based on 1349 HIV-1 infected patients who received at least one dose of CELSENTRI during clinical studies.
This includes 427 patients who received the recommended dose 300 mg twice daily and a further 401 patients who received 300 mg once daily for at least 24 weeks.
Assessment of treatment related adverse reactions is based on pooled data at the recommended dose from two Phase 3 studies (MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2) in CCR5-tropic HIV-1 infected patients.
The most frequently reported adverse reactions occurring in the Phase 3 studies at the recommended dose regardless of the incidence compared to OBT alone were diarrhoea, nausea and headache.
These adverse reactions were common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10).
The reported frequencies for these events as well as the rates of discontinuation due to any adverse reactions were similar in patients receiving CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT (Optimised Background Therapy) compared to those receiving OBT alone.
The adverse reactions are listed by system organ class (SOC) and frequency.
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness.
Frequencies are defined as very common (≥ 1/ 10), common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10) and uncommon (≥ 1/ 1000 to < 1/ 100).
The adverse reactions and laboratory abnormalities presented below are not exposure adjusted.
The following table presents adverse reactions occurring at a numerically higher rate among patients receiving CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT than patients on OBT alone with an incidence of ≥ 1%.
Table 3.
Adverse reactions occurring at a numerically higher rate among patients receiving CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT than patients on OBT alone with an incidence of ≥ 1%
System Organ Class Investigations
Adverse Reaction alanine aminotransferase increased, aspartate aminotransferase increased, gamma-glutamyltransferase increased, weight decreased
Frequency common
Nervous system disorders
dizziness, paraesthesia, dysgeusia, somnolence
common
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders
Cough
common
Gastrointestinal disorders
nausea
very common
vomiting, abdominal pain, abdominal distension, dyspepsia, constipation
common
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
rash, pruritus
common
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders
muscle spasms, back pain
common
General disorders and administration site conditions
Asthenia
common
Psychiatric disorders
Insomnia
common
Clinically important adverse reactions occurring in less than 1% of adult patients receiving CELSENTRI in Phase 3 studies are presented below.
Table 4.
Clinically important adverse reactions occurring in less than 1% of adult patients receiving CELSENTRI in Phase 3 studies
System Organ Class Cardiac disorders
Adverse Reaction myocardial infarction, myocardial
Frequency uncommon
9 ischaemia
Blood and lymphatic system disorders
pancytopenia, neutropenia, lymphadenopathy
uncommon
Nervous system disorders
loss of consciousness, epilepsy, petit mal epilepsy, convulsion, facial palsy, polyneuropathy, areflexia
uncommon
Respiratory, thoracic and Mediastinal disorders
respiratory distress, bronchospasm
uncommon
Gastrointestinal disorders Renal and urinary disorders Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders
pancreatitis, rectal haemorrhage renal failure, polyuria Myositis
uncommon uncommon uncommon
Infections and infestations Hepatobiliary disorders Psychiatric disorders
Pneumonia hepatic cirrhosis Hallucination
uncommon uncommon uncommon
In HIV infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of initiation of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic infections may arise (see section 4.4).
Laboratory abnormalities Table 5 shows the incidence ≥ 1% of Grade 3-4 Abnormalities (ACTG Criteria) based on the maximum shift in laboratory test values without regard to baseline values.
Table 5:
Incidence ≥ 1% of grade 3-4 abnormalities (ACTG criteria) based on maximum shift in laboratory test values without regard to baseline studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2 (pooled analysis, up to 48 weeks)
Celsentri 300 mg
OBT
Laboratory parameter
Limit
twice daily + OBT
alone
N
=421* (%)
N
=207* (%)
Aspartate aminotransferase Alanine aminotransferase Total bilirubin Amylase Lipase Absolute neutrophil count ULN:
Upper Limit of Normal
> 5.0x ULN > 5.0x ULN > 5.0x ULN > 2.0x ULN > 2.0x ULN < 750/ mm3
4.5 2.4 5.7 5.5 4.9 3.8
2.9 3.4 5.3 5.8 6.3 1.9
* Percentages based on total patients evaluated for each laboratory parameter
Cases of osteonecrosis have been reported, particularly in patients with generally acknowledged risk factors, advanced HIV disease or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
The frequency of this is unknown (see section 4.4).
4.9 Overdose
The highest dose administered in clinical studies was 1200 mg.
The dose limiting adverse reaction was postural hypotension.
Prolongation of the QT interval was seen in dogs and monkeys at plasma concentrations 6 and 12 times, respectively, those expected in humans at the maximum recommended dose of 300 mg twice daily.
However, no clinically significant QT prolongation compared to OBT alone was seen in the Phase 3 clinical studies using the recommended dose of maraviroc or in a specific pharmacokinetic study to evaluate the potential of CELSENTRI to prolong the QT interval.
10 There is no specific antidote for overdose with CELSENTRI.
Treatment of overdose should consist of general supportive measures including keeping the patient in a supine position, careful assessment of patient vital signs, blood pressure and ECG.
If indicated, elimination of unabsorbed active maraviroc should be achieved by emesis or gastric lavage.
Administration of activated charcoal may also be used to aid in removal of unabsorbed active substance.
Since maraviroc is moderately protein bound, dialysis may be beneficial in removal of this medicine.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Antivirals for systemic use, Other Antivirals ATC code:
J05AX09
Mechanism of action:
Maraviroc is a member of a therapeutic class called CCR5 antagonists.
Maraviroc selectively binds to the human chemokine receptor CCR5, preventing CCR5-tropic HIV-1 from entering cells.
Antiviral activity in vitro:
Maraviroc has no antiviral activity in vitro against viruses which can use CXCR4 as their entry co- receptor (dual-tropic or CXCR4-tropic viruses, collectively termed ‘ CXCR4-using’ virus below).
The serum adjusted EC90 value in 43 primary HIV-1 clinical isolates was 0.57 (0.06 – 10.7) ng/ mL without significant changes between different subtypes tested.
The antiviral activity of maraviroc against HIV-2 has not been evaluated.
For details please refer to http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/ htms/ human/ epar/ eparintro.
When used with other antiretroviral medicinal products in cell culture, the combination of maraviroc was not antagonistic with a range of NRTIs, NNRTIs, PIs or the HIV fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide.
Resistance:
Viral escape from maraviroc can occur via 2 routes: the selection of virus which can use CXCR4 as its entry co-receptor (CXCR4-using virus) or the selection of virus that continues to use exclusively CCR5 (CCR5-tropic virus).
In vitro:
HIV-1 variants with reduced susceptibility to maraviroc have been selected in vitro, following serial passage of two CCR5-tropic viruses (0 laboratory strains, 2 clinical isolates).
The maraviroc-resistant viruses remained CCR5-tropic and there was no conversion from a CCR5-tropic virus to a CXCR4- using virus.
Phenotypic resistance: concentration response curves for the maraviroc-resistant viruses were characterized phenotypically by curves that did not reach 100% inhibition in assays using serial dilutions of maraviroc.
Traditional IC50/ IC90 fold-change was not a useful parameter to measure phenotypic resistance, as those values were sometimes unchanged despite significantly reduced sensitivity.
Genotypic resistance: mutations were found to accumulate in the gp120 envelope glycoprotein (the viral protein that binds to the CCR5 co-receptor).
The position of these mutations was not consistent between different isolates.
Hence, the relevance of these mutations to maraviroc susceptibility in other viruses is not known.
Cross-resistance in vitro:
HIV-1 clinical isolates resistant to nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI), non- nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI), protease inhibitors (PI) and enfuvirtide
11 were all susceptible to maraviroc in cell culture.
Maraviroc-resistant viruses that emerged in vitro remained sensitive to the fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide and the protease inhibitor saquinavir.
In vivo:
Treatment naïve patients The resistance profile in treatment-naïve patients has not been characterized.
Treatment experienced patients In the pivotal studies (MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2), 7.6% of patients had a change in tropism result from CCR5-tropic to CXCR4-tropic or dual/ mixed-tropic between screening and baseline (a period of 4-6 weeks).
Failure with CXCR4-using virus:
CXCR4-using virus was detected at failure in approximately 60% of subjects who failed treatment on CELSENTRI, as compared to 6% of subjects who experienced treatment failure in the OBT alone arm.
To investigate the likely origin of the on-treatment CXCR4-using virus, a detailed clonal analysis was conducted on virus from 20 representative subjects (16 subjects from the CELSENTRI arms and 4 subjects from the OBT alone arm) in whom CXCR4-using virus was detected at treatment failure.
This analysis indicated that CXCR4-virus emerged from a pre-existing CXCR4-using reservoir not detected at baseline, rather than from mutation of CCR5-tropic virus present at baseline.
An analysis of tropism following failure of CELSENTRI therapy with CXCR4 -using virus, demonstrated that the virus population reverted back to CCR5 tropism in the majority of patients during follow up after discontinuation of CELSENTRI.
Out of 44 patients studied, the virus population in 30 reverted back to exclusively CCR5-tropism during a median follow-up of 203 days; 14 patients continued to have detectable CXCR4 -using virus.
However, the follow-up period in these patients were shorter (median 16 days).
At time of failure with CXCR4-using virus, the resistance pattern to other antiretrovirals appears similar to that of the CCR5-tropic population at baseline, based on available data.
Hence, in the selection of a treatment regimen, it should be assumed that viruses forming part of the previously undetected CXCR4 -using population (i. e. minor viral population) harbours the same resistance pattern as the CCR5-tropic population.
Failure with CCR5-tropic virus:
Phenotypic resistance: in patients with CCR5-tropic virus at time of treatment failure with CELSENTRI, 22 out of 58 patients had virus with reduced sensitivity to maraviroc.
In the remaining 36 patients, there was no evidence of virus with reduced sensitivity as identified by exploratory virology analyses on a representative group.
The latter group had markers correlating to low compliance (low and variable drug levels and often a calculated high residual sensitivity score of the OBT).
In patients failing therapy with R5-virus only, maraviroc might be considered still active if the maximal percentage inhibition (MPI) value is ≥ 95% (Phenosense Entry assay).
Residual activity in vivo for viruses with MPI-values < 95% has not been determined.
Genotypic resistance:
Key mutations (V3-loop) can presently not be suggested due to the high variability of the V3-sequence, and the low number of samples analysed.
Clinical Results
Studies in CCR5-tropic Treatment-Experienced Patients:
The clinical efficacy of CELSENTRI (in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products) on plasma HIV RNA levels and CD4+ cell counts have been investigated in two pivotal ongoing, randomized, double blind, multicentre studies (MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2, n=1076) in patients infected with CCR5 tropic HIV-1 as determined by the Monogram Trofile Assay.
Patients who were eligible for these studies had prior exposure to at least 3 antiretroviral medicinal product classes [≥ 1 nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI), ≥ 1 non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI), ≥ 2 protease inhibitors (PI), and/ or enfurvirtide] or documented
12 resistance to at least one member of each class.
Patients were randomised in a 2:2:1 ratio to CELSENTRI 300 mg (dose equivalence) once daily, twice daily or placebo in combination with an optimized background consisting of 3 to 6 antiretroviral medicinal products (excluding low-dose ritonavir).
The OBT was selected on the basis of the subject’ s prior treatment history and baseline genotypic and phenotypic viral resistance measurements.
Table 6:
Demographic and baseline characteristics of patients in studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2 (Pooled Analysis)
CELSENTRI
OBT
Demographic and Baseline Characteristics
300 mg twice daily + OBT
alone
Age (years)
N
= 426 46.3
N
= 209 45.7
(Range, years) Male Sex
21-73 89.7%
29-72 88.5%
Race (White/ Black/ Other) Mean Baseline HIV-1 RNA (log10 copies/ mL) Median Baseline CD4+ Cell Count (cells/ mm3)
85.2% /
12% / 2.8% 4.85 166.8
85.2% /
12.4% / 2.4% 4.86 171.3
(range, cells/ mm3)
(2.0-820.0)
(1.0-675.0)
Screening Viral Load > 100,000 copies/ mL
179 (42.0%)
84 (40.2%)
Baseline CD4+ Cell Count ≤ 200 cells/ mm3 Number (Percentage) of patients with GSS score:
250 (58.7%)
118 (56.5%)
0 1 2 ≥ 3
102 (23.9%) 138 (32.4%) 80 (18.8%) 104 (24.4%)
51 (24.4%) 53 (25.4%) 41 (19.6%) 59 (28.2%)
GeneSeq resistance assay
Limited numbers of patients from ethnicities other than Caucasian were included in the pivotal clinical studies, therefore very limited data are available in these patient populations.
The mean increase in CD4+ cell count from baseline in patients who failed with a change in tropism result to dual/ mixed tropic or CXCR4, in the CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT (+56 cells/ mm3) group was greater than that seen in patients failing OBT alone (+13.8 cells/ mm3) regardless of tropism.
Table 7.
Outcomes of randomised treatment at week 48 (pooled studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2)
HIV-1 RNA
Outcomes
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT N=426
OBT alone N=209
Treatment Difference1 (Confidence Interval2)
Change from baseline
-1.84
-0.78
-1.05
(log10 copies/ mL)
(-1.33, -0.78)
Proportion of patients with HIV RNA < 400 copies/ ml
56.1%
22.5%
Odds ratio:
4.76 (3.24, 7.00)
Proportion of patients with HIV RNA < 50 copies/ ml CD4+ cell count
45.5%
16.7%
Odds ratio:
4.49 (2.96, 6.83)
Change from baseline (cells/ mm3) 1 p-values < 0.0001
124.07
60.93
63.13 (44.28, 81.99)
13 2 For all efficacy endpoints the confidence intervals were 95%, except for HIV-1 RNA Change from baseline which was 97.5%
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT was superior to OBT alone across all subgroups of patients analysed (see Table 8).
Patients with very low CD4+ count at baseline (i. e. < 50 cells/ uL) had a less favourable outcome.
This subgroup had a high degree of bad prognostic markers, i. e. extensive resistance and high baseline viral loads.
However, a significant treatment benefit for CELSENTRI compared to OBT alone was still demonstrated (see Table 8).
Table 8.
Proportion of patients achieving < 50 copies/ ml at Week 48 by subgroup (pooled Studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2, ITT)
HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/ ml
CELSENTRI 300 mg
OBT
Subgroups
twice daily + OBT
alone
N=426
N=209
Baseline HIV-1 RNA:
< 5.0 log10 copies/ ml ≥ 5.0 log10 copies/ ml
58.4% 34.7%
26.0% 9.5%
Baseline CD4+ (cells/ uL):
< 50
16.5
2.6
50-100 101-200 201-350 ≥ 350
36.4 56.7 57.8 72.9
12.0 21.8 21.0 38.5
Number of active ARVs in OBT1,2:
0 1 2
32.7% 44.5% 58.2%
2.0% 7.4% 31.7%
1
≥ 3
62%
38.6%
Discontinuations or virological failures considered as failures.
2 Based on GSS.
Studies in Non-CCR5-tropic Treatment-Experienced Patients:
Study A4001029 was an exploratory study in patients infected with dual/ mixed or CXCR4 tropic HIV-1 with a similar design as the studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2.
In this study, neither superiority nor non-inferiority to OBT alone were demonstrated although there was no adverse outcome on viral load or CD4+ cell count
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption: the absorption of maraviroc is variable with multiple peaks.
Median peak maraviroc plasma concentrations is attained at 2 hours (range 0.5-4 hours) following single oral doses of 300 mg commercial tablet administered to healthy volunteers.
The pharmacokinetics of oral maraviroc are not dose proportional over the dose range.
The absolute bioavailability of a 100 mg dose is 23% and is predicted to be 33% at 300 mg.
Maraviroc is a substrate for the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein.
Coadministration of a 300 mg tablet with a high fat breakfast reduced maraviroc Cmax and AUC by 33% in healthy volunteers.
There were no food restrictions in the studies that demonstrated the efficacy and safety of CELSENTRI (see section 5.1).
Therefore, CELSENTRI can be taken with or without food at the recommended doses (see section 4.2).
Distribution: maraviroc is bound (approximately 76%) to human plasma proteins, and shows moderate affinity for albumin and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein.
The volume of distribution of maraviroc is approximately 194 L.
14 Metabolism: studies in humans and in vitro studies using human liver microsomes and expressed enzymes have demonstrated that maraviroc is principally metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system to metabolites that are essentially inactive against HIV-1.
In vitro studies indicate that CYP3A4 is the major enzyme responsible for maraviroc metabolism.
In vitro studies also indicate that polymorphic enzymes CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 do not contribute significantly to the metabolism of maraviroc.
Maraviroc is the major circulating component (approximately 42% radioactivity) following a single oral dose of 300 mg.
The most significant circulating metabolite in humans is a secondary amine (approximately 22% radioactivity) formed by N-dealkylation.
This polar metabolite has no significant pharmacological activity.
Other metabolites are products of mono-oxidation and are only minor components of plasma radioactivity.
Elimination: a mass balance/ excretion study was conducted using a single 300 mg dose of 14C-labeled maraviroc.
Approximately 20% of the radiolabel was recovered in the urine and 76% was recovered in the faeces over 168 hours.
Maraviroc was the major component present in urine (mean of 8% dose) and faeces (mean of 25% dose).
The remainder was excreted as metabolites.
After intravenous administration (30 mg), the half-life of maraviroc was 13.2 h, 22% of the dose was excreted unchanged in the urine and the values of total clearance and renal clearance were 44.0 L/ h and 10.17 L/ h respectively.
Children: the pharmacokinetics of maraviroc in paediatric patients have not been established (see section 4.2).
Elderly: population analysis of the Phase 1/ 2a and Phase 3 studies (16-65 years of age) has been conducted and no effect of age has been observed (see section 4.2).
Renal impairment: the pharmacokinetics of maraviroc have not been studied in patients with renal impairment.
However, renal clearance contributes less than 25% of maraviroc total clearance in the absence of CYP3A4 inhibitors, therefore the impact of renal impairment on maraviroc elimination should be minimal.
In the presence of metabolic inhibitors, renal clearance may account for up to 70% of total clearance of maraviroc and hence renal impairment may result in increased maraviroc exposures in this case (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Hepatic impairment: maraviroc is primarily metabolized and eliminated by the liver.
A study compared the pharmacokinetics of a single 300 mg dose of CELSENTRI in patients with mild (Child- Pugh Class A, n=8), and moderate (Child-Pugh Class B, n=8) hepatic impairment compared to healthy subjects (n=8).
Geometric mean ratios for Cmax and AUClast were 11% and 25% higher respectively for subjects with mild hepatic impairment, and 32% and 46% higher respectively for subjects with moderate hepatic impairment compared to subjects with normal hepatic function.
The effects of moderate hepatic impairment may be underestimated due to limited data in patients with decreased metabolic capacity and higher renal clearance in these subjects.
The results should therefore be interpreted with caution.
The pharmacokinetics of maraviroc have not been studied in subjects with severe hepatic impairment (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Race: no relevant difference between Caucasian, Asian and Black subjects has been observed.
The pharmacokinetics in other races has not been evaluated.
Gender: no relevant differences in pharmacokinetics have been observed.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
Primary pharmacological activity (CCR5 receptor affinity) was present in the monkey (100% receptor occupancy) and limited in the mouse, rat, rabbit and dog.
In mice and human beings that lack CCR5 receptors through genetic deletion, no significant adverse consequences have been reported.
15 In vitro and in vivo studies showed that maraviroc has a potential to increase QTc interval at supratherapeutic doses with no evidence of arrhythmia.
Repeated dose toxicity studies in rats identified the liver as the primary target organ for toxicity (increases in transaminases, bile duct hyperplasia, necrosis).
Maraviroc was evaluated for carcinogenic potential by a 6 month transgenic mouse study and a 24 month study in rats.
In mice, no statistically significant increase in the incidence of tumors was reported at systemic exposures from 7 to 39-times the human exposure (unbound AUC 0-24h measurement) at a dose of 300 mg twice daily.
In rats, administration of maraviroc at a systemic exposure 21-times the expected human exposure produced thyroid adenomas associated with adaptive liver changes.
These findings are considered of low human relevance.
In addition, cholangiocarcinomas (2/ 60 males at 900 mg/ kg) and cholangioma (1/ 60 females at 500 mg/ kg) were reported in the rat study at a systemic exposure at least 15-times the expected free human exposure.
Maraviroc was not mutagenic or genotoxic in a battery of in vitro and in vivo assays including bacterial reverse mutation, chromosome aberrations in human lymphocytes and rat bone marrow micronucleus.
Maraviroc did not impair mating or fertility of male or female rats, and did not affect sperm of treated male rats up to 1000 mg/ kg.
The exposure at this dose level corresponded to 39-fold the estimated free clinical AUC for a 300 mg twice daily dose.
Embryofoetal development studies were conducted in rats and rabbits at doses up to 39- and 34-fold the estimated free clinical AUC for a 300 mg twice daily dose.
In rabbit, ,7 foetuses had external anomalies at maternally toxic doses and 1 foetus at the mid dose of 75 mg/ kg.
Pre- and post-natal developmental studies were performed in rats at doses up to 27-fold the estimated free clinical AUC for a 300 mg twice daily dose.
A slight increase in motor activity in high-dose male rats at both weaning and as adults was noted, while no effects were seen in females.
Other developmental parameters of these offspring, including fertility and reproductive performance, were not affected by the maternal administration of maraviroc.
6 PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Tablet core:
Cellulose, microcrystalline Calcium hydrogen phosphate, anhydrous Sodium starch glycolate Magnesium stearate
Film-coat:
Poly (vinyl alcohol) Titanium dioxide Macrogol 3350 Talc Soya Lecithin Indigo carmine aluminium lake (E132)
6.2 Incompatibilities
Not applicable.
16 6.3 Shelf life
3 years.
6.4 Special precautions for storage
This medicinal product does not require any special storage condition.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
High density polyethylene bottles (HDPE) with polypropylene child resistant (CR) closures and an aluminium foil/ polyethylene heat induction seal containing 180 film-coated tablets.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) blisters with aluminium foil backing in a carton containing 30, 60, 90 film- coated tablets and multipacks containing 180 (2 packs of 90) film-coated tablets.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
No special requirements.
7 MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich Kent CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 001 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 002 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 003 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 004 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 005
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
18 September 2007
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) http: / /www. emea. europa. eu
17 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
CELSENTRI 300 mg film-coated tablets.
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each film-coated tablet contains 300 mg of maraviroc.
Excipients Each 300 mg film-coated tablet contains 1.68 mg of soya lecithin.
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Film-coated tablet.
Blue, biconvex, oval film-coated tablets debossed with “ Pfizer” on one side and “ MVC 300” on the other.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
CELSENTRI, in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products, is indicated for treatment- experienced adult patients infected with only CCR5-tropic HIV-1 detectable (see section 4.2).
This indication is based on safety and efficacy data from two double-blind, placebo-controlled trials in treatment-experienced patients (see section 5.1).
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Therapy should be initiated by a physician experienced in the management of HIV infection.
Before taking CELSENTRI it has to be confirmed that only CCR5-tropic HIV-1 is detectable (i. e.
CXCR4 or dual/ mixed tropic virus not detected) using an adequately validated and sensitive detection method on a newly drawn blood sample.
The Monogram Trofile assay was used in the clinical studies of CELSENTRI (see sections 4.4 and 5.1).
Other phenotypic and genotypic assays are currently being evaluated.
The viral tropism cannot be safely predicted by treatment history and assessment of stored samples.
There are currently no data regarding the reuse of CELSENTRI in patients that currently have only CCR5-tropic HIV-1 detectable, but have a history of failure on CELSENTRI (or other CCR5 antagonists) with a CXCR4 or dual/ mixed tropic virus.
There are no data regarding the switch from a medicinal product of a different antiretroviral class to CELSENTRI in virologically suppressed patients.
Alternative treatment options should be considered.
Adults: the recommended dose of CELSENTRI is 150 mg, 300 mg or 600 mg twice daily depending on interactions with co-administered antiretroviral therapy and other medicinal products (see Table 2 in Section 4.5).
CELSENTRI can be taken with or without food.
Children:
CELSENTRI is not recommended for use in children due to lack of data on safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetics (see section 5.2).
18 Elderly: there is limited experience in patients > 65 years of age (see section 5.2), therefore CELSENTRI should be used with caution in this population.
Renal impairment: dosage adjustment is only recommended in patients with renal impairment who are receiving potent CYP3A4 inhibitors such as: • protease inhibitors (except tipranavir/ ritonavir) • ketoconazole, itraconazole, clarithromycin, telithromycin.
CELSENTRI should be used with caution in patients with renal impairment (CLcr < 80ml/ min) who are taking potent CYP3A4 inhibitors (see sections 4.4 and 5.2).
Table 1 below provides dose interval adjustment guidelines based on simulations of increasing renal impairment in patients being coadministered potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.
The safety and efficacy of these dose interval adjustments have not been clinically evaluated.
Therefore, clinical response to treatment should be closely monitored in these patients.
Table 1.
Dose interval adjustments based on simulations of increasing renal impairment (for dose recommendations, see Section 4.5 Table 2) Recommended CELSENTRI dose interval
Creatinine clearance (CLcr) (ml/ min)
50- 80 ml/ min
< 50 – 30 ml/ min
< 30 ml/ min
Without potent CYP3A4 inhibitors or co- administered with tipranavir/ ritonavir If coadministered with potent CYP3A4
No dose interval adjustment required
inhibitors, e. g. lopinavir/ ritonavir, darunavir/ ritonavir, atazanavir/ ritonavir, ketoconazole (see also section 4.5)
Every 24 hours
If coadministered with saquinavir/ ritonavir Every 24 hours
Every 48 hours
Every 72 hours
Hepatic impairment: limited data are available in patients with hepatic impairment, therefore CELSENTRI should be used with caution in this population (see sections 4.4 and 5.2).
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to peanut or soya or to any of the excipients.
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
CELSENTRI should be taken as part of an antiretroviral combination regimen.
CELSENTRI should optimally be combined with other antiretrovirals to which the patient's virus is sensitive (see section 5.1).
CELSENTRI should only be used when only CCR5-tropic HIV-1 is detectable (i. e.
CXCR4 or dual/ mixed tropic virus not detected) as determined by an adequately validated and sensitive detection method (see sections 4.1, 4.2 and 5.1).
The Monogram Trofile assay was used in the clinical studies of CELSENTRI.
Other phenotypic and genotypic assays are currently being evaluated.
The viral tropism cannot be predicted by treatment history or assessment of stored samples.
Changes in viral tropism occur over time in HIV-1 infected patients.
Therefore there is a need to start therapy shortly after a tropism test.
Background resistance to other classes of antiretrovirals have been shown to be similar in previously undetected CXCR4-tropic virus of the minor viral population, as that found in CCR5-tropic virus.
Dose adjustment: physicians should ensure that appropriate dose adjustment of CELSENTRI is made when CELSENTRI is co-administered with CYP3A4 inhibitors and/ or inducers since maraviroc concentrations and its therapeutic effects may be affected (see sections 4.2 and 4.5).
Please also refer to the respective Summary of Product Characteristics of the other antiretroviral medicinal products used in the combination.
19 Information for patients: patients should be advised that antiretroviral therapies including CELSENTRI have not been shown to prevent the risk of transmission of HIV to others through sexual contact or contamination with blood.
They should continue to use appropriate precautions.
Patients should also be informed that CELSENTRI is not a cure for HIV-1 infection.
Postural hypotension: when CELSENTRI was administered in studies with healthy volunteers at doses higher than the recommended dose, cases of symptomatic postural hypotension were seen at a greater frequency than with placebo.
However, when CELSENTRI was given at the recommended dose in HIV infected patients in Phase 3 studies, postural hypotension was seen at a similar rate compared to placebo (approximately 0.5%).
Caution should be used when administering CELSENTRI in patients with a history of postural hypotension or on concomitant medicinal products known to lower blood pressure.
Potential effect on immunity:
CCR5 antagonists could potentially impair the immune response to certain infections.
This should be taken into consideration when treating infections such as active tuberculosis and invasive fungal infections.
The incidence of AIDS-defining infections was similar between CELSENTRI and placebo arms in the pivotal studies.
Cardiovascular safety: limited data exist with the use of CELSENTRI in patients with severe cardiovascular disease, therefore special caution should be exercised when treating these patients with CELSENTRI.
Immune reconstitution syndrome: in HIV infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of institution of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic pathogens may arise and cause serious clinical conditions, or aggravation of symptoms.
Typically, such reactions have been observed within the first few weeks or months of initiation of CART.
Relevant examples are cytomegalovirus retinitis, generalised and/ or focal mycobacterial infections, and pneumonia caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly known as Pneumocystis carinii).
Any inflammatory symptoms should be evaluated and treatment initiated when necessary.
Osteonecrosis: although the etiology is considered to be multifactorial (including corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe immunosuppression, higher body mass index), cases of osteonecrosis have been reported particularly in patients with advanced HIV-disease and/ or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
Patients should be advised to seek medical advice if they experience joint aches and pain, joint stiffness or difficulty in movement.
Hepatic safety: the safety and efficacy of CELSENTRI have not been specifically studied in patients with significant underlying liver disorders.
A case of possible CELSENTRI-induced hepatotoxicity with allergic features has been reported in a study in healthy volunteers.
In addition, an increase in hepatic adverse reactions with CELSENTRI was observed during studies of treatment-experienced subjects with HIV infection, although there was no overall increase in ACTG Grade 3/ 4 liver function test abnormalities (see section 4.8).
Patients with pre-existing liver dysfunction, including chronic active hepatitis, can have an increased frequency of liver function abnormalities during combination antiretroviral therapy and should be monitored according to standard practice.
Discontinuation of CELSENTRI should be considered in any patient with signs or symptoms of acute hepatitis, in particular if drug-related hypersensitivity is suspected or with increased liver transaminases combined with rash or other systemic symptoms of potential hypersensitivity (e. g. pruritic rash, eosinophila or elevated IgE).
Since there are very limited data in patients with hepatitis B/ C co-infection, special caution should be exercised when treating these patients with CELSENTRI.
In case of concomitant antiviral therapy for hepatitis B and/ or C, please refer also to the relevant product information for these medicinal products.
20 There is limited experience in patients with reduced hepatic function, therefore CELSENTRI should be used with caution in this population (see sections 4.2 and 5.2).
Renal impairment: the safety and efficacy of CELSENTRI have not been specifically studied in patients with renal impairment, therefore CELSENTRI should be used with caution in this population.
In the absence of metabolic inhibitors, renal clearance accounts for less than 25% of total clearance of maraviroc and hence renal impairment is not expected to significantly alter maraviroc exposures.
In the presence of metabolic inhibitors, renal clearance may account for up to 70% of total clearance of maraviroc, hence renal impairment may result in increased maraviroc exposures in this case.
Therefore, CELSENTRI should be used with caution in patients with renal impairment (CLcr < 80 ml/ min) who are also taking potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.
Table 1 provides dose interval adjustment guidelines based on simulations of increasing renal impairment in patients being coadministered potent CYP3A4 inhibitors.
The safety and efficacy of these dose interval adjustments have not been clinically evaluated.
Therefore, clinical response to treatment should be closely monitored in these patients (see sections 4.2 and 5.2).
Soya lecithin:
CELSENTRI contains soya lecithin.
If a patient is hypersensitive to peanut or soya, CELSENTRI should not be used.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Maraviroc is a substrate of cytochrome P450 CYP3A4.
Co-administration of CELSENTRI with medicinal products that induce CYP3A4 may decrease maraviroc concentrations and reduce its therapeutic effects.
Co-administration of CELSENTRI with medicinal products that inhibit CYP3A4 may increase maraviroc plasma concentrations.
Dose adjustment of CELSENTRI is recommended when CELSENTRI is co-administered with CYP3A4 inhibitors and/ or inducers.
Further details for concomitantly administered medicinal products are provided below (see Table 2).
Studies in human liver microsomes and recombinant enzyme systems have shown that maraviroc does not inhibit any of the major P450 enzymes at clinically relevant concentrations (CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4).
Maraviroc had no clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, the oral contraceptives ethinylestradiol and levonorgestrel, or urinary 6β -hydroxycortisol/ cortisol ratio, suggesting no inhibition or induction of CYP3A4 in vivo.
At higher exposure of maraviroc a potential inhibition of CYP2D6 cannot be excluded.
Based on the in vitro and clinical data, the potential for maraviroc to affect the pharmacokinetics of coadministered medicinal products is low.
Renal clearance accounts for approximately 23% of total clearance of maraviroc when maraviroc is administered without CYP3A4 inhibitors.
As both passive and active processes are involved, there is the potential for competition for elimination with other renally eliminated active substances.
However, co-administration of CELSENTRI with tenofovir (substrate for renal elimination) and Cotrimoxazole (contains trimethoprim, a renal cation transport inhibitor), showed no effect on the pharmacokinetics of maraviroc.
In addition, co-administration of CELSENTRI with lamivudine/ zidovudine showed no effect of maraviroc on lamivudine (primarily renally cleared) or zidovudine (non-P450 metabolism and renal clearance) pharmacokinetics.
In vitro results indicate that maraviroc could inhibit P- glycoprotein in the gut and may thus affect bioavailability of certain drugs..
Table 2.
Interactions and dose recommendations with other medical products
Medicinal product by therapeutic areas (dose of CELSENTRI used in study) ANTI-INFECTIVES Antiretrovirals NRTIs
Effects on drug levels Geometric mean ratio (range) if not stated otherwise
Recommendations concerning co- administration
21
Lamivudine 150 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Lamivudine AUC12: ↔ 1.13 (0.82, 2.09) Lamivudine Cmax: ↔ 1.16 (0.46, 2.55) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
No significant interaction seen/ expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and NRTIs can be co- administered without dose
Tenofovir 300 mg QD (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12: ↔ 1.03 (0.83, 1.19) Maraviroc Cmax: ↔ 1.03 (0.68, 1.45) Tenofovir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
adjustment.
Zidovudine 300 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID) NNRTIs
Zidovudine AUC12: ↔ 0.98 (0.45, 1.88) Zidovudine Cmax: ↔ 0.93 (0.38, 2.70) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
Efavirenz 600 mg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12: ↓ 0.55 (90% CI:
0.49, 0.62) Maraviroc Cmax: ↓ 0.49 (90% CI:
0.38, 0.63) Efavirenz concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be increased to 600 mg twice daily when co-administered with efavirenz in the absence of a PI or other potent CYP3A4 inhibitor.
For combination with efavirenz + PI, see below.
Nevirapine 200 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg Single Dose) PIs
Maraviroc AUC12: ↔ compared to historical controls Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ compared to historical controls Nevirapine concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
Comparison to exposure in historical controls suggests that CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and nevirapine can be co-administered without dose adjustment.
Atazanavir 400 mg QD (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 3.57 (2.55, 4.45) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 2.09 (1.31, 4.19) Atazanavir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with a PI; except in combination with
Atazanavir/ ritonavir 300 mg/ 100 mg QD (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 4.88 (3.28, 6.49) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 2.67 (1.52, 3.90) Atazanavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
tipranavir/ ritonavir or fosamprenavir/ ritonavir where the dose should be 300 mg BID.
Maraviroc does not significantly
Lopinavir/ ritonavir 400 mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 3.95 (2.32, 5.52) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 1.97 (1.26, 2.70) Lopinavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
affect PI drug levels.
Saquinavir/ ritonavir 1000 mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 9.77 (5.42, 20.5) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 4.78 (2.11, 9.88) Saquinavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
Darunavir/ ritonavir 600 mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 150 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12 ↑ 4.05 (2.10, 21.2) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 2.29 (0.74, 17.8) Darunavir/ ritonavir concentrations were consistent with historical data.
Nelfinavir
Limited data are available for co-
administration with nelfinavir.
Nelfinavir is a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor and would be expected to increase maraviroc concentrations.
Indinavir
Limited data are available for co- administration with indinavir.
Indinavir is a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor.
Population PK analysis in phase 3 studies suggests dose reduction of maraviroc when coadministered with indinavir gives appropriate maraviroc exposure.
Fosamprenavir/ ritonavir
Fosamprenavir is considered to be a moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor.
Population PK studies suggest that a dose adjustment of maraviroc is not required.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and tipranavir/ ritonavir or fosamprenavir/ ritonavir can be co- administered without dose
22
Tipranavir/ ritonavir 500 mg/ 200 mg BID (maraviroc 150 mg BID) NNRTI + PI
Maraviroc AUC12 ↔ 1.02 (0.65, 1.87) Maraviroc Cmax: ↔ 0.86 (0.37, 3.20) Tipranavir/ ritonavir concentrations were consistent with historical data.
adjustment.
Efavirenz 600 mg QD + lopinavir/ ritonavir 400mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID) Efavirenz 600 mg QD + saquinavir/ ritonavir 1000 mg/ 100 mg BID (maraviroc 100 mg BID) Efavirenz and atazanavir/ ritonavir or darunavir/ ritonavir Antibiotics
Maraviroc AUC12: ↑ 2.53 (1.71, 3.15) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 1.25 (0.87, 2.82) Efavirenz, lopinavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect expected.
Maraviroc AUC12: ↑ 5.00 (3.04, 6.31) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 2.26 (0.68, 4.09) Efavirenz, saquinavir/ ritonavir concentrations not measured, no effect expected.
Not studied.
Based on the extent of inhibition by atazanavir/ ritonavir or darunavir/ ritonavir in the absence of efavirenz, an increased exposure is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with efavirenz in the presence of a PI (except fosamprenavir/ ritonavir where the dose should be 300 mg twice daily).
Sulphamethoxazole/ Trimethoprim 800 mg/ 160 mg BID (maraviroc 300 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC12: ↔ 1.11 (0.84, 1.53) Maraviroc Cmax: ↔ 1.19 (0.69, 1.73) Sulphamethoxazole/ trimethoprim concentrations not measured, no effect expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and sulphamethoxazole/ trimethoprim can be co-administered without dose adjustment.
Rifampicin 600 mg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUC: ↓ 0.37 (90% CI:
0.33, 0.41) Maraviroc Cmax: ↓ 0.34 (90% CI:
0.26, 0.43) Rifampicin concentrations not measured, no effect expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be increased to 600 mg twice daily when co-administered with rifampicin in the absence of a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor.
This dose adjustment has not been studied in HIV patients.
See also section 4.4.
Rifampicin + efavirenz
Combination with two inducers has not been studied.
There may be a risk of suboptimal levels with risk of loss of virologic response and resistance development.
Concomitant use of CELSENTRI and rifampicin + efavirenz is not recommended.
Rifabutin + PI
Not studied.
Rifabutin is considered to be a weaker inducer than rifampicin.
When combining rifabutin with protease inhibitors that are potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 a net inhibitory effect on maraviroc is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with rifabutin in the presence of a PI (except tipranavir/ ritonavir or fosamprenavir/ ritonavir where the dose should be 300 mg twice daily).
See also section 4.4.
Clarithromycin, Telithromycin Antifungals
Not studied, but both are potent CYP3A4 inhibitors and would be expected to increase maraviroc concentrations.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with clarithromycin and telithromycin.
Ketoconazole 400 mg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Maraviroc AUCtau: ↑ 5.00 (2.40, 9.62) Maraviroc Cmax: ↑ 3.38 (1.11, 7.68) Ketoconazole concentrations not measured, no effect is expected.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with ketoconazole.
Itraconazole
Not studied.
Itraconazole, is a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor and would be expected to increase the exposure of maraviroc.
CELSENTRI dose should be decreased to 150 mg twice daily when co-administered with itraconazole.
Fluconazole Antivirals
Fluconazole is considered to be a moderate CYP3A4 inhibitor.
Population PK studies suggest that a dose adjustment of maraviroc is not required.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily should be administered with caution when coadministered with fluconazole.
HCV agents
Pegylated interferon and ribavirin have not been studied, no interaction is expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and pegylated interferon or
23
ribavirin can be coadministered without dose adjustment.
DRUG ABUSE Methadone
Not studied, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and methadone can be coadministered without dose adjustment.
Buprenorphine LIPID LOWERING MEDICINAL PRODUCTS
Not studied, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and buprenorphine can be coadministered without dose adjustment.
Statins
Not studied, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and statins can be coadministered without dose adjustment.
ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES Ethinylestradiol 30 mcg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID)
Ethinylestradiol.
AUCt: ↔ 1.00 (0.79, 1.20) Ethinylestradiol.
Cmax: ↔ 0.99 (0.61, 1.32) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily. and ethinylestradiol can be co- administered without dose adjustment.
Levonorgestrel 150mcg QD (maraviroc 100 mg BID) SEDATIVES
Levonorgestrel.
AUC12: ↔ 0.99 (0.70, 1.31) Levonorgestrel.
Cmax: ↔ 1.01 (0.66, 1.51) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and levonorgestrel can be co- administered without dose adjustment.
Benzodiazepines
Midazolam 7.5 mg Single Dose (maraviroc 300 mg BID) HERBAL PRODUCTS
Midazolam.
AUC: ↔ 1.18 (0.68, 1.77) Midazolam.
Cmax: ↔ 1.21 (0.51, 2.97) Maraviroc concentrations not measured, no interaction expected.
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily and midazolam can be co- administered without dose adjustment.
St John’ s Wort
Coadministration of maraviroc with St.
John's wort is expected to substantially decrease maraviroc concentrations and may result in suboptimal levels and lead to loss of virologic response and possible resistance to maraviroc.
Concomitant use of maraviroc and St.
John's wort (Hypericum Perforatum) or products containing St.
John's wort is not recommended.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
No meaningful clinical data on exposure during pregnancy are available.
Studies in rats and rabbits showed reproductive toxicity at high exposures.
Primary pharmacological activity (CCR5 receptor affinity) was limited in these species (see section 5.3).
CELSENTRI should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
Studies in lactating rats indicate that maraviroc is extensively secreted into rat milk.
Primary pharmacological activity (CCR5 receptor affinity) was limited in these species.
It is not known whether maraviroc is secreted into human milk.
Mothers should be instructed not to breast-feed if they are receiving CELSENTRI because of the potential for HIV transmission as well as any possible undesirable effects in breast-fed infants.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
CELSENTRI may cause dizziness.
Patients should be instructed that if they experience dizziness they should avoid potentially hazardous tasks such as driving or operating machinery.
24 4.8 Undesirable effects
The safety profile of CELSENTRI is based on 1349 HIV-1 infected patients who received at least one dose of CELSENTRI during clinical studies.
This includes 427 patients who received the recommended dose 300 mg twice daily and a further 401 patients who received 300 mg once daily for at least 24 weeks.
Assessment of treatment related adverse reactions is based on pooled data at the recommended dose from two Phase 3 studies (MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2) in CCR5-tropic HIV-1 infected patients.
The most frequently reported adverse reactions occurring in the Phase 3 studies at the recommended dose regardless of the incidence compared to OBT alone were diarrhoea, nausea and headache.
These adverse reactions were common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10).
The reported frequencies for these events as well as the rates of discontinuation due to any adverse reactions were similar in patients receiving CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT (Optimised Background Therapy) compared to those receiving OBT alone.
The adverse reactions are listed by system organ class (SOC) and frequency.
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness.
Frequencies are defined as very common (≥ 1/ 10), common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10) and uncommon (≥ 1/ 1000 to < 1/ 100).
The adverse reactions and laboratory abnormalities presented below are not exposure adjusted.
The following table presents adverse reactions occurring at a numerically higher rate among patients receiving CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT than patients on OBT alone with an incidence of ≥ 1%.
Table 3.
Adverse reactions occurring at a numerically higher rate among patients receiving CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT than patients on OBT alone with an incidence of ≥ 1%
System Organ Class Investigations
Adverse Reaction alanine aminotransferase increased, aspartate aminotransferase increased, gamma-glutamyltransferase increased, weight decreased
Frequency common
Nervous system disorders
dizziness, paraesthesia, dysgeusia, somnolence
common
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders
Cough
common
Gastrointestinal disorders
nausea
very common
vomiting, abdominal pain, abdominal distension, dyspepsia, constipation
common
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
rash, pruritus
common
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders
muscle spasms, back pain
common
General disorders and administration site conditions
Asthenia
common
Psychiatric disorders
Insomnia
common
Clinically important adverse reactions occurring in less than 1% of adult patients receiving CELSENTRI in Phase 3 studies are presented below.
Table 4.
Clinically important adverse reactions occurring in less than 1% of adult patients receiving CELSENTRI in Phase 3 studies
System Organ Class Cardiac disorders
Adverse Reaction myocardial infarction, myocardial
Frequency uncommon
25 ischaemia
Blood and lymphatic system disorders
pancytopenia, neutropenia, lymphadenopathy
uncommon
Nervous system disorders
loss of consciousness, epilepsy, petit mal epilepsy, convulsion, facial palsy, polyneuropathy, areflexia
uncommon
Respiratory, thoracic and Mediastinal disorders
respiratory distress, bronchospasm
uncommon
Gastrointestinal disorders Renal and urinary disorders Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders
pancreatitis, rectal haemorrhage renal failure, polyuria Myositis
uncommon uncommon uncommon
Infections and infestations Hepatobiliary disorders Psychiatric disorders
Pneumonia hepatic cirrhosis Hallucination
uncommon uncommon uncommon
In HIV infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of initiation of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic infections may arise (see section 4.4).
Laboratory abnormalities Table 5 shows the incidence ≥ 1% of Grade 3-4 Abnormalities (ACTG Criteria) based on the maximum shift in laboratory test values without regard to baseline values.
Table 5:
Incidence ≥ 1% of grade 3-4 abnormalities (ACTG criteria) based on maximum shift in laboratory test values without regard to baseline studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2 (pooled analysis, up to 48 weeks)
Celsentri 300 mg
OBT
Laboratory parameter
Limit
twice daily + OBT
alone
N
=421* (%)
N
=207* (%)
Aspartate aminotransferase Alanine aminotransferase Total bilirubin Amylase Lipase Absolute neutrophil count ULN:
Upper Limit of Normal
> 5.0x ULN > 5.0x ULN > 5.0x ULN > 2.0x ULN > 2.0x ULN < 750/ mm3
4.5 2.4 5.7 5.5 4.9 3.8
2.9 3.4 5.3 5.8 6.3 1.9
* Percentages based on total patients evaluated for each laboratory parameter
Cases of osteonecrosis have been reported, particularly in patients with generally acknowledged risk factors, advanced HIV disease or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
The frequency of this is unknown (see section 4.4).
4.9 Overdose
The highest dose administered in clinical studies was 1200 mg.
The dose limiting adverse reaction was postural hypotension.
Prolongation of the QT interval was seen in dogs and monkeys at plasma concentrations 6 and 12 times, respectively, those expected in humans at the maximum recommended dose of 300 mg twice daily.
However, no clinically significant QT prolongation compared to OBT alone was seen in the Phase 3 clinical studies using the recommended dose of maraviroc or in a specific pharmacokinetic study to evaluate the potential of CELSENTRI to prolong the QT interval.
26 There is no specific antidote for overdose with CELSENTRI.
Treatment of overdose should consist of general supportive measures including keeping the patient in a supine position, careful assessment of patient vital signs, blood pressure and ECG.
If indicated, elimination of unabsorbed active maraviroc should be achieved by emesis or gastric lavage.
Administration of activated charcoal may also be used to aid in removal of unabsorbed active substance.
Since maraviroc is moderately protein bound, dialysis may be beneficial in removal of this medicine.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Antivirals for systemic use, Other Antivirals ATC code:
J05AX09
Mechanism of action:
Maraviroc is a member of a therapeutic class called CCR5 antagonists.
Maraviroc selectively binds to the human chemokine receptor CCR5, preventing CCR5-tropic HIV-1 from entering cells.
Antiviral activity in vitro:
Maraviroc has no antiviral activity in vitro against viruses which can use CXCR4 as their entry co- receptor (dual-tropic or CXCR4-tropic viruses, collectively termed ‘ CXCR4-using’ virus below).
The serum adjusted EC90 value in 43 primary HIV-1 clinical isolates was 0.57 (0.06 – 10.7) ng/ mL without significant changes between different subtypes tested.
The antiviral activity of maraviroc against HIV-2 has not been evaluated.
For details please refer to http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/ htms/ human/ epar/ eparintro.
When used with other antiretroviral medicinal products in cell culture, the combination of maraviroc was not antagonistic with a range of NRTIs, NNRTIs, PIs or the HIV fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide.
Resistance:
Viral escape from maraviroc can occur via 2 routes: the selection of virus which can use CXCR4 as its entry co-receptor (CXCR4-using virus) or the selection of virus that continues to use exclusively CCR5 (CCR5-tropic virus).
In vitro:
HIV-1 variants with reduced susceptibility to maraviroc have been selected in vitro, following serial passage of two CCR5-tropic viruses (0 laboratory strains, 2 clinical isolates).
The maraviroc-resistant viruses remained CCR5-tropic and there was no conversion from a CCR5-tropic virus to a CXCR4- using virus.
Phenotypic resistance: concentration response curves for the maraviroc-resistant viruses were characterized phenotypically by curves that did not reach 100% inhibition in assays using serial dilutions of maraviroc.
Traditional IC50/ IC90 fold-change was not a useful parameter to measure phenotypic resistance, as those values were sometimes unchanged despite significantly reduced sensitivity.
Genotypic resistance: mutations were found to accumulate in the gp120 envelope glycoprotein (the viral protein that binds to the CCR5 co-receptor).
The position of these mutations was not consistent between different isolates.
Hence, the relevance of these mutations to maraviroc susceptibility in other viruses is not known.
Cross-resistance in vitro:
HIV-1 clinical isolates resistant to nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI), non- nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI), protease inhibitors (PI) and enfuvirtide
27 were all susceptible to maraviroc in cell culture.
Maraviroc-resistant viruses that emerged in vitro remained sensitive to the fusion inhibitor enfuvirtide and the protease inhibitor saquinavir.
In vivo:
Treatment naïve patients The resistance profile in treatment-naïve patients has not been characterized.
Treatment experienced patients In the pivotal studies (MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2), 7.6% of patients had a change in tropism result from CCR5-tropic to CXCR4-tropic or dual/ mixed-tropic between screening and baseline (a period of 4-6 weeks).
Failure with CXCR4-using virus:
CXCR4-using virus was detected at failure in approximately 60% of subjects who failed treatment on CELSENTRI, as compared to 6% of subjects who experienced treatment failure in the OBT alone arm.
To investigate the likely origin of the on-treatment CXCR4-using virus, a detailed clonal analysis was conducted on virus from 20 representative subjects (16 subjects from the CELSENTRI arms and 4 subjects from the OBT alone arm) in whom CXCR4-using virus was detected at treatment failure.
This analysis indicated that CXCR4-virus emerged from a pre-existing CXCR4-using reservoir not detected at baseline, rather than from mutation of CCR5-tropic virus present at baseline.
An analysis of tropism following failure of CELSENTRI therapy with CXCR4 -using virus, demonstrated that the virus population reverted back to CCR5 tropism in the majority of patients during follow up after discontinuation of CELSENTRI.
Out of 44 patients studied, the virus population in 30 reverted back to exclusively CCR5-tropism during a median follow-up of 203 days; 14 patients continued to have detectable CXCR4 -using virus.
However, the follow-up period in these patients were shorter (median 16 days).
At time of failure with CXCR4-using virus, the resistance pattern to other antiretrovirals appears similar to that of the CCR5-tropic population at baseline, based on available data.
Hence, in the selection of a treatment regimen, it should be assumed that viruses forming part of the previously undetected CXCR4 -using population (i. e. minor viral population) harbours the same resistance pattern as the CCR5-tropic population.
Failure with CCR5-tropic virus:
Phenotypic resistance: in patients with CCR5-tropic virus at time of treatment failure with CELSENTRI, 22 out of 58 patients had virus with reduced sensitivity to maraviroc.
In the remaining 36 patients, there was no evidence of virus with reduced sensitivity as identified by exploratory virology analyses on a representative group.
The latter group had markers correlating to low compliance (low and variable drug levels and often a calculated high residual sensitivity score of the OBT).
In patients failing therapy with R5-virus only, maraviroc might be considered still active if the maximal percentage inhibition (MPI) value is ≥ 95% (Phenosense Entry assay).
Residual activity in vivo for viruses with MPI-values < 95% has not been determined.
Genotypic resistance:
Key mutations (V3-loop) can presently not be suggested due to the high variability of the V3-sequence, and the low number of samples analysed.
Clinical Results
Studies in CCR5-tropic Treatment-Experienced Patients:
The clinical efficacy of CELSENTRI (in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products) on plasma HIV RNA levels and CD4+ cell counts have been investigated in two pivotal ongoing, randomized, double blind, multicentre studies (MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2, n=1076) in patients infected with CCR5 tropic HIV-1 as determined by the Monogram Trofile Assay.
Patients who were eligible for these studies had prior exposure to at least 3 antiretroviral medicinal product classes [≥ 1 nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI), ≥ 1 non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI), ≥ 2 protease inhibitors (PI), and/ or enfurvirtide] or documented
28 resistance to at least one member of each class.
Patients were randomised in a 2:2:1 ratio to CELSENTRI 300 mg (dose equivalence) once daily, twice daily or placebo in combination with an optimized background consisting of 3 to 6 antiretroviral medicinal products (excluding low-dose ritonavir).
The OBT was selected on the basis of the subject’ s prior treatment history and baseline genotypic and phenotypic viral resistance measurements.
Table 6:
Demographic and baseline characteristics of patients in studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2 (Pooled Analysis)
CELSENTRI
OBT
Demographic and Baseline Characteristics
300 mg twice daily + OBT
alone
Age (years)
N
= 426 46.3
N = 209 45.7
(Range, years)
21-73
29-72
Male Sex
89.7%
88.5%
Race (White/ Black/ Other) Mean Baseline HIV-1 RNA (log10 copies/ mL) Median Baseline CD4+ Cell Count (cells/ mm3)
85.2% /
12% / 2.8% 4.85 166.8
85.2% /
12.4% / 2.4% 4.86 171.3
(range, cells/ mm3)
(2.0-820.0)
(1.0-675.0)
Screening Viral Load > 100,000 copies/ mL
179 (42.0%)
84 (40.2%)
Baseline CD4+ Cell Count ≤ 200 cells/ mm3 Number (Percentage) of patients with GSS score:
250 (58.7%)
118 (56.5%)
0 1 2 ≥ 3
102 (23.9%) 138 (32.4%) 80 (18.8%) 104 (24.4%)
51 (24.4%) 53 (25.4%) 41 (19.6%) 59 (28.2%)
GeneSeq resistance assay
Limited numbers of patients from ethnicities other than Caucasian were included in the pivotal clinical studies, therefore very limited data are available in these patient populations.
The mean increase in CD4+ cell count from baseline in patients who failed with a change in tropism result to dual/ mixed tropic or CXCR4, in the CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT (+56 cells/ mm3) group was greater than that seen in patients failing OBT alone (+13.8 cells/ mm3) regardless of tropism.
Table 7.
Outcomes of randomised treatment at week 48 (pooled studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2)
Outcomes
CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT
OBT alone
Treatment Difference1 (Confidence Interval2)
HIV-1 RNA
N=426
N=209
Change from baseline
-1.84
-0.78
-1.05
(log10 copies/ mL)
(-1.33, -0.78)
Proportion of patients with HIV RNA < 400 copies/ ml
56.1%
22.5%
Odds ratio:
4.76 (3.24, 7.00)
Proportion of patients with HIV RNA < 50 copies/ ml CD4+ cell count
45.5%
16.7%
Odds ratio:
4.49 (2.96, 6.83)
Change from baseline (cells/ mm3) 1 p-values < 0.0001 2
124.07
60.93
63.13 (44.28, 81.99)
For all efficacy endpoints the confidence intervals were 95%, except for HIV-1 RNA Change from baseline which was 97.5%
29 CELSENTRI 300 mg twice daily + OBT was superior to OBT alone across all subgroups of patients analysed (see Table 8).
Patients with very low CD4+ count at baseline (i. e. < 50 cells/ uL) had a less favourable outcome.
This subgroup had a high degree of bad prognostic markers, i. e. extensive resistance and high baseline viral loads.
However, a significant treatment benefit for CELSENTRI compared to OBT alone was still demonstrated (see Table 8).
Table 8.
Proportion of patients achieving < 50 copies/ ml at Week 48 by subgroup (pooled Studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2, ITT)
HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/ ml
CELSENTRI 300 mg
OBT
Subgroups
twice daily + OBT
alone
N=426
N=209
Baseline HIV-1 RNA:
< 5.0 log10 copies/ ml ≥ 5.0 log10 copies/ ml
58.4% 34.7%
26.0% 9.5%
Baseline CD4+ (cells/ uL):
< 50
16.5
2.6
50-100 101-200 201-350 ≥ 350
36.4 56.7 57.8 72.9
12.0 21.8 21.0 38.5
Number of active ARVs in OBT1,2:
0 1 2
32.7% 44.5% 58.2%
2.0% 7.4% 31.7%
1
≥ 3
62%
38.6%
Discontinuations or virological failures considered as failures.
2 Based on GSS.
Studies in Non-CCR5-tropic Treatment-Experienced Patients:
Study A4001029 was an exploratory study in patients infected with dual/ mixed or CXCR4 tropic HIV-1 with a similar design as the studies MOTIVATE 1 and MOTIVATE 2.
In this study, neither superiority nor non-inferiority to OBT alone were demonstrated although there was no adverse outcome on viral load or CD4+ cell count
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption: the absorption of maraviroc is variable with multiple peaks.
Median peak maraviroc plasma concentrations is attained at 2 hours (range 0.5-4 hours) following single oral doses of 300 mg commercial tablet administered to healthy volunteers.
The pharmacokinetics of oral maraviroc are not dose proportional over the dose range.
The absolute bioavailability of a 100 mg dose is 23% and is predicted to be 33% at 300 mg.
Maraviroc is a substrate for the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein.
Coadministration of a 300 mg tablet with a high fat breakfast reduced maraviroc Cmax and AUC by 33% in healthy volunteers.
There were no food restrictions in the studies that demonstrated the efficacy and safety of CELSENTRI (see section 5.1).
Therefore, CELSENTRI can be taken with or without food at the recommended doses (see section 4.2).
Distribution: maraviroc is bound (approximately 76%) to human plasma proteins, and shows moderate affinity for albumin and alpha-1 acid glycoprotein.
The volume of distribution of maraviroc is approximately 194 L.
Metabolism: studies in humans and in vitro studies using human liver microsomes and expressed enzymes have demonstrated that maraviroc is principally metabolized by the cytochrome P450 system
30 to metabolites that are essentially inactive against HIV-1.
In vitro studies indicate that CYP3A4 is the major enzyme responsible for maraviroc metabolism.
In vitro studies also indicate that polymorphic enzymes CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 do not contribute significantly to the metabolism of maraviroc.
Maraviroc is the major circulating component (approximately 42% radioactivity) following a single oral dose of 300 mg.
The most significant circulating metabolite in humans is a secondary amine (approximately 22% radioactivity) formed by N-dealkylation.
This polar metabolite has no significant pharmacological activity.
Other metabolites are products of mono-oxidation and are only minor components of plasma radioactivity.
Elimination: a mass balance/ excretion study was conducted using a single 300 mg dose of 14C-labeled maraviroc.
Approximately 20% of the radiolabel was recovered in the urine and 76% was recovered in the faeces over 168 hours.
Maraviroc was the major component present in urine (mean of 8% dose) and faeces (mean of 25% dose).
The remainder was excreted as metabolites.
After intravenous administration (30 mg), the half-life of maraviroc was 13.2 h, 22% of the dose was excreted unchanged in the urine and the values of total clearance and renal clearance were 44.0 L/ h and 10.17 L/ h respectively.
Children: the pharmacokinetics of maraviroc in paediatric patients have not been established (see section 4.2).
Elderly: population analysis of the Phase 1/ 2a and Phase 3 studies (16-65 years of age) has been conducted and no effect of age has been observed (see section 4.2).
Renal impairment: the pharmacokinetics of maraviroc have not been studied in patients with renal impairment.
However, renal clearance contributes less than 25% of maraviroc total clearance in the absence of CYP3A4 inhibitors, therefore the impact of renal impairment on maraviroc elimination should be minimal.
In the presence of metabolic inhibitors, renal clearance may account for up to 70% of total clearance of maraviroc and hence renal impairment may result in increased maraviroc exposures in this case (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Hepatic impairment: maraviroc is primarily metabolized and eliminated by the liver.
A study compared the pharmacokinetics of a single 300 mg dose of CELSENTRI in patients with mild (Child- Pugh Class A, n=8), and moderate (Child-Pugh Class B, n=8) hepatic impairment compared to healthy subjects (n=8).
Geometric mean ratios for Cmax and AUClast were 11% and 25% higher respectively for subjects with mild hepatic impairment, and 32% and 46% higher respectively for subjects with moderate hepatic impairment compared to subjects with normal hepatic function.
The effects of moderate hepatic impairment may be underestimated due to limited data in patients with decreased metabolic capacity and higher renal clearance in these subjects.
The results should therefore be interpreted with caution.
The pharmacokinetics of maraviroc have not been studied in subjects with severe hepatic impairment (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Race: no relevant difference between Caucasian, Asian and Black subjects has been observed.
The pharmacokinetics in other races has not been evaluated.
Gender: no relevant differences in pharmacokinetics have been observed.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
Primary pharmacological activity (CCR5 receptor affinity) was present in the monkey (100% receptor occupancy) and limited in the mouse, rat, rabbit and dog.
In mice and human beings that lack CCR5 receptors through genetic deletion, no significant adverse consequences have been reported.
In vitro and in vivo studies showed that maraviroc has a potential to increase QTc interval at supratherapeutic doses with no evidence of arrhythmia.
31 Repeated dose toxicity studies in rats identified the liver as the primary target organ for toxicity (increases in transaminases, bile duct hyperplasia, necrosis).
Maraviroc was evaluated for carcinogenic potential by a 6 month transgenic mouse study and a 24 month study in rats.
In mice, no statistically significant increase in the incidence of tumors was reported at systemic exposures from 7 to 39-times the human exposure (unbound AUC 0-24h measurement) at a dose of 300 mg twice daily.
In rats, administration of maraviroc at a systemic exposure 21-times the expected human exposure produced thyroid adenomas associated with adaptive liver changes.
These findings are considered of low human relevance.
In addition, cholangiocarcinomas (2/ 60 males at 900 mg/ kg) and cholangioma (1/ 60 females at 500 mg/ kg) were reported in the rat study at a systemic exposure at least 15-times the expected free human exposure.
Maraviroc was not mutagenic or genotoxic in a battery of in vitro and in vivo assays including bacterial reverse mutation, chromosome aberrations in human lymphocytes and rat bone marrow micronucleus.
Maraviroc did not impair mating or fertility of male or female rats, and did not affect sperm of treated male rats up to 1000 mg/ kg.
The exposure at this dose level corresponded to 39-fold the estimated free clinical AUC for a 300 mg twice daily dose.
Embryofoetal development studies were conducted in rats and rabbits at doses up to 39- and 34-fold the estimated free clinical AUC for a 300 mg twice daily dose.
In rabbit, ,7 foetuses had external anomalies at maternally toxic doses and 1 foetus at the mid dose of 75 mg/ kg.
Pre- and post-natal developmental studies were performed in rats at doses up to 27-fold the estimated free clinical AUC for a 300 mg twice daily dose.
A slight increase in motor activity in high-dose male rats at both weaning and as adults was noted, while no effects were seen in females.
Other developmental parameters of these offspring, including fertility and reproductive performance, were not affected by the maternal administration of maraviroc.
6 PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Tablet core:
Cellulose, microcrystalline Calcium hydrogen phosphate, anhydrous Sodium starch glycolate Magnesium stearate
Film-coat:
Poly (vinyl alcohol) Titanium dioxide Macrogol 3350 Talc Soya Lecithin Indigo carmine aluminium lake (E132)
6.2 Incompatibilities
Not applicable.
6.3 Shelf life
3 years.
32 6.4 Special precautions for storage
This medicinal product does not require any special storage condition.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
High density polyethylene bottles (HDPE) with polypropylene child resistant (CR) closures and an aluminium foil/ polyethylene heat induction seal containing 180 film-coated tablets.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) blisters with aluminium foil backing in a carton containing 30, 60, 90 film- coated tablets and multipacks containing 180 (2 packs of 90) film-coated tablets.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
No special requirements.
7 MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich Kent CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 006 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 007 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 008 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 009 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 010
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
18 September 2007
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) http: / /www. emea. europa. eu
33 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
34 A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturers responsible for batch release
Gödecke GmbH Mooswaldallee 1 79090 Freiburg Germany
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (See Annex I:
Summary of Product Characteristics, section 4.2).
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable.
• OTHER CONDITIONS
Pharmacovigilance system
The MAH must ensure that the system of pharmacovigilance, as described in version 1.1 presented in Module 1.8.1. of the Marketing Authorisation Application, is in place and functioning before and whilst the product is on the market.
Risk Management plan
The MAH commits to performing the studies and additional pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan, as agreed in version 1.4 of the Risk Management Plan (RMP) presented in Module 1.8.2. of the Marketing Authorisation Application and any subsequent updates of the RMP agreed by the CHMP.
As per the CHMP Guideline on Risk Management Systems for medicinal products for human use, the updated RMP should be submitted at the same time as the next Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR).
In addition, an updated RMP should be submitted • When new information is received that may impact on the current Safety Specification, Pharmacovigilance Plan or risk minimisation activities • Within 60 days of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached • At the request of the EMEA.
35 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
36 A.
LABELLING
37 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE IMMEDIATE PACKAGING
Bottle label - 150 mg film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
CELSENTRI 150 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 150 mg of maraviroc.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains soya lecithin: see the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
180 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF REACH AND SITE OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
38 11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 001
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Celsentri 150 mg
39 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE IMMEDIATE PACKAGING
Bottle label - 300 mg film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
CELSENTRI 300 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 300 mg of maraviroc.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains soya lecithin: see the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
180 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF REACH AND SITE OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
40 11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 006
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Celsentri 300 mg
41 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
Carton for blister pack containing 150 mg maraviroc film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
CELSENTRI 150 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 150 mg of maraviroc.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains soya lecithin: see the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
30 film-coated tablets 60 film-coated tablets 90 film-coated tablets Multipack containing 180 (2 packs of 90) film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF REACH AND SITE OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Sealed pack Do not use if box has been opened
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
42 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 002 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 003 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 004 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 005
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Celsentri 150 mg
43 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
Carton for blister pack containing 300 mg maraviroc film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
CELSENTRI 300 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 300 mg of maraviroc.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains soya lecithin: see the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
30 film-coated tablets 60 film-coated tablets 90 film-coated tablets Multipack containing 180 (2 packs of 90) film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF REACH AND SITE OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Sealed pack Do not use if box has been opened
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
44 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 007 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 008 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 009 EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 010
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Celsentri 300 mg
45 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE INTERMEDIATE CARTON Multipacks of 180 (2 packs of 90 film-coated tablets) - without blue box - 150 mg film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Celsentri 150 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 150 mg of maraviroc.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains soya lecithin: see the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
Component of a multipack comprising 2 packs, each containing 90 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF REACH AND SITE OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Sealed pack Do not use if box has been opened
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
46 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 005
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Celsentri 150 mg
47 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE INTERMEDIATE CARTON Multipacks of 180 (2 packs of 90 film-coated tablets) - without blue box - 300 mg film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Celsentri 300 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 300 mg of maraviroc.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains soya lecithin: see the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
Component of a multipack comprising 2 packs, each containing 90 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF REACH AND SITE OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Sealed pack Do not use if box has been opened
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
48 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 010
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Celsentri 300 mg
49 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING Outer wrapper label on multi packs of 180 (2 packs of 90 film-coated tablets) wrapped in transparent foil - including the blue box - 150 mg film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Celsentri 150 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 150 mg of maraviroc.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains soya lecithin: see the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
Multipack comprising 2 packs, each containing 90 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF REACH AND SITE OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Sealed pack Do not use if box has been opened
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
50 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 005
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
51 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING Outer wrapper label on multi packs of 180 (2 packs of 90 film-coated tablets) wrapped in transparent foil - including the blue box - 300 mg film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Celsentri 300 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 300 mg of maraviroc.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains soya lecithin: see the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
Multipack comprising 2 packs, each containing 90 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF REACH AND SITE OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Sealed pack Do not use if box has been opened
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
52 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer Limited Ramsgate Road Sandwich CT13 9NJ United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 418/ 010
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
53 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS
Blister Pack of 10 x 150 mg maraviroc film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
CELSENTRI 150 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer (logo)
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
5.
OTHER
54 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS
Blister Pack of 10 x 300 mg maraviroc film-coated tablets
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
CELSENTRI 300 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
2.
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Pfizer (logo)
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP {MM-YYYY}
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot:
{number}
5.
OTHER
55 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
56 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
CELSENTRI 150 mg film-coated tablets CELSENTRI 300 mg film-coated tablets maraviroc
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine.
- Keep this leaflet.
You may need to read it again.
- If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or your pharmacist.
- This medicine has been prescribed for you.
Do not pass it on to others.
It may harm them, even
if their symptoms are the same as yours.
- If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet,
please tell your doctor or your pharmacist.
In this leaflet:
1.
What CELSENTRI is and what it is used for 2.
Before you take CELSENTRI 3.
How to take CELSENTRI 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store CELSENTRI 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT CELSENTRI IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
CELSENTRI is an antiretroviral medicine used in the treatment of Human Immunodeficiency Virus type-1 (HIV-1) infection.
Its active ingredient, maraviroc, belongs to a group of medicines called CCR5 antagonists.
CELSENTRI prevents the entry of HIV-1 into the cells in your blood that are attacked by HIV (called CD4 or T-cells).
CELSENTRI works by blocking a receptor called CCR5 that HIV use to gain entry into these cells.
CELSENTRI reduces the amount of HIV in your body and enhances your immune system.
CELSENTRI must be taken in combination with other medicines used to treat HIV.
2 BEFORE YOU TAKE CELSENTRI
Do not take CELSENTRI if you are allergic (hypersensitive) to maraviroc or to peanut or soya or to any of the other ingredients of CELSENTRI (see section 2, Important information about some of the ingredients of CELSENTRI).
Take special care with CELSENTRI:
Your doctor must take blood samples to test whether CELSENTRI is an appropriate treatment for you.
Before taking this medicine, make sure that your doctor knows if you:
• have problems with your liver including chronic hepatitis B or C as there is only limited experience in patients with liver problems.
Your liver function may need to be closely monitored.
If you notice symptoms of hepatitis (loss of appetite, fever, feeling sick/ being sick and/ or yellowing of skin or eyes), rash and/ or itching, you should stop taking CELSENTRI and inform your doctor immediately.
57 • have or previously had low blood pressure and/ or if you are taking any medicines to lower blood pressure
• have tuberculosis or serious fungal infections as due to the way CELSENTRI works on certain immune cells, CELSENTRI could potentially increase the risk of developing infections.
However, there has been no evidence of an increase in the occurrence of AIDS-related infections associated with the use of CELSENTRI in clinical studies
• have or previously had any kidney problems particularly if you are taking certain antibiotics (clarithromycin, telithromycin, antifungal medicines (ketoconazole, itraconazole) and/ or protease inhibitors (except for tipranavir/ ritonavir)
• have problems with your heart or circulatory system as there is only limited experience in patients with serious problems of this type.
It is not known if CELSENTRI works in children.
Therefore CELSENTRI is not recommended for use in children.
CELSENTRI has only been used in limited numbers of patients 65 years or older.
If you belong to this age group please discuss with your doctor if you can use CELSENTRI.
CELSENTRI is not a cure for HIV infection or AIDS (advanced HIV infection).
CELSENTRI does not reduce the risk of passing HIV to others through sexual contact, sharing needles or exposure to your blood.
It is important to continue to take appropriate precautions to prevent passing HIV to others.
In some patients with AIDS and a history of opportunistic infection (an infection that can occur when your immune system is impaired), signs and symptoms of inflammation from previous infections may occur soon after anti-HIV treatment is started.
It is believed that these symptoms are due to an improvement in the body’ s immune response, enabling the body to fight infections that may have been present with no obvious symptoms.
If you notice any symptoms of infection, please inform your doctor immediately.
Some patients taking combination antiretroviral therapy may develop a bone disease called osteonecrosis (death of bone tissue caused by loss of blood supply to the bone).
The length of combination antiretroviral therapy, corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe immunosuppression, higher body mass index, among others, may be some of the many risk factors for developing this disease.
Signs of osteonecrosis are joint stiffness, aches and pains (especially of the hip, knee and shoulder) and difficulty in movement.
If you notice any of these symptoms please inform your doctor.
Taking other medicines
Please tell your doctor and your pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription.
Some medicines may affect the levels of CELSENTRI in the body when they are taken at the same time as CELSENTRI.
Therefore the dose of CELSENTRI may need to be adjusted.
Tell your doctor if you are taking any medicines including other medicines to treat HIV infection (e. g. efavirenz, lopinavir, saquinavir, darunavir, atazanavir, nelfinavir, indinavir), antibiotics (clarithromycin, telithromycin, rifampicin) and antifungal medicines (ketoconazole, itraconazole).
This will allow your doctor to prescribe the most appropriate dose of CELSENTRI for you.
Medicines containing St.
John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum) are likely to prevent CELSENTRI from working properly and should not be taken together with CELSENTRI.
58 Taking CELSENTRI with food and drink
CELSENTRI can be taken with or without food.
Pregnancy
Tell your doctor if you are pregnant, planning to become pregnant or become pregnant whilst taking this medicine.
If you are pregnant, CELSENTRI should only be taken after careful discussion with your doctor.
The safe use of CELSENTRI in pregnancy has not been established.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking any medicine.
Breast-feeding
It is not known whether the active ingredient in CELSENTRI can pass into your breast milk.
Therefore, mothers should not breast-feed during treatment with CELSENTRI.
In general, women infected with HIV should not breast-feed because the virus may be transmitted through the breast milk.
Driving and using machines
CELSENTRI may cause dizziness.
If you experience dizziness while taking CELSENTRI do not drive and do not operate any tools or machines.
Important information about some of the ingredients of CELSENTRI
CELSENTRI contains soya lecithin.
If you are allergic to peanut or soya do not use this medicinal product.
3.
HOW TO TAKE CELSENTRI
Always take CELSENTRI exactly as your doctor has instructed.
You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure how to take CELSENTRI.
The usual dose of CELSENTRI is 150 mg, 300 mg or 600 mg twice per day depending on other medicines that you are taking at the same time as CELSENTRI.
Always take the dose recommended by your doctor.
CELSENTRI can be taken with or without food.
CELSENTRI should always be taken by mouth.
You should continue to take CELSENTRI for as long as instructed by your doctor.
CELSENTRI must be taken in combination with other medicines used to treat HIV.
Please refer to the Package Leaflets of these other medicines for guidance on how to take them.
If you take more CELSENTRI than you should
If you accidentally take more than the prescribed dose of CELSENTRI, contact your doctor or the nearest hospital right away.
You may feel dizzy or light-headed when you stand or sit up quickly.
This is due to a sudden fall in your blood pressure.
If this happens, lie down until you feel better.
When you get up, do so as slowly as possible.
59 If you forget to take CELSENTRI
If you miss a dose of CELSENTRI, take the missed dose as soon as possible and then take your next scheduled dose at its regular time.
If it is almost time for your next dose, do not take the missed dose.
Wait and take the next dose at its regular time.
Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose.
If you stop taking CELSENTRI
It has been shown that taking all doses at the appropriate times may greatly increase the effectiveness of your antiretroviral medicines.
Therefore, unless your doctor instructs you to stop treatment, it is important to keep taking CELSENTRI correctly, as described above.
If you have any further questions on the use of this product, ask your doctor or your pharmacist.
4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, CELSENTRI can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.
When treating HIV infection, it is not always easy to identify what side effects are caused by CELSENTRI, by the other medicines you are taking, or by the HIV infection itself.
Tell your doctor if you notice anything unusual about your health.
A very common side-effect (likely to occur in more than 1 in 10 patients) is feeling sick.
Common side effects (likely to occur in fewer than 1 in 10 patients) include:
• diarrhoea, being sick (vomiting), stomach ache, feeling bloated, indigestion, constipation, weight loss • headache, dizziness, abnormal sense of taste, sleepiness, problems sleeping, abnormal sensations in the body such as pins and needles • rash, itching, muscle spasms, back pain, feeling weak, cough • increased levels of substances that measure the function of the liver and pancreas.
These can be seen in the results of blood tests and can be a sign of reduced function or damage of these organs.
If you experience symptoms, such as loss of appetite, feeling sick/ being sick and/ or yellowing of skin or eyes, you should inform your doctor.
Uncommon side effects (likely to occur in fewer than 1 in 100 patients) include:
• reduction in number of white and red blood cells, enlarged lymph glands, heart attack, reduced blood flow to the heart • inflammation of the pancreas, rectal bleeding, liver disease, muscle aches and pains • fainting, epilepsy, fits, inability to move the muscles in the face, tingling or burning sensation in the hands or feet, loss of reflexes, hallucination • kidney failure, producing more urine than normal • pneumonia, breathing difficulties such as shortness of breath.
If any of the side effects get serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
5.
HOW TO STORE CELSENTRI
• Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
• Do not use CELSENTRI after the expiry date which is stated on the carton, blister or bottle label.
The expiry date refers to the last day of that month.
60 • This medicine does not require any special storage conditions.
Medicines should not be disposed of via wastewater or household waste.
Ask your pharmacist how to dispose of medicines no longer required.
These measures will help to protect the environment.
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What CELSENTRI contains
• The active ingredient in CELSENTRI is maraviroc.
Each film-coated tablet contains either 150 mg or 300 mg of maraviroc.
• The other ingredients are:
Tablet core: cellulose microcrystalline, calcium hydrogen phosphate anhydrous, sodium starch glycolate, magnesium stearate
Film-coat: poly (vinyl alcohol), titanium dioxide, macrogol 3350, talc, soya lecithin, indigo carmine aluminium lake (E132).
What CELSENTRI looks like and contents of the pack
CELSENTRI film-coated tablets are blue coloured with “ Pfizer” on one side and “ MVC 150” or “ MVC 300” on the other.
CELSENTRI 150 mg and 300 mg film-coated tablets are supplied in bottles of 180 tablets or in blister packs of 30, 60, 90 film-coated tablets and multipacks containing 180 (2 packs of 90) film-coated tablets.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed in all countries.
Marketing Authorisation Holder and Manufacturer
The Marketing Authorisation Holder is:
Pfizer Limited, Ramsgate Road, Sandwich, Kent, CT13 9NJ, United Kingdom.
The Manufacturer is:
Gödecke GmbH (a pharma plant of Pfizer GmbH), Mooswaldallee 1, 79090 Freiburg, Germany.
61 For any information about this medicinal product, please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder:
België/ Belgique/ Belgien Pfizer S. A. / N. V.
Tél/ Tel: +32 (0)2 554 62 11
Luxembourg/ Luxemburg Pfizer S. A.
Tél/ Tel: +32 (0)2 554 62 11
България Пфайзер Люксембург САРЛ, Клон България тел.: +3592 970 43 33
Magyarország Pfizer Kft.
Tel. + 36 1 488 37 00
Č eská republika Pfizer s. r. o.
Tel: +420-283-004-111
Malta V. J.
Salomone Pharma Ltd.
Tel: +356 21 22 01 74
Danmark Pfizer ApS Tel: +45 44 20 11 00
Nederland Pfizer bv Tel: +31 (0)10 4064 301
Deutschland Pfizer Pharma GmbH Tel: +49 (0)30 550055 51000
Norge Pfizer AS Tlf: +47 67 52 61 00
Eesti Österreich Pfizer Luxembourg SARL Eesti filiaal Tel.: +372 6 405 328
Pfizer Corporation Austria Ges. m. b. H.
Tel: +43 (0)1 521 15-0
Ελλάδα Pfizer Hellas A. E.
Τηλ: +30 210 6785 800
Polska Pfizer Polska Sp. z o. o.
Tel. :+48 22 335 61 00
España Pfizer S. A.
Tel: +34 91 490 99 00
Portugal Laboratórios Pfizer, Lda Tel: + 351 214 235 500
France Pfizer Tél: +33 (0)1 58 07 34 40
România Pfizer România S. R. L.
Tel: + 40 (0)21 207 28 00
Ireland Pfizer Healthcare Ireland Tel:
1 800 633 363
Slovenija Pfizer Luxembourg SARL Pfizer, podruž nica za svetovanje s področ ja farmacevtske dejavnosti, Ljubljana Tel: +386 (0)1 52 11 400
Ísland Vistor hf.
Sími: + 354 535 7000
Slovenská republika Pfizer Luxembourg SARL, organizač ná zlož ka Tel: + 421-2-3355 5500
Italia Pfizer Italia S. r. l.
Tel: +39 06 33 18 21
Suomi/ Finland Pfizer Oy Puh. / Tel: +358 (0)9 43 00 40
62 Κύπρος GEO.
PAVLIDES & ARAOUZOS LTD Τηλ: +35722818087
Sverige Pfizer AB Tel: +46 (0)8 550 520 00
Latvija Pfizer Luxembourg SARL Filiā le Latvijā Tel: + 371 670 35 775
United Kingdom Pfizer Limited Tel: + 44 (0)1737 331111
Lietuva Pfizer Luxembourg SARL, filialas Lietuvoje Tel: +3705 2514000
This leaflet was last approved in
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) website: http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/.
63