# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	GNOME
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-GNOME/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

The windows key opens the activities overview. You can usually find it next to the
GNOME Documentation Project
gnome-doc-list@gnome.org
What is the "windows" key?
When you press the
If you have an Apple keyboard, there will not be a windows key on your keyboard. The
Need to add info on changing the keybinding using the new preferences windows.
Phil Bull
philbull@gmail.com
Some website use Silverlight to display web pages. The Moonlight plug-in lets you view these pages.
Install the Silverlight plug-in
shaunm
Would be nice to (soft?) link to a page on the software installer

If you view a Silverlight-enabled website but don't have the plug-in installed, you will probably see a message telling you so. This message should have instructions telling you how to get the plug-in, but these instructions might not be suitable for your web browser or version of Linux.
If you want to view Silverlight-enabled websites, you should install the
Some Linux distributions have a copy of Moonlight that you can install using their software installer; just open the installer and search for
If your distribution doesn't have a Moonlight software package, see the
You may need to install Flash to be able to view websites like YouTube, which display videos and interactive web pages.
Install the Flash plug-in

If you do not have Flash installed, you will probably see a message telling you so when you visit a website that needs it. Flash is available as a free (but not open-source) download for most web browsers. Most Linux distributions have a version of Flash that you can install through their software installer (package manager) too.
If Flash is available from the software installer:
Open the software installer application and search for
Look for the
If you have any web browser windows open, close them and then re-open them. The web browser should realize that Flash is installed when you open it again and you should now be able to view websites using Flash.
If Flash
Go to the
Click where it says
Look at the
Open-source alternatives to Flash
A handful of free, open-source alternatives to Flash are available. These tend to work better than the Flash plug-in in some ways (for example, by handling sound playback better), but worse in others (for example, by not being able to display some of the more complicated Flash pages on the web).
You might like to try one of these out if you are dissatisfied with the Flash player, or would like to use as much open-source software as possible on your computer. Here are a few of the options:
Gnash
LightSpark
SWFdec (no longer being updated)
Change the default email client by going to
Do I need to scan my emails for viruses?
Viruses are programs which causes problems if they manage to find their way onto your computer. A common way of them getting onto your computer is through email messages.
Viruses which can affect computers running Linux are quite rare, so you are
You may, however, wish to scan your email for viruses in case you happen to forward a virus from one person to another. For example, if one of your friends has a Windows computer with a virus and sends you a virus-infected email, and you then forward that email to another friend with a Windows computer, then the second friend might get the virus too. You could install an anti-virus application to scan your emails to prevent this, but it's unlikely to happen and most people using Windows and Mac OS have anti-virus software of their own anyway.
Change which mail application is used to write emails
When you click a button or link to send a new email (for example, in your word processing application), your default mail application will open up with a blank message, ready for you to write. If you have more than one mail application installed, however, the wrong mail application might open up. You can fix this by changing which one is the default email application:
Click your name on the top bar and select
Open
Choose which email client you would like to be used by default by changing the
Change the default web browser by going to
Change which web browser websites are opened in
When you click a link to a web page in any application, a web browser will automatically open up to that page. If you have more than one browser installed, however, the page may not open up in the browser you wanted it to open in. To fix this, change the default web browser:
Choose which web browser you would like links to be opened in by changing the
When you open up a different web browser, it might tell you that it's not the default browser any more. If this happens, click the
Shaun McCance
shaunm@gnome.org

Web, email & chat
Connections
Internet connections
Web
Browsing the web
Email
Chat
Chat (instant messaging)
Check that they have the right video codecs installed.
Other people can't play the videos I made
If you made a video on your Linux computer and sent it to someone using Windows or Mac OS, you may find that they have problems playing the video.
To be able to play your video, the person you sent it to must have the right
Open the
Right-click on video file and select
Go to the
Ask the person having problems with playback if they have the right codec installed. They may find it helpful to search the web for the name of the codec plus the name of their video playback application. For example, if your video uses the
If you can't find the right codec, try the
There are a few other problems which might prevent someone from playing your video. The video could have been damaged when you sent it to them (sometimes big files aren't copied across perfectly), they could have problems with their video playback application, or the video may not have been created properly (there could have been some errors when you saved the video).
You might not have the right codecs installed, or the DVD might be the wrong region.
Why won't DVDs play?
If you insert a DVD into your computer and it doesn't play, you may not have the right DVD "codecs" installed, or the DVD might be from a different "region".
Installing the right codecs for DVD playback
In order to play DVDs, you need to have the right
DVDs are also "copy-protected" using a system called CSS. This prevents you from copying DVDs, but it also prevents you from playing them unless you have some extra software to handle the copy protection.
You can buy a commercial DVD decoder that can handle copy protection from
Checking the DVD region
DVDs have a "region code", which tells you in which region of the world you are allowed to play the DVD. DVD players can only play DVDs from the same region as them. For example, if you have a region 1 DVD player, you will only be allowed to play DVDs from North America.
If the region of your computer's DVD player and the DVD you are trying to play do not match, you won't be able to play the DVD. It is often possible to change the region used by your DVD player, but you can only do this a few times before it locks into one region permanently.
To change the DVD region of your computer's DVD player, use
Use longer, more complicated passwords.
Tiffany Antopolski
tiffany.antopolski@gmail.com
Choose a secure password
Make your passwords easy enough for you to remember, but very difficult for others (including computer programs) to guess.
Choosing a good password will help to keep your computer safe. If your password is easy to guess, someone may figure it out and gain access to your personal information.
People could even use computers to systematically try to guess your password, so even one that would be difficult for a human to guess might be extremely easy for a computer program to crack. Here are some tips for choosing a good password:
Use a mixture of upper-case and lower-case letters, numbers, symbols and spaces in the password. This makes it more difficult to guess; there are more symbols to choose from, so more possible passwords that someone would have to check when trying to guess yours.
A good method for choosing a password is to take the first letter of each word in a phrase that you can remember. The phrase could be the name of a movie, a book, a song or an album. For example, "Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions" would become F:ARoMD or faromd or f: aromd.
Make your password as long as possible. The more characters it contains, the longer it should take for a person or computer to guess it.
Do not use any words that appear in a standard dictionary in any language. Password crackers will try these first. The most common password is "password" - people can guess passwords like this very quickly!
Do not use any personal information such as a date, license plate number, or any family member's name.
Do not use any nouns.
Choose a password that can be typed quickly, to decrease the chances of someone being able to make out what you have typed if they happen to be watching you.
Never write your passwords down anywhere. They can be easily found!
Use different passwords for different things.
Use different passwords for different accounts.
If you use the same password for all of your accounts, anyone who guesses it will be able to access all of your accounts immediately.
It can be difficult to remember lots of passwords, however. Though not as secure as using a different passwords for everything, it may be easier to use the same one for things that don't matter (like websites), and different ones for important things (like your online banking account and your email).
Change your passwords regularly.
User forum.
tiffany@antopolski.com
Get in touch with other users.
Remove users that no longer use your computer.
Delete a user account
You can add multiple user accounts to your computer. See
Click
Click
Select the user you want to delete and click the
Each user has their own home folder for their files and settings. You can choose to keep or delete the user's home folder. Delete the files if you're sure they won't be used anymore and you need to free up disk space. These files are permanently deleted. They can't be recovered. You may want to back up the files to an external drive or CD before deleting them.
You may not be able to delete the user. This is a bug. It has been filed with bugzilla. For more information see
Add your photo to the login and user screens.
Change your login screen photo
When you log in or switch users, you will see a list of users with their login photos. You can change your photo to a stock image or an image of your own. You can even take a new login photo with your webcam.
Click your name on the top bar and select
Click the picture next to your name. A drop-down gallery will be shown with some stock login photos. If you like one of them, click it to use it for yourself.
If you'd rather use a picture you already have on your computer, click
If you have a webcam, you can take a new login photo right now by clicking
Keep your account secure by changing your password often in your account settings.
Change your password
We need a note in here about password hints. Share content with user-add
Turns out that you get a dialog to change the keyring password when you log in after changing your password. Mention that in a blurb above the steps above #changepass below. "When you next log in, you will be asked to.... If you prefer to change the keyring password immediately, do this:
We need pages on the keyring. Link to them from the section below on changing your keyring password. This page can still go final for 3.0.x without that, but leave this comment in for 3.2.
It is a good idea to change your password from time to time, especially if you think someone else knows what your password is.
Click the label next to
The label should look like a series of dots or boxes if you already have a password set.
Enter your current password, then a new password. Enter your new password again in the
You can also click the button next to the
Click
Make sure you
Change the keyring password
If you change your login password, it may become out of sync with the
Open the
In the
Enter your
Click
You can only do some things, like installing applications, if you have admin privileges.
Problems caused by administrative restrictions
There are a few problems that you might experience because you don't have
Connecting to some networks/wireless networks
Viewing the contents of a removable disk plugged-in to the computer, or the contents of a different disk partition (e.g. if you have a Windows partition)
Installing new applications
You can
You need admin privileges to change important parts of your system.
How do administrative privileges work?
As well as the files that
The way that they are protected is by only allowing users with
Sometimes you need to use these applications, so you may be able to temporarily get admin privileges to allow you to make the changes. If an application needs admin privileges, it will ask for your password. For example, if you want to install some new software, the software installer (package manager) will ask for your admin password so it can add the new application to the system. Once it has finished, your admin privileges will be taken away again.
Admin privileges are associated with your user account. Some users are allowed to have admin privileges and some are not. Without admin priveleges you will not be able to install software. Some user accounts (for example, the "root" account) have permanent admin privileges. You shouldn't use admin privileges all of the time, because you might accidentally change an important file and break something.
In summary, admin privileges allow you to change important parts of your system when you need to, but prevent you from doing it accidentally.
What does "super user" mean?
A user with admin privileges is sometimes called a
Why are admin privileges useful?
Requiring users to have admin privileges before important system changes are made is useful because it helps to prevent your system from being broken, intentionally or unintentionally.
If you had admin privileges all of the time, you might accidentally change an important file, or run an application which changes something important by mistake. Only getting admin privileges temporarily, when you need them, reduces the risk of these mistakes happening.
Only certain, trusted users should be allowed to have admin privileges. This prevents other users from messing with the computer and doing things like uninstalling applications that you need, installing applications that you don't want, or changing important files. This is useful from a security standpoint.
You can change which users are allowed to make changes to the system by giving them administrative privileges.
Change who has administrative privileges
Administrative privileges are a way of deciding who can make changes to important parts of the system. You can change which users have admin privileges and which ones don't. They are a good way of keeping your system secure and preventing potentially damaging unauthorized changes.
Click your name on the top bar, select
Click
Select the user whose privileges you want to change.
Click the label
Close the User Accounts window. The user's privileges will be changed when they next log in.
The first user account on the system is usually the one that has admin privileges. This is the user account that was created when you first installed the system.
It is unwise to have too many users with
Explain how admin privileges can be given to other people, or removed. Warn the reader about how it's unwise to have too many admins on a system.
Add new users so that other people can log in to the computer.
Add a new user account
We need a note in here about password hints. Share content with user-changepassword
You can add multiple user accounts to your computer. Give one account to each person in your household or company. Every user has their own home folder, documents, and settings.
Click
In the list of accounts on the left, click the
If you want the new user to have administrative access to the computer, select
Enter the new user's full name. The username will be filled in automatically based on the full name. The default is probably OK, but you can change it if you like.
Click
The account is initially disabled until you choose what to do about the user's password. Under
If you choose
Back in the
Allow guests to use your computer temporarily, without having to give them a password.
Add a guest user account
You can create a user account for guests, people who will only use the computer on a brief, temporary basis. The guest user will be able to use the programs on your computer, but they won't be able to access your files, change your settings, or install software.
Create a guest user account:
Select
The new guest user account will be selected. Under
Users

User accounts
Each person that uses the computer should have a different user account. This allows them to keep their files separate from yours and to choose their own settings. It's also more secure. You can only access a different user account if you know the password.
Accounts
Manage user accounts
Passwords
Privileges
User privileges
Type characters not found on your keyboard, including foreign alphabets, mathematical symbols, and dingbats.
Enter special characters
Marking complete for 3.0. We didn't get keyboard-inputmethods in. If we get it for 3.0.1, uncomment the last section, write something, and link.
You can enter and view thousands of characters from most of the world's writing systems, even those not found on your keyboard. This page lists some different ways you can enter special characters.
Methods to enter characters
Character map
GNOME comes with a character map application that allows you to browse all the characters in Unicode. Use the character map to find the character you want, and then copy and paste it to wherever you need it.
You can find
Compose key
A compose key is a special key that allows you to press multiple keys in a row to get a special character. For example, to type the accented letter
Keyboards don't have specific compose keys. Instead, you can define one of the existing keys on your keyboard as a compose key.
Define a compose key
Click your name in the top bar and select
Click
Select the
Find the group called
You can type many common characters using the compose key, for example:
Press
Press
Press
Press
For more compose key sequences, see
Code points
You can enter any Unicode character using only your keyboard with the numeric code point of the character. Every character is identified by a four-character code point. To find the code point for a character, find the character in the character map application and look in the status bar or the
To enter a character by its code point, hold down
Keyboard layouts
You can make your keyboard behave like the keyboard for another language, regardless of the letters printed on the keys. You can even easily switch between different keyboard layouts using an icon in the top bar. To learn how, see

Tips & tricks
Set the sound volume for the computer and control the loudness of each application.
Change the sound volume
To change the sound volume, click the volume icon on the top bar and move the volume slider left or right. You can completely turn off sound by dragging the slider all the way to the right.
Some keyboards have keys that let you control the volume. They normally look like stylized speakers with waves coming out of them. They are often near the "F" keys at the top. On laptop keyboards, they are usually on the "F" keys. Hold down the
Of course, if you have external speakers, you can also change the volume using the volume control on the speakers themselves. Some headphones have a volume control too.
Changing the sound volume for individual applications
You can change the volume for one application, but leave the volume for others unchanged. This is useful if you're listening to music and browsing the web, for example. You might want to turn off the volume in the web browser so sounds from websites don't interrupt the music.
Some applications have volume controls in their main windows. If your application has one of these, use that to change the volume. Otherwise, click the volume icon on the top bar and select
Only applications that are playing sounds will be listed. If an application is playing sounds but isn't listed, it might not support the feature that lets you control its volume in this way. In that case, you can't change its volume.
Connect speakers or headphones and select a default audio output device.
Use different speakers or headphones
You can use external speakers or headphones with your computer. Speakers usually either connect using a circular TRS (
If your speakers or headphones have a TRS plug, plug it into the appropriate socket on your computer. Most computers have two sockets: one for microphones and one for speakers. Look for a picture of headphones next to the socket. Speakers or headphones plugged into a TRS socket will usually be used by default. If not, see the instructions below for selecting the default device.
Some computers support multi-channel output for surround sound. This usually uses multiple TRS jacks, which are often color-coded. If you are unsure which plugs go in which sockets, you can test the sound output in the sound settings. Click your name in the top bar and select
If you have USB speakers or headphones, or analog headphones plugged into a USB sound card, plug them into any USB port. USB speakers act as separate audio devices, and you may have to specify which speakers to use by default.
Select a default audio input device
Click
On the
If you don't see your device on the
Use an analog or USB microphone and select a default input device.
Use a different microphone
You can use an external microphone for chatting with friends, speaking with colleagues at work, making voice recordings, or using other multimedia applications. Even if your computer has a built-in microphone or a webcam with a microphone, a separate microphone usually provides better audio quality.
If your microphone has a circular plug, just plug it into the appropriate adapter on your computer. Most computers have two adapters: one for microphones and one for speakers. Look for a picture of a microphone next to the adapter. Microphones plugged into the appropriate adapter will usually be used by default. If not, see the instructions below for selecting a default input device.
If you have a USB microphone, plug it into any USB port on your computer. USB microphones act as separate audio devices, and you may have to specify which microphone to use by default.
On the
If you don't see your device on the
Check that it's not muted, that cables are plugged in properly, and that the sound card is detected.
I can't hear any sounds on the computer
If you can't hear any sounds on your computer, for example when you try to play some music, try these troubleshooting steps to see if you can fix the problem.
Make sure that the sound is not muted
Click the sound icon on the top panel (it looks like a speaker) and make sure that the sound is not muted or turned right down.
Some laptops have mute switches or keys on their keyboards—try pressing that key to see if it unmutes the sound.
You should also check that you haven't muted the application that you're using to play sound (e.g. your music player or movie player). The application may have a mute or volume button in its main window, so check that. Also, click the sound icon on the top panel and choose
Check that the speakers are turned on and connected properly
If your computer has external speakers, make sure that they are turned on and that the volume is turned up. Make sure that the speaker cable is securely plugged into the "output" audio socket on the back of the computer. This socket is usually light green in color.
Some sound cards are able to switch which socket they use for output (to the speakers) and input (from a microphone, for instance). The output socket may be different when running Linux than on Windows or Mac OS. Try connecting the speaker cable to the different audio sockets on the computer in turn to see if that works.
A final thing to check is that the audio cable is securely plugged into the back of the speakers. Some speakers have more than one input too.
Check that the right sound device is selected
Some computers have multiple "sound devices" installed. Some of these are capable of outputting sound and some are not, so you should check that you have the correct one selected. This might involve some trial-and-error to choose the right one.
Click the sound icon on the top panel and select
In the
For the selected device, try changing the profile—play a sound after you change the profile to see if it works. You might need to go through the list and try each profile.
If that doesn't work, you might want to try doing the same for any other devices that are listed.
Try changing the
Check that the sound card was detected properly
Your sound card may not have been detected properly. If this has happened, your computer will think that it isn't able to play sound. A possible reason for the card not being detected properly is that the drivers for the card are not installed.
Go to the
Type
A list of devices will be shown. If there are no
If your sound card is not detected, you may need to manually install the drivers for it. How you do this will depend on the card you have.
You can see what sound card you have by using the
You may be able to find and install drivers for your card. It's best to ask on support forums (or otherwise) for your Linux distribution for instructions.
If you can't get drivers for your sound card, you might prefer to buy a new sound card. You can get sound cards that can be installed inside the computer and external USB sound cards.
Check your audio cables and sound card drivers.
I hear crackling or buzzing when sounds are playing
If you hear crackling or buzzing when sounds are playing on your computer, you may have a problem with the audio cables or connectors, or a problem with the drivers for the sound card.
Check that the speakers are plugged in correctly.
If the speakers aren't fully plugged in, or if they are plugged into the wrong socket, you might hear a buzzing sound.
Make sure the speaker/headphone cable isn't damaged.
Audio cables and connectors can gradually wear with use. Try plugging the cable or headphones into another audio device (like an MP3 player or a CD player) to check if there is still a crackling sound. If there is, you may need to replace the cable or headphones.
Check if the sound drivers aren't very good.
Some sound cards don't work very well on Linux because they don't have very good drivers. This problem is more difficult to identify. Try searching for the make and model of your sound card on the internet, plus the search term "Linux", to see if other people are having the same problem.
You can use the
Are we shipping any sort of device manager? If we do (or even if we recommend one, but people need to install it), and if you can get all the information you need about the sound card from that, we should link to that for getting info on your sound card.
Troubleshoot problems like having no sound or having poor sound quality.
Sound problems
There are a number of ways for sound playback to break on your computer. Which of the topics below best describes the problem you are experiencing?
Choose the sound to play for messages, set the alert volume, or disable alert sounds.
Choose or disable the alert sound
Your computer will play a simple alert sound for certain types of messages and events. You can choose different sound clips for alerts, set the alert volume independently of your system volume, or disable alert sounds entirely.
On the
Use the volume slider on the
To disable alert sounds entirely, select
Use the workspace selector in the Activities overview.
Switch between workspaces
Using the mouse:
In the
Using the keyboard:
Press
Press
@@image: 'figures/shell-workspaces.png'; md5=7bff363fa97b90b297adcd52bd20d6ea
Workspaces are a way of grouping windows on your desktop.
What is a workspace, and how will it help me?
Workspace selector
Workspaces refer to the grouping of windows on your desktop. You can create many workspaces, which act like virtual desktops. Workspaces are meant to reduce clutter and make the desktop easier to navigate.
Workspaces can be used to organize your work. For example, you could have all your communication windows, such as e-mail and your chat program on one workspace and the work you are doing on a different workspace. Your music manager could be on a third workspace.
Using workspaces:
In the
To add a workspace, drag and drop a window from an existing workspace onto the empty workspace in the workspace selector. This workspace now contains the window you dropped into it, and a new empty workspace will appear below it.
To remove a workspace simply close all of its windows or move them to other workspaces.
There is always at least one workspace.
Go to the Activities overview and drag the window to a different workspace.
Move a window to a different workspace
Open the
Click and drag the window toward the right of the screen.
The
Drop the window onto an empty workspace. This workspace now contains the window you dropped into it, and a new empty workspace appears at the bottom of the workspace panel.
Click on the window to make it
Press
Press
Press
Switch between windows
More prose, talk about Alt+`. Maybe a screenshot. 3.0.1
Including all applications in the window switcher makes switching between tasks a single-step process and provides a full picture of what applications are running.
From a workspace:
Press
Release the
Otherwise, still holding-down the
Windows in the window switcher are grouped by application. Previews of applications with multiple windows pop down as you click through. Press
In the window switcher, applications from different workspaces are divided by vertical separators.
You can also move between the application icons in the window switcher with the → or ← arrow keys, or by clicking it with the mouse.
Previews of applications with a single window can be displayed with the ↓ arrow key.
From the
Click on a
Restore, resize, arrange and hide.
Window operations
Make more task-based. Maybe split up. Overview doesn't seem as useful as it could be. Revisit hide/minimize terminology. 3.0.1.
Windows can be resized or concealed to suit workflow.
Briefly explain the different window states that exist and how you can use and recognize those states. Discuss interesting ways of arranging windows (i.e. if there is a "Tile" option or something like that). Mention, in passing, how you can move and resize windows in multiple ways.
Minimize, restore and close
To minimize or hide a window:
Press
To restore the window:
Click on it in the
To close the window:
Click the
Press
Press
Resize
A window cannot be resized if it is
To resize your window horizontally and/or vertically:
Move the mouse pointer into any corner of the window until it changes into a 'corner-pointer'. Click+hold+drag to resize the window in any direction.
To resize only in the horizontal direction:
Move the mouse pointer to either side of the window until it changes into a 'side-pointer'. Click+hold+drag to resize the window horizontally.
To resize only in the vertical direction:
Move the mouse pointer to the top or bottom of the window until it changes into a 'top-pointer' or 'bottom-pointer' respectively. Click+hold+drag to resize the window vertically.
Arranging windows in your workspace
Two windows can be placed side by side. Drag a window by its titlebar toward the left side of the screen until the cursor touches the left side. The left half of the screen becomes highlighted. Unclick, and the window resizes to fill half the screen. Repeat for another window, dragging it to the right side and releasing.
Move and organize your windows.
Windows and workspaces
Like other desktops, Gnome uses windows to display your running applications. Using both the
In addition to windows, you can also group your applications together within workspaces. Visit the window and workspace help topics below to better learn how to use these features.
Very brief overview of what you can do with windows. Link to relevant topics.
Working with windows
Working with workspaces
Double-click on the title bar.
Maximize and unmaximize (restore) a window
To maximize or unmaximize a window:
Double-click on the title bar of the window.
Alternatively, to maximize a window:
Click on the title bar of an application and drag it to the top of the screen. When the mouse pointer touches the top of the screen, the entire screen becomes highlighted. Release the mouse button to maximize the window.
To restore the window to its original size:
Click on the title bar of the application, and drag it down from the top bar. After the window separates from the top bar it will restore itself to an unmaximized state.
Press
You can also use your keyboard to maximize a window. Press
Check the activities overview or other workspaces.
Find a lost window
A window on a different workspace, or hidden behind another window, is easily found using the
Open the activities overview and make sure the
Click on the different workspaces in the
Right-click on the application in the dash and its open windows will be listed. Click on the window in the list to switch to it.
Using the window switcher:
Press
If an application has multiple open windows, press
An overview of terms used to describe different parts of the desktop.
Activities, dash, top bar... What are they?
Activities overview
The
Alt-Tab window switcher
When you hold down the
Dash
The
Hot corner
The
Notifications

System settings
The
Top bar
The
Workspace
You can put windows on different
The
Change your chat status and hide notifications.
Change your availability
If you're working on something and don't want to be bothered, you can change your status to
When you're marked busy, most notifications will not pop up at the bottom of the screen. Very important notifications, such as when your battery is critically low, will still pop up. Notifications will still be available in the messaging tray when you move your mouse to the bottom right corner, and they will be shown to you when you mark yourself available again.
If you use GNOME's built-in instant messaging features, this will also change your availability to your chat contacts, so they know not to disturb you.
Overview
An overview of the different parts of the desktop.
Overview of the desktop
The Desktop
Applications and windows
Files and folders
@@image: 'figures/shell-notification.png'; md5=d7c8fce4285b89bd895de47edba780c7
Messages pop-up at the bottom of the screen telling you when certain events happen.
Marina Zhurakhinskaya
marinaz@redhat.com
Notifications and the message tray
What is a notification?
If an application or a system component wants to get your attention, a notification will be shown at the bottom of the screen.
For example, if you get a new chat message, new updates are available for your computer, or your computer’s battery is low, you will get a notification informing you about that.
To minimize distraction, the notification will first appear as a single line. You can move your mouse over it if you want to see its full content.
The message tray
The message tray gives you a way to get back to your notifications when it is convenient for you. It appears when you move your mouse to the bottom right corner of the screen and contains all the notifications that you have not acted upon or that permanently reside in it.
You can view the notifications by clicking on the message tray items. The items in the message tray are usually applications that sent you notifications. However, chat notifications are given special treatment and are represented by the individual contacts who sent you the chat messages.
The message tray is always visible in the activities overview.
Getting around the desktop using the keyboard.
Useful keyboard shortcuts
Getting around the desktop

Switch between the
Alt
F2
Pop up command window (for quickly running commands)
Tab

`
Switch between windows from the same application, or from the selected application after
This shortcut uses
Ctrl
Give keyboard focus to the top bar. In the
D
Hide all windows and show the desktop. This shortcut may not work on all distros.
Up/Down
Switch between workspaces.
Shift
Move the current window to a different workspace.
L
Lock the screen.
Common editing shortcuts
A
Select all text or items in a list.
X
Cut (remove) selected text or items and place it on the clipboard.
C
Copy selected text or items to the clipboard.
V
Paste the contents of the clipboard.
Z
Undo the last action.
Capturing from the screen
Print
Take a screenshot.
Take a screenshot of a window.
R
Start and end screencast recording.
@@image: 'figures/shell-top-bar.png'; md5=cfca3f44e612311786ba66b0d07c3efd
@@image: 'figures/shell-activities.png'; md5=e9fd4a053aade039919675b0c6b9b3e2
@@image: 'figures/shell-dash.png'; md5=6743f2c22420cb61bf0f1885f3ca8876
@@image: 'figures/shell-appts.png'; md5=a8fd39344b169993fcd49eed38a55c5f
@@image: 'figures/shell-exit.png'; md5=92aa5189eefa383d710da00cf52fb339
A visual introduction to your desktop, the top bar, and the activities overview.
Introduction to GNOME
mimico
Add a screen shot of a message tray
GNOME 3 features a completely reimagined user interface designed to stay out of your way, minimize distractions, and help you get things done. When you first log in, you will see an empty desktop and the top bar.
GNOME shell top bar
The top bar provides access to your windows and applications, your calendar and appointments, and system properties like sound, networking, and power. Under your name in the top bar, you can set your availability, change your profile or settings, log out or switch users, or turn off your computer.
Activities button
To access your windows and applications, click the
The dash
On the left of the overview, you will find the
To pick a window in a running application, or to open a new window, right-click on the application icon. You can also drag the icon to the overview, or onto any workspace thumbnail on the right.
When you enter the overview, you will initially be in the windows overview. This shows you live thumbnails of all the windows on the current workspace. Click any window to focus that window and exit the overview. You can also use the scroll wheel on your mouse to zoom in on any window thumbnail.
Click
Learn more about starting applications.
Learn more about windows and workspaces.
Clock, calendar & appointments
Clock, calendar, and appointments
Click the clock in the middle of the top bar to see the current date, a month-by-month calendar, and a list of your upcoming appointments. You can also access the date and time settings and open your full
Learn more about the calendar and appointments.
You and your computer
User menu
Click your name in the top-right corner to manage your profile and your computer.
You can quickly set your availability directly from the menu. When you use the
If you set yourself to Busy, you won't be bothered by message popups at the bottom of your screen. Messages will still be available in the message tray when you move your mouse to the bottom-right corner. But only urgent messages will be presented, such as when your battery is critically low.
Learn more about changing your availability.
The menu also allows you to edit your personal information and change the system settings.
When you leave your computer, you can lock your screen to prevent other people from using it. You can quickly switch users without logging out completely to give somebody else access to the computer. Or you can suspend or power off the computer from the menu.
Learn more about switching users, logging out, and turning off your computer.
Message Tray
The message tray can be brought into view by moving your mouse into the bottom-right corner. This is where your notifications are stored until you are ready to view them.
Learn more about the message tray.
Learn more about notifications.
Learn how to leave your user account, by logging out, switching users, and so on.
Log out, power off, switch users
More links would be good, especially in #logout. Could go final as-is. Incomplete for now
When you've finished using your computer, you can turn it off, suspend it (to save power), or leave it powered on and just log out.
Log out or switch users
To let other users use your computer, you can either log out, or leave yourself logged in and just switch users. If you just switch users, all of your applications will continue running, and everything will be where you left it when you log back in.
To log out or switch users, click your name on the top bar and select the appropriate option.
Lock the screen
If you're leaving your computer for a short time, you should lock your screen to prevent other people from accessing your files and running applications. When you return, simply enter your password to log back in. If you don't lock your screen, it will lock automatically after a certain amount of time.
To lock your screen, click your name on the top bar and select
When your screen is locked, other users can log in to their own accounts by clicking
Suspend
To save power, suspend your computer when you aren't using it. If you use a laptop, GNOME suspends your computer automatically when you close your lid. This saves your state to your computer's memory and powers off most of your computer's functions. A very small amount of power is still used during suspend.
To suspend your computer manually, click your name on the top bar and select
Shut down or restart
If you want to power off your computer entirely, or do a full restart, first log out by clicking your name on the top bar and selecting
If there are other users logged in, you may not be allowed to power off or restart the computer, because this will end their sessions. If you are an administrative user, you may be asked for your password to power off.
If you need to shut down or restart quickly, you can do it without logging out. Click your name on the top bar, then hold down the
Launch apps from the the activities overview.
Start applications
If an app is running, it's focused. You can create a new window by dragging to the windows overview or onto a workspace thumbnail. (Also mention dragging to overview in list item below, not just workspace thumbnail.) Right-click icon to choose a window to focus or get new window. Mention middle-click?
Move your mouse pointer to the
There are several ways of opening an application once you're in the activities overview:
Start typing the name of an application - it should search for it instantly. (If this doesn't happen, click the search bar at the top right of the screen and then start typing.) Then, click the application's icon to start it.
Click the
Some applications have icons in the
If you have applications that you use very frequently, you can
You can launch an application in a separate
Quickly running a command
Another, more advanced way of running an application is to use its
For example, to launch
Add (or remove) frequently-used program icons on the dash.
Pin your favorite apps to the dash
To add an application to the
Open the
Find the application you want to add to the dash by clicking on
Alternately, you can click-and-drag the icon into the dash.
To remove an application icon from the dash, right click on the application icon and select
Change how long to wait before locking the screen in the
The screen locks itself too quickly
If you leave your computer for a few minutes, the screen will automatically lock itself so you have to enter your password to start using it again. This is done for security reasons (so no-one can mess with your work if you leave the computer unattended), but it can be annoying if the screen locks itself too quickly.
To wait for a longer period before automatically locking the screen:
Select
Change the value in the
If you don't ever want the screen to lock itself automatically, switch
Switch to a different language for user interface and help text.
Change language
How do you change the system language, i.e. the language of the login screen or even the boot process?
You can use your desktop and applications in any of dozens of languages, provided you have the proper language packs installed on your computer.
Select your desired language on the
You have to log out and back in for language changes to take effect. Click your name in the top bar and select
There are some special folders in your home folder where applications can store things like music, pictures, and documents. These folders use standard names according to your language. When you log back in, you will be asked if you want to rename these folders to the standard names for your selected language. If you plan to use the new language all the time, you should update the folder names.
You can log in to your system using a supported fingerprint scanner.
Paul W. Frields
stickster@gmail.com
Log in with a fingerprint
If your system has a supported fingerprint scanner, you can record your fingerprint and use it to log in. You must have administrative privileges to perform these steps.
First, record a fingerprint the system can use to identify you.
If your finger is too dry, you may have difficulty registering your fingerprint. If this happens, moisten your finger slightly, dry it with a clean, lint-free cloth, and retry.
Select your user name in the upper right-hand corner, then choose
Unlock your account using the
Enter your password at the prompt.
Select the
Select an option for the fingerprint you want to register. You may choose your right index finger, your left index finger, or a different finger. Then select
Swipe the finger you selected three times at a
Select
Now check that your new fingerprint login works. If you register a fingerprint, you still have the option to log in with your password.
Save any open work, and then log out. Select your name in the upper right-hand corner and then select
A confirmation message will appear. Select
At the login screen, select your user name from the list. The password entry form will appear.
Within 30 seconds, select the fingerprint button above and to the right of your name.
The fingerprint button is labeled with a picture of a hand. If the timer runs out, the button will disappear and you will only be permitted to log in with a password. If you want to try again, select the
Swipe the finger you registered at a
If you previously created a login keyring, it is secured by your password. To unlock it, enter your password.
Take a picture or record a video of what's happening on your screen.
Screenshots and screencasts
You can take a picture of your screen (a
Take a screenshot
To take a picture of what's on your screen:
Go to the
In the window that appears, choose what to take a picture of.
You can take a picture of the whole of the screen (
Click
If you selected
The
You can also drag and drop the image of the screenshot into another application, to paste it there, or to the
Make a screencast
You can make a video recording of what is happening on your screen:
Press
A red circle is displayed in the bottom right corner of the screen when the recording is in progress.
Once you've finished, press
A file named
In the file name, %d is the date, %u is a string of letters that makes the file name unique, and %c is a counter that is incremented each time a recording is made within a single session.
You can
If print-outs are streaky, fading, or missing colors, check your ink levels or clean the print head.
GNOME Documentation Team
Why are there streaks, lines or the wrong colors on my print-outs?
This had a seealso and two inline links to printing-inklevel. I removed printing-inklevel for 3.0. If it gets written, add the links back.
If your print-outs are streaky, faded, have lines on them that shouldn't be there, or are otherwise poor in quality, this may be due to a problem with the printer or a low ink/toner supply.
Fading text or images
You may be running out of ink or toner. Check your ink/toner supply and buy a new cartridge if necessary.
Streaks and lines
If you have an inkjet printer, the print head may be dirty or partially blocked. Try cleaning the print head (see the printer's manual for instructions).
Wrong colors
The printer may have run out of one color of ink or toner. Check your ink/toner supply and buy a new cartridge if necessary.
Jagged lines, or lines aren't straight
If lines on your print-out that should be straight turn out jagged, you may need to align the print head. See the printer's instruction manual for details on how to do this.
Set up a printer that is connected to your computer.
Jim Campbell
jwcampbell@gmail.com
Set up a local printer
Your system can recognize many types of printers automatically once they're connected. Most printers are connected with a USB cable that attaches to your computer.
Do we have anything on what to do when your printer isn't found? 3.0.1?
Make sure the printer is turned on.
Connect the printer to your system via the appropriate cable. You may see activity on the screen as the system searches for drivers, and you may be asked to authenticate to install them.
A message will appear when the system is finished installing the printer. Select
If your printer was not set up automatically, you can add it in the printer settings.
Click
Click the
Click the
In the pop-up window, select
If your printer does not appear in the Add Printer pop-up, you may need to
After you install the printer, you may wish to
Pick the printer that you use most often.
Set the default printer
If you have more than one printer available, you can select which will be your default printer. You may want to pick the printer you use most often.
You need administrative privileges on the system to set the default printer.
Select your desired default printer from the list of available printers.
Select the
When you print in an application, the default printer is automatically used, unless you choose a different printer for that specific output.
@@image: 'figures/printing-select.png'; md5=e38a5749ed445a812346602ad58b88b4
Print only specific pages, or only a range of pages.
Print only certain pages
To only print certain pages from the document:
Click
In the
Type the numbers of the pages you want to print in the text box, separated by commas. Use a dash to denote a range of pages.
For example, if you enter "1,3,5-7,9" in the
How you clear a paper jam will depend on the make and model of printer that you have.
Clearing a paper jam
Sometimes printers incorrectly feed sheets of paper and get jammed.
The manual for your printer will usually provide detailed instructions on how to clear paper jams. Usually, you will need to open one of the printer's panels to find the jam inside and then firmly (but carefully!) pull the jammed paper out of the printer's feeding mechanism.
Once the jam has been cleared you may need to press the printer's
Collate and reverse the print order.
Make pages print in a different order
Reverse
Printers usually print the first page first, and the last page last, so the pages end up in reverse order when you pick them up. If needed, you can reverse this printing order.
To reverse the order:
Click
In the
Collate
If you are printing more than one copy of the document, the print-outs will be grouped by page number by default (i.e. all of the copies of page one come out, then the copies of page two, and so on).
To Collate:
In the
Make sure that you have the envelope/label the right way up, and have chosen the correct paper size.
Print envelopes and labels
Most printers will allow you to print directly onto an envelope or sheet of labels. This is especially useful if you have a lot of letters to send, for example.
Printing onto envelopes
There are two things you need to check when trying to print onto an envelope. The first is that your printer knows what size the envelope is. After you click
Secondly, you need to make sure that the envelopes are loaded with the right side up in the printer's in-tray. Check the printer's manual for this, or try to print a single envelope and check which side is printed on to see which way is the right way up.
Some printers are not designed to be able to print envelopes, especially some laser printers. Check your printer's manual to see if it accepts envelopes; otherwise, you could damage the printer by feeding an envelop in.
Print a document on a different paper size or orientation.
Change the paper size when printing
If you want to change the paper size of your document (for example, print a US Letter-sized PDF on A4 paper), you can change the printing format for the document.
Select the
Under the
Click
You can also use the
Portrait
Landscape
Reverse portrait
Reverse landscape
Cancel a pending print job and remove it from the queue.
Cancel a print job
If you accidentally started printing a document, you can quickly cancel the print so you don't need to waste any ink or paper. Click the printer icon on the top bar and then click
If this doesn't cancel the print job like you expected, try holding down the
As a last resort, especially if you have a big print job with a lot of pages that won't cancel, remove the paper from the printer's paper input tray. The printer should realize that there is no paper and will stop printing. You can then try canceling the print job again, or try turning the printer off and then on again.
Be careful that you don't damage the printer when removing the paper, though - if you would have to pull hard on the paper to remove it, you should probably just leave it where it is.
Print a booklet on a single-sided printer
These instruction are for printing a booklet from a PDF document. If you want to print a booklet from a
To print:
Choose the
Under
Type the numbers of the pages in this order (n is the total number of pages, and a multiple of 4):
n, 1, 2, n-1, n-2, 3, 4, n-3, n-4, 5, 6, n-5, n-6, 7, 8, n-7, n-8, 9, 10, n-9, n-10, 11, 12, n-11...
...until you have typed all of the pages.
Examples:
4 page booklet: Type
8 page booklet: Type
12 page booklet: Type
16 page booklet: Type
20 page booklet: Type
Choose the
Under
In the
In the
In the
Click
When all the pages have printed, flip the pages over and place them back in the printer.
In the
Print folded booklets (like a book or pamphlet) using normal A4/Letter-size paper.
Print folded booklets
You can make folded booklets (like a small book or pamphlet) by printing pages of a document in a special order and changing a couple of printing options.
To print a booklet:
Go to the
Now, go to the
Under
In the
How to print a folded, multi-page booklet using A4 or Letter-sized paper.
Print a booklet
You can print a booklet from a PDF. If you want to print a booklet from a
If your
If the number of pages in your PDF document is not a multiple of 4, you should add the appropriate number of blank pages (1,2 or 3) to make it a multiple of 4. To do so, you can:
Create a
Export the blank pages to a PDF.
Merge the blank pages with your PDF document using
Select the type of printer you will be using for printing from the list below:
Print on both sides of the paper, or multiple pages per sheet.
Print two-sided and multi-page layouts
You can print on both sides of each sheet of paper:
Go to the
Printers handle two-sided printing in different ways. It's a good idea to experiment with your printer to see how it works.
You can print more than one page of the document per
The availability of these options may depend on the type of printer you have, as well as the application you are using. This option may not always be available.

Printing
Jim C
Needs info about network printing - 2011-06-08
Setup
Set up a printer
Sizes and layouts
Different paper sizes and layouts
Undetected printers, paper jams, print-outs that look wrong...
Printer problems

Display & screen

Language & region
Settings

User & system settings
Loose cables and hardware problems are possible reasons.
My computer will not turn on
There are a number of reasons why your computer will not turn on. This topic gives a brief overview of some of the possible reasons.
This is a complicated topic. Give troubleshooting steps/reasons for why the computer won't turn on. Some of the reasons may be down to hardware failure.
This was marked incomplete as of 2011-04-04. I marked it final for 3.0. If there's more to add, revisit for 3.2.
Computer not plugged in, empty battery, or loose cable
Make sure that the power cables of the computer are firmly plugged in and the power outlets are switched on. Make sure that the monitor is plugged in and switched on too. If you have a laptop, connect the charging cable (in case it has run out of battery). You may also want to check that the battery is correctly fitted in place (check the underside of the laptop).
Problem with the computer hardware
A component of your computer may be broken or malfunctioning. If this is the case, you will need to get your computer repaired. Common faults include a broken power supply unit, incorrectly-fitted components (such as the memory/RAM) and a faulty motherboard.
The computer beeps and then switches off
If the computer beeps several times when you turn it on and then turns off (or fails to start), it may be indicating that it has detected a problem. These beeps are sometimes referred to as
The computer fans are spinning but nothing is on the screen
The first thing to check is that your monitor is plugged in and turned on.
This problem could also be due to a hardware fault. The fans might turn on when you press the power button, but other essential parts of the computer might fail to turn on. In this case, take your computer in for repairs.
When your laptop is running on battery, the screen will dim when the computer is idle in order to save power.
Why does my screen go dim after a while?
We have a few disparate pages on this. We should consider consolidating or rethinking how we cross-link them.
When your laptop computer is running on battery, the screen will dim when the computer is idle in order to save power. When you start using the computer again, the screen will brighten.
You can stop the screen from dimming itself:
Click your name on the top bar and click
Open
Look in
I want the computer to turn off when I press the power button
When you press the power button on your computer, a window will pop up asking what you want to do - whether you want to turn off the computer, send it to sleep and so on. You can make it so that one of these options happens automatically when you press the power button, rather than showing this window.
Click your name at the top of the screen, select
Suspend sends it to sleep; hibernate saves your files but completely switches off the power.
What happens when I suspend or hibernate the computer?
I would like a better explanation of what "saved to disk" means. As written, it could be confused with open files being saved, which they aren't. Also, with GNOME 3, we barely expose hibernate. It's in the power settings, but nothing does it by default. Restructure prose to reflect that.
This page stays incomplete until this is dealt with.
When you
When you
Some computers have problems with hardware support which mean that they
Always save your work before suspending/hibernating
You should save all of your work before suspending or hibernating the computer, just in case something goes wrong and your open applications and documents can't be recovered when you switch on the computer again.
Some computer hardware causes problems with suspend/hibernate.
Why won't my computer turn back on after I sent it to sleep?
Marked incomplete as of 2011-04-04. Marking final for 3.0. Revisit for 3.2
If you send your computer to sleep (suspend it) or hibernate it, then try to wake it up or turn it back on, you may find that it doesn't work as you expected. This could be because suspend/hibernate aren't supported properly by your hardware.
My computer is asleep and won't wake up
If you sent your computer to sleep (suspended it) and then press a key or click the mouse, it should wake up and display a screen asking for your password. If this does not happen, try pressing the power button (don't hold it in; just press it once).
If this still doesn't help, make sure that your computer's monitor is switched on and try pressing a key on the keyboard again.
As a last resort, turn off the computer by holding-in the power button for 5-10 seconds. You will lose any unsaved work by doing this. You should then be able to turn on the computer again, though.
If this happens every time you send your computer to sleep, the suspend feature may not work with your hardware.
None of my applications/documents are open when I turn on the computer again
If you hibernated your computer and switched it on again, but none of your documents or applications are open, it probably failed to hibernate properly. Sometimes this happens because of a minor problem, and the computer will be able to hibernate properly the next time you do it. It might also happen because you had installed a software update which required the computer to be restarted; in this case, the computer may have shut down instead of hibernating.
It is also possible that the computer is not capable of hibernating because the hardware doesn't support it properly. This might be because of a problem with Linux drivers for your hardware, for example. You can test this by hibernating again and seeing if it works the second time. If it doesn't, it's probably a problem with your computer's drivers.
My wireless connection (or other hardware) doesn't work when I wake up my computer
If you send your computer to sleep or hibernate it and then wake it up again, you may find that your internet connection, mouse, or some other device doesn't work properly. This could be because the device's driver doesn't properly support suspend/hibernate. This is a
If the device has a power switch, try turning it off and then on again. In most cases, the device will start working again. If it connects via a USB cable or similar, unplug the device and then plug it in again and see if it works.
If you cannot turn off/unplug the device, or if this doesn't work, you may need to restart your computer for the device to start working again.
Natalia Ruz
nruz@alumnos.inf.utfsm.cl

Power & battery
Battery settings
Power problems
Troubleshoot problems with power and batteries.
Problems
Your computer will work, but you might need a different power cable or a travel adapter.
Will my computer work with a different country's power supply?
Different countries use power supplies at different voltages (usually 110V or 220-240V) and AC frequencies (usually 50 Hz or 60 Hz). Your computer should work with a different country's power supply as long as you have an appropriate power adapter. You may also need to flip a switch.
If you have a laptop, all you should need to do is get the right plug for your power adapter. Many laptops come packaged with more than one plug for their adapter, so you may already have the right one. If not, plugging your existing one into a standard travel adapter will suffice.
If you have a desktop computer, you can also get a cable with a different plug, or use a travel adapter. In this case, however, you may need to change the voltage switch on the computer's power supply, if there is one. Many computers don't have a switch like this, and will happily work with either voltage. Look at the back of the computer and find the socket that the power cable plugs into. Somewhere nearby, there may be a small switch marked "110V" or "230V" (for example). Switch it if you need to.
Be careful when changing power cables or using travel adapters. Switch everything off first if you can.
Some wireless devices have problems handling when your computer is sent to sleep and don't wake up again properly.
I have no wireless network when I wake up my computer
If you have sent your computer to sleep (suspended it) or hibernated it, you may find that your wireless internet connection doesn't work when you wake it up again. This happens when the wireless device's
If this happens, try turning your wireless connection off and then on again. If you have a power switch for the wireless card, turn it off and then on again and see if it works. Some laptops have a keyboard shortcut that can be used to turn the wireless on and off; its icon often looks like a "radio beacon". You can also try clicking the network icon on the top bar and unchecking
If this doesn't work, restarting your computer should get the wireless working again.
Allowing the battery to completely discharge is bad for it.
Why did my computer turn off/hibernate when the battery got to 10%?
When the charge level of the battery gets too low, your computer will automatically hibernate (that is, it will save all of your open documents and applications, and then turn off). It does this to make sure that the battery doesn't completely discharge, since this is bad for the battery. If the battery just ran out, the computer wouldn't have time to shut down properly either.
You can change what happens when the battery level gets too low by clicking your name at the top of the screen, selecting
Some computers have problems hibernating, and may not be able to recover the applications and documents you had open when you turn on the computer again. In this case, it is possible that you could lose some of your work if you didn't save it before the computer hibernated. You may be able to
Computers usually get warm, but if they get too hot they can overheat, which can be damaging.
My computer gets really hot
Most computers get warm after a while, and some can get quite hot. This is normal: it's simply part of the way that the computer cools itself. However, if your computer gets very warm it could be a sign that it is overheating, which can potentially cause damage.
Most laptops get reasonably warm once you have been using them for a while. It's generally nothing to worry about - computers produce a lot of heat and laptops are very compact, so they need to remove their heat rapidly and their outer casing warms up as a result. Some laptops do get too hot, however, and may be uncomfortable to use. This is normally the result of a poorly-designed cooling system. You can sometimes get additional cooling accessories which fit to the bottom of the laptop and provide more efficient cooling.
If you have a desktop computer which feels hot to the touch, it may have insufficient cooling. If this concerns you, you can buy extra cooling fans or check that the cooling fans and vents are free from dust and other blockages. You might want to consider putting the computer in a better-ventilated area too - if kept in confined spaces (e.g. in a cupboard), the computer's cooling system may not be able to remove heat and circulate cool air fast enough.
Some people are concerned about the health risks of using hot laptops. There are suggestions that prolonged use of a hot laptop on your lap might possibly reduce (male) fertility, and there are reports of minor burns being suffered too (in extreme cases). If you are concerned about these potential problems, you may wish to consult a medical practitioner for advice. Of course, you can simply choose not to rest the laptop on your lap.
Most modern computers will shut themselves down if they get too hot, in order to prevent damage from occurring. If your computer keeps shutting down, this might be the reason. If your computer is overheating, you will probably need to get it repaired.
Some fan-control software could be missing, or your laptop may be running hot.
The laptop fan is always running
If your laptop's cooling fan is always running, it could be that the hardware that controls the laptop's cooling system isn't very well supported in Linux. Some laptops need extra software to control their cooling fans efficiently, but this software may not be installed (or available for Linux at all) and so the fans just run at full speed all of the time.
If this is the case, you may be able to change some settings or install extra software that allows full control of the fan. For example,
It is also possible that your laptop just produces a lot of heat. This does not necessarily mean that it is overheating; it might just need the fan to run at full speed all of the time to allow it to stay cool enough. If this is the case, you have little option but to let the fan run at full speed all of the time. You can sometimes buy additional cooling accessories for your laptop which may help.
Laptops go to sleep when you close the lid, in order to save power.
Why does my computer turn off when I close the lid?
When you close the lid of your laptop, your computer will
Some computers are unable to suspend properly, normally because their hardware isn't completely supported by the operating system (e.g. the Linux drivers are incomplete). In this case, you may find that you are unable to wake up your computer after you've closed the lid. You can try to
Stop the computer from suspending when the lid is closed
If you don't want the computer to suspend when you close the lid, you can change the settings for that behavior. To set the computer to blank the screen, rather than suspend, when the lid is closed:
Be very careful if you change this setting. Some laptops can overheat if they are left running with the lid closed, especially if they are in a confined place like a backpack.
Open the
To change the setting used when running on battery power, type this command and press
gsettings set org.gnome.settings-daemon.plugin.power lid-close-battery-action blank
To change the setting used when running on AC power, type this command and press
gsettings set org.gnome.settings-daemon.plugin.power lid-close-ac-action blank
There are other settings available besides "blank," such as "nothing," which causes the computer to do nothing.
Laptops and desktop monitors usually have buttons that you can press to change the brightness.
How can I make the screen brighter?
If you have a laptop or netbook, there are probably some screen brightness controls on the keyboard. They usually have stylized "sun" icons, and are often on or above the function keys (e.g.
You can also change the brightness by clicking your name on the top panel, selecting
If you have a desktop computer, you should be able to use controls on the monitor to change the brightness of the screen. How you do this depends very much on what monitor you have - some have specific buttons to change brightness, whereas others have buttons which you use to navigate on-screen menus.
If you have increased the brightness to the maximum but it's still not bright enough, you may need to adjust the
Tweaks from the manufacturer and differing battery life estimates may be the cause of this problem.
Why do I have less battery life than I did on Windows/Mac OS?
Some computers appear to have a shorter battery life when running on Linux than they do when running Windows or Mac OS. One reason for this is that computer vendors install special software for Windows/Mac OS that optimizes various hardware/software settings for a given model of computer. These tweaks are often highly specific, and may not be documented, so including them in Linux is difficult.
Unfortunately, there's not an easy way of applying these tweaks yourself without knowing exactly what they are. You may find that using some
Another possible reason for the discrepancy is that the method of estimating battery life is different on Windows/Mac OS than on Linux. The actual battery life could be exactly the same, but the different methods give different estimates. See
Some laptops intentionally slow down when they are running on battery.
Why is my laptop slow when it's on battery?
Some laptops intentionally slow down when they are running on battery in order to conserve power. The laptop's processor (CPU) switches to a slower speed, and processors use less power when running slower, so the battery should last longer.
This feature is called
Tips such as "Don't let the battery charge get too low"
Get the most out of your laptop battery
As laptop batteries age, they get worse at storing charge and their capacity gradually decreases. There are a few techniques that you can use to prolong their useful lifetime, although you shouldn't expect a big difference.
Don't let the battery run all the way down. Always recharge
Heat has a detrimental effect on a battery's charging efficiency. Don't let the battery get any warmer than it has to.
Batteries age even if you leave them in storage. There is little advantage in buying a replacement battery at the same time as you get the original battery - always buy replacements when you need them.
This advice applies specifically to Lithium-Ion (Li-Ion) batteries, which are the most common type. Other types of battery may behave differently.
Tips to reduce your computer's power consumption.
Use less power and improve battery life
Computers can use a lot of power. By using some simple energy-saving strategies, you can reduce your energy bill and help the environment. If you have a laptop, this will also help to increase the amount of time that it can run on battery power.
General tips

Turn off the computer when you will not be using it for longer periods. Some people worry that turning off a computer regularly may cause it to wear out faster, but modern computers are quite robust, so this shouldn't be an issue.
Use the Power Management preferences to change your power settings. There are a number of options that will help to save power: you can
Turn off any external devices (like printers and scanners) when you're not using them.
Laptops, netbooks, and other devices with batteries

Most laptops have buttons on the keyboard (or a keyboard shortcut) that you can use to reduce the brightness.
If you don't need an Internet connection for a little while, turn off the wireless/Bluetooth card. These devices work by broadcasting radio waves, which takes quite a bit of power.
Some computers have a physical switch that can be used to turn it off, whereas others have a keyboard shortcut that you can use instead. You can turn it on again when you need it.
More advanced tips
Reduce the number of tasks that are running in the background. Computers use more power when they have more work to do.
Most of your running applications do very little when you're not actively using them. However, applications that frequently grab data from the internet, play music or movies, or run distributed calculations can impact your power consumption.
The battery life that is displayed is only an estimate.
It says X minutes of battery remaining, but that's not true
When you check the remaining battery life, you may find that the
In order to estimate the remaining battery life, a number of factors must be taken into account. One is the amount of power currently being used by the computer: power consumption varies depending on how many programs you have open, which devices are plugged in, and whether you are running any intensive tasks (like watching a DVD or converting music files, for example). This changes from moment to moment, and is difficult to predict.
Another factor is how the battery discharges. Some batteries lose charge faster the emptier they get. Without precise knowledge of how the battery discharges, only a rough estimate of remaining battery life can be made.
As the battery discharges, the Power Manager will figure-out its discharge properties and will learn how to make better estimates of battery life. They will never be completely accurate, though.
If you get a completely ridiculous battery life estimate (say, hundreds of days!), the Power Manager is probably missing some of the data it needs to make a sensible estimate.
If you unplug the power and run the laptop on battery for a while, then plug it in and let it recharge again, the Power Manager should be able to get the data it needs.
Your battery is probably not broken; it's more likely that it is too old to hold charge.
An error reports my battery has low capacity
Let's see if we can get that dialog to have a help button pointing here.
When you first log in, you might see a message that says:
Battery may be broken. Your battery has a very low capacity which means that it may be old or broken.
This message is displayed when the computer detects that your battery is not capable of storing much charge. The most likely reason for this is that your battery is old. If this is the case, there will be no damage to your computer or hardware.
Over time, all laptop batteries lose their ability to store charge. After a while (normally a year or more), the battery will only be able to store a fraction of the charge that it could when it was new. The message above is shown when this happens.
If your computer or battery is relatively new, it should be capable of holding a high percentage of its design charge. If it can't, then your battery may be broken and you might need to seek a replacement.
Edit your connection settings, and remove the unwanted connection option.
My computer connects to the wrong network
The instructions for accessing the network settings are wrong. Also, I don't actually see how to accomplish this task with GNOME 3. Needs revision.
When you turn your computer on, your computer will automatically try to connect to wireless networks that you have connected to in the past. If it tries to connect to the wrong network each time (that is, not the one that you want it to connect to), do the following:
Click the network icon on the top bar and select
Go to the
Click that network once to select it and click
If you later want to connect to the network that you just deleted, click on the network icon in the top panel and select the network from the list. You may need to re-enter the security settings for that network connection.
WEP and WPA are ways of encrypting data on wireless networks.
What do WEP and WPA mean?
WEP and WPA (along with WPA2) are names for different encryption tools used to secure your wireless connection. Encryption scrambles the network connection so that no-one can "listen in" to it and look at which web pages you are viewing, for example. WEP stands for
Using
Contributors to the Ubuntu documentation wiki
Make sure that simple network settings are correct and prepare for the next few troubleshooting steps.
Wireless network troubleshooter
Perform an initial connection check
In this step you will check some basic information about your wireless network connection. This is to make sure that your networking problem isn't caused by a relatively simple issue, like the wireless connection being turned off, and to prepare for the next few troubleshooting steps.
Make sure that your laptop is not connected to a
If you have an external wireless adapter (such as a USB adapter, or a PCMCIA card that plugs into your laptop), make sure that it is firmly inserted into the proper slot on your computer.
If your wireless card is
Click the network icon and make sure that
Open the Terminal, type
This will display information about your network hardware and connection status. Look down the list of information and see if there is a section related to the wireless network adapter. The information for each network device is separated by a row of dashes. If you find the line
If you are connected to your wireless router, but you still cannot access the internet, your router may not be set up correctly, or your Internet Service Provider (ISP) maybe experiencing some technical problems. Review your router and ISP setup guides to make sure the settings are correct, or contact your ISP for support.
If the information from
You may need details such as the model number of your wireless adapter in subsequent troubleshooting steps.
Gather information about your network hardware
In this step, you will collect information about your wireless network device. The way you fix many wireless problems depends on the make and model number of the wireless adapter, so you will need to make a note of these details. It can also be helpful to have some of the items that came with your computer too, like device driver installation discs. Look for the following items, if you still have them:
The packaging and instructions for your wireless devices (especially the user guide for your router)
The disc containing drivers for your wireless adapter (even if it only contains Windows drivers)
The manufacturers and model numbers of your computer, wireless adapter and router. This information can usually be found on the underside/reverse of the device.
Any version/revision numbers that may be printed on your wireless network devices or their packaging. These can be especially helpful, so look carefully.
Anything on the driver disc that identifies either the device itself, its "firmware" version, or the components (chipset) it uses.
If possible, try to get access to an alternative working internet connection so that you can download software and drivers if necessary. (Plugging your computer directly into the router with an Ethernet network cable is one way of providing this, but only plug it in when you need to.)
Once you have as many of these items as possible, click
Even though your wireless adapter is connected, it may not have been recognized properly by the computer.
Wireless connection troubleshooter
Check that the wireless adapter was recognized
Even though the wireless adapter is connected to the computer, it may not have been recognized as a network device by the computer. In this step, you will check whether the device was recognized properly.
Open a Terminal window, type
Look through the information that appeared and find the
If a wireless device is listed, continue on to the
If a wireless device is
PCI (internal) wireless adapter
Internal PCI adapters are the most common, and are found in most laptops made within the past few years. To check if your PCI wireless adapter was recognized:
Open a Terminal, type
Look through the list of devices that is shown and find any that are marked
Network controller: Intel Corporation PRO/Wireless 3945ABG [Golan] Network Connection
If you found your wireless adapter in the list, proceed to the
USB wireless adapter
Wireless adapters that plug into a USB port on your computer are less common. They can plug directly into a USB port, or may be connected by a USB cable. 3G/mobile broadband adapters look quite similar to wireless (wifi) adapters, so if you think you have a USB wireless adapter, double-check that it is not actually a 3G adapter. To check if your USB wireless adapter was recognized:
Open a Terminal, type
Look through the list of devices that is shown and find any that seem to refer to a wireless or network device. The one corresponding to your wireless adapter might include words like
Checking for a PCMCIA device
PCMCIA wireless adapters are typically rectangular cards which slot into the side of your laptop. They are more commonly found in older computers. To check if your PCMCIA adapter was recognized:
Start your computer
Open a Terminal and type the following, then press
tail -f /var/log/messages
This will display a list of messages related to your computer's hardware, and will automatically update if anything to do with your hardware changes.
Insert your wireless adapter into the PCMCIA slot and see what changes in the Terminal window. The changes should include some information about your wireless adapter. Look through them and see if you can identify it.
To stop the command from running in the Terminal, press
If you found any information about your wireless adapter, proceed to the
Wireless adapter was not recognized
If your wireless adapter was not recognized, it might not be working properly or the correct drivers may not be installed for it. How you check to see if there are any drivers you can install will depend on which Linux distribution you are using (like Ubuntu, Fedora or openSuSE).
To get specific help, look at the support options on your distribution's website. These might include mailing lists and web chats where you can ask about your wireless adapter, for example.
Some device drivers don't work very well with certain wireless adapters, so you may need to find a better one.
Make sure that working device drivers are installed
In this step you can check to see if you can get working device drivers for your wireless adapter. A
Check to see if your wireless adapter is on a list of supported devices
Most Linux distributions keep a list of wireless devices that they have support for. Sometimes, these lists provide extra information on how to get the drivers for certain adapters working properly. Go to the list for your distribution (for example,
Look for restricted (binary) drivers
Many Linux distributions only come with device drivers which are
Some Linux distributions have a tool that can download restricted drivers for you. If your distribution has one of these, use it to see if it can find any wireless drivers for you.
Use the Windows drivers for your adapter
In general, you cannot use a device driver designed for one operating system (like Windows) on another operating system (like Linux). This is because they have different ways of handling devices. For wireless adapters, however, you can install a compatibility layer called
If none of these options work, you may want to try a different wireless adapter to see if you can get that working. USB wireless adapters are often quite cheap, and will plug into any computer. You should check that the adapter is compatible with your Linux distribution before buying it, though.
Identify and fix problems with wireless connections
This is a step-by step troubleshooting guide to help you identify and fix wireless problems. If you cannot connect to a wireless network for some reason, try following the instructions here.
We will proceed through the following steps to get your computer connected to the internet:
Performing an initial check
Gathering information about your hardware
Checking your hardware
Attempting to create a connection to your wireless router
Performing a check of your modem and router
To get started, click on the
Using the command line
Some of the instructions in this guide ask you to type commands into the
If you are not familiar with using a command line, don't worry - this guide will direct you at each step. All you need to remember is that commands are case-sensitive (so you must type them
Click the network icon on the top bar and select
Connect to a hidden wireless network
It is possible to set-up a wireless network so that it is "hidden" - that is, it won't show up in the list of networks which is displayed when you click the network icon on the top bar (or the list of wireless networks on any other computer). To connect to a hidden wireless network:
Open
Select
In the window that appears, type the network name, choose the type of wireless security and click
You may have to check the settings of the wireless base station/router to see what the network name is. It is sometimes called the
You should also check the wireless base station's security settings; look for terms like WEP and WPA.
You may think that hiding your wireless network will improve security by preventing people who don't know about it from connecting. In practice, this is not the case; the network is slightly harder to find but it is still detectable.
The wireless could be turned off or broken, there might be too many wireless networks nearby, or you might be out of range.
I can't see my wireless network in the list
There are a number of reasons why you might not be able to see your wireless network on the list of networks which appears when you click the network icon on the top bar.
If no networks are shown in the list, your wireless hardware could be turned off, or it
If there are lots of wireless networks nearby, the network you are looking for might not be on the first page of the list. If this is the case, look at the bottom of the list for an arrow pointing towards the right and hover your mouse over it to display the rest of the wireless networks.
You could be out of range of the network. Try moving closer to the wireless base station/router and see if the network appears in the list after a while.
The list of wireless networks takes time to update. If you have just turned on your computer or moved to a different location, wait for a minute or so and then check if the network has appeared in the list.
The network could be hidden. You need to
You might have low signal, or the network might not be letting you connect properly.
Why does my wireless network keep disconnecting?
You may find that you have been disconnected from a wireless network even though you wanted to stay connected. Your computer will normally try to reconnect to the network as soon as this happens (the network icon on the top bar will spin or pulse if it is trying to reconnect), but it can be annoying, especially if you were using the internet at the time.
Weak wireless signal
A common reason for being disconnected from a wireless network is that you have low signal. Wireless networks have a limited range, so if you are too far away from the wireless base station you may not be able to get a strong enough signal to maintain a connection. Walls and other objects between you and the base station can also weaken the signal.
The network icon on the top bar displays how strong your wireless signal is. If the signal looks low, try moving closer to the wireless base station.
Network connection not being established properly
Sometimes, when you connect to a wireless network, it may appear that you have successfully connected at first, but then you will be disconnected soon after. This normally happens because your computer was only partially successful in connecting to the network - it managed to establish a connection, but was unable to finalize the connection for some reason and so was disconnected.
A possible reason for this is that you entered the wrong wireless passphrase, or that your computer was not allowed on the network (because the network requires a username to log in, for example).
Unreliable wireless hardware/drivers
Some wireless network hardware can be a little unreliable. Wireless networks are complicated, so wireless cards and base stations occasionally run into minor problems and may drop connections. This is annoying, but it happens quite regularly with many devices. If you are disconnected from wireless connections from time to time, this may be the only reason. If it happens very regularly, you may want to consider getting some different hardware.
Busy wireless networks
Wireless networks in busy places (in universities and coffee shops, for example) often have many computers trying to connect to them at once. Sometimes these networks get too busy and may not be able to handle all of the computers that are trying to connect, so some of them get disconnected.
Get on the internet - wirelessly.
Connect to a wireless network
If you have a wireless-enabled computer, you can connect to a wireless network that is within range to get access to the internet, view shared files on the network, and so on.
Click on the network icon in the top bar and click the name of the network you want to connect to.
If the name of the network isn't in the list, try clicking
If the network is protected by a password (
If you do not know the key, it may be written on the underside of the wireless router or base station, in its instruction manual, or you may have to ask the person who administers the wireless network.
The network icon will change appearance as the computer attempts to connect to the network.
If the connection is successful, the icon will change to a dot with several bars above it. More bars indicate a stronger connection to the network. If there aren't many bars, the connection is weak and might not be very reliable.
If the connection is not successful, you
A stronger connection to a wireless network does not necessarily mean that you have a faster internet connection, or that you will have faster download speeds. The wireless connection connects your computer to the
Open the Network settings and switch Airplane Mode to ON.
Turn off wireless (airplane mode)
If you have your computer on an airplane (or some other area where wireless connections are not allowed), you should switch off your wireless. You may also want to switch off your wireless for other reasons (to save battery power, for example). To do this:
Open
Using
To set up most wired network connections, all you need to do is plug in a network cable.
Connect to a wired (Ethernet) network
To set up most wired network connections, all you need to do is plug in a network cable. The network icon on the top bar should spin or pulse for a few seconds and then will change to a "socket" icon when you are connected.
If this does not happen, you should first of all make sure that your network cable is plugged in. One end of the cable should be plugged into the rectangular Ethernet (network) port on your computer, the other end should be plugged into a switch, router, network wall socket or similar (depending on the network setup you have).
You can't plug one computer directly into another one with a network cable (at least, not without some extra setting-up). To connect two computers, you should plug them both into a network hub, router or switch.
If you are still not connected, your network may not support automatic set-up (DHCP). In this case you'll have to
An IP Address is like a phone number for your computer.
What is an IP address?
"IP address" stands for
An IP address is similar to your phone number. Your phone number is a unique set of numbers that identifies your phone so that other people can call you. Similarly, an IP address is a unique set of numbers that identifies your computer so that it can send and receive data with other computers.
Currently, most IP addresses consist of four sets of numbers, each separated by a period.
An IP address can either be
VPNs allow you to connect to a local network over the internet. Learn how to set-up a VPN connection.
Connect to a VPN
A VPN (or
There are a number of different types of VPN. You may have to install some extra software depending on what type of VPN you're connecting to. Find out the connection details from whoever is in charge of the VPN and see which
If there isn't a NetworkManager package for your type of VPN, you will probably have to download and install some client software from the company that provides the VPN software. You'll probably have to follow some different instructions to get that working.
Once that's done, you can set up the VPN connection:
Click the network icon on the top bar and, under
Click
Click
When you've finished setting-up the VPN, click the network icon on the top bar, go to
Hopefully, you will successfully connect to the VPN. If not, you may need to double-check the VPN settings you entered. You can do this by clicking the network icon, clicking
To disconnect from the VPN, click the network icon on the top bar and click
Other things might be downloading, you could have a poor connection, or it could be a busy time of day.
The internet seems slow
If you are using the internet and it seems slow, there are a number of things could be causing the slow down.
A couple of quick fixes to try are closing your web browser and then re-opening it, and disconnecting from the internet and then reconnecting again. (Doing this resets a lot of things that might be causing the internet to run slowly.)
Busy time of day
Internet service providers commonly set-up internet connections so that they are shared between several households. Even though you connect separately, through your own phone line or cable connection, the connection to the rest of the internet at the telephone exchange might actually be shared. If this is the case and lots of your neighbors are using the internet at the same time as you, you might notice a slow-down. You're most likely to experience this at times when your neighbors are probably on the internet (in the evenings, for example).
Downloading lots of things at once
If you or someone else using your internet connection are downloading several files at once, or watching videos, the internet connection might not be fast enough to keep up with the demand. In this case, it will feel slower.
Unreliable connection
Some internet connections are just unreliable, especially temporary ones or those in high demand areas. If you are in a busy coffee shop or a conference center, the internet connection might be too busy or simply unreliable.
Low wireless connection signal
If you're connected to the internet by wireless (wifi), check the network icon on the top bar to see if you have good wireless signal. If not, the internet may seem slow because you don't have a very strong signal.
Using a slower mobile internet connection
If you have a mobile internet connection and notice that it is going slowly, you may have moved into an area where signal reception is poor. When this happens, the internet connection will automatically switch from a fast "mobile broadband" connection like 3G to a more reliable, but slower, connection like GPRS.
Web browser has a problem
Sometimes web browsers encounter a problem which makes them run slow. This could be for any number of reasons - you could have visited a website which the browser struggled to load, or you might have had the browser open for a long time, for example. Try closing all of the browser's windows and then opening the browser again to see if this makes a difference.
A proxy filters websites that you look at, usually for control or security purposes.
What is a proxy?
A
When you go to a website, the text and images on that website pass through the proxy first before reaching your computer. The proxy will scan the contents of the website and will decide whether to display it or whether to show you a different page, for example.
An example of where proxies are commonly used is in universities. When a student connects to the university's wireless network and tries to visit a website, the proxy will instead redirect them to a log-in page. They will then log-in to the network and can go to the page they were trying to look at. Someone who is not a student will get the same log-in page but will not have log-in details, so will be unable to browse the web. This stops people who are not authorized from using the connection.
Double-check the password, try using the pass key instead of the password, turn the wireless card off and on again...
I've entered the correct password, but I still can't connect
If you're sure that you entered the correct
Double-check that you have the right password
Passwords are case-sensitive (it matters whether they have capital or lower-case letters), so check that you didn't get the case of one of the letters wrong.
Try the hex or ASCII pass key
The password you enter can also be represented in a different way - as a string of characters in hexadecimal (numbers 0-9 and letters a-f) called a pass key. Each password has an equivalent pass key. If you have access to the pass key as well as the password/passphrase, try typing the pass key instead. Make sure you select the correct
Try turning your wireless card off and then on again
Sometimes wireless cards get stuck or experience a minor problem that means they won't connect. Try turning the card off and then on again to reset it - see
Check that you're using the right type of wireless security
When prompted for your wireless security password, you can choose which type of wireless security to use. Make sure you choose the one that is used by the router or wireless base station. This should be selected by default, but sometimes it will not be for some reason. If you don't know which one it is, use trial and error to go through the different options.
Check that your wireless card is properly supported
Some wireless cards aren't supported very well. They show up as a wireless connection, but they can't connect to a network because their drivers lack the ability to do this. See if you can get an alternative wireless driver, or if you need to perform some extra set-up (like installing a different

Internet & networking
Troubleshooting
Troubleshooting internet connection problems
Wireless
Wireless connections
Wired
Wired connections
Sharing files
Sharing files on the network
Security
VPN
VPN connections
You need to uncheck the
Other users can't control the network connections
If you can edit a network connection but other users on your computer can't, you may have set the connection to be
The reason for this is that, since everyone is affected if the settings are changed, only highly-trusted (admin) users should be allowed to modify the connection.
If other users really need to be able to change the connection themselves, make it so the connection is
Make it so that the connection isn't shared any more
Open
From the
You will have to enter your admin password to change the connection. Only admin users can do this.
Uncheck
You can save settings (like the password) for a network connection so that everyone who uses the computer will be able to connect to it.
Other users can't connect to the internet
If you have set up a network connection but other users on your computer can't connect to it, they probably aren't entering the right settings when they try to connect. For example, if you have a wireless connection, they may not be entering the right wireless security password.
You can make it so that everyone can share the settings for a network connection once you have set it up. This means that you only need to set it up once, and everyone else on the computer will be able to connect to it without being asked any questions. To do this:
Open
From the
Check
Other users of the computer will now be able to use this connection without entering any further details.
Manually set network settings
If your network doesn't automatically assign network settings to your computer, you may have to manually enter the settings yourself. This topic assumes that you already know the correct settings to use. If not, you may need to ask your network administrator or look at the settings of your router or switch.
To manually set your network settings:
Click the network icon on the top bar and click
Find the network connection that you want to set-up manually. For example, if you plug-in to the network with a cable, look at the
Click the connection you want to edit to select it, then click
Go to the
Click
These three addresses must be IP addresses; that is, they must be four numbers separated by periods (e.g. 123.45.6.78).
Type the IP addresses of the DNS servers you want to use in the corresponding field, separated by commas.
Click
The unique code assigned to network hardware.
What is a MAC address?
A
A MAC address consists of six sets of two characters, each separated by a colon.
To identify the MAC address of your own network hardware:
Open
Your MAC address will be displayed as the
In practice, you may need to
Using a static IP address can make it easier to administer some network services.
Create a connection with a fixed IP address
Most networks will automatically assign an IP address and other details to your computer when you connect to the network. These details can change periodically, but you might want to have a fixed IP address for the computer so you always know what its address is (for example, if it is a file server).
To give your computer a fixed (static) IP address:
Click the
Select the network connection from the list (
Click on the
If no connection information is listed in the
Enter the
If necessary, enter a
Click
You need to specify the right network port to enable/disable network access for a program with your firewall.
Commonly-used network ports
This is a list of network ports commonly used by applications which provide network services, like file sharing or remote desktop viewing. You can change your system's firewall to
Port
Name
Description
5353/udp
mDNS, Avahi
Allows systems to find each other, and describe which services they offer, without you having to specify the details manually.
631/udp
Allows you to send print jobs to a printer over the network.
631/tcp
Allows you to share your printer with other people over the network.
5298/tcp
Presence
Allows you to advertise your instant messaging status to other people on the network, such as "online" or "busy".
5900/tcp
Remote desktop
Allows you to share your desktop so other people can view it or provide remote assistance.
3689/tcp
Music sharing (DAAP)
Allows you to share your music library with others on your network.
You can control which programs can access the network. This helps to keep your computer secure.
Enable or block firewall access
Your system should be equipped with a
Many applications can provide network services. For instance, you can share files or let someone view your desktop remotely. Depending on how your computer is set up, you may need to adjust the firewall to allow these services to work as intended.
Each program that provides network services uses a specific
Go to
Open or disable the port for your network service, depending on whether you want people to be able to access it or not. Which port you need to change will
Save or apply the changes, following any additional instructions given by the firewall tool.
Knowing your IP address can help you troubleshoot network problems.
Find your IP address
Knowing your IP address can help you to troubleshoot problems with your internet connection. You may be surprised to learn that you have
Find your internal IP address:
Open
Your internal IP address will be displayed as the
Find your external, internet IP address:
Visit
The site will display your external IP address for you.
Learn what the options on the wireless connection editing screen mean.
Edit a wireless connection
This topic needs significant revision to be comprehensive. A number of settings remain undocumented.
This topic describes all of the options that are available when you edit a wireless network connection. To edit a connection, select it in the
Most networks will work fine if you leave these settings at their defaults, so you probably don't need to change any of them. Many of the options here are provided to give you greater control over more advanced networks.
Available to all users / Connect automatically
Connect automatically
Check this option if you would like the computer to try to connect to this wireless network whenever it is in range.
If several networks which are set to connect automatically are in range, the computer will connect to the first one shown in the
Available to all users
Check this if you would like all of the users on the computer to have access to this wireless network. If the network has a
If this is checked, you need to be an
SSID
This is the name of the wireless network you are connecting to, otherwise known as the
Mode
Use this to specify whether you are connecting to an
If you choose
BSSID
This is the
Device MAC address
A
This option can be used to change the MAC address of your network card.
Cloned MAC address
Your network hardware (wireless card) can pretend to have a different MAC address. This is useful if you have a device or service which will only communicate with a certain MAC address (for example, a cable broadband modem). If you put that MAC address into the
MTU
This setting changes the
Wireless Security
This defines what sort of
Some types of encryption are stronger than others, but may not be supported by older wireless networking equipment. You'll normally need to type a password for the connection; more sophisticated types of security may also require a username and a digital "certificate". See
IPv4 Settings
There's also Shared to other computers
Then there's addresses and dns servers and ipv4 addressing routes.
All current info correct, but incomplete
Use this tab to define information like the IP address of your computer and which DNS servers it should use. Change the
The following methods are available:
Automatic (DHCP)
Get information like the IP address and DNS server to use from a
Automatic (DHCP) addresses only
If you choose this setting, your computer will get its IP address from a DHCP server, but you will have to manually define other details (like which DNS server to use).
Manual
Choose this option if you would like to define all of the network settings yourself, including which IP address the computer should use.
Link-Local Only

Disabled
This option will disable the network connection and prevent you from connecting to it. Note that
IPv6 Settings
The list of methods is a bit different
This is similar to the
There are few Linux viruses, so you probably don't need anti-virus software.
Do I need anti-virus software?
If you are used to Windows or Mac OS, you are probably also used to having anti-virus software running all of the time. Anti-virus software runs in the background, constantly checking for computer viruses which might find their way onto your computer and cause problems.
Anti-virus software does exist for Linux, but you probably don't need to use it. Viruses which affect Linux are still very rare. Some argue that this is because Linux is not as widely used as other operating systems, so no-one writes viruses for it. Others argue that Linux is intrinsically more secure, and security problems which viruses could make use of are fixed very quickly.
Whatever the reason, Linux viruses are so rare that you don't really need to worry about them at the moment.
If you want to be extra-safe, or if you want to check for viruses in files that you are passing between yourself and people using Windows and Mac OS, you can still install anti-virus software. Check in the software installer or search online - a number of applications are available.
You can connect computers together by forming an
Connect directly to another computer with a wireless connection
These instructions are outdated - at the moment there doesn't seem to be a way to create a new wireless network that you can then change to being Ad-Hoc. You used to be able to do this. This becomes an issue at step 3 in the steps list below.
You can connect computers together by forming an
To set-up an ad-hoc wireless network:
On one of the computers, click your name on the top bar and select
Go to the
In the window that appears, choose a name for the wireless network and then go to the
Choose an
Change the
On the other computer, click the network icon on the top bar and look for a network with the SSID you chose. It might take a minute or two to appear in the list.
Click it to connect to the ad-hoc network. Once connected, you will be able to access network shares and so on, like you would if both computers were connected to a conventional wireless network.
These instructions will be different if one of the computers is not running Linux. You may find it easiest to set-up the ad-hoc network on the Linux computer and connect to it using the other computer.
Also note that some wireless network cards do not support ad-hoc networking, so you will not be able to use them to create an ad-hoc network.
Securing an ad-hoc network
Anyone in the area will be able to connect to your ad-hoc network, so it's not very secure. You can add a
To add a password:
Go to the
Go to the
Choose your own password and then click
Specify the default view, sort order, and zoom levels for the file manager.
File manager views preferences
You can control the default view for new folders, how files and folders are sorted by default, the zoom level for the icon and compact views, and whether files are displayed in the tree sidebar. In any file manager window, click
Default view
View new folders using
By default, new folders are shown in icon view. You can select a view for each folder as you browse, and the file manager will remember which view you prefer for each folder. But if you often use the list or compact views, you can use these views by default.
Change the view for an individual folder from the
Arrange items
You can arrange the items in your folder by name, file size, file type, when they were last modified, when they were last accessed, or when they were trashed. You can change how files are sorted in an individual folder using the
Use the
Sort folders before files
By default, the file manager will show all folders before files. Folders and files will each be arranged according to the selected sort order. If you would rather not treat folders specially and have them mixed with files according to the sort order, deselect this option.
Show hidden and backup files
The file manager does not display hidden files or folders by default. See
Icon view defaults
Default zoom level
You can make the icons and text larger or smaller in icon view. You can do this in an individual folder from the
In icon view, more or fewer captions are shown based on your zoom level. See
Text beside icons
Selecting this option will place folder and file names to the right of icons, rather than below them. This is a more compact layout that allows you to see more information at once.
Compact view defaults
You can make the icons and text larger or smaller in compact view. You can do this in an individual folder from the
All columns have the same width
By default, each column in compact view is as wide as it needs to be to fit the names of the items in that column. Selecting this option will make all the columns have the same width. This will make files and folders that have names longer than the column width be displayed with an ellipsis (...) at the end.
List view defaults
You can make the icons and text larger or smaller in list view. You can do this in an individual folder from the
Tree view defaults
You can show a full folder tree in your file manager sidebar by selecting
Control when thumbnails and previews are used for files.
File manager preview preferences
The file manager creates thumbnails to preview image and video files, and can also preview text files and sound files. Previews can be slow for large files or over networks, so you can control when previews are made. In any file manager window, click
By default, all previews are only done for local files on your computer or connected external drives. The file manager can
Text Files
The icon for plain text files looks like a piece of paper with text inside. The file manager automatically extracts the first few lines of text from the file and shows it in the icon. You can turn this feature on or off, or turn it on only for files on your computer and local external drives.
Other Previewable Files
The file manager can automatically create thumbnails for images, videos, PDF files, and various other file types. Applications with custom file types can even provide thumbnail support for files they create. You can turn this feature on or off, or turn it on only for files on your computer and local external drives. You can also only allow thumbnails to be created for files below a certain file size.
Sound Files
You can
Folders
If you show file sizes in
File manager preferences
Control what information is displayed in columns in list view.
File manager list columns preferences
There are 12 columns of information that you can display in the file manager's list view. Click
Use the
The name of folders and files in the folder being viewed.
Size
The size of a folder is given as the number of items contained in the folder. The size of a file is given as bytes, KB, or MB.
Type
Displayed as folder, or file type such as PDF document, JPEG image, MP3 audio, and more.
Date Modified
Gives the date and time of the last time the file was modified.
Date Accessed
Gives the date and time of the last time the file was accessed.
Group
The group the file is owned by. On my home computers, each user is in their own group. Groups are sometimes used in corporate environments, where users might be in groups according to department or project.
Location
The path to the location of the file.
MIME Type
Displays the MIME type of the item.
Permissions
Displays the file access permissions e.g.
The first character
The next three characters
The next three
The last three characters in the column
Each character has the following meanings:
r : Read permission.
w : Write permission.
x : Execute permission.
- : No permission.
Octal Permissions
Displays the file permissions in octal notation prefixed with '40' for folders and '100' for files. In the last three digits, each digit represents user class, group class and other users respectively.
Read adds 4 to the total of each of the last three digits.
Write adds 2 to the total.
Execute adds 1 to the total.
Owner
The name of the user the folder or file is owned by.
SELinux Context
Displays the SELinux Context of the file, if applicable.
Control who can view and edit your files and folders.
Set file permissions
You can use file permissions to control who can view and edit files that you own. To view and set the permissions for a file, right click it and select
See
Files
You can set the permissions for the file owner, the group owner, and all other users of the system. For your files, you are the owner, and you can give yourself read-only or read-and-write permission. Set a file to read-only if you don't want to accidentally change it.
Every user on your computer belongs to a group. On home computers, it is common for each user to have their own group, and group permissions are not often used. In corporate environments, groups are sometimes used for departments or projects. As well as having an owner, each file belongs to a group. You can set the file's group and control the permissions for all users in that group. You can only set the file's group to a group you belong to.
You can also set the permissions for users other than the owner and those in the file's group.
If the file is a program, such as a script, you must select
You can set permissions on folders for the owner, group, and other users. See the details of file permissions above for an explanation of owners, groups, and other users.
The permissions you can set for a folder are different from those you can set for a file.
None
The user will not even be able to see what files are in the folder.
List files only
The user will be able to see what files are in the folder, but will not be able to open, create, or delete files.
Access files
The user will be able to open files in the folder (provided they have permission to do so on the particular file), but will not be able to create new files or delete files.
Create and delete files
The user will have full access to the directory, including opening, creating, and deleting files.
You can also quickly set the file permissions for all the files in the folder by using the
If you click
View basic file information, set permissions, and choose default applications.
File properties
To view information about a file or folder, right-click it and select
The file properties window shows you information like the type of file, the size of the file, and when you last modified it. If you need this information often, you can have it displayed in
The information given on the
This page is intentionally written to give you some overview of the other tabs, because I happen to know that in 3.0 it's the target of the Help button in the properties dialog, regardless of the tab you're on.
Basic properties
You can rename the file by changing this field. You can also rename a file outside the properties window. See
This helps you identify the type of the file, such as PDF document, OpenDocument Text, or JPEG image. The file type determines which applications can open the file, amongst other things. For example, you can't open a picture with a music player. See
The
Contents
This field is displayed if you are looking at the properties of a folder rather than a file. It helps you see the number of items in the folder. If the folder includes other folders, each inner folder is counted as one item, even if it contains further items. Each file is also counted as one item. If the folder is empty, the contents will display
This field is displayed if you are looking at a file (not a folder). The size of a file tells you how much disk space it takes up. This is also an indicator of how long it will take to download a file or send it in an email (big files take longer to send/receive).
Sizes may be given in bytes, KB, MB, or GB; in the case of the last three, the size in bytes will also be given in parentheses. Technically, 1 KB is 1024 bytes, 1 MB is 1024 KB and so on.
The location of each file on your computer is given by its
Volume
The file system or device that the file is stored on. This shows you where the file is physically stored, for example if it is on the hard disk or on a CD, or a
Free Space
This is only displayed for folders. It gives the amount of disk space which is available on the disk that the folder is on. This is useful for checking if the hard disk is full.
Accessed
The date and time when the file was last opened.
Modified
The date and time when the file was last changed and saved.
@@image: 'figures/nautilus-icons.png'; md5=c23665786e41e7bcb87fa0f8d355d74e
Control icon captions and the date format used in the file manager.
File manager display preferences
You can control various aspects of how the file manager displays files, including captions under icons and how dates are formatted. In any file manager window, click
Icon captions
File manager icons with captions
When you use icon view, you can choose to have extra information about files and folders displayed in a caption under each icon. This is useful, for example, if you often need to see who owns a file or when it was last modified.
As you zoom in on a folder (under the
The information you can show in icon captions is the same as the columns you can use in list view. See
If you have a file manager window open, you may have to reload for icon caption changes to take effect. Click
Date format
Access and modification times for files can be displayed in icon captions or in list view columns. You can choose the date format that is easiest for you from the
View and edit files on another computer over FTP, SSH, Windows shares, or WebDAV.
Browse files on a server or network share
You can connect to a server or network share to browse and view files on that server, exactly as if they were on your own computer. This is a convenient way to download or upload files on the internet, or to share files with other people on your local network.
To browse files over the network, open the
Connect to a file server
In the file manager, click
Enter the server address, select the type of server, and enter any additional information as required. Then click
For servers on the internet, you can usually use the domain name (e.g.
A new window will open showing you the files on the server. You can browse the files just as you would for those on your own computer.
The server will also be added to the sidebar so you can access it quickly in the future
Different types of server
You can connect to different types of servers. Some servers are public, and allow anybody to connect. Other servers require you to log in with a user name and password.
You may not have permissions to perform certain actions on files on a server. For example, on public FTP sites, you will probably not be able to delete files.
Types of server
SSH
If you have a
We should have a topics on encryption keys, possibly rolling the seahorse help into gnome-help. Then link from here.
When using SSH, all the data you send (including your password) is encrypted so that other users on your network can't see it.
FTP (with login)
FTP is a popular way of exchanging files on the Internet. Because data is not encrypted over FTP, many servers now provide access through SSH. Some servers, however, still allow or require you to use FTP to upload or download files. FTP sites with logins will usually allow you to delete and upload files.
Public FTP
Sites that allow you to download files will sometimes provide public or anonymous FTP access. These servers do not require a user name and password, and will usually not allow you to delete or upload files.
Some anonymous FTP sites require you to log in with a public user name and password, or with a public user name using your email address as the password. For these servers, use the
Windows share
Windows computers use a proprietary protocol to share files over a local area network. Computers on a Windows network are sometimes grouped into
WebDAV and Secure WebDAV
Based on the HTTP protocol used on the web, WebDAV is sometimes used to share files on a local network and to store files on the internet. If the server you're connecting to supports secure connections, you should choose this option. Secure WebDAV uses strong SSL encryption, so that other users can't see your password.
Also used by gnome-user-share, but we're not talking about that in gnome-help for 3.0. Hopefully it will be better integrated in 3.2, and we can discuss it better in the help. If that happens, link from here.
Add, delete, and rename bookmarks in the file manager.
Edit folder bookmarks
Your bookmarks are listed in the
Delete a bookmark:
Click on
In the
Click
Add a bookmark:
Open the folder (or location) that you want to bookmark.
Click
Rename a bookmark
In the
In the
Renaming a bookmark does not rename the folder. If you have bookmarks to two different folders in two different locations, but which each have the same name, the bookmarks will have the same name, and you won't be able to tell them apart. In these cases, it is useful to give a bookmark a name other than the name of the folder it points to.
Single-click to open files, run or view executable text files, and specify trash behavior.
File manager behavior preferences
You can control whether you single-click or double-click files, whether folders are opened in new windows, how executable text files are handled, and the trash behavior. In any file manager window, click
Behavior
Single click to open items
Double click to open items
By default, clicking selects files and double-clicking opens them. You can instead choose to have files and folders open when you click on them once. When you use single-click mode, you can hold down the
Open each folder in its own window
When you open a folder in the file manager, it will normally open in the same window. You can right-click a folder and select
Executable text files
An executable text file is a file that contains a program that you can run (execute). The
You can select to
File manager trash preferences
Trash
Ask before emptying the Trash or deleting files
This option is selected by default. When emptying the trash, a message will be displayed confirming that you would like to empty the trash or delete files.
Include a delete command that bypasses Trash
Selecting this option will add a
Deleting an item using the
Add a
Why isn't my audio player recognized when I plug it in?
If your audio player (MP3 player etc.) is plugged in to the computer but you can't see it in your music organizer application, it may not have been properly recognized as an audio player.
Try unplugging the player and then plugging it in again. If that doesn't help, open the File Manager. You should see the player listed under
Now, find the audio player in the File Manager sidebar and eject it (right-click and click
These instructions won't work for iPods and some other audio players. They should work if your player is a
When you look in the audio player folder again, you won't see the
Brand-new iPods need to be set-up using the iTunes software before you can use them.
My new iPod won't work
If you have a new iPod that has never been connected to a computer before, it won't be recognized properly when you connect it to a Linux computer. This is because iPods need to be set up and updated using the
To set up your iPod, install iTunes on a Windows or Mac computer and plug it in. You will be led through a few steps to set it up. If asked for the
Once you have finished setup, the iPod should work normally when you plug it into a Linux computer.
Use a media player to copy the songs and safely remove the iPod afterward.
Songs don't appear on my iPod when I copy them onto it
When you plug an iPod into your computer, it will appear in your music player application and also in the file manager (the
You also need to wait for the songs to finish copying to the iPod before you unplug it. Before unplugging the iPod, make sure you choose to
A further reason why songs might not be appearing on your iPod is that the music player application you're using does not support converting the songs from one audio format to another. If you copy a song which is saved in an audio format that is not supported by your iPod (for example, an Ogg Vorbis (.oga) file), the music player will try to convert it to a format that the iPod does understand, such as MP3. If the appropriate conversion software (also called a codec or encoder) is not installed, the music player will not be able to do the conversion and so will not copy the song. Look in the software installer for an appropriate codec.
Support for that file format might not be installed or the songs could be "copy protected".
I can't play the songs I bought from an online music store
If you downloaded some music from an online store you may find that it won't play on your computer, especially if you bought it on a Windows or Mac OS computer and then copied it over.
This could be because the music is in a format that is not recognized by your computer. To be able to play a song you need to have support for the right audio formats installed - for example, if you want to play MP3 files, you need MP3 support installed. If you don't have support for a given audio format, you should see a message telling you so when you try to play a song. The message should also provide instructions for how to install support for that format so that you can play it.
If you do have support installed for the song's audio format but still can't play it, the song might be
You can learn more about DRM from the
If you have to wiggle or click the mouse before it responds.
Mouse has a delay before it will work
Wireless and optical mice, as well as touchpads on laptops, may need to "wake up" before they will work. They automatically go to sleep when not in use to save battery power. To wake up your mouse or touchpad you can click on a mouse button or wiggle the mouse.
Laptop touchpads sometimes have a delay after you stop typing before they will start working. This is to prevent you from accidentally touching the touchpad with your palm while typing. See
Click or scroll using taps and gestures on your touchpad.
Click or scroll with the touchpad
You can click, double-click, drag, and scroll using only your touchpad, without separate hardware buttons. Access these features in the mouse and touchpad settings.
Click
Select the
The touchpad tab will only be availabe if your computer has a touchpad.
To click, double-click, and drag with your touchpad, select
You can scroll using your touchpad using either the edges of the touchpad or using two fingers.
Select
Select
Two-finger scrolling may not work on all touchpads.
Change how quickly the pointer moves when you use your mouse or touchpad.
Adjust speed of the mouse and touchpad
If your pointer moves too fast or slow when you move your mouse or use your touchpad, you can adjust the pointer sensitivity and acceleration for these devices.
Open
Adjust the
You can set the sensitivity and acceleration differently for your mouse and touchpad. Sometimes the most comfortable settings for one type of device aren't the most comfortable for another. Just set the sliders on both the
How to check your mouse if it is not working.
Mouse pointer not moving
Check that the mouse is plugged in
If you have a mouse with a cable, check that it is firmly plugged in to your computer.
If it is a USB mouse (with a rectangular connector), try plugging it in to a different USB port. If it is a PS/2 mouse (with a small, round connector with six pins), make sure that it is plugged in to the green mouse port rather than the purple keyboard port. You may need to restart the computer if it was not plugged in.
Check that the mouse was recognized by your computer
Click
Type
In the terminal window, at the prompt (the $), type
A short list of mouse devices will appear. Check that at least one of the items says
If there is no entry that has the name of the mouse followed by
If your mouse has a serial (RS-232) connector, you may need to perform some extra steps to get it working. The steps might depend on the make or model of your mouse.
It can be complicated to fix problems with mouse detection. Ask for support from your distribution or vendor if you think that your mouse has not been detected properly.
Should provide some useful advice rather than just saying "you might need to perform extra steps".
Check that the mouse actually works
Plug the mouse in to a different computer and see if it works.
If the mouse is an optical or laser mouse, a light should be shining out of the bottom of the mouse if it is turned on. If there is no light, check that it is turned on. If it is and there is still no light, the mouse may be broken.
Checking wireless mice
Click a button and see if the mouse pointer moves now. Some wireless mice go to sleep to save power, so might not respond until you click a button.
Check that the battery of the mouse is charged.
Make sure that the receiver (dongle) is firmly plugged in to the computer.
If your mouse and receiver can operate on different radio channels, make sure that they are both set to the same channel.
You may need to press a button on the mouse, receiver or both to establish a connection. The instruction manual of your mouse should have more details if this is the case.
Most RF (radio) wireless mice should work automatically when you plug them into your computer. If you have a Bluetooth or IR (infrared) wireless mouse, you may need to perform some extra steps to get it working. The steps might depend on the make or model of your mouse.
How to enable
Click and move mouse pointer using keypad
If you have difficulties using a mouse or other pointing device, you can control the mouse pointer using the numeric keypad on your keyboard. This feature is called
Open
Switch
Make sure that
You can quickly turn Mouse Keys on and off by clicking the
The keypad is a set of numerical buttons on your keyboard, usually arranged into a square grid. If you have a keyboard without a keypad (such as a laptop keyboard), you may need to hold down the function (
Each number on the keypad corresponds to a direction. For example, pressing
If you want to use the keypad to type numbers while Mouse Keys is enabled, turn
The normal number keys, in a line at the top of the keyboard, will not control the mouse pointer. Only the keypad number keys can be used.
Use the middle mouse button to open applications, paste text, open tabs, and more.
Middle-click
Many mice and some touchpads have a middle mouse button. On a mouse with a scroll wheel, you can usually press directly down on the scroll wheel to middle-click. If you don't have a middle mouse button, you can press the left and right mouse buttons at the same time to middle-click.
On touchpads that support multi-finger taps, you can tap with three fingers at once to middle-click. You have to
Many applications use middle-click for advanced click shortcuts.
One common shortcut is to paste selected text. (This is sometimes called primary selection paste.) Select the text you want to paste, then go to where you want to paste it and middle-click. The selected text is pasted at the mouse position.
Pasting text with your middle mouse button is completely separate from the normal clipboard. Selecting text does not copy it to your clipboard. This quick method of pasting only works with the middle mouse button.
In the
Most web browsers allow you to open links in tabs quickly with the middle mouse button. Just click any link with your middle mouse button, and it will open in a new tab. Be careful clicking the link in the
In the file manager, middle-click serves two roles. If you middle-click a folder, it will open in a new tab. This mimics the behavior of popular web browsers. If you middle-click a file, it will open the file, just as if you had double-clicked.
Some specialized applications allow you to use the middle mouse button for other functions. Search your application's help for
Reverse the left and right mouse buttons in the mouse settings.
Use your mouse left-handed
You can swap the behavior of the left and right buttons on your mouse or touchpad to make it more comfortable for left-handed use.
On the
Change how far you have to move your mouse pointer to start dragging.
Adjust the mouse drag threshold
When you click something, it's not uncommon for your hand to move a little between the time you press the mouse button and the time you release it. For this reason, dragging only starts if you move the pointer past a certain threshold, so that you don't accidentally start dragging every time you click. You can control the minimum distance required to start dragging.
Under
Control how quickly you need to press the mouse button a second time to double-click.
Adjust the double-click speed
Double-clicking only happens when you press the mouse button twice quickly enough. If the second press is too long after the first, you'll just get two separate clicks, not a double click. If you have difficulty pressing the mouse button so quickly, you should increase the timeout.
Under
If your mouse double-clicks when you want it to single-click even though you have increased the double-click timeout, your mouse may be faulty. Try plugging a different mouse into your computer and see if that works properly. Alternatively, plug your mouse into a different computer and see if it still has the same problem.
Turn the touchpad off while typing to prevent accidental clicks.
Disable touchpad while typing
Touchpads on laptops are often located where you rest your wrist while typing, which can sometimes cause accidental clicks while you type. You can disable the touchpad while you type. It will only work again a short time after your last key stroke.
On the
I repurposed this page. It used to just be how to disable your touchpad entirely. Phil had some instructions on how to do this in gconf-editor, as well as how to trigger an auto-disable when you plugged in your mouse. GConf instructions are outdated for GNOME 3. We could resurrect and make current the old stuff, but as maybe a tip or advanced topics. Check git history.

Mouse
Maybe some topic grouping work.
Common mouse problems
Common problems
Tips

Get more help

Sound, video & pictures
Sound

Basic sound
Music and players
Music and portable audio players
Photos
Photos and digital cameras
Videos
Videos and video cameras
Send us an e-mail.
Mailing list
You can send an email to the GNOME docs mailing list to learn more about how to get involved with the documentation team.
Change the resolution of the screen and its orientation (rotation).
Natalia Ruz Leiva
Change the size/rotation of the screen
You can change how big (or how detailed) things appear on the screen by changing the
To change either of these options, click on your name on the top bar and choose
When you use another display, like a projector, it should be detected automatically so you can change its settings in the same way as your usual display. If this does not happen, just click
Resolution
The resolution is the number of pixels (dots on the screen) in each direction that can be displayed.
You can choose the one you prefer from the options in the drop-down menu. Notice that if you choose one that is not the right for your screen it may
To save the changes, click
Rotation
There are some laptops that can rotate physically their screens in many directions, so it is useful to be able to change the display rotation. You can choose the rotation you want for your screen from the drop-down menu.
When you've selected the one you prefer, click
The screen resolution may be set incorrectly.
Why do things look fuzzy/pixelated on my screen?
This can happen because the display resolution that you have set it is not the right one for your screen.
To solve this, click your name on the top bar and go to
Would like a little more explanation on native resolution, which is generally only applicable on LCDs. There's a stub for using two monitors. Link from section below when it's added.
When multiple displays are connected
If you have two displays connected to the computer (for example, a normal monitor and a projector), the displays might have different resolutions. However, the computer's graphics card can only display the screen in one resolution at a time, so at least one of the displays might look fuzzy.
You can set it so that the two displays have different resolutions, but you won't be able to display the same thing on both screens simultaneously. In effect, you will have two independent screens connected at the same time. You can move windows from one screen to another, but you can't show the same window on both screens at once.
To set-up the displays so that they each have their own resolution:
Click your name on the top bar and click
Uncheck
Select each display in turn from the gray box at the top of the
How to set an image as your desktop background.
April Gonzales
loonycookie@gmail.com
Change the desktop background
You can change the image used on your desktop background, or set it to a simple color or gradient.
Click
Select an image or color. The settings are applied immediately.
There are three choices in the drop-down list on the left.
Select
Select
You can also select
You can also browse for any picture on your computer by clicking the
Make the keyboard not repeat letters when you hold down a key, or change the delay and speed of repeat keys.
Turn off repeated key presses
By default, when you hold down a key on your keyboard, the letter or symbol will be repeated until you release the key. If you have difficulty picking your finger back up quickly enough, you can disable this feature, or change how long it takes before key presses start repeating.
Open
On the
@@image: 'figures/system-run.png'; md5=9dadf4c82c1b531d67de67e4e628846e
Make your keyboard behave like a keyboard for another language.
Use alternate keyboard layouts
Keyboards come in hundreds of different layouts for different languages. Even for a single language, there are often multiple keyboard layouts, such as the Dvorak layout for English. You can make your keyboard behave like a keyboard with a different layout, regardless of the letters and symbols printed on the keys. This is useful if you often switch between multiple languages.
Select the
Click the
You can preview an image of any layout by selecting it in the list and clicking
When you add multiple layouts, you can quickly switch between them using the keyboard layout icon in the top bar. The top bar will display a short string identifying the current layout, such as
When you use multiple layouts, you can choose to have all windows use the same layout or to set a different layout for each window. Using a different layout for each window is useful, for example, if you're writing an article in another language in a word processor window. Your keyboard selection will be remembered for each window as you switch between windows.
By default, new windows will use the default keyboard layout. You can instead choose to have them use the layout of the window you were last using. The default layout is the layout at the top of the list. Use the
Custom options
You may want to add certain symbols to specific keys or adjust custom option and behaviors. You can do this by clicking
Make the insertion point blink and control how quickly it blinks.
Make the keyboard cursor blink
It is possible to lose the keyboard cursor in a text field. Setting it to blink may make it easier to locate on the screen. To make the cursor blink and to adjust the speed of it:
Select
Use the

Keyboard
IRC
Meet us on IRC.
@@image: 'figures/gnome.png'; md5=85ec62374d1dc2168674a56999647b05
@@image: 'figures/yelp-icon-big.png'; md5=292c209957ac50bb031fcec6cddfa47f
A guide for GNOME 3 desktop users
Desktop Help
Help

Troubleshoot screen and graphics problems.
Screen problems
Most problems with the display are caused by issues with graphics drivers or configuration. Which of the topics below best describes the problem you are experiencing?
Troubleshoot problems with connecting your Bluetooth device.
Bluetooth problems
Bluetooth devices sometimes have problems connecting, or transferring files. Which of the topics below best describes the problem you are experiencing?
Hardware

Hardware & drivers
More topics
Hardware problems
A hardware/device driver allows your computer to use devices that are attached to it.
What is a driver?
Devices are the physical "parts" of your computer. They may be
In order for your computer to be able to use these devices, it needs to know how to communicate with them. This is done by a piece of software called a
When you attach a device to your computer, you must have the correct driver installed for that device to work. For example, if you plug in a printer but the correct driver isn't available, you won't be able to use the printer. Normally, each model of device uses a driver that is not compatible with any other model.
On Linux, the drivers for most devices are installed by default, so everything should work when you plug it in. However, the drivers may need to be installed manually or may not be available at all.
In addition, some existing drivers are incomplete or partially non-functional. For example, you might find that your printer can't do double-sided printing, but is otherwise completely functional.
Troubleshoot media card readers
Media card reader doesn't work
Many computers contain readers for SD, MMC, SM, MS, CF, and other storage media cards. These should be automatically detected and
Make sure that the card is put in correctly. Many cards look as though they are upside down when correctly inserted. Also make sure that the card is firmly seated in the slot; some cards, especially CF, require a small amount of force to insert correctly. (Be careful not to push too hard! If you come up against something solid, do not force it.)
Open
If your card does not show up in the sidebar, click
If you see the card reader but not the card, the problem may be with the card itself. Try a different card or check the card on a different reader if possible.
If no cards or drives are available in the

Fingerprints & smart cards
Change the desc when we have a smart card page
How and where to report problems with these help topics.
Participate to improve this guide.
This help system is created by a volunteer community. You are welcome to participate. If you notice a problem with these help pages (like typos, incorrect instructions or topics that should be covered but aren't), you can file a
You need to register so you can file a bug and receive updates by e-mail about its status. If you don't already have an account, just click on the
Once you have an account, log in, click on
To file your bug, choose the component in the
If you are requesting help about a topic that you feel is not covered, choose
Your report will be given an ID number, and its status will be updated as it is being dealt with. Thanks for helping make the GNOME Help better!
These are backup files. They are hidden by default.
What is a file with a "~" at the end of its name?
Files with a "~" at the end of their names (for example,
These files are hidden by default. If you are seeing them, that is because you either selected
These files are treated in the same way as normal hidden files. See
Arrange files by name, size, type, or when they were changed.
Sort files and folders
May benefit from figures illustrating the different views.
You can sort files in different ways in a folder, for example by sorting them in order of date or file size. See
When you change how items are sorted in a folder, it only affects that folder. The file manager will remember your sorting choice for that folder, but will use the default sort order for other folders. See
The way that you can sort files depends on the
Icon view
To sort files in a different order, right-click a blank space in the folder and choose an option from the
As an example, if you select
You can sort in the reverse order by selecting
For complete control over the order and position of files in the folder, right-click a blank space in the folder and select
The
List view
To sort files in a different order, click one of the column headings in the file manager. For example, click
In list view, you can show columns with more attributes and sort on those columns. Click
Compact view
You can sort files in Compact view in the same way that you can sort them in the Icon view. The only difference is that you can't manually position the files anywhere you want; they are always organized as a list in this view.
Ways of sorting files
By Name
Sorts alphabetically by the name of the file.
By Size
Sorts by the size of the file (how much disk space it takes up). Sorts from smallest to largest by default.
By Type
Sorts alphabetically by the file type. Files of the same type are grouped together, then sorted by name.
By Modification Date
Sorts by the date and time that a file was last changed. Sorts from oldest to newest by default.
Easily transfer files to your contacts and devices from the file manager.
Share and transfer files
If we get gnome-user-share integrated nicely in 3.2, we should discuss or link that here.
You can easily share files with your contacts or transfer them to external devices or
Locate the file you want to transfer.
Right-click the file and select
The
You can send multiple files at once. Select multiple files by holding down
Destinations
To email the file, select
To send the file to an instant messaging contact, select
To write the file to a CD or DVD, select
To transfer the file to a Bluetooth device, select
To copy the file to an external device like a USB flash drive, or to upload it to a server you've connected to, select
Press
Select files by pattern
You can select files in a folder using a pattern on the file name. Press


For example:
If you have an OpenDocument Text file, a PDF file, and an image that all have the same base name
Invoice.*
If you have some photos that are named like
Vacation-???.jpg
If you have photos as before, but you've edited some of them and added
Vacation-???-edited.jpg
Locate files based on file name and type. Save your searches for later use.
Search for files
You can search for files based on their name or file type directly within the file manager. You can even save common searches, and they will appear as special folders in your home folder.
Other search applications
Search
If you know the files you want are under a particular folder, go to that folder.
Click
Type a word or words that you know appear in the file name and press enter. For example, if you name all your invoices with the word "Invoice", type
You can narrow your results by selecting a different starting folder in
You can open, copy, delete, or otherwise work with your files from the search results, just as you would from any folder in the file manager.
Click
If you perform certain searches often, you can save them to access them quickly.
Save a search
Start a search as above.
When you're happy with the search parameters, click
Give the search a name and click
To remove the search file when you are done with it, simply
Change file or folder name.
Rename a file or folder
You can change the name of a file or folder.
Right-click on a file or folder and select
Type the new name and press
You can also rename a file from the
When you rename a file, only the first part of the name of the file is selected, not the file extension (the part after the "."). The extension normally denotes what type of file it is (e.g.
Valid characters for file names
You can use any character except the
If you name a file with a
The name is already used
You can't have two files or folders with the same name in the same folder. If you try to rename a file to a name that already exists in the folder you are working in, the file manager will not allow it. Use a different name.
File and folder names are case sensitive. For example,
The file name is too long
On some file systems, file names can have no more than 255 characters in their names. Use a shorter name.
The option to rename is grayed out
If
Eject or unmount a USB flash drive, CD, DVD, or other device.
Safely remove an external drive
When you use external storage devices like USB flash drives, you should safely remove them before unplugging them. If you just unplug a device, you run the risk of unplugging while an application is still using it, which could result in some of your files being lost or damaged. When you use an optical disc like a CD or DVD, you can use the same steps to eject the disc from your computer.
From the
Locate the device in the sidebar. It should have a small eject icon next to the name. Click the eject icon to safely remove or eject the device.
Alternately, you can right-click the device and select either
If any of the files on the device are open and in use by an application, you will not be able to safely remove the device. You will be prompted with a window telling you that "the volume is busy", and listing all the open files on the device. Once you close all the files on the device, the device will automatically be safe to remove (so you can unplug or eject it).
You can also choose
If you can't close one of the files, for example if the application using the file is locked up, you can right-click the file in the
When you delete a file, they are normally sent to the Trash. You can get them back from the Trash.
Recover a file that you deleted
If you deleted a file by pressing
Click
If your deleted file is there, right-click on it and select
If you deleted the file using
There are a number of recovery tools available that are sometimes able to recover files that were permanently deleted. They are generally not very easy to use, however. If you accidentally permanently deleted a file, it's probably best to ask for advice on a support forum to see if you can recover it.
Move the mouse pointer over a music file and it will start playing.
Quickly preview music/sound files
Move your mouse pointer over a music file (or other sound file). A musical note icon will appear and the song will start playing. Move the mouse away from the file and the song will stop playing.
Only music files which are in a supported format can be played in this way.
Music files on network shares cannot be previewed in this way by default. To change this, see
@@image: 'figures/nautilus.png'; md5=cbc3bbf0d998ed7a6567eb3b0c402195

Files, folders & search

Common tasks
Removable drives and external disks
Backing up
Tips and questions
Open files using an application that isn't the default one for that type of file. You can change the default too.
Cristopher Thomas
crisnoh@gmail.com
Open files with other applications
When you double-click a file in the file manager, it will be opened with the default application for that file type. You can open it in a different application, search online for applications, or set the default application for all files of the same type.
To open a file with an application other than the default, right-click the file and select the application you want from the top of the menu. If you don't see the application you want, click
If you still can't find the application you want, you can search for more applications by clicking
Change the default application
You can change the default application that is used to open files of a given type. This will allow you to open your preferred application when you double-click to open a file. For example, you might want your favorite music player to open when you double-click an MP3 file.
Select a file of the type whose default application you want to change. For example, to change which application is used to open MP3 files, select a
Right-click the file and select
Select the
Select the application you want and click
If
This changes the default application not just for the selected file, but for all files with the same type.
Follow these tips if you can't find a file you created or downloaded.
Find a lost file
If you created or downloaded a file, but now you can't find it, follow these tips.
If you don't remember where you saved the file, but you have some idea of how you named it, you can search for the file by name. See
If you just downloaded the file, your web browser might have automatically saved it to a common folder. Check the
You might have accidentally deleted the file. When you delete a file, it gets moved to the trash, where it stays until you manually empty the trash. See
You might have renamed the file in a way that made the file hidden. Files that start with a
Make a file invisible, so you can't see it in the file manager.
Hide a file
You can hide files by renaming them with a
To hide a file,
You can hide folders in the same way that you can hide files. Rename the folder with a "." at the beginning of its name.
Show all hidden files
If you want to see all hidden files in a folder, go to that folder and either click
Some hidden files will have a "." at the beginning of their name. Others might have a "~" at the end of their name instead (see
To hide these files again, either click
Hidden files will only be shown in the current window, until you turn the option for that window off. To show hidden files in all file manager windows, see
Unhide a file
To unhide a file, go to the folder containing the hidden file and click
For example, to unhide a file called
Once you have renamed the file, you can either click
Michael Hill
mdhillca@gmail.com
Put files and documents onto a blank CD or DVD using a CD/DVD burner.
Write files to a CD or DVD
You can put files onto a blank disc by using
Place an empty disc into your CD/DVD writable drive.
In the
(You can also click on
In the
Drag or copy the desired files into the window.
Click
Under
(You could choose
Click
Click the
If
When the disc burning is complete, it will eject automatically. Choose
If the disc wasn't burned properly
Sometimes the computer doesn't record the data correctly, and you won't be able to see the files you put onto the disc when you insert it into a computer.
In this case, try burning the disc again but use a lower burning speed, e.g. 12x rather than 48x. Burning at slower speeds is more reliable. You can choose the speed by clicking the
Remove files or folders you no longer need.
Delete files and folders
If you don't want a file or folder any more, you can delete it.
When you delete an item it is moved to the Trash folder, where it is stored until you empty the trash. Items stored in the Trash folder can be
Select the item you want to delete by clicking it once.
Press
To delete files permanently, and to free up disk space on your computer, you need to empty the trash. To empty the trash, right-click
Deleted files on a
Permanently delete a file
You can immediately delete a file permanently, without having to send it to the trash first.
Select the item you want to delete.
Press and hold the
Because you cannot undo this, you will be asked to confirm that you want to delete the file or folder.
If you frequently need to delete files without using the trash (for example, if you often work with sensitive data), you can add a
Copy or move items to a new directory.
Copy or move files and folders
A file or folder can be copied or moved to a new location by dragging and dropping with the mouse, using the copy and paste commands, or by using keyboard shortcuts.
For example, you might want to copy a presentation onto a memory stick so you can take it to work with you. Or, you could make a back-up copy of a document before you make changes to it (and then use the old copy if you don't like your changes).
These instructions apply to both files and folders. You copy and move files and folders in exactly the same way.
Copy and paste files
Select the file you want to copy by clicking on it once.
Click
Navigate to another folder, where you want to put the copy of the file.
Click
Cut and paste files to move them
Select the file you want to move by clicking on it once.
Click
Navigate to another folder, where you want to move the file.
Click
Drag files to copy or move
Open the file manager and go to the folder which contains the file you want to copy.
Click
Click and drag the file from one window to another. This will
For example, if you drag a file from a USB memory stick to your Home folder, it will be copied, because you're dragging from one device to another.
You can force the file to be copied by holding down the
Why can't I copy/move a file?
You can't copy or move a file into a folder that is
This topic would be ideal for expanding sections. All of the sections would be collapsed by default, so the topic would look sparse, but then the reader could expand the section reflecting their preferred choice of interaction.
Manage and organize files with the file manager.
Browse files and folders
Use the
To open the file manager, open
In the file manager, double-click any folder to view its contents, and double-click any file to open it with the default application for that file. You can also right-click a folder to open it in a new tab or new window. In
The
If you want to quickly skip to a file in the folder you're viewing, start typing its name. A search box will appear at the bottom of the window and the first file which matches your search will be highlighted. Press the
You can quickly access common places from the
If you frequently move files between nested folders, you might find it more useful to show a
This page is a feature overview. There should be a greater visual separation between features. Small illustrative figures should be used to display these features where appropriate, and video demonstrations of some of the features might be useful too. Explain how you can add things to the sidebar (link to a topic or explain it here).
Automatically run applications for CDs and DVDs, cameras, audio players, and other devices and media.
Open an application when you plug in a device
You can have an application automatically start when you plug in a device. For example, you might want your photo organizer to start when you plug in a digital camera. You can also turn this off, so that nothing happens when you plug something in.
To decide which applications should start when you plug in various devices:
Click
Instead of simply starting an application, you can also set it so that:
The device will be shown in the File Manager (choose
You will be asked what to open (
Nothing at all will happen (
The
If you don't see the device or media type that you want to change in the list (such as Blu-ray discs or E-book readers), click
Don't open
If you don't want any applications to be opened automatically, whatever you plug in, check
If your computer's graphics card doesn't support certain features, a more basic version of the desktop will be started.
What is fallback mode?
If your computer's graphics card doesn't support certain features, a more basic version of the desktop will be displayed and you will see a message telling you what happened. This is called
Most of the features that are missing in fallback mode are related to organizing windows and starting applications. For example, instead of having an activities overview, you will have an
Starting in fallback mode doesn't necessarily mean that your graphics card isn't good enough to run GNOME - it might just mean that you don't have the right drivers installed for your graphics card. If you can find better graphics card drivers for your computer, you may be able to run the full version of GNOME.
Prevent other people from using your desktop when you go away from your computer.
Automatically lock your screen
When you leave your computer, you should
Make sure
Dim the screen to save power or increase the brightness to make it more readable in bright light.
Set screen brightness
You can change the brightness of your screen to save power or make the screen more readable in bright light. You can also have the screen dim automatically when on battery power and have it turn off automatically when not in use.
Set the brightness
Adjust the
Many laptop keyboards have special keys on the keyboard to adjust the brightness. These have a picture of what looks like the Sun and are usually located on the
Select
The screen will automatically turn off after you haven't used it for a while. This only affects the display, and doesn't turn off your computer. You can adjust how long you have to be inactive with the
Understand what volumes and partitions are and use the disk utility to manage them.
Manage volumes and partitions
The word
Often, a mounted volume is called a
View and manage volumes and partitions using the disk utility
You can check and modify your computer's storage volumes with the disk utility.
Open the
In the pane marked
In the right pane, the area labeled
Take care; it is possible to completely erase the data on your disk with these tools if you try to.
Your computer most likely has at least one
One primary partition must contain information that your computer uses to start up, or
Remove all of the files and folders from an external hard disk or USB flash drive by formatting it.
Wipe everything off a removable disk
If you have a removable disk, like a USB memory stick or an external hard disk, you may sometimes wish to completely remove all of its files and folders. You can do this by
Format a removable disk
Open the
Select the disk you want to wipe from the
Make sure that you have selected the correct disk! If you choose the wrong disk, all of the files on the other disk will be deleted!
Click
Give the disk a name and click
Right-click on the disk and choose
Formatting a disk does not securely delete your files
Formatting a disk is not a completely secure way of wiping all of its data. A formatted disk will not appear to have files on it, but it is possible that special recovery software could retrieve the files. If you need to securely delete the files, you will need to use a command-line utility, such as
You can test your hard disk for problems to make sure that it's healthy.
Check your hard disk for problems
Rewrite steps to use common simple form in 3.0.1
Checking the hard disk
Hard disks have a built-in health-check tool called
Although SMART runs automatically, you can also check your disk's health by running the
Check your disk's health using the Disk Utility application
Select the disk you want to check from the

Click the
What if the disk isn't healthy?
Even if the
If the status says "Pre-fail", the disk is still reasonably healthy but signs of wear have been detected which mean it might fail in the near future. If your hard disk (or computer) is a few years old, you are likely to see this message on at least some of the health checks. You should
If it gets worse, you may wish to take the computer/hard disk to a professional for further diagnosis or repair.
With
Check how much disk space is left
You can check how much disk space is left by using
Check with Disk Usage Analyzer
To check the free disk space and disk capacity using
Open the
The
(You can click on
Click
Click the
Click

Check with System Monitor
To check the free disk space and disk capacity with
Open the
Select the
What if the disk is too full?
If the disk is too full you should:
Delete files that aren't important or that you won't use anymore.
Make
You can run benchmarks on your hard disk to check how fast it is.
Test the performance of your hard disk
If you want to perform benchmark test and see how fast is your hard disk:
You can choose the hard disk from the
Choose
Click
When the test is finished, the results will appear on the graph.
It would be really really great if somebody could write something about the results and the charts, I can't do that... I don't really know what does it mean. thanks.

Disks & storage
Add other timezones so you can see what time it is in other cities.
Change your timezone
Click on the clock located in the middle of the top bar.
Select
You may need to click
Click on your the location on the map, then select your current city from the drop-down list.
The time shown on the top bar will update automatically when you select a different location. The time in the window will be updated next time you access the
Click the clock on the top bar and go into the
Change the date and time
If the date and time displayed on the top bar are incorrect or in the wrong format, you can change them:
Click on the clock in the middle of the top bar and select
Adjust the date and time by clicking on the arrows to choose the year, day, hour and minute. You can choose the month from a drop-down list.
If you like, you can have the clock update itself automatically by turning the
When
You can also change how the hour is displayed by turning the 24-hour format ON or OFF.
Display your appointments on the calendar at the top of the screen.
Calendar appointments
This requires
Most distros have come with
To view your appointments:
Click on the clock on the top bar.
Click the date for which you want to see your appointments on the
The calendar will display existing appointments on the right. As appointments are added in
To quickly get to the full
This will work only if you have an existing
Should have some information or link to "how to add a mail account to Evolution", and possibly an image (but maybe a screenshot is too big).

Date & time
@@image: 'figures/bluetooth-menu.png'; md5=42c7614ce7079d3fe15019ae1ab5f8a1
Enable or disable the Bluetooth device on your computer.
Turn Bluetooth on or off
You can turn
The Bluetooth icon and menu can be found on the top bar.
To turn
Many laptop computers have a hardware switch or key combination to turn Bluetooth on and off. If the Bluetooth hardware is turned off, you will not see a Bluetooth icon in the top bar. Look for a switch on your computer or a key on your keyboard. The keyboard key is often accessed with the help of the
If you are connecting to another
To turn
Share files between Bluetooth-enabled devices, like your computer and your phone.
Send a file to another Bluetooth device
You can send files to connected Bluetooth devices, such as some mobile phones or other computers. Some types of devices don't allow the transfer of files, or specific types of files.
If you have not done so already,
Click the Bluetooth icon in the top bar and click
Choose the file you want to send and click
(To send more than one file in a folder, hold down
Select the device which you want to send the files to from the list and then click
You can limit the list to only specific device types using the
The owner of the receiving device usually has to press a button to accept the file. Once the owner accepts or declines, the result of the file transfer will be shown on your screen.
Remove a device from the list of Bluetooth devices.
Remove a connection between Bluetooth devices
If you don't want to be connected to a Bluetooth device any more, remove the connection:
Click the Bluetooth icon in the top bar, and choose
Select the device you want to disconnect in the left pane, and then click the
Click
You can
The adapter could be turned off or may not have drivers, or Bluetooth might be disabled or blocked.
Why can't I connect my Bluetooth device?
There are a number of reasons why you may not be able to connect to a Bluetooth device (like a phone or headset):
Connection blocked or untrusted
Some Bluetooth devices block connections by default, or require you to change a setting to allow connections to be made. Make sure that your device is setup to allow connections.
Bluetooth hardware not recognized
Your Bluetooth adapter/dongle may not have been recognized by the computer. This could be because drivers for the adapter aren't installed. Some Bluetooth adapters aren't supported on Linux, so you may not be able to get the right drivers for them. In this case, you will probably have to get a different Bluetooth adapter.
Adapter not switched on
Make sure that your Bluetooth adapter is switched on. Click the Bluetooth icon on the top bar and check that it's not disabled.
Device Bluetooth connection switched off
Check that Bluetooth is turned on on the device you're trying to connect to. For example, if you're trying to connect to a phone, make sure that it's not in airplane mode.
Pair Bluetooth devices.
Connect your computer to another Bluetooth device
Before you can transfer files between Bluetooth-enabled devices, you first need to connect them. This is also called, "pairing" Bluetooth devices.

Select the Bluetooth icon in the top-bar, and select
Make the other Bluetooth device discoverable or visible, and place it within 10 meters of your computer. Then select
If there are too many devices listed, select the
Select
The automatic PIN setting will use a six-digit numerical code. A device with no input keys or screen, such as a mouse or headset, may require a specific PIN such as 0000, or no PIN at all. Check your device's manual for the proper setting.
Choose an appropriate PIN setting for your device, and then select
Select
Enter the PIN code on your other device, if required. You need to finish your entry within about 20 seconds on most devices, or the connection will not be completed. If that happens, return to the device list and start again.
A message appears when the connection successfully completes. If the device offers other capabilities, such as Personal Area Networking (PAN) on a mobile phone, you can enable them using checkboxes. Then select
You can

Bluetooth

Backups
Back up your important files

The best way to back up up your files is to do so regularly, keeping the copies off-site and (possibly) encrypted.
Advice on where to store your backups and what type of storage device to use.
c
Where to store your backup
You should store backup copies of your files somewhere separate from your computer - on an external hard disk, for example. That way, if the computer breaks, the backup will still be intact. For maximum security, you shouldn't keep the backup in the same building as your computer. If there is a fire or theft, both copies of the data could be lost if they are kept together.
It is important to choose an appropriate
Local and remote storage options
USB memory key (low capacity)
Internal disk drive (high capacity)
External hard disk (typically high capacity)
Network-connected drive (high capacity)
File/backup server (high capacity)
Writable CDs or DVDs (low/medium capacity)
Online backup service (
Some of these options have sufficient capacity to allow for a backup of every file on your system, also known as a
Back up anything that you can't bear to lose if something goes wrong.
What to back up
Your priority should be to backup your
Your personal files
This may include documents, spreadsheets, email, calendar appointments, financial data, family photos, or any other personal files that you would consider irreplaceable.
Your personal settings
This includes changes you may have made to colors, backgrounds, screen resolution and mouse settings on your desktop. This also includes application preferences, such as settings for
Most people never change the system settings that are created during installation. If you do customize your system settings for some reason, or if you use your computer as a server, then you may wish to backup these settings.
Installed software
The software you use can normally be restored quite quickly after a serious computer problem, by reinstalling it.
In general, you will want to backup files that are irreplaceable and files that require a great time investment to replace without a backup. If things are easy to replace, on the other hand, you may not want to use up disk space by having backups of them.
A list of folders where you can find documents, files and settings that you may want to back up.
Where can I find the files I want to back up?
Deciding which files to back up, and locating them, is the most difficult step when attempting to perform a backup. Listed below are the most common locations of important files and settings that you may want to back up.
Personal files (documents, music, photos and videos)
These are usually stored in your
If your backup medium has sufficient space (if it's an external hard disk, for example), consider backing up the entire Home folder. You can find out how much disk space your Home folder takes up by using the
Hidden files
Any file or folder name that starts with a period (.) is hidden by default. To view hidden files, click
Personal settings (desktop preferences, themes, and software settings)
Most applications store their settings in hidden folders inside your Home folder (see above for information on hidden files).
Most of your application settings will be stored in the hidden folders
System-wide settings
Settings for important parts of the system aren't stored in your Home folder. There are a number of locations that they could be stored, but most are stored in the
Retrieve your files from a backup.
Restore a backup
If you lost or deleted some of you files, but you have a backup of them, you can restore them from the backup:
If you want to restore your backup from a device such as external hard drive, USB drive or another computer on the network, you can
If you created your backup using a backup application such as
Use Déjà Dup (or some other backup application) to make copies of your valuable files and settings to protect against loss.
How to back up
The easiest way of backing up your files and settings is to let a backup application manage the backup process for you. A number of different backup applications are available, for example
The help for your chosen backup application will walk you through setting your preferences for the backup, as well as how to restore your data.
An alternative option is to
The amount of data you can back up is limited by the size of the storage device. If you have the room on your backup device, it is best to back up the entire Home folder with the following exceptions:
Files that are already backed-up somewhere else, such as to a CD, DVD, or other removable media.
Files that you can recreate easily. For example, if you are a programmer, you don't have to back up the files that get produced when you compile your programs. Instead, just make sure that you back up the original source files.
Any files in the Trash folder. Your Trash folder can be found in
Learn how often your should backup your important files to make sure that they're safe.
Frequency of backups
How often you make backups will depend on the type of data to be backed up. For example, if you are running a network environment with critical data stored on your servers, then even nightly backups may not be enough.
On the other hand, if you are backing up the data on your home computer then hourly backups would likely be unnecessary. You may find it helpful to consider the following points when planning your backup schedule:
The amount of time you spend on the computer.
How often and by how much the data on the computer changes.
If the data you want to back up is lower priority, or subject to few changes, like music, e-mails and family photos, then weekly or even monthly backups may suffice. However, if you happen to be in the middle of a tax audit, more frequent backups may be necessary.
As a general rule, the amount of time in between backups should be no more than the amount of time you are willing to spend re-doing any lost work. For example, if spending a week re-writing lost documents is too long for you, you should back up at least once per week.
Verify your backup was successful.
Check your backup
After you have backed up your files, you should make sure that the backup was successful. If it didn't work properly, you could lose important data since some files could be missing from the backup.
When you use the file manager to copy or move files, the computer checks to make sure that all of the data transferred correctly. However, if you are transferring data that is very important to you, you may want to perform additional checks to confirm that your data has been transferred properly.
You can do an extra check by looking through the copied files and folders on the destination media. By checking to make sure that the files and folders you transferred are actually there in the backup, you can have extra confidence that the process was successful.
If you find that you do regular backups of large amounts of data, you may find it easier to use a dedicated backup program, such as
A few tips on using the desktop help guide.
About this guide
This guide is designed to give you a tour of the features of your desktop, answer your computer-related questions, and provide tips on using your computer more effectively.We've tried to make this guide as easy to use as possible:
The guide is sorted into small, task-oriented topics--not chapters. This means that you don't need to skim through an entire manual to find the answer to your questions.
Related-items are linked together. "See-also" links at the bottom of some pages will direct you to related topics. This makes it easy to find similar topics that might help you perform a certain task.
It includes built-in search. The bar at the top of the help browser is a
The guide is constantly being improved. Although we attempt to provide you with a comprehensive set of helpful information, we know we won't answer all of your questions here. We will keep adding more information to make things more helpful, though.
Thank you for taking the time to read the desktop help. We sincerely hope that you will never have to use it.
-- The GNOME documentation team
Enable visual alerts to flash the screen or window when an alert sound is played.
Flash the screen for alert sounds
Your computer will play a simple alert sound for certain types of messages and events. If you have a hard time hearing these sounds, you can have either the entire screen or your current window visually flash whenever the alert sound is played.
This can also be useful if you're in an environment where you need your computer to be silent, such as in a library. See
Open
Switch
You can quickly turn visual alerts on and off by clicking the
Type keyboard shortcuts one key at a time rather than having to hold down all of the keys at once.
Turn on Sticky Keys
Turn on from the keyboard?! How do I turn these features on from the keyboard then? Used to be there were odd shortcuts. I think 5x Shift turned one of them on. Fix for 3.2

You might want to turn on sticky keys if you find it difficult to hold down several keys at once.
Open
Select
Switch
You can quickly turn Sticky Keys on and off by clicking the
If you press two keys at once, you can have sticky keys turn itself off temporarily to let you enter a keyboard shortcut in the "standard" way.
For example, if you have sticky keys turned on but press
Select
You can have the computer make a "beep" sound when you start typing a keyboard shortcut with sticky keys turned on. This is useful if you want to know that sticky keys is expecting a keyboard shortcut to be typed, so the next key press will be interpreted as part of a shortcut. Select
Have a delay between a key being pressed and that letter appearing on the screen.
Turn on Slow Keys
Turn on
Switch
You can quickly turn Slow Keys on and off by clicking the
Use the
You can have your computer make a sound when you press a key, when a key press is accepted, or when a key press is rejected because you didn't hold the key down long enough.
Use the
Read screen aloud
GNOME provides the
I'd like this page to have more on how to start Orca, then pass off to the Orca help for more information.
Press and hold the left mouse button to right-click.
Simulate a right mouse click
You can make it so that, instead of clicking the right mouse button, you can just hold-down the left mouse button for a while to do the same thing. This is useful if you find it difficult to move your fingers individually on one hand, or if you have a specialized mouse.
Switch
You can change how long you must hold down the left mouse button for before it is registered as a right click. In the

Universal access
The GNOME desktop includes assistive technologies to support users with various impairments and special needs, and to interact with common assistive devices. Many accessibility features can be accessed from the accessibility menu in the top bar.
Visual impairments
Blindness
Low vision
Color-blindness
Other topics
Hearing impairments
Mobility impairments
Mouse movement
Clicking and dragging
Keyboard use
Zoom in on your screen so it's easier to see things.
Magnify the screen area
Magnifying the screen is different than just enlarging the
Open
Switch
You can now move around the screen area. By moving your mouse to the edges of the screen, you will move the magnified area in different directions, allowing you to view your area of choice.
You can quickly turn zoom on and off by clicking the
Pressing
Quickly locate the pointer
If you have trouble seeing where the mouse pointer is on your screen, you can make it so that simply pressing the
Click your name on the top panel and select
Open
Check
Your
@@image: 'figures/universal-access-menu.png'; md5=0a74b1981ea14f71e521f92f1ab6ec86
The universal access menu is the icon on the top bar that looks like a person.
Find the universal access menu
The
The universal access menu can be found on the top bar.
To access this menu using the keyboard rather than the mouse, press
Use larger fonts to make text easier to read.
Change text size on the screen
If you have difficulty reading the text on your screen, you can change the size of the font.
Under
You can quickly change the text size by clicking the
The Hover Click (Dwell Click) feature allows you to click by holding the mouse still.
Simulate clicking by hovering
You can make it so that buttons are clicked when you hover the mouse pointer over them (hover click). This is useful if you find it difficult to move the mouse and click the mouse button at the same time. When hover click is turned on you can move your mouse pointer over a button, let go of the mouse and then wait for a while before the button will be clicked for you.
Switch
The
When you hover your mouse pointer over a button and don't move it, it will gradually change color. When it has fully changed color, the button will be clicked.
Hover click will click anywhere that your mouse pointer is hovering over, not just on buttons.
Change how long to wait before the button is clicked
You can change how long the delay should be between hovering the mouse pointer over a button and that button being pressed. To do this, go to the
Change how much the mouse is allowed to move/wiggle when hovering
You don't need to hold the mouse perfectly still when hovering over a button to click it - the pointer is allowed to move a little bit and will still click after a while. If it moves too much, however, the click will not happen.
You can change how much the pointer is allowed to move but still be considered "still enough" to click the button. Go to the
Make windows and buttons on the screen more (or less) vivid, so they're easier to see.
Adjust the contrast
You can adjust the contrast of windows and buttons so that they're easier to see. This is not the same as
Under
You can quickly change the contrast by clicking the
Use the
Read screen in Braille
GNOME provides the
Ignore quickly-repeated keypresses of the same key.
Turn on Bounce Keys
Turn on
Switch
Use the
You can quickly turn Bounce Keys on and off by clicking the
translator-credits