# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each prolonged-release capsule contains 0.5 mg of tacrolimus.
Excipient:
Each prolonged-release capsule contains 53.64 mg of lactose monohydrate
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Prolonged-release hard capsules.
Yellow-orange gelatin capsules imprinted in red with “ 0.5 mg” on the light yellow capsule cap and “ 647” on the orange capsule body, containing white powder.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Prophylaxis of transplant rejection in adult kidney or liver allograft recipients.
Treatment of allograft rejection resistant to treatment with other immunosuppressive medicinal products in adult patients.
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Advagraf is a once-a-day oral formulation of tacrolimus.
Advagraf therapy requires careful monitoring by adequately qualified and equipped personnel.
The medicinal product should only be prescribed, and changes in immunosuppressive therapy initiated, by physicians experienced in immunosuppressive therapy and the management of transplant patients.
Inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised switching of immediate- or prolonged-release formulations of tacrolimus is unsafe.
This can lead to graft rejection or increased incidence of side effects, including under- or overimmunosuppression, due to clinically relevant differences in systemic exposure to tacrolimus.
Patients should be maintained on a single formulation of tacrolimus with the corresponding daily dosing regimen; alterations in formulation or regimen should only take place under the close supervision of a transplant specialist (see sections 4.4 and 4.8).
Following conversion to any alternative formulation, therapeutic drug monitoring must be performed and dose adjustments made to ensure that systemic exposure to tacrolimus is maintained.
General considerations The recommended initial doses presented below are intended to act solely as a guideline.
Advagraf is routinely administered in conjunction with other immunosuppressive agents in the initial post- operative period.
The dose may vary depending upon the immunosuppressive regimen chosen.
Advagraf dosing should primarily be based on clinical assessments of rejection and tolerability in each patient individually aided by blood level monitoring (see below under “ Target whole blood trough concentration recommendations”).
If clinical signs of rejection are apparent, alteration of the immunosuppressive regimen should be considered.
In stable patients converted from Prograf (twice daily) to Advagraf (once daily) on a 1:1 (mg: mg) total daily dose basis the systemic exposure to tacrolimus (AUC0-24) for Advagraf was approximately 10% lower than that for Prograf.
The relationship between tacrolimus trough levels (C24) and systemic
2 exposure (AUC0-24) for Advagraf is similar to that of Prograf.
When converting from Prograf capsules to Advagraf tacrolimus trough levels should be measured prior to conversion and within two weeks after conversion.
Dose adjustments should be made to ensure that similar systemic exposure is maintained.
In de novo kidney and liver transplant patients AUC0-24 of tacrolimus for Advagraf on Day 1 was 30% and 50% lower respectively, when compared with that for Prograf at equivalent doses.
By Day 4, systemic exposure as measured by trough levels is similar for both kidney and liver transplant patients with both formulations.
Careful and frequent monitoring of tacrolimus trough levels is recommended in the first two weeks post-transplant with Advagraf to ensure adequate drug exposure in the immediate post-transplant period.
As tacrolimus is a substance with low clearance, adjustments to the Advagraf dose regimen may take several days before steady state is achieved.
In patients unable to take oral medicinal products during the immediate post-transplant period, tacrolimus therapy can be initiated intravenously (Prograf 5 mg/ ml Concentrate for Infusion) at a dose approximately 1/ 5th of the recommended oral dose for that indication.
Method of administration It is recommended that the oral daily dose of Advagraf be administered once daily in the morning.
Advagraf prolonged-release capsules should be taken immediately following removal from the blister.
Patients should be advised not to swallow the desiccant.
The capsules should be swallowed with fluid (preferably water).
Advagraf should generally be administered on an empty stomach or at least 1 hour before or 2 to 3 hours after a meal, to achieve maximal absorption (see section 5.2).
A forgotten morning dose should be taken as soon as possible on the same day.
A double dose should not be taken on the next morning.
Duration of dosing To suppress graft rejection, immunosuppression must be maintained; consequently, no limit to the duration of oral therapy can be given.
Dose recommendations - Kidney transplantation Prophylaxis of transplant rejection Oral Advagraf therapy should commence at a dose of 0.20 - 0.30 mg/ kg/ day administered once daily in the morning.
Administration should commence within 24 hours after the completion of surgery.
Dose adjustment during post-transplant period Advagraf doses are usually reduced in the post-transplant period.
It is possible in some cases to withdraw concomitant immunosuppressive therapy, leading to Advagraf monotherapy.
Post-transplant improvement in the condition of the patient may alter the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and may necessitate further dose adjustments.
Dose recommendations - Liver transplantation Prophylaxis of transplant rejection Oral Advagraf therapy should commence at a dose of 0.10 - 0.20 mg/ kg/ day administered once daily in the morning.
Administration should commence approximately 12-18 hours after the completion of surgery.
Dose adjustment during post-transplant period Advagraf doses are usually reduced in the post-transplant period.
It is possible in some cases to withdraw concomitant immunosuppressive therapy, leading to Advagraf monotherapy.
Post-transplant improvement in the condition of the patient may alter the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and may necessitate further dose adjustments.
Dose recommendations – Conversion of Prograf treated patients to Advagraf Allograft transplant patients maintained on twice daily Prograf capsules dosing requiring conversion to once daily Advagraf should be converted on a 1:1 (mg: mg) total daily dose basis.
Advagraf should be administered in the morning.
Following conversion, tacrolimus trough levels should be monitored and if necessary dose adjustments made to maintain similar systemic exposure.
3 Dose recommendations - Rejection therapy Increased doses of tacrolimus, supplemental corticosteroid therapy, and introduction of short courses of mono-/ polyclonal antibodies have all been used to manage rejection episodes.
If signs of toxicity are noted (e. g. pronounced adverse reactions - see section 4.8) the dose of Advagraf may need to be reduced.
For information on conversion from ciclosporin to Advagraf, see below under “ Dose adjustments in specific patient populations”.
Kidney and liver transplantation For conversion from other immunosuppressants to once daily Advagraf, treatment should begin with the initial oral dose recommended in kidney and liver transplantation respectively for prophylaxis of transplant rejection.
Heart transplantation In adult patients converted to Advagraf, an initial oral dose of 0.15 mg/ kg/ day should be administered once daily in the morning.
Other allografts transplantation Although there is no clinical experience with Advagraf in lung-transplanted, pancreas-transplanted and intestine-transplanted patients, Prograf has been used in lung-transplanted patients at an initial oral dose of 0.10 - 0.15 mg/ kg/ day, in pancreas-transplanted patients at an initial oral dose of 0.2 mg/ kg/ day and in intestinal transplantation at an initial oral dose of 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
Dose adjustments in specific patient populations Patients with liver impairment Dose reduction may be necessary in patients with severe liver impairment in order to maintain the blood trough levels within the recommended target range.
Patients with kidney impairment As the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus are unaffected by renal function, no dose adjustment should be required.
However, owing to the nephrotoxic potential of tacrolimus careful monitoring of renal function is recommended (including serial serum creatinine concentrations, calculation of creatinine clearance and monitoring of urine output).
Race In comparison to Caucasians, black patients may require higher tacrolimus doses to achieve similar trough levels.
Gender There is no evidence that male and female patients require different doses to achieve similar trough levels.
Elderly patients There is no evidence currently available to indicate that dosing should be adjusted in elderly patients.
Conversion from ciclosporin to Advagraf Care should be taken when converting patients from ciclosporin-based to tacrolimus-based therapy (see sections 4.4 and 4.5).
Advagraf therapy should be initiated after considering ciclosporin blood concentrations and the clinical condition of the patient.
Dosing should be delayed in the presence of elevated ciclosporin blood levels.
In practice, tacrolimus-based therapy has been initiated 12 - 24 hours after discontinuation of ciclosporin.
Monitoring of ciclosporin blood levels should be continued following conversion as the clearance of ciclosporin might be affected.
Target whole blood trough concentration recommendations Dosing should primarily be based on clinical assessments of rejection and tolerability in each individual patient aided by whole blood tacrolimus trough level monitoring.
As an aid to optimise dosing, several immunoassays are available for determining tacrolimus concentrations in whole blood.
Comparisons of concentrations from the published literature to individual values in clinical practice should be assessed with care and knowledge of the assay methods employed.
In current clinical practice, whole blood levels are monitored using immunoassay methods.
The relationship between tacrolimus trough levels (C24) and systemic exposure (AUC 0-24) is similar between the two formulations Advagraf and Prograf.
Blood trough levels of tacrolimus should be monitored during the post-transplantation period.
Blood trough levels for Advagraf should be drawn approximately 24 hours post-dosing, just prior to the next dose.
Frequent trough level monitoring in the initial two weeks post transplantation is recommended, 4 followed by periodic monitoring during maintenance therapy.
Blood trough levels of tacrolimus should also be monitored following conversion from Prograf to Advagraf, dose adjustment, changes in the immunosuppressive regimen, or co-administration of substances which may alter tacrolimus whole blood concentrations (see section 4.5).
The frequency of blood level monitoring should be based on clinical needs.
As Advagraf is a medicinal product with low clearance, adjustments to the Advagraf dose regimen may take several days before steady state is achieved.
Clinical study analysis suggests that the majority of patients can be successfully managed if tacrolimus blood trough levels are maintained below 20 ng/ ml.
It is necessary to consider the clinical condition of the patient when interpreting whole blood levels.
In clinical practice, whole blood trough levels have generally been in the range 5 - 20 ng/ ml in liver transplant recipients and 10 - 20 ng/ ml in kidney and heart transplant patients in the early post- transplant period.
During subsequent maintenance therapy, blood concentrations have generally been in the range of 5 - 15 ng/ ml in liver, kidney and heart transplant recipients.
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to tacrolimus or other macrolides or to any of the excipients.
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Medication errors, including inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised substitution of immediate- or prolonged-release tacrolimus formulations, have been observed.
This has led to serious adverse events, including graft rejection, or other side effects which could be a consequence of either under- or over- exposure to tacrolimus.
Patients should be maintained on a single formulation of tacrolimus with the corresponding daily dosing regimen; alterations in formulation or regimen should only take place under the close supervision of a transplant specialist (see sections 4.2 and 4.8).
There is limited experience in non-Caucasian patients and patients at elevated immunological risk (e. g. retransplantation, evidence of panel reactive antibodies (PRA)).
For treatment of allograft rejection resistant to treatment with other immunosuppressive medicinal products in adult patients clinical data are not yet available for the prolonged-release formulation Advagraf.
For prophylaxis of transplant rejection in adult heart allograft recipients and for paediatric allograft recipients clinical data are not yet available for the prolonged-release formulation Advagraf.
During the initial post-transplant period, monitoring of the following parameters should be undertaken on a routine basis: blood pressure, ECG, neurological and visual status, fasting blood glucose levels, electrolytes (particularly potassium), liver and renal function tests, haematology parameters, coagulation values, and plasma protein determinations.
If clinically relevant changes are seen, adjustments of the immunosuppressive regimen should be considered.
Herbal preparations containing St.
John’ s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) or other herbal preparations should be avoided when taking Advagraf due to the risk of interactions that lead to decrease in blood concentrations of tacrolimus and reduced clinical effect of tacrolimus (see section 4.5).
Since levels of tacrolimus in blood may significantly change during diarrhoea episodes, extra monitoring of tacrolimus concentrations is recommended during episodes of diarrhoea.
The combined administration of ciclosporin and tacrolimus should be avoided and care should be taken when administering tacrolimus to patients who have previously received ciclosporin (see sections 4.2 and 4.5).
Ventricular hypertrophy or hypertrophy of the septum, reported as cardiomyopathies, have been observed in Prograf treated patients on rare occasions and may therefore also occur with Advagraf.
Most cases have been reversible, occurring with tacrolimus blood trough concentrations much higher than the recommended maximum levels.
Other factors observed to increase the risk of these clinical 5 conditions included pre-existing heart disease, corticosteroid usage, hypertension, renal or hepatic dysfunction, infections, fluid overload, and oedema.
Accordingly, high-risk patients receiving substantial immunosuppression should be monitored, using such procedures as echocardiography or ECG pre- and post-transplant (e. g. initially at 3 months and then at 9 -12 months).
If abnormalities develop, dose reduction of Advagraf therapy, or change of treatment to another immunosuppressive agent should be considered.
Tacrolimus may prolong the QT interval but at this time lacks substantial evidence for causing Torsades de Pointes.
Caution should be exercised in patients with diagnosed or suspected Congenital Long QT Syndrome.
Patients treated with tacrolimus have been reported to develop EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders.
A combination of immunosuppressives such as antilymphocytic antibodies given concomitantly increases the risk of EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders.
EBV-Viral Capsid Antigen (VCA)-negative patients have been reported to have an increased risk of developing lymphoproliferative disorders.
Therefore, in this patient group, EBV-VCA serology should be ascertained before starting treatment with Advagraf.
During treatment, careful monitoring with EBV- PCR is recommended.
Positive EBV-PCR may persist for months and is per se not indicative of lymphoproliferative disease or lymphoma.
Patients treated with immunosuppressants, including Advagraf are at increased risk for opportunistic infections (bacterial, fungal, viral and protozoal).
Among these conditions are BK virus associated nephropathy and JC virus associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
These infections are often related to a high total immunosuppressive burden and may lead to serious or fatal conditions that physicians should consider in the differential diagnosis in immunosuppressed patients with deteriorating renal function or neurological symptoms.
As with other immunosuppressive agents, owing to the potential risk of malignant skin changes, exposure to sunlight and UV light should be limited by wearing protective clothing and using a sunscreen with a high protection factor.
As with other potent immunosuppressive compounds, the risk of secondary cancer is unknown (see section 4.8).
Patients treated with tacrolimus have been reported to develop posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES).
If patients taking tacrolimus present with symptoms indicating PRES such as headache, altered mental status, seizures, and visual disturbances, a radiological procedure (e. g.
MRI) should be performed.
If PRES is diagnosed, adequate blood pressure and seizure control and immediate discontinuation of systemic tacrolimus is advised.
Most patients completely recover after appropriate measures are taken.
As Advagraf prolonged-release capsules contain lactose, special care should be taken in patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Metabolic interactions Systemically available tacrolimus is metabolised by hepatic CYP3A4.
There is also evidence of gastrointestinal metabolism by CYP3A4 in the intestinal wall.
Concomitant use of medicinal products or herbal remedies known to inhibit or induce CYP3A4 may affect the metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby increase or decrease tacrolimus blood levels.
It is therefore recommended to monitor tacrolimus blood levels whenever substances which have the potential to alter CYP3A metabolism are used concomitantly and to adjust the tacrolimus dose as appropriate in order to maintain similar tacrolimus exposure (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Inhibitors of metabolism Clinically the following substances have been shown to increase tacrolimus blood levels:
Strong interactions have been observed with antifungal agents such as ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole and voriconazole, the macrolide antibiotic erythromycin or HIV protease inhibitors (e. g.
6 ritonavir).
Concomitant use of these substances may require decreased tacrolimus doses in nearly all patients.
Pharmacokinetics studies have indicated that the increase in blood levels is mainly a result of increase in oral bioavailability of tacrolimus owing to the inhibition of gastrointestinal metabolism.
Effect on hepatic clearance is less pronounced.
Weaker interactions have been observed with clotrimazole, clarithromycin, josamycin, nifedipine, nicardipine, diltiazem, verapamil, danazol, ethinylestradiol, omeprazole and nefazodone.
In vitro the following substances have been shown to be potential inhibitors of tacrolimus metabolism: bromocriptine, cortisone, dapsone, ergotamine, gestodene, lidocaine, mephenytoin, miconazole, midazolam, nilvadipine, norethindrone, quinidine, tamoxifen, (triacetyl)oleandomycin.
Grapefruit juice has been reported to increase the blood level of tacrolimus and should therefore be avoided.
Lansoprazol and ciclosporin may potentially inhibit CYP3A4-mediated metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations.
Inducers of metabolism Clinically the following substances have been shown to decrease tacrolimus blood levels:
Strong interactions have been observed with rifampicin, phenytoin, St.
John’ s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) which may require increased tacrolimus doses in almost all patients.
Clinically significant interactions have also been observed with phenobarbital.
Maintenance doses of corticosteroids have been shown to reduce tacrolimus blood levels.
High dose prednisolone or methylprednisolone administered for the treatment of acute rejection have the potential to increase or decrease tacrolimus blood levels.
Carbamazepine, metamizole and isoniazid have the potential to decrease tacrolimus concentrations.
Effect of tacrolimus on the metabolism of other medicinal products Tacrolimus is a known CYP3A4 inhibitor; thus concomitant use of tacrolimus with medicinal products known to be metabolised by CYP3A4 may affect the metabolism of such medicinal products.
The half-life of ciclosporin is prolonged when tacrolimus is given concomitantly.
In addition, synergistic/ additive nephrotoxic effects can occur.
For these reasons, the combined administration of ciclosporin and tacrolimus is not recommended and care should be taken when administering tacrolimus to patients who have previously received ciclosporin (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Tacrolimus has been shown to increase the blood level of phenytoin.
As tacrolimus may reduce the clearance of steroid-based contraceptives leading to increased hormone exposure, particular care should be exercised when deciding upon contraceptive measures.
Limited knowledge of interactions between tacrolimus and statins is available.
Clinical data suggest that the pharmacokinetics of statins are largely unaltered by the co-administration of tacrolimus.
Animal data have shown that tacrolimus could potentially decrease the clearance and increase the half- life of pentobarbital and antipyrine.
Other potential interactions that may increase systemic exposure of tacrolimus Prokinetic agents such as metoclopramide and cisapride.
Cimetidine.
Magnesium-aluminum-hydroxide.
Other interactions which have led to clinically detrimental effects Concurrent use of tacrolimus with medicinal products known to have nephrotoxic or neurotoxic effects may increase these effects (e. g., aminoglycosides, gyrase inhibitors, vancomycin, cotrimoxazole, NSAIDs, ganciclovir or aciclovir).
Enhanced nephrotoxicity has been observed following the administration of amphotericin B and ibuprofen in conjunction with tacrolimus.
As tacrolimus treatment may be associated with hyperkalaemia, or may increase pre-existing hyperkalaemia, high potassium intake, or potassium-sparing diuretics (e. g., amiloride, triamterene, or spironolactone) should be avoided.
Immunosuppressants may affect the response to vaccination and vaccination during treatment with tacrolimus may be less effective.
The use of live attenuated vaccines should be avoided.
Protein binding considerations 7 Tacrolimus is extensively bound to plasma proteins.
Possible interactions with other medicinal products known to have high affinity for plasma proteins should be considered (e. g., NSAIDs, oral anticoagulants, or oral antidiabetics).
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Human data show that tacrolimus crosses the placenta.
Limited data from organ transplant recipients show no evidence of an increased risk of adverse events on the course and outcome of pregnancy under tacrolimus treatment compared with other immunosuppressive medicinal products.
To date, no other relevant epidemiological data are available.
Tacrolimus treatment can be considered in pregnant women, when there is no safer alternative and when the perceived benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
In case of in utero exposure, monitoring of the newborn for the potential adverse events of tacrolimus is recommended (in particular effects on the kidneys). There is a risk for premature delivery (< 37 week) as well as for hyperkalaemia in the newborn (incidence 8 of 111 neonates, i. e.
7.2%) which, however normalises spontaneously.
In rats and rabbits, tacrolimus caused embryofoetal toxicity at doses which demonstrated maternal toxicity (see section 5.3).
Tacrolimus affected fertility in male rats (see section 5.3).
Lactation Human data demonstrate that tacrolimus is excreted in breast milk.
As detrimental effects on the newborn cannot be excluded, women should not breast-feed whilst receiving Advagraf.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
Tacrolimus may cause visual and neurological disturbances.
This effect may be enhanced if Advagraf is administered in association with alcohol.
4.8 Undesirable effects
The adverse reaction profile associated with immunosuppressive agents is often difficult to establish owing to the underlying disease and the concurrent use of multiple medications.
Many of the adverse reactions stated below are reversible and/ or respond to dose reduction.
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness.
Adverse reactions are listed below in descending order by frequency of occurrence: very common (≥ 1/ 10); common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10); uncommon (≥ 1/ 1,000 to < 1/ 100); rare (≥ 1/ 10,000 to < 1/ 1,000); very rare (< 1/ 10,000), not known (cannot be estimated from the available data).
Cardiac disorders common: uncommon:
ischaemic coronary artery disorders, tachycardia ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac arrest, heart failures, cardiomyopathies, ventricular hypertrophy, supraventricular arrhythmias, palpitations, ECG investigations abnormal, heart rate and pulse investigations abnormal
rare: very rare:
pericardial effusion echocardiogram abnormal
Blood and lymphatic system disorders common:
anaemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, red blood cell analyses abnormal
uncommon:
coagulopathies, coagulation and bleeding analyses abnormal, pancytopenia, neutropenia
rare:
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hypoprothrombinaemia
Nervous system disorders very common: common:
tremor, headache seizures, disturbances in consciousness, paraesthesias and dysaesthesias, peripheral neuropathies, dizziness, writing impaired, nervous system disorders 8
uncommon:
coma, central nervous system haemorrhages and cerebrovascular accidents, paralysis and paresis, encephalopathy, speech and language abnormalities, amnesia
rare: very rare:
hypertonia myasthenia
Eye disorders
common: uncommon: rare:
vision blurred, photophobia, eye disorders cataract blindness
Ear and labyrinth disorders common: uncommon: rare: very rare:
tinnitus hypoacusis deafness neurosensory hearing impaired
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders common:
dyspnoea, parenchymal lung disorders, pleural effusion, pharyngitis, cough, nasal congestion and inflammations
uncommon: rare:
respiratory failures, respiratory tract disorders, asthma acute respiratory distress syndrome
Gastrointestinal disorders very common: common:
diarrhoea, nausea gastrointestinal inflammatory conditions, gastrointestinal ulceration and perforation, gastrointestinal haemorrhages, stomatitis and ulceration, ascites, vomiting, gastrointestinal and abdominal pains, dyspeptic signs and symptoms, constipation, flatulence, bloating and distension, loose stools, gastrointestinal signs and symptoms
uncommon:
ileus paralytic, peritonitis, acute and chronic pancreatitis, blood amylase increased, gastrooesophageal reflux disease, impaired gastric emptying
rare:
subileus, pancreatic pseudocyst
Renal and urinary disorders very common: common:
renal impairment renal failure, renal failure acute, oliguria, renal tubular necrosis, nephropathy toxic, urinary abnormalities, bladder and urethral symptoms
uncommon: very rare:
anuria, haemolytic uraemic syndrome nephropathy, cystitis haemorrhagic
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders common: uncommon: rare: very rare:
pruritus, rash, alopecias, acne, sweating increased dermatitis, photosensitivity toxic epidermal necrolysis (Lyell’ s syndrome) Stevens Johnson syndrome
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders common: uncommon:
arthralgia, muscle cramps, pain in limb, back pain joint disorders
Endocrine disorders rare: hirsutism
Metabolism and nutrition disorders very common: common:
hyperglycaemic conditions, diabetes mellitus, hyperkalaemia hypomagnesaemia, hypophosphataemia, hypokalaemia, hypocalcaemia, hyponatraemia, fluid overload, hyperuricaemia, appetite decreased, anorexia,
9 metabolic acidoses, hyperlipidaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia, other electrolyte abnormalities
uncommon:
dehydration, hypoproteinaemia, hyperphosphataemia, hypoglycaemia
Infections and infestations As is well known for other potent immunosuppressive agents, patients receiving tacrolimus are frequently at increased risk for infections (viral, bacterial, fungal, protozoal).
The course of pre- existing infections may be aggravated.
Both generalised and localised infections can occur.
Cases of BK virus associated nephropathy, as well as cases of JC virus associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), have been reported in patients treated with immunosuppressants, including Advagraf.
Injury, poisoning and procedural complications common:
primary graft dysfunction
Medication errors, including inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised substitution of immediate- or prolonged-release tacrolimus formulations, have been observed.
A number of associated cases of transplant rejection have been reported (frequency cannot be estimated from available data).
Neoplasms benign, malignant and unspecified (incl cysts and polyps)
Patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy are at increased risk of developing malignancies.
Benign as well as malignant neoplasms including EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders and skin malignancies have been reported in association with tacrolimus treatment.
Vascular disorders very common: common:
hypertension haemorrhage, thromboembolic and ischaemic events, peripheral vascular disorders, vascular hypotensive disorders
uncommon:
infarction, venous thrombosis deep limb, shock
General disorders and administration site conditions common:
asthenic conditions, febrile disorders, oedema, pain and discomfort, blood alkaline phosphatase increased, weight increased, body temperature perception disturbed
uncommon:
multi-organ failure, influenza like illness, temperature intolerance, chest pressure sensation, feeling jittery, feeling abnormal, blood lactate dehydrogenase increased, weight decreased
rare: very rare:
thirst, fall, chest tightness, mobility decreased, ulcer fat tissue increased
Immune system disorders Allergic and anaphylactoid reactions have been observed in patients receiving tacrolimus (see section 4.4).
Hepatobiliary disorders common:
hepatic enzymes and function abnormalities, cholestasis and jaundice, hepatocellular damage and hepatitis, cholangitis
rare: very rare:
hepatitic artery thrombosis, venoocclusive liver disease hepatic failure, bile duct stenosis
Reproductive system and breast disorders uncommon:
dysmenorrhoea and uterine bleeding
Psychiatric disorders very common: common:
insomnia anxiety symptoms, confusion and disorientation, depression, depressed mood, mood disorders and disturbances, nightmare, hallucination, mental disorders
uncommon:
4.9 Overdose
psychotic disorder 10
Experience with overdose is limited.
Several cases of accidental overdose have been reported with tacrolimus; symptoms have included tremor, headache, nausea and vomiting, infections, urticaria, lethargy, increased blood urea nitrogen and elevated serum creatinine concentrations, and increase in alanine aminotransferase levels.
No specific antidote to tacrolimus therapy is available.
If overdose occurs, general supportive measures and symptomatic treatment should be conducted.
Based on its high molecular weight, poor aqueous solubility, and extensive erythrocyte and plasma protein binding, it is anticipated that tacrolimus will not be dialysable.
In isolated patients with very high plasma levels, haemofiltration or -diafiltration have been effective in reducing toxic concentrations.
In cases of oral intoxication, gastric lavage and/ or the use of adsorbents (such as activated charcoal) may be helpful, if used shortly after intake.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Calcineurin inhibitors, ATC code:
L04AD02
Mechanism of action and pharmacodynamic effects At the molecular level, the effects of tacrolimus appear to be mediated by binding to a cytosolic protein (FKBP12) which is responsible for the intracellular accumulation of the compound.
The FKBP12-tacrolimus complex specifically and competitively binds to and inhibits calcineurin, leading to a calcium-dependent inhibition of T-cell signal transduction pathways, thereby preventing transcription of a discrete set of lymphokine genes.
Tacrolimus is a highly potent immunosuppressive agent and has proven activity in both in vitro and in vivo experiments.
In particular, tacrolimus inhibits the formation of cytotoxic lymphocytes, which are mainly responsible for graft rejection.
Tacrolimus suppresses T-cell activation and T-helper-cell dependent B-cell proliferation, as well as the formation of lymphokines (such as interleukins-2, -3, and γ -interferon) and the expression of the interleukin-2 receptor.
Results from clinical trials performed with once-daily tacrolimus Advagraf Liver transplantation The efficacy and safety of Advagraf and Prograf, both in combination with corticosteroids, was compared in 471 de novo liver transplant recipients.
The event rate of biopsy confirmed acute rejection within the first 24 weeks after transplantation was 32.6% in the Advagraf group (N=237) and 29.3% in the Prograf group (N=234).
The treatment difference (Advagraf – Prograf) was 3.3% (95% confidence interval [-5.7%, 12.3%]). The 12-month patient survival rates were 89.2% for Advagraf and 90.8% for Prograf; in the Advagraf arm 25 patients died (14 female, 11 male) and in the Prograf arm 24 patients died (5 female, 19 male).
12-month graft survival was 85.3% for Advagraf and 85.6% for Prograf.
Kidney transplantation The efficacy and safety of Advagraf and Prograf, both in combination with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and corticosteroids, was compared in 667 de novo kidney transplant recipients.
The event rate for biopsy-confirmed acute rejection within the first 24 weeks after transplantation was 18.6% in the Advagraf group (N=331) and 14.9% in the Prograf group (N=336).
The treatment difference (Advagraf-Prograf) was 3.8% (95% confidence interval [-2.1%, 9.6%]).
The 12-month patient survival rates were 96.9% for Advagraf and 97.5% for Prograf; in the Advagraf arm 10 patients died (3 female, 7 male) and in the Prograf arm 8 patients died (3 female, 5 male).
12-month graft survival was 91.5% for Advagraf and 92.8% for Prograf.
11 The efficacy and safety of Prograf, ciclosporin and Advagraf, all in combination with basiliximab antibody induction, MMF and corticosteroids, was compared in 638 de novo kidney transplant recipients.
The incidence of efficacy failure at 12 months (defined as death, graft loss, biopsy- confirmed acute rejection, or lost to follow-up) was 14.0% in the Advagraf group (N=214), 15.1% in the Prograf group (N=212) and 17.0% in the ciclosporin group (N=212).
The treatment difference was -3.0% (Advagraf-ciclosporin) (95.2% confidence interval [-9.9%, 4.0%]) for Advagraf vs. ciclosporin and -1.9% (Prograf-ciclosporin) (95.2% confidence interval [-8.9%, 5.2%]) for Prograf vs. ciclosporin.
The 12-month patient survival rates were 98.6% for Advagraf, 95.7% for Prograf and 97.6% for ciclosporin; in the Advagraf arm 3 patients died (all male), in the Prograf arm 10 patients died (3 female, 7 male) and in the ciclosporin arm 6 patients died (3 female, 3 male).
12-month graft survival was 96.7% for Advagraf, 92.9% for Prograf and 95.7% for ciclosporin.
Results from published data of tacrolimus administered twice daily as Prograf capsules in other primary organ transplantation Prograf has evolved into an accepted treatment as primary immunosuppressive medicinal product following pancreas, lung and intestinal transplantation.
In prospective published studies oral Prograf was investigated as primary immunosuppressant in approximately 175 patients following lung, 475 patients following pancreas and 630 patients following intestinal transplantation.
Overall, the safety profile of oral Prograf in these published studies appeared to be similar to what was reported in the large studies, where Prograf was used as primary treatment in liver, kidney and heart transplantation.
Efficacy results of the largest studies in each indication are summarised below.
Lung transplantation The interim analysis of a recent multicentre study using oral Prograf discussed 110 patients who underwent 1:1 randomisation to either tacrolimus or ciclosporin.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.01 to 0.03 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.05 to 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
A lower incidence of acute rejection episodes for tacrolimus- versus ciclosporin-treated patients (11.5% versus 22.6%) and a lower incidence of chronic rejection, the bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (2.86% versus 8.57%), was reported within the first year after transplantation.
The 1-year patient survival rate was 80.8% in the tacrolimus and 83% in the ciclosporin group (Treede et al., 3rd ICI San Diego, US, 2004; Abstract 22).
Another randomised study included 66 patients on tacrolimus versus 67 patients on ciclosporin.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.025 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.15 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 10 to 20 ng/ ml.
The 1-year patient survival was 83% in the tacrolimus and 71% in the ciclosporin group, the 2-year survival rates were 76% and 66%, respectively.
Acute rejection episodes per 100 patient-days were numerically fewer in the tacrolimus (0.85 episodes) than in the ciclosporin group (1.09 episodes).
Obliterative bronchiolitis developed in 21.7% of patients in the tacrolimus group compared with 38.0% of patients in the ciclosporin group (p = 0.025).
Significantly more ciclosporin-treated patients (n = 13) required a switch to tacrolimus than tacrolimus-treated patients to ciclosporin (n = 2) (p = 0.02) (Keenan et al., Ann Thoracic Surg 1995; 60:580).
In an additional two-centre study, 26 patients were randomised to the tacrolimus versus 24 patients to the ciclosporin group.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.05 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.1 to 0.3 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 12 to 15 ng/ ml.
The 1-year survival rates were 73.1% in the tacrolimus versus 79.2% in the ciclosporin group.
Freedom from acute rejection was higher in the tacrolimus group at 6 months (57.7% versus 45.8%) and at 1 year after lung transplantation (50% versus 33.3%) (Treede et al., J Heart Lung Transplant 2001; 20:511).
The three studies demonstrated similar survival rates.
The incidences of acute rejection were numerically lower with tacrolimus in all three studies and one of the studies reported a significantly lower incidence of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome with tacrolimus.
Pancreas transplantation A multicentre study using oral Prograf included 205 patients undergoing simultaneous pancreas- kidney transplantation who were randomised to tacrolimus (n = 103) or to ciclosporin (n = 102).
The initial oral per protocol dose of tacrolimus was 0.2 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 8 to 15 ng/ ml by Day 5 and 5 to 10 ng/ mL after Month 6.
Pancreas survival at 1 year was significantly superior with tacrolimus:
91.3% versus 74.5% with ciclosporin (p < 0.0005), whereas renal graft survival was similar in both groups.
In total 34 patients switched treatment from
12 ciclosporin to tacrolimus, whereas only 6 tacrolimus patients required alternative therapy (Bechstein et al., Transplantation 2004; 77:1221).
Intestinal transplantation Published clinical experience from a single centre on the use of oral Prograf for primary treatment following intestinal transplantation showed that the actuarial survival rate of 155 patients (65 intestine alone, 75 liver and intestine, and 25 multivisceral) receiving tacrolimus and prednisone was 75% at 1 year, 54% at 5 years, and 42% at 10 years.
In the early years the initial oral dose of tacrolimus was 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
Results continuously improved with increasing experience over the course of 11 years.
A variety of innovations, such as techniques for early detection of Epstein-Barr (EBV) and CMV infections, bone marrow augmentation, the adjunct use of the interleukin-2 antagonist daclizumab, lower initial tacrolimus doses with target trough levels of 10 to 15 ng/ ml, and most recently allograft irradiation were considered to have contributed to improved results in this indication over time (Abu- Elmagd et al., Ann Surg 2001; 234:404).
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption In man tacrolimus has been shown to be able to be absorbed throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
Available tacrolimus is generally rapidly absorbed.
Advagraf is a prolonged-release formulation of tacrolimus resulting in an extended oral absorption profile with an average time to Cmax of approximately 2 hours.
Absorption is variable and the mean oral bioavailability of tacrolimus (investigated with the Prograf formulation) is in the range of 20% - 25% (individual range in adult patients 6% - 43%).
The oral bioavailability of Advagraf was reduced when it was administered after a meal.
Both the rate and extent of absorption of Advagraf were reduced when administered with food.
Bile flow does not influence the absorption of tacrolimus and therefore treatment with Advagraf may commence orally.
A strong correlation exists between AUC and whole blood trough levels at steady-state for Advagraf.
Monitoring of whole blood trough levels therefore provides a good estimate of systemic exposure.
Distribution and elimination In man, the disposition of tacrolimus after intravenous infusion may be described as biphasic.
In the systemic circulation, tacrolimus binds strongly to erythrocytes resulting in an approximate 20:1 distribution ratio of whole blood/ plasma concentrations.
In plasma, tacrolimus is highly bound (> 98.8%) to plasma proteins, mainly to serum albumin and α -1-acid glycoprotein.
Tacrolimus is extensively distributed in the body.
The steady-state volume of distribution based on plasma concentrations is approximately 1300 l (healthy subjects).
Corresponding data based on whole blood averaged 47.6 l.
Tacrolimus is a low-clearance substance.
In healthy subjects, the average total body clearance estimated from whole blood concentrations was 2.25 l/ h.
In adult liver, kidney and heart transplant patients, values of 4.1 l/ h, 6.7 l/ h and 3.9 l/ h, respectively, have been observed.
Factors such as low haematocrit and protein levels, which result in an increase in the unbound fraction of tacrolimus, or corticosteroid-induced increased metabolism are considered to be responsible for the higher clearance rates observed following transplantation.
The half-life of tacrolimus is long and variable.
In healthy subjects, the mean half-life in whole blood is approximately 43 hours.
Metabolism and biotransformation Tacrolimus is widely metabolised in the liver, primarily by the cytochrome P450-3A4.
Tacrolimus is also considerably metabolised in the intestinal wall.
There are several metabolites identified.
Only one of these has been shown in vitro to have immunosuppressive activity similar to that of tacrolimus.
The other metabolites have only weak or no immunosuppressive activity.
In systemic circulation only one of the inactive metabolites is present at low concentrations.
Therefore, metabolites do not contribute to the pharmacological activity of tacrolimus.
Excretion
13 Following intravenous and oral administration of 14C-labelled tacrolimus, most of the radioactivity was eliminated in the faeces.
Approximately 2% of the radioactivity was eliminated in the urine.
Less than 1% of unchanged tacrolimus was detected in the urine and faeces, indicating that tacrolimus is almost completely metabolised prior to elimination: bile being the principal route of elimination.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
The kidneys and the pancreas were the primary organs affected in toxicity studies performed in rats and baboons.
In rats, tacrolimus caused toxic effects to the nervous system and the eyes.
Reversible cardiotoxic effects were observed in rabbits following intravenous administration of tacrolimus.
Embryofoetal toxicity was observed in rats and rabbits and was limited to doses that caused significant toxicity in maternal animals.
In rats, female reproductive function including birth was impaired at toxic doses and the offspring showed reduced birth weights, viability and growth.
A negative effect of tacrolimus on male fertility in the form of reduced sperm counts and motility was observed in rats.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Capsule content:
Hypromellose Ethylcellulose Lactose monohydrate Magnesium stearate.
Capsule shell:
Titanium dioxide (E 171) Yellow iron oxide (E 172) Red iron oxide (E 172) Gelatin.
Printing ink (Opacode S-1-15083):
Shellac Lecithin (soya) Simethicone Red iron oxide (E 172) Hydroxypropyl Cellulose.
6.2 Incompatibilities
Tacrolimus is not compatible with PVC.
Tubing, syringes and other equipment used to prepare a suspension of Advagraf capsule contents should not contain PVC.
6.3 Shelf life
3 years After opening the aluminium wrapper:
1 year
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Store in the original package and in a dry place in order to protect from moisture.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
14 Transparent PVC/ PVDC aluminium blister wrapped in an aluminium pouch with a desiccant.
Ten capsules per blister.
Pack sizes:
30, 50 and 100 prolonged-release capsules.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
No special requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 2353 EW Leiderdorp Netherlands
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 001 EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 002 EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 009
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
23/ 04/ 2007
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
{MM/ YYYY}
15 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each prolonged-release capsule contains 1 mg of tacrolimus.
Excipient:
Each prolonged-release capsule contains 107.28 mg of lactose monohydrate
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Prolonged-release hard capsules.
White-orange gelatin capsules imprinted in red with “ 1 mg” on the white capsule cap and “ the orange capsule body, containing white powder.
677” on
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Prophylaxis of transplant rejection in adult kidney or liver allograft recipients.
Treatment of allograft rejection resistant to treatment with other immunosuppressive medicinal products in adult patients.
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Advagraf is a once-a-day oral formulation of tacrolimus.
Advagraf therapy requires careful monitoring by adequately qualified and equipped personnel.
The medicinal product should only be prescribed, and changes in immunosuppressive therapy initiated, by physicians experienced in immunosuppressive therapy and the management of transplant patients.
Inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised switching of immediate- or prolonged-release formulations of tacrolimus is unsafe.
This can lead to graft rejection or increased incidence of side effects, including under- or overimmunosuppression, due to clinically relevant differences in systemic exposure to tacrolimus.
Patients should be maintained on a single formulation of tacrolimus with the corresponding daily dosing regimen; alterations in formulation or regimen should only take place under the close supervision of a transplant specialist (see sections 4.4 and 4.8).
Following conversion to any alternative formulation, therapeutic drug monitoring must be performed and dose adjustments made to ensure that systemic exposure to tacrolimus is maintained.
General considerations The recommended initial doses presented below are intended to act solely as a guideline.
Advagraf is routinely administered in conjunction with other immunosuppressive agents in the initial post- operative period.
The dose may vary depending upon the immunosuppressive regimen chosen.
Advagraf dosing should primarily be based on clinical assessments of rejection and tolerability in each patient individually aided by blood level monitoring (see below under “ Target whole blood trough concentration recommendations”).
If clinical signs of rejection are apparent, alteration of the immunosuppressive regimen should be considered.
In stable patients converted from Prograf (twice daily) to Advagraf (once daily) on a 1:1 (mg: mg) total daily dose basis the systemic exposure to tacrolimus (AUC0-24) for Advagraf was approximately 10% lower than that for Prograf.
The relationship between tacrolimus trough levels (C24) and systemic 16 exposure (AUC0-24) for Advagraf is similar to that of Prograf.
When converting from Prograf capsules to Advagraf tacrolimus trough levels should be measured prior to conversion and within two weeks after conversion.
Dose adjustments should be made to ensure that similar systemic exposure is maintained.
In de novo kidney and liver transplant patients AUC0-24 of tacrolimus for Advagraf on Day 1 was 30% and 50% lower respectively, when compared with that for Prograf at equivalent doses.
By Day 4, systemic exposure as measured by trough levels is similar for both kidney and liver transplant patients with both formulations.
Careful and frequent monitoring of tacrolimus trough levels is recommended in the first two weeks post-transplant with Advagraf to ensure adequate drug exposure in the immediate post-transplant period.
As tacrolimus is a substance with low clearance, adjustments to the Advagraf dose regimen may take several days before steady state is achieved.
In patients unable to take oral medicinal products during the immediate post-transplant period, tacrolimus therapy can be initiated intravenously (Prograf 5 mg/ ml Concentrate for Infusion) at a dose approximately 1/ 5th of the recommended oral dose for that indication.
Method of administration It is recommended that the oral daily dose of Advagraf be administered once daily in the morning.
Advagraf prolonged-release capsules should be taken immediately following removal from the blister.
Patients should be advised not to swallow the desiccant.
The capsules should be swallowed with fluid (preferably water).
Advagraf should generally be administered on an empty stomach or at least 1 hour before or 2 to 3 hours after a meal, to achieve maximal absorption (see section 5.2).
A forgotten morning dose should be taken as soon as possible on the same day.
A double dose should not be taken on the next morning.
Duration of dosing To suppress graft rejection, immunosuppression must be maintained; consequently, no limit to the duration of oral therapy can be given.
Dose recommendations - Kidney transplantation Prophylaxis of transplant rejection Oral Advagraf therapy should commence at a dose of 0.20 - 0.30 mg/ kg/ day administered once daily in the morning.
Administration should commence within 24 hours after the completion of surgery.
Dose adjustment during post-transplant period Advagraf doses are usually reduced in the post-transplant period.
It is possible in some cases to withdraw concomitant immunosuppressive therapy, leading to Advagraf monotherapy.
Post-transplant improvement in the condition of the patient may alter the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and may necessitate further dose adjustments.
Dose recommendations - Liver transplantation Prophylaxis of transplant rejection Oral Advagraf therapy should commence at a dose of 0.10 - 0.20 mg/ kg/ day administered once daily in the morning.
Administration should commence approximately 12-18 hours after the completion of surgery.
Dose adjustment during post-transplant period Advagraf doses are usually reduced in the post-transplant period.
It is possible in some cases to withdraw concomitant immunosuppressive therapy, leading to Advagraf monotherapy.
Post-transplant improvement in the condition of the patient may alter the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and may necessitate further dose adjustments.
Dose recommendations – Conversion of Prograf treated patients to Advagraf Allograft transplant patients maintained on twice daily Prograf capsules dosing requiring conversion to once daily Advagraf should be converted on a 1:1 (mg: mg) total daily dose basis.
Advagraf should be administered in the morning.
Following conversion, tacrolimus trough levels should be monitored and if necessary dose adjustments made to maintain similar systemic exposure.
17 Dose recommendations - Rejection therapy Increased doses of tacrolimus, supplemental corticosteroid therapy, and introduction of short courses of mono-/ polyclonal antibodies have all been used to manage rejection episodes.
If signs of toxicity are noted (e. g. pronounced adverse reactions - see section 4.8) the dose of Advagraf may need to be reduced.
For information on conversion from ciclosporin to Advagraf, see below under “ Dose adjustments in specific patient populations”.
Kidney and liver transplantation For conversion from other immunosuppressants to once daily Advagraf, treatment should begin with the initial oral dose recommended in kidney and liver transplantation respectively for prophylaxis of transplant rejection.
Heart transplantation In adult patients converted to Advagraf, an initial oral dose of 0.15 mg/ kg/ day should be administered once daily in the morning.
Other allografts transplantation Although there is no clinical experience with Advagraf in lung-transplanted, pancreas-transplanted and intestine-transplanted patients, Prograf has been used in lung-transplanted patients at an initial oral dose of 0.10 - 0.15 mg/ kg/ day, in pancreas-transplanted patients at an initial oral dose of 0.2 mg/ kg/ day and in intestinal transplantation at an initial oral dose of 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
Dose adjustments in specific patient populations Patients with liver impairment Dose reduction may be necessary in patients with severe liver impairment in order to maintain the blood trough levels within the recommended target range.
Patients with kidney impairment As the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus are unaffected by renal function, no dose adjustment should be required.
However, owing to the nephrotoxic potential of tacrolimus careful monitoring of renal function is recommended (including serial serum creatinine concentrations, calculation of creatinine clearance and monitoring of urine output).
Race In comparison to Caucasians, black patients may require higher tacrolimus doses to achieve similar trough levels.
Gender There is no evidence that male and female patients require different doses to achieve similar trough levels.
Elderly patients There is no evidence currently available to indicate that dosing should be adjusted in elderly patients.
Conversion from ciclosporin to Advagraf Care should be taken when converting patients from ciclosporin-based to tacrolimus-based therapy (see sections 4.4 and 4.5).
Advagraf therapy should be initiated after considering ciclosporin blood concentrations and the clinical condition of the patient.
Dosing should be delayed in the presence of elevated ciclosporin blood levels.
In practice, tacrolimus-based therapy has been initiated 12 - 24 hours after discontinuation of ciclosporin.
Monitoring of ciclosporin blood levels should be continued following conversion as the clearance of ciclosporin might be affected.
Target whole blood trough concentration recommendations Dosing should primarily be based on clinical assessments of rejection and tolerability in each individual patient aided by whole blood tacrolimus trough level monitoring.
As an aid to optimise dosing, several immunoassays are available for determining tacrolimus concentrations in whole blood.
Comparisons of concentrations from the published literature to individual values in clinical practice should be assessed with care and knowledge of the assay methods employed.
In current clinical practice, whole blood levels are monitored using immunoassay methods.
The relationship between tacrolimus trough levels (C24) and systemic exposure (AUC 0-24) is similar between the two formulations Advagraf and Prograf.
Blood trough levels of tacrolimus should be monitored during the post-transplantation period.
Blood trough levels for Advagraf should be drawn approximately 24 hours post-dosing, just prior to the next dose.
Frequent trough level monitoring in the initial two weeks post transplantation is recommended, 18 followed by periodic monitoring during maintenance therapy.
Blood trough levels of tacrolimus should also be monitored following conversion from Prograf to Advagraf, dose adjustment, changes in the immunosuppressive regimen, or co-administration of substances which may alter tacrolimus whole blood concentrations (see section 4.5).
The frequency of blood level monitoring should be based on clinical needs.
As Advagraf is a medicinal product with low clearance, adjustments to the Advagraf dose regimen may take several days before steady state is achieved.
Clinical study analysis suggests that the majority of patients can be successfully managed if tacrolimus blood trough levels are maintained below 20 ng/ ml.
It is necessary to consider the clinical condition of the patient when interpreting whole blood levels.
In clinical practice, whole blood trough levels have generally been in the range 5 - 20 ng/ ml in liver transplant recipients and 10 - 20 ng/ ml in kidney and heart transplant patients in the early post- transplant period.
During subsequent maintenance therapy, blood concentrations have generally been in the range of 5 - 15 ng/ ml in liver, kidney and heart transplant recipients.
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to tacrolimus or other macrolides or to any of the excipients.
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Medication errors, including inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised substitution of immediate- or prolonged-release tacrolimus formulations, have been observed.
This has led to serious adverse events, including graft rejection, or other side effects which could be a consequence of either under- or over- exposure to tacrolimus.
Patients should be maintained on a single formulation of tacrolimus with the corresponding daily dosing regimen; alterations in formulation or regimen should only take place under the close supervision of a transplant specialist (see sections 4.2 and 4.8).
There is limited experience in non-Caucasian patients and patients at elevated immunological risk (e. g. retransplantation, evidence of panel reactive antibodies (PRA)).
For treatment of allograft rejection resistant to treatment with other immunosuppressive medicinal products in adult patients clinical data are not yet available for the prolonged-release formulation Advagraf.
For prophylaxis of transplant rejection in adult heart allograft recipients and for paediatric allograft recipients clinical data are not yet available for the prolonged-release formulation Advagraf.
During the initial post-transplant period, monitoring of the following parameters should be undertaken on a routine basis: blood pressure, ECG, neurological and visual status, fasting blood glucose levels, electrolytes (particularly potassium), liver and renal function tests, haematology parameters, coagulation values, and plasma protein determinations.
If clinically relevant changes are seen, adjustments of the immunosuppressive regimen should be considered.
Herbal preparations containing St.
John’ s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) or other herbal preparations should be avoided when taking Advagraf due to the risk of interactions that lead to decrease in blood concentrations of tacrolimus and reduced clinical effect of tacrolimus (see section 4.5).
Since levels of tacrolimus in blood may significantly change during diarrhoea episodes, extra monitoring of tacrolimus concentrations is recommended during episodes of diarrhoea.
The combined administration of ciclosporin and tacrolimus should be avoided and care should be taken when administering tacrolimus to patients who have previously received ciclosporin (see sections 4.2 and 4.5).
Ventricular hypertrophy or hypertrophy of the septum, reported as cardiomyopathies, have been observed in Prograf treated patients on rare occasions and may therefore also occur with Advagraf.
Most cases have been reversible, occurring with tacrolimus blood trough concentrations much higher than the recommended maximum levels.
Other factors observed to increase the risk of these clinical 19 conditions included pre-existing heart disease, corticosteroid usage, hypertension, renal or hepatic dysfunction, infections, fluid overload, and oedema.
Accordingly, high-risk patients receiving substantial immunosuppression should be monitored, using such procedures as echocardiography or ECG pre- and post-transplant (e. g. initially at 3 months and then at 9 -12 months).
If abnormalities develop, dose reduction of Advagraf therapy, or change of treatment to another immunosuppressive agent should be considered.
Tacrolimus may prolong the QT interval but at this time lacks substantial evidence for causing Torsades de Pointes.
Caution should be exercised in patients with diagnosed or suspected Congenital Long QT Syndrome.
Patients treated with tacrolimus have been reported to develop EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders.
A combination of immunosuppressives such as antilymphocytic antibodies given concomitantly increases the risk of EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders.
EBV-Viral Capsid Antigen (VCA)-negative patients have been reported to have an increased risk of developing lymphoproliferative disorders.
Therefore, in this patient group, EBV-VCA serology should be ascertained before starting treatment with Advagraf.
During treatment, careful monitoring with EBV- PCR is recommended.
Positive EBV-PCR may persist for months and is per se not indicative of lymphoproliferative disease or lymphoma.
Patients treated with immunosuppressants, including Advagraf are at increased risk for opportunistic infections (bacterial, fungal, viral and protozoal).
Among these conditions are BK virus associated nephropathy and JC virus associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
These infections are often related to a high total immunosuppressive burden and may lead to serious or fatal conditions that physicians should consider in the differential diagnosis in immunosuppressed patients with deteriorating renal function or neurological symptoms.
As with other immunosuppressive agents, owing to the potential risk of malignant skin changes, exposure to sunlight and UV light should be limited by wearing protective clothing and using a sunscreen with a high protection factor.
As with other potent immunosuppressive compounds, the risk of secondary cancer is unknown (see section 4.8).
Patients treated with tacrolimus have been reported to develop posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES).
If patients taking tacrolimus present with symptoms indicating PRES such as headache, altered mental status, seizures, and visual disturbances, a radiological procedure (e. g.
MRI) should be performed.
If PRES is diagnosed, adequate blood pressure and seizure control and immediate discontinuation of systemic tacrolimus is advised.
Most patients completely recover after appropriate measures are taken.
As Advagraf prolonged-release capsules contain lactose, special care should be taken in patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Metabolic interactions Systemically available tacrolimus is metabolised by hepatic CYP3A4.
There is also evidence of gastrointestinal metabolism by CYP3A4 in the intestinal wall.
Concomitant use of medicinal products or herbal remedies known to inhibit or induce CYP3A4 may affect the metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby increase or decrease tacrolimus blood levels.
It is therefore recommended to monitor tacrolimus blood levels whenever substances which have the potential to alter CYP3A metabolism are used concomitantly and to adjust the tacrolimus dose as appropriate in order to maintain similar tacrolimus exposure (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Inhibitors of metabolism Clinically the following substances have been shown to increase tacrolimus blood levels:
Strong interactions have been observed with antifungal agents such as ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole and voriconazole, the macrolide antibiotic erythromycin or HIV protease inhibitors (e. g.
20 ritonavir).
Concomitant use of these substances may require decreased tacrolimus doses in nearly all patients.
Pharmacokinetics studies have indicated that the increase in blood levels is mainly a result of increase in oral bioavailability of tacrolimus owing to the inhibition of gastrointestinal metabolism.
Effect on hepatic clearance is less pronounced.
Weaker interactions have been observed with clotrimazole, clarithromycin, josamycin, nifedipine, nicardipine, diltiazem, verapamil, danazol, ethinylestradiol, omeprazole and nefazodone.
In vitro the following substances have been shown to be potential inhibitors of tacrolimus metabolism: bromocriptine, cortisone, dapsone, ergotamine, gestodene, lidocaine, mephenytoin, miconazole, midazolam, nilvadipine, norethindrone, quinidine, tamoxifen, (triacetyl)oleandomycin.
Grapefruit juice has been reported to increase the blood level of tacrolimus and should therefore be avoided.
Lansoprazol and ciclosporin may potentially inhibit CYP3A4-mediated metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations.
Inducers of metabolism Clinically the following substances have been shown to decrease tacrolimus blood levels:
Strong interactions have been observed with rifampicin, phenytoin, St.
John’ s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) which may require increased tacrolimus doses in almost all patients.
Clinically significant interactions have also been observed with phenobarbital.
Maintenance doses of corticosteroids have been shown to reduce tacrolimus blood levels.
High dose prednisolone or methylprednisolone administered for the treatment of acute rejection have the potential to increase or decrease tacrolimus blood levels.
Carbamazepine, metamizole and isoniazid have the potential to decrease tacrolimus concentrations.
Effect of tacrolimus on the metabolism of other medicinal products Tacrolimus is a known CYP3A4 inhibitor; thus concomitant use of tacrolimus with medicinal products known to be metabolised by CYP3A4 may affect the metabolism of such medicinal products.
The half-life of ciclosporin is prolonged when tacrolimus is given concomitantly.
In addition, synergistic/ additive nephrotoxic effects can occur.
For these reasons, the combined administration of ciclosporin and tacrolimus is not recommended and care should be taken when administering tacrolimus to patients who have previously received ciclosporin (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Tacrolimus has been shown to increase the blood level of phenytoin.
As tacrolimus may reduce the clearance of steroid-based contraceptives leading to increased hormone exposure, particular care should be exercised when deciding upon contraceptive measures.
Limited knowledge of interactions between tacrolimus and statins is available.
Clinical data suggest that the pharmacokinetics of statins are largely unaltered by the co-administration of tacrolimus.
Animal data have shown that tacrolimus could potentially decrease the clearance and increase the half- life of pentobarbital and antipyrine.
Other potential interactions that may increase systemic exposure of tacrolimus Prokinetic agents such as metoclopramide and cisapride.
Cimetidine.
Magnesium-aluminum-hydroxide.
Other interactions which have led to clinically detrimental effects Concurrent use of tacrolimus with medicinal products known to have nephrotoxic or neurotoxic effects may increase these effects (e. g., aminoglycosides, gyrase inhibitors, vancomycin, cotrimoxazole, NSAIDs, ganciclovir or aciclovir).
Enhanced nephrotoxicity has been observed following the administration of amphotericin B and ibuprofen in conjunction with tacrolimus.
As tacrolimus treatment may be associated with hyperkalaemia, or may increase pre-existing hyperkalaemia, high potassium intake, or potassium-sparing diuretics (e. g., amiloride, triamterene, or spironolactone) should be avoided.
Immunosuppressants may affect the response to vaccination and vaccination during treatment with tacrolimus may be less effective.
The use of live attenuated vaccines should be avoided.
Protein binding considerations 21 Tacrolimus is extensively bound to plasma proteins.
Possible interactions with other medicinal products known to have high affinity for plasma proteins should be considered (e. g., NSAIDs, oral anticoagulants, or oral antidiabetics).
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Human data show that tacrolimus crosses the placenta.
Limited data from organ transplant recipients show no evidence of an increased risk of adverse events on the course and outcome of pregnancy under tacrolimus treatment compared with other immunosuppressive medicinal products.
To date, no other relevant epidemiological data are available.
Tacrolimus treatment can be considered in pregnant women, when there is no safer alternative and when the perceived benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
In case of in utero exposure, monitoring of the newborn for the potential adverse events of tacrolimus is recommended (in particular effects on the kidneys). There is a risk for premature delivery (< 37 week) as well as for hyperkalaemia in the newborn (incidence 8 of 111 neonates, i. e.
7.2%) which, however normalises spontaneously.
In rats and rabbits, tacrolimus caused embryofoetal toxicity at doses which demonstrated maternal toxicity (see section 5.3).
Tacrolimus affected fertility in male rats (see section 5.3).
Lactation Human data demonstrate that tacrolimus is excreted in breast milk.
As detrimental effects on the newborn cannot be excluded, women should not breast-feed whilst receiving Advagraf.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
Tacrolimus may cause visual and neurological disturbances.
This effect may be enhanced if Advagraf is administered in association with alcohol.
4.8 Undesirable effects
The adverse reaction profile associated with immunosuppressive agents is often difficult to establish owing to the underlying disease and the concurrent use of multiple medications.
Many of the adverse reactions stated below are reversible and/ or respond to dose reduction.
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness.
Adverse reactions are listed below in descending order by frequency of occurrence: very common (≥ 1/ 10); common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10); uncommon (≥ 1/ 1,000 to < 1/ 100); rare (≥ 1/ 10,000 to < 1/ 1,000); very rare (< 1/ 10,000), not known (cannot be estimated from the available data).
Cardiac disorders common: uncommon:
ischaemic coronary artery disorders, tachycardia ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac arrest, heart failures, cardiomyopathies, ventricular hypertrophy, supraventricular arrhythmias, palpitations, ECG investigations abnormal, heart rate and pulse investigations abnormal
rare: very rare:
pericardial effusion echocardiogram abnormal
Blood and lymphatic system disorders common:
anaemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, red blood cell analyses abnormal
uncommon:
coagulopathies, coagulation and bleeding analyses abnormal, pancytopenia, neutropenia
rare:
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hypoprothrombinaemia
Nervous system disorders very common: common:
tremor, headache seizures, disturbances in consciousness, paraesthesias and dysaesthesias, peripheral neuropathies, dizziness, writing impaired, nervous system disorders 22
uncommon:
coma, central nervous system haemorrhages and cerebrovascular accidents, paralysis and paresis, encephalopathy, speech and language abnormalities, amnesia
rare: very rare:
hypertonia myasthenia
Eye disorders
common: uncommon: rare:
vision blurred, photophobia, eye disorders cataract blindness
Ear and labyrinth disorders common: uncommon: rare: very rare:
tinnitus hypoacusis deafness neurosensory hearing impaired
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders common:
dyspnoea, parenchymal lung disorders, pleural effusion, pharyngitis, cough, nasal congestion and inflammations
uncommon: rare:
respiratory failures, respiratory tract disorders, asthma acute respiratory distress syndrome
Gastrointestinal disorders very common: common:
diarrhoea, nausea gastrointestinal inflammatory conditions, gastrointestinal ulceration and perforation, gastrointestinal haemorrhages, stomatitis and ulceration, ascites, vomiting, gastrointestinal and abdominal pains, dyspeptic signs and symptoms, constipation, flatulence, bloating and distension, loose stools, gastrointestinal signs and symptoms
uncommon:
ileus paralytic, peritonitis, acute and chronic pancreatitis, blood amylase increased, gastrooesophageal reflux disease, impaired gastric emptying
rare:
subileus, pancreatic pseudocyst
Renal and urinary disorders very common: common:
renal impairment renal failure, renal failure acute, oliguria, renal tubular necrosis, nephropathy toxic, urinary abnormalities, bladder and urethral symptoms
uncommon: very rare:
anuria, haemolytic uraemic syndrome nephropathy, cystitis haemorrhagic
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders common: uncommon: rare: very rare:
pruritus, rash, alopecias, acne, sweating increased dermatitis, photosensitivity toxic epidermal necrolysis (Lyell’ s syndrome) Stevens Johnson syndrome
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders common: uncommon:
arthralgia, muscle cramps, pain in limb, back pain joint disorders
Endocrine disorders rare: hirsutism
Metabolism and nutrition disorders very common: common:
hyperglycaemic conditions, diabetes mellitus, hyperkalaemia hypomagnesaemia, hypophosphataemia, hypokalaemia, hypocalcaemia, hyponatraemia, fluid overload, hyperuricaemia, appetite decreased, anorexia,
23 metabolic acidoses, hyperlipidaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia, other electrolyte abnormalities
uncommon:
dehydration, hypoproteinaemia, hyperphosphataemia, hypoglycaemia
Infections and infestations As is well known for other potent immunosuppressive agents, patients receiving tacrolimus are frequently at increased risk for infections (viral, bacterial, fungal, protozoal).
The course of pre- existing infections may be aggravated.
Both generalised and localised infections can occur.
Cases of BK virus associated nephropathy, as well as cases of JC virus associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), have been reported in patients treated with immunosuppressants, including Advagraf.
Injury, poisoning and procedural complications common:
primary graft dysfunction
Medication errors, including inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised substitution of immediate- or prolonged-release tacrolimus formulations, have been observed.
A number of associated cases of transplant rejection have been reported (frequency cannot be estimated from available data).
Neoplasms benign, malignant and unspecified (incl cysts and polyps)
Patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy are at increased risk of developing malignancies.
Benign as well as malignant neoplasms including EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders and skin malignancies have been reported in association with tacrolimus treatment.
Vascular disorders very common: common:
hypertension haemorrhage, thromboembolic and ischaemic events, peripheral vascular disorders, vascular hypotensive disorders
uncommon:
infarction, venous thrombosis deep limb, shock
General disorders and administration site conditions common:
asthenic conditions, febrile disorders, oedema, pain and discomfort, blood alkaline phosphatase increased, weight increased, body temperature perception disturbed
uncommon:
multi-organ failure, influenza like illness, temperature intolerance, chest pressure sensation, feeling jittery, feeling abnormal, blood lactate dehydrogenase increased, weight decreased
rare: very rare:
thirst, fall, chest tightness, mobility decreased, ulcer fat tissue increased
Immune system disorders Allergic and anaphylactoid reactions have been observed in patients receiving tacrolimus (see section 4.4).
Hepatobiliary disorders common:
hepatic enzymes and function abnormalities, cholestasis and jaundice, hepatocellular damage and hepatitis, cholangitis
rare: very rare:
hepatitic artery thrombosis, venoocclusive liver disease hepatic failure, bile duct stenosis
Reproductive system and breast disorders uncommon:
dysmenorrhoea and uterine bleeding
Psychiatric disorders very common: common:
insomnia anxiety symptoms, confusion and disorientation, depression, depressed mood, mood disorders and disturbances, nightmare, hallucination, mental disorders
uncommon:
4.9 Overdose
psychotic disorder 24
Experience with overdose is limited.
Several cases of accidental overdose have been reported with tacrolimus; symptoms have included tremor, headache, nausea and vomiting, infections, urticaria, lethargy, increased blood urea nitrogen and elevated serum creatinine concentrations, and increase in alanine aminotransferase levels.
No specific antidote to tacrolimus therapy is available.
If overdose occurs, general supportive measures and symptomatic treatment should be conducted.
Based on its high molecular weight, poor aqueous solubility, and extensive erythrocyte and plasma protein binding, it is anticipated that tacrolimus will not be dialysable.
In isolated patients with very high plasma levels, haemofiltration or -diafiltration have been effective in reducing toxic concentrations.
In cases of oral intoxication, gastric lavage and/ or the use of adsorbents (such as activated charcoal) may be helpful, if used shortly after intake.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Calcineurin inhibitors, ATC code:
L04AD02
Mechanism of action and pharmacodynamic effects At the molecular level, the effects of tacrolimus appear to be mediated by binding to a cytosolic protein (FKBP12) which is responsible for the intracellular accumulation of the compound.
The FKBP12-tacrolimus complex specifically and competitively binds to and inhibits calcineurin, leading to a calcium-dependent inhibition of T-cell signal transduction pathways, thereby preventing transcription of a discrete set of lymphokine genes.
Tacrolimus is a highly potent immunosuppressive agent and has proven activity in both in vitro and in vivo experiments.
In particular, tacrolimus inhibits the formation of cytotoxic lymphocytes, which are mainly responsible for graft rejection.
Tacrolimus suppresses T-cell activation and T-helper-cell dependent B-cell proliferation, as well as the formation of lymphokines (such as interleukins-2, -3, and γ -interferon) and the expression of the interleukin-2 receptor.
Results from clinical trials performed with once-daily tacrolimus Advagraf Liver transplantation The efficacy and safety of Advagraf and Prograf, both in combination with corticosteroids, was compared in 471 de novo liver transplant recipients.
The event rate of biopsy confirmed acute rejection within the first 24 weeks after transplantation was 32.6% in the Advagraf group (N=237) and 29.3% in the Prograf group (N=234).
The treatment difference (Advagraf – Prograf) was 3.3% (95% confidence interval [-5.7%, 12.3%]). The 12-month patient survival rates were 89.2% for Advagraf and 90.8% for Prograf; in the Advagraf arm 25 patients died (14 female, 11 male) and in the Prograf arm 24 patients died (5 female, 19 male).
12-month graft survival was 85.3% for Advagraf and 85.6% for Prograf.
Kidney transplantation The efficacy and safety of Advagraf and Prograf, both in combination with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and corticosteroids, was compared in 667 de novo kidney transplant recipients.
The event rate for biopsy-confirmed acute rejection within the first 24 weeks after transplantation was 18.6% in the Advagraf group (N=331) and 14.9% in the Prograf group (N=336).
The treatment difference (Advagraf-Prograf) was 3.8% (95% confidence interval [-2.1%, 9.6%]).
The 12-month patient survival rates were 96.9% for Advagraf and 97.5% for Prograf; in the Advagraf arm 10 patients died (3 female, 7 male) and in the Prograf arm 8 patients died (3 female, 5 male).
12-month graft survival was 91.5% for Advagraf and 92.8% for Prograf.
25 The efficacy and safety of Prograf, ciclosporin and Advagraf, all in combination with basiliximab antibody induction, MMF and corticosteroids, was compared in 638 de novo kidney transplant recipients.
The incidence of efficacy failure at 12 months (defined as death, graft loss, biopsy- confirmed acute rejection, or lost to follow-up) was 14.0% in the Advagraf group (N=214), 15.1% in the Prograf group (N=212) and 17.0% in the ciclosporin group (N=212).
The treatment difference was -3.0% (Advagraf-ciclosporin) (95.2% confidence interval [-9.9%, 4.0%]) for Advagraf vs. ciclosporin and -1.9% (Prograf-ciclosporin) (95.2% confidence interval [-8.9%, 5.2%]) for Prograf vs. ciclosporin.
The 12-month patient survival rates were 98.6% for Advagraf, 95.7% for Prograf and 97.6% for ciclosporin; in the Advagraf arm 3 patients died (all male), in the Prograf arm 10 patients died (3 female, 7 male) and in the ciclosporin arm 6 patients died (3 female, 3 male).
12-month graft survival was 96.7% for Advagraf, 92.9% for Prograf and 95.7% for ciclosporin.
Results from published data of tacrolimus administered twice daily as Prograf capsules in other primary organ transplantation Prograf has evolved into an accepted treatment as primary immunosuppressive medicinal product following pancreas, lung and intestinal transplantation.
In prospective published studies oral Prograf was investigated as primary immunosuppressant in approximately 175 patients following lung, 475 patients following pancreas and 630 patients following intestinal transplantation.
Overall, the safety profile of oral Prograf in these published studies appeared to be similar to what was reported in the large studies, where Prograf was used as primary treatment in liver, kidney and heart transplantation.
Efficacy results of the largest studies in each indication are summarised below.
Lung transplantation The interim analysis of a recent multicentre study using oral Prograf discussed 110 patients who underwent 1:1 randomisation to either tacrolimus or ciclosporin.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.01 to 0.03 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.05 to 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
A lower incidence of acute rejection episodes for tacrolimus- versus ciclosporin-treated patients (11.5% versus 22.6%) and a lower incidence of chronic rejection, the bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (2.86% versus 8.57%), was reported within the first year after transplantation.
The 1-year patient survival rate was 80.8% in the tacrolimus and 83% in the ciclosporin group (Treede et al., 3rd ICI San Diego, US, 2004; Abstract 22).
Another randomised study included 66 patients on tacrolimus versus 67 patients on ciclosporin.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.025 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.15 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 10 to 20 ng/ ml.
The 1-year patient survival was 83% in the tacrolimus and 71% in the ciclosporin group, the 2-year survival rates were 76% and 66%, respectively.
Acute rejection episodes per 100 patient-days were numerically fewer in the tacrolimus (0.85 episodes) than in the ciclosporin group (1.09 episodes).
Obliterative bronchiolitis developed in 21.7% of patients in the tacrolimus group compared with 38.0% of patients in the ciclosporin group (p = 0.025).
Significantly more ciclosporin-treated patients (n = 13) required a switch to tacrolimus than tacrolimus-treated patients to ciclosporin (n = 2) (p = 0.02) (Keenan et al., Ann Thoracic Surg 1995; 60:580).
In an additional two-centre study, 26 patients were randomised to the tacrolimus versus 24 patients to the ciclosporin group.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.05 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.1 to 0.3 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 12 to 15 ng/ ml.
The 1-year survival rates were 73.1% in the tacrolimus versus 79.2% in the ciclosporin group.
Freedom from acute rejection was higher in the tacrolimus group at 6 months (57.7% versus 45.8%) and at 1 year after lung transplantation (50% versus 33.3%) (Treede et al., J Heart Lung Transplant 2001; 20:511).
The three studies demonstrated similar survival rates.
The incidences of acute rejection were numerically lower with tacrolimus in all three studies and one of the studies reported a significantly lower incidence of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome with tacrolimus.
Pancreas transplantation A multicentre study using oral Prograf included 205 patients undergoing simultaneous pancreas- kidney transplantation who were randomised to tacrolimus (n = 103) or to ciclosporin (n = 102).
The initial oral per protocol dose of tacrolimus was 0.2 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 8 to 15 ng/ ml by Day 5 and 5 to 10 ng/ mL after Month 6.
Pancreas survival at 1 year was significantly superior with tacrolimus:
91.3% versus 74.5% with ciclosporin (p < 0.0005), whereas renal graft survival was similar in both groups.
In total 34 patients switched treatment from
26 ciclosporin to tacrolimus, whereas only 6 tacrolimus patients required alternative therapy (Bechstein et al., Transplantation 2004; 77:1221).
Intestinal transplantation Published clinical experience from a single centre on the use of oral Prograf for primary treatment following intestinal transplantation showed that the actuarial survival rate of 155 patients (65 intestine alone, 75 liver and intestine, and 25 multivisceral) receiving tacrolimus and prednisone was 75% at 1 year, 54% at 5 years, and 42% at 10 years.
In the early years the initial oral dose of tacrolimus was 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
Results continuously improved with increasing experience over the course of 11 years.
A variety of innovations, such as techniques for early detection of Epstein-Barr (EBV) and CMV infections, bone marrow augmentation, the adjunct use of the interleukin-2 antagonist daclizumab, lower initial tacrolimus doses with target trough levels of 10 to 15 ng/ ml, and most recently allograft irradiation were considered to have contributed to improved results in this indication over time (Abu- Elmagd et al., Ann Surg 2001; 234:404).
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption In man tacrolimus has been shown to be able to be absorbed throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
Available tacrolimus is generally rapidly absorbed.
Advagraf is a prolonged-release formulation of tacrolimus resulting in an extended oral absorption profile with an average time to Cmax of approximately 2 hours.
Absorption is variable and the mean oral bioavailability of tacrolimus (investigated with the Prograf formulation) is in the range of 20% - 25% (individual range in adult patients 6% - 43%).
The oral bioavailability of Advagraf was reduced when it was administered after a meal.
Both the rate and extent of absorption of Advagraf were reduced when administered with food.
Bile flow does not influence the absorption of tacrolimus and therefore treatment with Advagraf may commence orally.
A strong correlation exists between AUC and whole blood trough levels at steady-state for Advagraf.
Monitoring of whole blood trough levels therefore provides a good estimate of systemic exposure.
Distribution and elimination In man, the disposition of tacrolimus after intravenous infusion may be described as biphasic.
In the systemic circulation, tacrolimus binds strongly to erythrocytes resulting in an approximate 20:1 distribution ratio of whole blood/ plasma concentrations.
In plasma, tacrolimus is highly bound (> 98.8%) to plasma proteins, mainly to serum albumin and α -1-acid glycoprotein.
Tacrolimus is extensively distributed in the body.
The steady-state volume of distribution based on plasma concentrations is approximately 1300 l (healthy subjects).
Corresponding data based on whole blood averaged 47.6 l.
Tacrolimus is a low-clearance substance.
In healthy subjects, the average total body clearance estimated from whole blood concentrations was 2.25 l/ h.
In adult liver, kidney and heart transplant patients, values of 4.1 l/ h, 6.7 l/ h and 3.9 l/ h, respectively, have been observed.
Factors such as low haematocrit and protein levels, which result in an increase in the unbound fraction of tacrolimus, or corticosteroid-induced increased metabolism are considered to be responsible for the higher clearance rates observed following transplantation.
The half-life of tacrolimus is long and variable.
In healthy subjects, the mean half-life in whole blood is approximately 43 hours.
Metabolism and biotransformation Tacrolimus is widely metabolised in the liver, primarily by the cytochrome P450-3A4.
Tacrolimus is also considerably metabolised in the intestinal wall.
There are several metabolites identified.
Only one of these has been shown in vitro to have immunosuppressive activity similar to that of tacrolimus.
The other metabolites have only weak or no immunosuppressive activity.
In systemic circulation only one of the inactive metabolites is present at low concentrations.
Therefore, metabolites do not contribute to the pharmacological activity of tacrolimus.
Excretion
27 Following intravenous and oral administration of 14C-labelled tacrolimus, most of the radioactivity was eliminated in the faeces.
Approximately 2% of the radioactivity was eliminated in the urine.
Less than 1% of unchanged tacrolimus was detected in the urine and faeces, indicating that tacrolimus is almost completely metabolised prior to elimination: bile being the principal route of elimination.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
The kidneys and the pancreas were the primary organs affected in toxicity studies performed in rats and baboons.
In rats, tacrolimus caused toxic effects to the nervous system and the eyes.
Reversible cardiotoxic effects were observed in rabbits following intravenous administration of tacrolimus.
Embryofoetal toxicity was observed in rats and rabbits and was limited to doses that caused significant toxicity in maternal animals.
In rats, female reproductive function including birth was impaired at toxic doses and the offspring showed reduced birth weights, viability and growth.
A negative effect of tacrolimus on male fertility in the form of reduced sperm counts and motility was observed in rats.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Capsule content:
Hypromellose Ethylcellulose Lactose monohydrate Magnesium stearate.
Capsule shell:
Titanium dioxide (E 171) Yellow iron oxide (E 172) Red iron oxide (E 172) Gelatin.
Printing ink (Opacode S-1-15083):
Shellac Lecithin (soya) Simethicone Red iron oxide (E 172) Hydroxypropyl Cellulose.
6.2 Incompatibilities
Tacrolimus is not compatible with PVC.
Tubing, syringes and other equipment used to prepare a suspension of Advagraf capsule contents should not contain PVC.
6.3 Shelf life
3 years After opening the aluminium wrapper:
1 year
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Store in the original package and in a dry place in order to protect from moisture.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
28 Transparent PVC/ PVDC aluminium blister wrapped in an aluminium pouch with a desiccant.
Ten capsules per blister.
Pack sizes:
30, 50, 60 and 100 prolonged-release capsules.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
No special requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 2353 EW Leiderdorp Netherlands
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 003 EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 004 EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 005 EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 006
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
23/ 04/ 2007
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
{MM/ YYYY}
29 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each prolonged-release capsule contains 5 mg of tacrolimus.
Excipient:
Each prolonged-release capsule contains 536.4 mg of lactose monohydrate
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Prolonged-release hard capsules.
Greyish red-orange gelatin capsules imprinted in red with “ 5 mg” on the greyish red capsule cap and ” 687” on the orange capsule body, containing white powder.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Prophylaxis of transplant rejection in adult kidney or liver allograft recipients.
Treatment of allograft rejection resistant to treatment with other immunosuppressive medicinal products in adult patients.
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Advagraf is a once-a-day oral formulation of tacrolimus.
Advagraf therapy requires careful monitoring by adequately qualified and equipped personnel.
The medicinal product should only be prescribed, and changes in immunosuppressive therapy initiated, by physicians experienced in immunosuppressive therapy and the management of transplant patients.
Inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised switching of immediate- or prolonged-release formulations of tacrolimus is unsafe.
This can lead to graft rejection or increased incidence of side effects, including under- or overimmunosuppression, due to clinically relevant differences in systemic exposure to tacrolimus.
Patients should be maintained on a single formulation of tacrolimus with the corresponding daily dosing regimen; alterations in formulation or regimen should only take place under the close supervision of a transplant specialist (see sections 4.4 and 4.8).
Following conversion to any alternative formulation, therapeutic drug monitoring must be performed and dose adjustments made to ensure that systemic exposure to tacrolimus is maintained.
General considerations The recommended initial doses presented below are intended to act solely as a guideline.
Advagraf is routinely administered in conjunction with other immunosuppressive agents in the initial post- operative period.
The dose may vary depending upon the immunosuppressive regimen chosen.
Advagraf dosing should primarily be based on clinical assessments of rejection and tolerability in each patient individually aided by blood level monitoring (see below under “ Target whole blood trough concentration recommendations”).
If clinical signs of rejection are apparent, alteration of the immunosuppressive regimen should be considered.
In stable patients converted from Prograf (twice daily) to Advagraf (once daily) on a 1:1 (mg: mg) total daily dose basis the systemic exposure to tacrolimus (AUC0-24) for Advagraf was approximately 10% lower than that for Prograf.
The relationship between tacrolimus trough levels (C24) and systemic 30 exposure (AUC0-24) for Advagraf is similar to that of Prograf.
When converting from Prograf capsules to Advagraf tacrolimus trough levels should be measured prior to conversion and within two weeks after conversion.
Dose adjustments should be made to ensure that similar systemic exposure is maintained.
In de novo kidney and liver transplant patients AUC0-24 of tacrolimus for Advagraf on Day 1 was 30% and 50% lower respectively, when compared with that for Prograf at equivalent doses.
By Day 4, systemic exposure as measured by trough levels is similar for both kidney and liver transplant patients with both formulations.
Careful and frequent monitoring of tacrolimus trough levels is recommended in the first two weeks post-transplant with Advagraf to ensure adequate drug exposure in the immediate post-transplant period.
As tacrolimus is a substance with low clearance, adjustments to the Advagraf dose regimen may take several days before steady state is achieved.
In patients unable to take oral medicinal products during the immediate post-transplant period, tacrolimus therapy can be initiated intravenously (Prograf 5 mg/ ml Concentrate for Infusion) at a dose approximately 1/ 5th of the recommended oral dose for that indication.
Method of administration It is recommended that the oral daily dose of Advagraf be administered once daily in the morning.
Advagraf prolonged-release capsules should be taken immediately following removal from the blister.
Patients should be advised not to swallow the desiccant.
The capsules should be swallowed with fluid (preferably water).
Advagraf should generally be administered on an empty stomach or at least 1 hour before or 2 to 3 hours after a meal, to achieve maximal absorption (see section 5.2).
A forgotten morning dose should be taken as soon as possible on the same day.
A double dose should not be taken on the next morning.
Duration of dosing To suppress graft rejection, immunosuppression must be maintained; consequently, no limit to the duration of oral therapy can be given.
Dose recommendations - Kidney transplantation Prophylaxis of transplant rejection Oral Advagraf therapy should commence at a dose of 0.20 - 0.30 mg/ kg/ day administered once daily in the morning.
Administration should commence within 24 hours after the completion of surgery.
Dose adjustment during post-transplant period Advagraf doses are usually reduced in the post-transplant period.
It is possible in some cases to withdraw concomitant immunosuppressive therapy, leading to Advagraf monotherapy.
Post-transplant improvement in the condition of the patient may alter the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and may necessitate further dose adjustments.
Dose recommendations - Liver transplantation Prophylaxis of transplant rejection Oral Advagraf therapy should commence at a dose of 0.10 - 0.20 mg/ kg/ day administered once daily in the morning.
Administration should commence approximately 12-18 hours after the completion of surgery.
Dose adjustment during post-transplant period Advagraf doses are usually reduced in the post-transplant period.
It is possible in some cases to withdraw concomitant immunosuppressive therapy, leading to Advagraf monotherapy.
Post-transplant improvement in the condition of the patient may alter the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and may necessitate further dose adjustments.
Dose recommendations – Conversion of Prograf treated patients to Advagraf Allograft transplant patients maintained on twice daily Prograf capsules dosing requiring conversion to once daily Advagraf should be converted on a 1:1 (mg: mg) total daily dose basis.
Advagraf should be administered in the morning.
Following conversion, tacrolimus trough levels should be monitored and if necessary dose adjustments made to maintain similar systemic exposure.
31 Dose recommendations - Rejection therapy Increased doses of tacrolimus, supplemental corticosteroid therapy, and introduction of short courses of mono-/ polyclonal antibodies have all been used to manage rejection episodes.
If signs of toxicity are noted (e. g. pronounced adverse reactions - see section 4.8) the dose of Advagraf may need to be reduced.
For information on conversion from ciclosporin to Advagraf, see below under “ Dose adjustments in specific patient populations”.
Kidney and liver transplantation For conversion from other immunosuppressants to once daily Advagraf, treatment should begin with the initial oral dose recommended in kidney and liver transplantation respectively for prophylaxis of transplant rejection.
Heart transplantation In adult patients converted to Advagraf, an initial oral dose of 0.15 mg/ kg/ day should be administered once daily in the morning.
Other allografts transplantation Although there is no clinical experience with Advagraf in lung-transplanted, pancreas-transplanted and intestine-transplanted patients, Prograf has been used in lung-transplanted patients at an initial oral dose of 0.10 - 0.15 mg/ kg/ day, in pancreas-transplanted patients at an initial oral dose of 0.2 mg/ kg/ day and in intestinal transplantation at an initial oral dose of 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
Dose adjustments in specific patient populations Patients with liver impairment Dose reduction may be necessary in patients with severe liver impairment in order to maintain the blood trough levels within the recommended target range.
Patients with kidney impairment As the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus are unaffected by renal function, no dose adjustment should be required.
However, owing to the nephrotoxic potential of tacrolimus careful monitoring of renal function is recommended (including serial serum creatinine concentrations, calculation of creatinine clearance and monitoring of urine output).
Race In comparison to Caucasians, black patients may require higher tacrolimus doses to achieve similar trough levels.
Gender There is no evidence that male and female patients require different doses to achieve similar trough levels.
Elderly patients There is no evidence currently available to indicate that dosing should be adjusted in elderly patients.
Conversion from ciclosporin to Advagraf Care should be taken when converting patients from ciclosporin-based to tacrolimus-based therapy (see sections 4.4 and 4.5).
Advagraf therapy should be initiated after considering ciclosporin blood concentrations and the clinical condition of the patient.
Dosing should be delayed in the presence of elevated ciclosporin blood levels.
In practice, tacrolimus-based therapy has been initiated 12 - 24 hours after discontinuation of ciclosporin.
Monitoring of ciclosporin blood levels should be continued following conversion as the clearance of ciclosporin might be affected.
Target whole blood trough concentration recommendations Dosing should primarily be based on clinical assessments of rejection and tolerability in each individual patient aided by whole blood tacrolimus trough level monitoring.
As an aid to optimise dosing, several immunoassays are available for determining tacrolimus concentrations in whole blood.
Comparisons of concentrations from the published literature to individual values in clinical practice should be assessed with care and knowledge of the assay methods employed.
In current clinical practice, whole blood levels are monitored using immunoassay methods.
The relationship between tacrolimus trough levels (C24) and systemic exposure (AUC 0-24) is similar between the two formulations Advagraf and Prograf.
Blood trough levels of tacrolimus should be monitored during the post-transplantation period.
Blood trough levels for Advagraf should be drawn approximately 24 hours post-dosing, just prior to the next dose.
Frequent trough level monitoring in the initial two weeks post transplantation is recommended, 32 followed by periodic monitoring during maintenance therapy.
Blood trough levels of tacrolimus should also be monitored following conversion from Prograf to Advagraf, dose adjustment, changes in the immunosuppressive regimen, or co-administration of substances which may alter tacrolimus whole blood concentrations (see section 4.5).
The frequency of blood level monitoring should be based on clinical needs.
As Advagraf is a medicinal product with low clearance, adjustments to the Advagraf dose regimen may take several days before steady state is achieved.
Clinical study analysis suggests that the majority of patients can be successfully managed if tacrolimus blood trough levels are maintained below 20 ng/ ml.
It is necessary to consider the clinical condition of the patient when interpreting whole blood levels.
In clinical practice, whole blood trough levels have generally been in the range 5 - 20 ng/ ml in liver transplant recipients and 10 - 20 ng/ ml in kidney and heart transplant patients in the early post- transplant period.
During subsequent maintenance therapy, blood concentrations have generally been in the range of 5 - 15 ng/ ml in liver, kidney and heart transplant recipients.
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to tacrolimus or other macrolides or to any of the excipients.
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Medication errors, including inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised substitution of immediate- or prolonged-release tacrolimus formulations, have been observed.
This has led to serious adverse events, including graft rejection, or other side effects which could be a consequence of either under- or over- exposure to tacrolimus.
Patients should be maintained on a single formulation of tacrolimus with the corresponding daily dosing regimen; alterations in formulation or regimen should only take place under the close supervision of a transplant specialist (see sections 4.2 and 4.8).
There is limited experience in non-Caucasian patients and patients at elevated immunological risk (e. g. retransplantation, evidence of panel reactive antibodies (PRA)).
For treatment of allograft rejection resistant to treatment with other immunosuppressive medicinal products in adult patients clinical data are not yet available for the prolonged-release formulation Advagraf.
For prophylaxis of transplant rejection in adult heart allograft recipients and for paediatric allograft recipients clinical data are not yet available for the prolonged-release formulation Advagraf.
During the initial post-transplant period, monitoring of the following parameters should be undertaken on a routine basis: blood pressure, ECG, neurological and visual status, fasting blood glucose levels, electrolytes (particularly potassium), liver and renal function tests, haematology parameters, coagulation values, and plasma protein determinations.
If clinically relevant changes are seen, adjustments of the immunosuppressive regimen should be considered.
Herbal preparations containing St.
John’ s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) or other herbal preparations should be avoided when taking Advagraf due to the risk of interactions that lead to decrease in blood concentrations of tacrolimus and reduced clinical effect of tacrolimus (see section 4.5).
Since levels of tacrolimus in blood may significantly change during diarrhoea episodes, extra monitoring of tacrolimus concentrations is recommended during episodes of diarrhoea.
The combined administration of ciclosporin and tacrolimus should be avoided and care should be taken when administering tacrolimus to patients who have previously received ciclosporin (see sections 4.2 and 4.5).
Ventricular hypertrophy or hypertrophy of the septum, reported as cardiomyopathies, have been observed in Prograf treated patients on rare occasions and may therefore also occur with Advagraf.
Most cases have been reversible, occurring with tacrolimus blood trough concentrations much higher than the recommended maximum levels.
Other factors observed to increase the risk of these clinical 33 conditions included pre-existing heart disease, corticosteroid usage, hypertension, renal or hepatic dysfunction, infections, fluid overload, and oedema.
Accordingly, high-risk patients receiving substantial immunosuppression should be monitored, using such procedures as echocardiography or ECG pre- and post-transplant (e. g. initially at 3 months and then at 9 -12 months).
If abnormalities develop, dose reduction of Advagraf therapy, or change of treatment to another immunosuppressive agent should be considered.
Tacrolimus may prolong the QT interval but at this time lacks substantial evidence for causing Torsades de Pointes.
Caution should be exercised in patients with diagnosed or suspected Congenital Long QT Syndrome.
Patients treated with tacrolimus have been reported to develop EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders.
A combination of immunosuppressives such as antilymphocytic antibodies given concomitantly increases the risk of EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders.
EBV-Viral Capsid Antigen (VCA)-negative patients have been reported to have an increased risk of developing lymphoproliferative disorders.
Therefore, in this patient group, EBV-VCA serology should be ascertained before starting treatment with Advagraf.
During treatment, careful monitoring with EBV- PCR is recommended.
Positive EBV-PCR may persist for months and is per se not indicative of lymphoproliferative disease or lymphoma.
Patients treated with immunosuppressants, including Advagraf are at increased risk for opportunistic infections (bacterial, fungal, viral and protozoal).
Among these conditions are BK virus associated nephropathy and JC virus associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
These infections are often related to a high total immunosuppressive burden and may lead to serious or fatal conditions that physicians should consider in the differential diagnosis in immunosuppressed patients with deteriorating renal function or neurological symptoms.
As with other immunosuppressive agents, owing to the potential risk of malignant skin changes, exposure to sunlight and UV light should be limited by wearing protective clothing and using a sunscreen with a high protection factor.
As with other potent immunosuppressive compounds, the risk of secondary cancer is unknown (see section 4.8).
Patients treated with tacrolimus have been reported to develop posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES).
If patients taking tacrolimus present with symptoms indicating PRES such as headache, altered mental status, seizures, and visual disturbances, a radiological procedure (e. g.
MRI) should be performed.
If PRES is diagnosed, adequate blood pressure and seizure control and immediate discontinuation of systemic tacrolimus is advised.
Most patients completely recover after appropriate measures are taken.
As Advagraf prolonged-release capsules contain lactose, special care should be taken in patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Metabolic interactions Systemically available tacrolimus is metabolised by hepatic CYP3A4.
There is also evidence of gastrointestinal metabolism by CYP3A4 in the intestinal wall.
Concomitant use of medicinal products or herbal remedies known to inhibit or induce CYP3A4 may affect the metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby increase or decrease tacrolimus blood levels.
It is therefore recommended to monitor tacrolimus blood levels whenever substances which have the potential to alter CYP3A metabolism are used concomitantly and to adjust the tacrolimus dose as appropriate in order to maintain similar tacrolimus exposure (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Inhibitors of metabolism Clinically the following substances have been shown to increase tacrolimus blood levels:
Strong interactions have been observed with antifungal agents such as ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole and voriconazole, the macrolide antibiotic erythromycin or HIV protease inhibitors (e. g.
34 ritonavir).
Concomitant use of these substances may require decreased tacrolimus doses in nearly all patients.
Pharmacokinetics studies have indicated that the increase in blood levels is mainly a result of increase in oral bioavailability of tacrolimus owing to the inhibition of gastrointestinal metabolism.
Effect on hepatic clearance is less pronounced.
Weaker interactions have been observed with clotrimazole, clarithromycin, josamycin, nifedipine, nicardipine, diltiazem, verapamil, danazol, ethinylestradiol, omeprazole and nefazodone.
In vitro the following substances have been shown to be potential inhibitors of tacrolimus metabolism: bromocriptine, cortisone, dapsone, ergotamine, gestodene, lidocaine, mephenytoin, miconazole, midazolam, nilvadipine, norethindrone, quinidine, tamoxifen, (triacetyl)oleandomycin.
Grapefruit juice has been reported to increase the blood level of tacrolimus and should therefore be avoided.
Lansoprazol and ciclosporin may potentially inhibit CYP3A4-mediated metabolism of tacrolimus and thereby increase tacrolimus whole blood concentrations.
Inducers of metabolism Clinically the following substances have been shown to decrease tacrolimus blood levels:
Strong interactions have been observed with rifampicin, phenytoin, St.
John’ s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) which may require increased tacrolimus doses in almost all patients.
Clinically significant interactions have also been observed with phenobarbital.
Maintenance doses of corticosteroids have been shown to reduce tacrolimus blood levels.
High dose prednisolone or methylprednisolone administered for the treatment of acute rejection have the potential to increase or decrease tacrolimus blood levels.
Carbamazepine, metamizole and isoniazid have the potential to decrease tacrolimus concentrations.
Effect of tacrolimus on the metabolism of other medicinal products Tacrolimus is a known CYP3A4 inhibitor; thus concomitant use of tacrolimus with medicinal products known to be metabolised by CYP3A4 may affect the metabolism of such medicinal products.
The half-life of ciclosporin is prolonged when tacrolimus is given concomitantly.
In addition, synergistic/ additive nephrotoxic effects can occur.
For these reasons, the combined administration of ciclosporin and tacrolimus is not recommended and care should be taken when administering tacrolimus to patients who have previously received ciclosporin (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Tacrolimus has been shown to increase the blood level of phenytoin.
As tacrolimus may reduce the clearance of steroid-based contraceptives leading to increased hormone exposure, particular care should be exercised when deciding upon contraceptive measures.
Limited knowledge of interactions between tacrolimus and statins is available.
Clinical data suggest that the pharmacokinetics of statins are largely unaltered by the co-administration of tacrolimus.
Animal data have shown that tacrolimus could potentially decrease the clearance and increase the half- life of pentobarbital and antipyrine.
Other potential interactions that may increase systemic exposure of tacrolimus Prokinetic agents such as metoclopramide and cisapride.
Cimetidine.
Magnesium-aluminum-hydroxide.
Other interactions which have led to clinically detrimental effects Concurrent use of tacrolimus with medicinal products known to have nephrotoxic or neurotoxic effects may increase these effects (e. g., aminoglycosides, gyrase inhibitors, vancomycin, cotrimoxazole, NSAIDs, ganciclovir or aciclovir).
Enhanced nephrotoxicity has been observed following the administration of amphotericin B and ibuprofen in conjunction with tacrolimus.
As tacrolimus treatment may be associated with hyperkalaemia, or may increase pre-existing hyperkalaemia, high potassium intake, or potassium-sparing diuretics (e. g., amiloride, triamterene, or spironolactone) should be avoided.
Immunosuppressants may affect the response to vaccination and vaccination during treatment with tacrolimus may be less effective.
The use of live attenuated vaccines should be avoided.
Protein binding considerations 35 Tacrolimus is extensively bound to plasma proteins.
Possible interactions with other medicinal products known to have high affinity for plasma proteins should be considered (e. g., NSAIDs, oral anticoagulants, or oral antidiabetics).
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Human data show that tacrolimus crosses the placenta.
Limited data from organ transplant recipients show no evidence of an increased risk of adverse events on the course and outcome of pregnancy under tacrolimus treatment compared with other immunosuppressive medicinal products.
To date, no other relevant epidemiological data are available.
Tacrolimus treatment can be considered in pregnant women, when there is no safer alternative and when the perceived benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
In case of in utero exposure, monitoring of the newborn for the potential adverse events of tacrolimus is recommended (in particular effects on the kidneys). There is a risk for premature delivery (< 37 week) as well as for hyperkalaemia in the newborn (incidence 8 of 111 neonates, i. e.
7.2%) which, however normalises spontaneously.
In rats and rabbits, tacrolimus caused embryofoetal toxicity at doses which demonstrated maternal toxicity (see section 5.3).
Tacrolimus affected fertility in male rats (see section 5.3).
Lactation Human data demonstrate that tacrolimus is excreted in breast milk.
As detrimental effects on the newborn cannot be excluded, women should not breast-feed whilst receiving Advagraf.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
Tacrolimus may cause visual and neurological disturbances.
This effect may be enhanced if Advagraf is administered in association with alcohol.
4.8 Undesirable effects
The adverse reaction profile associated with immunosuppressive agents is often difficult to establish owing to the underlying disease and the concurrent use of multiple medications.
Many of the adverse reactions stated below are reversible and/ or respond to dose reduction.
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness.
Adverse reactions are listed below in descending order by frequency of occurrence: very common (≥ 1/ 10); common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10); uncommon (≥ 1/ 1,000 to < 1/ 100); rare (≥ 1/ 10,000 to < 1/ 1,000); very rare (< 1/ 10,000), not known (cannot be estimated from the available data).
Cardiac disorders common: uncommon:
ischaemic coronary artery disorders, tachycardia ventricular arrhythmias and cardiac arrest, heart failures, cardiomyopathies, ventricular hypertrophy, supraventricular arrhythmias, palpitations, ECG investigations abnormal, heart rate and pulse investigations abnormal
rare: very rare:
pericardial effusion echocardiogram abnormal
Blood and lymphatic system disorders common:
anaemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, red blood cell analyses abnormal
uncommon:
coagulopathies, coagulation and bleeding analyses abnormal, pancytopenia, neutropenia
rare:
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hypoprothrombinaemia
Nervous system disorders very common: common:
tremor, headache seizures, disturbances in consciousness, paraesthesias and dysaesthesias, peripheral neuropathies, dizziness, writing impaired, nervous system disorders 36
uncommon:
coma, central nervous system haemorrhages and cerebrovascular accidents, paralysis and paresis, encephalopathy, speech and language abnormalities, amnesia
rare: very rare:
hypertonia myasthenia
Eye disorders
common: uncommon: rare:
vision blurred, photophobia, eye disorders cataract blindness
Ear and labyrinth disorders common: uncommon: rare: very rare:
tinnitus hypoacusis deafness neurosensory hearing impaired
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders common:
dyspnoea, parenchymal lung disorders, pleural effusion, pharyngitis, cough, nasal congestion and inflammations
uncommon: rare:
respiratory failures, respiratory tract disorders, asthma acute respiratory distress syndrome
Gastrointestinal disorders very common: common:
diarrhoea, nausea gastrointestinal inflammatory conditions, gastrointestinal ulceration and perforation, gastrointestinal haemorrhages, stomatitis and ulceration, ascites, vomiting, gastrointestinal and abdominal pains, dyspeptic signs and symptoms, constipation, flatulence, bloating and distension, loose stools, gastrointestinal signs and symptoms
uncommon:
ileus paralytic, peritonitis, acute and chronic pancreatitis, blood amylase increased, gastrooesophageal reflux disease, impaired gastric emptying
rare:
subileus, pancreatic pseudocyst
Renal and urinary disorders very common: common:
renal impairment renal failure, renal failure acute, oliguria, renal tubular necrosis, nephropathy toxic, urinary abnormalities, bladder and urethral symptoms
uncommon: very rare:
anuria, haemolytic uraemic syndrome nephropathy, cystitis haemorrhagic
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders common: uncommon: rare: very rare:
pruritus, rash, alopecias, acne, sweating increased dermatitis, photosensitivity toxic epidermal necrolysis (Lyell’ s syndrome) Stevens Johnson syndrome
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders common: uncommon:
arthralgia, muscle cramps, pain in limb, back pain joint disorders
Endocrine disorders rare: hirsutism
Metabolism and nutrition disorders very common: common:
hyperglycaemic conditions, diabetes mellitus, hyperkalaemia hypomagnesaemia, hypophosphataemia, hypokalaemia, hypocalcaemia, hyponatraemia, fluid overload, hyperuricaemia, appetite decreased, anorexia,
37 metabolic acidoses, hyperlipidaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia, other electrolyte abnormalities
uncommon:
dehydration, hypoproteinaemia, hyperphosphataemia, hypoglycaemia
Infections and infestations As is well known for other potent immunosuppressive agents, patients receiving tacrolimus are frequently at increased risk for infections (viral, bacterial, fungal, protozoal).
The course of pre- existing infections may be aggravated.
Both generalised and localised infections can occur.
Cases of BK virus associated nephropathy, as well as cases of JC virus associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), have been reported in patients treated with immunosuppressants, including Advagraf.
Injury, poisoning and procedural complications common:
primary graft dysfunction
Medication errors, including inadvertent, unintentional or unsupervised substitution of immediate- or prolonged-release tacrolimus formulations, have been observed.
A number of associated cases of transplant rejection have been reported (frequency cannot be estimated from available data).
Neoplasms benign, malignant and unspecified (incl cysts and polyps) Patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy are at increased risk of developing malignancies.
Benign as well as malignant neoplasms including EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders and skin malignancies have been reported in association with tacrolimus treatment.
Vascular disorders very common: common:
hypertension haemorrhage, thromboembolic and ischaemic events, peripheral vascular disorders, vascular hypotensive disorders
uncommon:
infarction, venous thrombosis deep limb, shock
General disorders and administration site conditions common:
asthenic conditions, febrile disorders, oedema, pain and discomfort, blood alkaline phosphatase increased, weight increased, body temperature perception disturbed
uncommon:
multi-organ failure, influenza like illness, temperature intolerance, chest pressure sensation, feeling jittery, feeling abnormal, blood lactate dehydrogenase increased, weight decreased
rare: very rare:
thirst, fall, chest tightness, mobility decreased, ulcer fat tissue increased
Immune system disorders Allergic and anaphylactoid reactions have been observed in patients receiving tacrolimus (see section 4.4).
Hepatobiliary disorders common:
hepatic enzymes and function abnormalities, cholestasis and jaundice, hepatocellular damage and hepatitis, cholangitis
rare: very rare:
hepatitic artery thrombosis, venoocclusive liver disease hepatic failure, bile duct stenosis
Reproductive system and breast disorders uncommon:
dysmenorrhoea and uterine bleeding
Psychiatric disorders very common: common:
insomnia anxiety symptoms, confusion and disorientation, depression, depressed mood, mood disorders and disturbances, nightmare, hallucination, mental disorders
uncommon:
psychotic disorder
38 4.9 Overdose
Experience with overdose is limited.
Several cases of accidental overdose have been reported with tacrolimus; symptoms have included tremor, headache, nausea and vomiting, infections, urticaria, lethargy, increased blood urea nitrogen and elevated serum creatinine concentrations, and increase in alanine aminotransferase levels.
No specific antidote to tacrolimus therapy is available.
If overdose occurs, general supportive measures and symptomatic treatment should be conducted.
Based on its high molecular weight, poor aqueous solubility, and extensive erythrocyte and plasma protein binding, it is anticipated that tacrolimus will not be dialysable.
In isolated patients with very high plasma levels, haemofiltration or -diafiltration have been effective in reducing toxic concentrations.
In cases of oral intoxication, gastric lavage and/ or the use of adsorbents (such as activated charcoal) may be helpful, if used shortly after intake.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Calcineurin inhibitors, ATC code:
L04AD02
Mechanism of action and pharmacodynamic effects At the molecular level, the effects of tacrolimus appear to be mediated by binding to a cytosolic protein (FKBP12) which is responsible for the intracellular accumulation of the compound.
The FKBP12-tacrolimus complex specifically and competitively binds to and inhibits calcineurin, leading to a calcium-dependent inhibition of T-cell signal transduction pathways, thereby preventing transcription of a discrete set of lymphokine genes.
Tacrolimus is a highly potent immunosuppressive agent and has proven activity in both in vitro and in vivo experiments.
In particular, tacrolimus inhibits the formation of cytotoxic lymphocytes, which are mainly responsible for graft rejection.
Tacrolimus suppresses T-cell activation and T-helper-cell dependent B-cell proliferation, as well as the formation of lymphokines (such as interleukins-2, -3, and γ -interferon) and the expression of the interleukin-2 receptor.
Results from clinical trials performed with once-daily tacrolimus Advagraf Liver transplantation The efficacy and safety of Advagraf and Prograf, both in combination with corticosteroids, was compared in 471 de novo liver transplant recipients.
The event rate of biopsy confirmed acute rejection within the first 24 weeks after transplantation was 32.6% in the Advagraf group (N=237) and 29.3% in the Prograf group (N=234).
The treatment difference (Advagraf – Prograf) was 3.3% (95% confidence interval [-5.7%, 12.3%]). The 12-month patient survival rates were 89.2% for Advagraf and 90.8% for Prograf; in the Advagraf arm 25 patients died (14 female, 11 male) and in the Prograf arm 24 patients died (5 female, 19 male).
12-month graft survival was 85.3% for Advagraf and 85.6% for Prograf.
Kidney transplantation The efficacy and safety of Advagraf and Prograf, both in combination with mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and corticosteroids, was compared in 667 de novo kidney transplant recipients.
The event rate for biopsy-confirmed acute rejection within the first 24 weeks after transplantation was 18.6% in the Advagraf group (N=331) and 14.9% in the Prograf group (N=336).
The treatment difference (Advagraf-Prograf) was 3.8% (95% confidence interval [-2.1%, 9.6%]).
The 12-month patient survival rates were 96.9% for Advagraf and 97.5% for Prograf; in the Advagraf arm 10 patients died (3 female, 7 male) and in the Prograf arm 8 patients died (3 female, 5 male).
12-month graft survival was 91.5% for Advagraf and 92.8% for Prograf.
The efficacy and safety of Prograf, ciclosporin and Advagraf, all in combination with basiliximab antibody induction, MMF and corticosteroids, was compared in 638 de novo kidney transplant
39 recipients.
The incidence of efficacy failure at 12 months (defined as death, graft loss, biopsy- confirmed acute rejection, or lost to follow-up) was 14.0% in the Advagraf group (N=214), 15.1% in the Prograf group (N=212) and 17.0% in the ciclosporin group (N=212).
The treatment difference was -3.0% (Advagraf-ciclosporin) (95.2% confidence interval [-9.9%, 4.0%]) for Advagraf vs. ciclosporin and -1.9% (Prograf-ciclosporin) (95.2% confidence interval [-8.9%, 5.2%]) for Prograf vs. ciclosporin.
The 12-month patient survival rates were 98.6% for Advagraf, 95.7% for Prograf and 97.6% for ciclosporin; in the Advagraf arm 3 patients died (all male), in the Prograf arm 10 patients died (3 female, 7 male) and in the ciclosporin arm 6 patients died (3 female, 3 male).
12-month graft survival was 96.7% for Advagraf, 92.9% for Prograf and 95.7% for ciclosporin.
Results from published data of tacrolimus administered twice daily as Prograf capsules in other primary organ transplantation Prograf has evolved into an accepted treatment as primary immunosuppressive medicinal product following pancreas, lung and intestinal transplantation.
In prospective published studies oral Prograf was investigated as primary immunosuppressant in approximately 175 patients following lung, 475 patients following pancreas and 630 patients following intestinal transplantation.
Overall, the safety profile of oral Prograf in these published studies appeared to be similar to what was reported in the large studies, where Prograf was used as primary treatment in liver, kidney and heart transplantation.
Efficacy results of the largest studies in each indication are summarised below.
Lung transplantation The interim analysis of a recent multicentre study using oral Prograf discussed 110 patients who underwent 1:1 randomisation to either tacrolimus or ciclosporin.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.01 to 0.03 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.05 to 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
A lower incidence of acute rejection episodes for tacrolimus- versus ciclosporin-treated patients (11.5% versus 22.6%) and a lower incidence of chronic rejection, the bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (2.86% versus 8.57%), was reported within the first year after transplantation.
The 1-year patient survival rate was 80.8% in the tacrolimus and 83% in the ciclosporin group (Treede et al., 3rd ICI San Diego, US, 2004; Abstract 22).
Another randomised study included 66 patients on tacrolimus versus 67 patients on ciclosporin.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.025 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.15 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 10 to 20 ng/ ml.
The 1-year patient survival was 83% in the tacrolimus and 71% in the ciclosporin group, the 2-year survival rates were 76% and 66%, respectively.
Acute rejection episodes per 100 patient-days were numerically fewer in the tacrolimus (0.85 episodes) than in the ciclosporin group (1.09 episodes).
Obliterative bronchiolitis developed in 21.7% of patients in the tacrolimus group compared with 38.0% of patients in the ciclosporin group (p = 0.025).
Significantly more ciclosporin-treated patients (n = 13) required a switch to tacrolimus than tacrolimus-treated patients to ciclosporin (n = 2) (p = 0.02) (Keenan et al., Ann Thoracic Surg 1995; 60:580).
In an additional two-centre study, 26 patients were randomised to the tacrolimus versus 24 patients to the ciclosporin group.
Tacrolimus was started as continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 0.05 mg/ kg/ day and oral tacrolimus was administered at a dose of 0.1 to 0.3 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 12 to 15 ng/ ml.
The 1-year survival rates were 73.1% in the tacrolimus versus 79.2% in the ciclosporin group.
Freedom from acute rejection was higher in the tacrolimus group at 6 months (57.7% versus 45.8%) and at 1 year after lung transplantation (50% versus 33.3%) (Treede et al., J Heart Lung Transplant 2001; 20:511).
The three studies demonstrated similar survival rates.
The incidences of acute rejection were numerically lower with tacrolimus in all three studies and one of the studies reported a significantly lower incidence of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome with tacrolimus.
Pancreas transplantation A multicentre study using oral Prograf included 205 patients undergoing simultaneous pancreas- kidney transplantation who were randomised to tacrolimus (n = 103) or to ciclosporin (n = 102).
The initial oral per protocol dose of tacrolimus was 0.2 mg/ kg/ day with subsequent dose adjustments to target trough levels of 8 to 15 ng/ ml by Day 5 and 5 to 10 ng/ mL after Month 6.
Pancreas survival at 1 year was significantly superior with tacrolimus:
91.3% versus 74.5% with ciclosporin (p < 0.0005), whereas renal graft survival was similar in both groups.
In total 34 patients switched treatment from ciclosporin to tacrolimus, whereas only 6 tacrolimus patients required alternative therapy (Bechstein et al., Transplantation 2004; 77:1221).
40 Intestinal transplantation Published clinical experience from a single centre on the use of oral Prograf for primary treatment following intestinal transplantation showed that the actuarial survival rate of 155 patients (65 intestine alone, 75 liver and intestine, and 25 multivisceral) receiving tacrolimus and prednisone was 75% at 1 year, 54% at 5 years, and 42% at 10 years.
In the early years the initial oral dose of tacrolimus was 0.3 mg/ kg/ day.
Results continuously improved with increasing experience over the course of 11 years.
A variety of innovations, such as techniques for early detection of Epstein-Barr (EBV) and CMV infections, bone marrow augmentation, the adjunct use of the interleukin-2 antagonist daclizumab, lower initial tacrolimus doses with target trough levels of 10 to 15 ng/ ml, and most recently allograft irradiation were considered to have contributed to improved results in this indication over time (Abu- Elmagd et al., Ann Surg 2001; 234:404).
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption In man tacrolimus has been shown to be able to be absorbed throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
Available tacrolimus is generally rapidly absorbed.
Advagraf is a prolonged-release formulation of tacrolimus resulting in an extended oral absorption profile with an average time to Cmax of approximately 2 hours.
Absorption is variable and the mean oral bioavailability of tacrolimus (investigated with the Prograf formulation) is in the range of 20% - 25% (individual range in adult patients 6% - 43%).
The oral bioavailability of Advagraf was reduced when it was administered after a meal.
Both the rate and extent of absorption of Advagraf were reduced when administered with food.
Bile flow does not influence the absorption of tacrolimus and therefore treatment with Advagraf may commence orally.
A strong correlation exists between AUC and whole blood trough levels at steady-state for Advagraf.
Monitoring of whole blood trough levels therefore provides a good estimate of systemic exposure.
Distribution and elimination In man, the disposition of tacrolimus after intravenous infusion may be described as biphasic.
In the systemic circulation, tacrolimus binds strongly to erythrocytes resulting in an approximate 20:1 distribution ratio of whole blood/ plasma concentrations.
In plasma, tacrolimus is highly bound (> 98.8%) to plasma proteins, mainly to serum albumin and α -1-acid glycoprotein.
Tacrolimus is extensively distributed in the body.
The steady-state volume of distribution based on plasma concentrations is approximately 1300 l (healthy subjects).
Corresponding data based on whole blood averaged 47.6 l.
Tacrolimus is a low-clearance substance.
In healthy subjects, the average total body clearance estimated from whole blood concentrations was 2.25 l/ h.
In adult liver, kidney and heart transplant patients, values of 4.1 l/ h, 6.7 l/ h and 3.9 l/ h, respectively, have been observed.
Factors such as low haematocrit and protein levels, which result in an increase in the unbound fraction of tacrolimus, or corticosteroid-induced increased metabolism are considered to be responsible for the higher clearance rates observed following transplantation.
The half-life of tacrolimus is long and variable.
In healthy subjects, the mean half-life in whole blood is approximately 43 hours.
Metabolism and biotransformation Tacrolimus is widely metabolised in the liver, primarily by the cytochrome P450-3A4.
Tacrolimus is also considerably metabolised in the intestinal wall.
There are several metabolites identified.
Only one of these has been shown in vitro to have immunosuppressive activity similar to that of tacrolimus.
The other metabolites have only weak or no immunosuppressive activity.
In systemic circulation only one of the inactive metabolites is present at low concentrations.
Therefore, metabolites do not contribute to the pharmacological activity of tacrolimus.
Excretion Following intravenous and oral administration of 14C-labelled tacrolimus, most of the radioactivity was eliminated in the faeces.
Approximately 2% of the radioactivity was eliminated in the urine.
Less
41 than 1% of unchanged tacrolimus was detected in the urine and faeces, indicating that tacrolimus is almost completely metabolised prior to elimination: bile being the principal route of elimination.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
The kidneys and the pancreas were the primary organs affected in toxicity studies performed in rats and baboons.
In rats, tacrolimus caused toxic effects to the nervous system and the eyes.
Reversible cardiotoxic effects were observed in rabbits following intravenous administration of tacrolimus.
Embryofoetal toxicity was observed in rats and rabbits and was limited to doses that caused significant toxicity in maternal animals.
In rats, female reproductive function including birth was impaired at toxic doses and the offspring showed reduced birth weights, viability and growth.
A negative effect of tacrolimus on male fertility in the form of reduced sperm counts and motility was observed in rats.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Capsule content:
Hypromellose Ethylcellulose Lactose monohydrate Magnesium stearate.
Capsule shell:
Titanium dioxide (E 171) Yellow iron oxide (E 172) Red iron oxide (E 172) Gelatin.
Printing ink (Opacode S-1-15083):
Shellac Lecithin (soya) Simethicone Red iron oxide (E 172) Hydroxypropyl Cellulose.
6.2 Incompatibilities
Tacrolimus is not compatible with PVC.
Tubing, syringes and other equipment used to prepare a suspension of Advagraf capsule contents should not contain PVC.
6.3 Shelf life
3 years After opening the aluminium wrapper:
1 year
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Store in the original package and in a dry place in order to protect from moisture.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
Transparent PVC/ PVDC aluminium blister wrapped in an aluminium pouch with a desiccant.
Ten capsules per blister.
42 Pack sizes:
30, 50 and 100 prolonged-release capsules.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
No special requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 2353 EW Leiderdorp Netherlands
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 007 EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 008 EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 010
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
23/ 04/ 2007
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
{MM/ YYYY}
43 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
44 A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release
Astellas Ireland Co.
Ltd Killorglin Co.
Kerry Ireland
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (See Annex I:
Summary of Product Characteristics, section 4.2).
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable.
• OTHER CONDITIONS
Risk Management Plan The MAH commits to performing the studies and additional pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan, as agreed in version 3.2 of the Risk Management Plan (RMP) presented in Module 1.8.2. of the Marketing Authorisation Application and any subsequent updates of the RMP agreed by the CHMP.
As per the CHMP Guideline on Risk Management Systems for medicinal products for human use, the updated RMP should be submitted at the same time as the next Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR).
In addition, an updated RMP should be submitted
- When new information is received that may impact on the current Safety Specification,
Pharmacovigilance Plan or risk minimisation activities
- Within 60 days of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being
reached
- At the request of the EMEA
45 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
46 A.
LABELLING
47 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (30, 50, 100 Box)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each capsule contains:
0.5 mg tacrolimus.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Also contains: lactose, see package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
30 prolonged-release hard capsules 50 prolonged-release hard capsules 100 prolonged-release hard capsules
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Once daily.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Do not swallow the desiccant.
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY} Use all the capsules within 1 year of opening the aluminium wrapping and before the expiry date.
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
48 Store in the original package and in a dry place in order to protect from moisture.
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 2353 EW Leiderdorp Netherlands
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 001 30 capsules EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 002 50 capsules EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 009 100 capsules
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Advagraf 0.5 mg
49 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (Blister)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus
2.
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY}
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
5.
OTHER
Once daily.
50 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (30, 50 Aluminium Wrapper)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus Oral use.
2.
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY} Use all the capsules within 1 year of opening the aluminium wrapping and before the expiry date.
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
5.
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT
30 prolonged-release hard capsules 50 prolonged-release hard capsules
6.
OTHER
Once daily.
51 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (30, 50, 60, 100 Box)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each capsule contains:
1 mg tacrolimus.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Also contains: lactose, see package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
30 prolonged-release hard capsules 50 prolonged-release hard capsules 60 prolonged-release hard capsules 100 prolonged-release hard capsules
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Once daily.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Do not swallow the desiccant.
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY} Use all the capsules within 1 year of opening the aluminium wrapping and before the expiry date.
52 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Store in the original package and in a dry place in order to protect from moisture.
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 2353 EW Leiderdorp Netherlands
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 003 30 capsules EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 004 50 capsules EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 005 60 capsules EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 006 100 capsules
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Advagraf 1 mg
53 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS
Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (Blister)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus
2.
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY}
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
5.
OTHER
Once daily.
54 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS
Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (30, 50, 60, 100 Aluminium Wrapper)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus Oral use.
2.
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY} Use all the capsules within 1 year of opening the aluminium wrapping and before the expiry date.
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
5.
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT
30 prolonged-release hard capsules 50 prolonged-release hard capsules 60 prolonged-release hard capsules 100 prolonged-release hard capsules
6.
OTHER
Once daily.
55 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (30, 50, 100 Box)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each capsule contains:
5 mg tacrolimus.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Also contains: lactose, see package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
30 prolonged-release hard capsules 50 prolonged-release hard capsules 100 prolonged-release hard capsules
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Once daily.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Do not swallow the desiccant.
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY} Use all the capsules within 1 year of opening the aluminium wrapping and before the expiry date.
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
56 Store in the original package and in a dry place in order to protect from moisture.
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 2353 EW Leiderdorp Netherlands
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 007 30 capsules EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 008 50 capsules EU/ 1/ 07/ 387/ 010 100 capsules
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Advagraf 5 mg
57 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS
Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (Blister)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus
2.
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY}
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
5.
OTHER
Once daily.
58 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS
Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-Release Capsules (30, 50 Aluminium Wrapper)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus Oral use.
2.
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP:
{MM/ YYYY} Use all the capsules within 1 year of opening the aluminium wrapping and before the expiry date.
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Batch:
{number}
5.
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT
30 prolonged-release hard capsules 50 prolonged-release hard capsules
6.
OTHER
Once daily.
59 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
60 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-release hard capsules Tacrolimus
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine.
- Keep this leaflet.
You may need to read it again.
- If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
- This medicine has been prescribed for you.
Do not pass it on to others.
It may harm them, even
if their symptoms are the same as yours.
- If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet,
please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
In this leaflet:
1.
What Advagraf is and what it is used for 2.
Before you take Advagraf 3.
How to take Advagraf 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store Advagraf 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT ADVAGRAF IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
Advagraf prolonged-release capsules are an additional oral pharmaceutical form of the already available product Prograf capsules.
Advagraf is taken once daily, while Prograf is taken twice daily.
Advagraf belongs to a group of medicines called immunosuppressants.
Following your organ transplant (liver, kidney), your body’ s immune system will try to reject the new organ.
Advagraf is used to control your body’ s immune response enabling your body to accept the transplanted organ.
Advagraf is often used in combination with other medicines that also suppress the immune system.
You may also be given Advagraf for an ongoing rejection of your transplanted liver, kidney, heart or other organ or if any previous treatment you were taking was unable to control this immune response after your transplantation.
2.
BEFORE YOU TAKE ADVAGRAF
Do not take Advagraf
- if you are allergic (hypersensitive) to tacrolimus or any of the other ingredients of Advagraf.
- if you are allergic (hypersensitive) to any antibiotic belonging to the subgroup of macrolide
antibiotics (e. g. erythromycin, clarithromycin, josamycin).
Take special care with Advagraf
- You will need to take Advagraf every day as long as you need immunosuppression to prevent
rejection of your transplanted organ.
You should keep in regular contact with your doctor.
- Whilst you are taking Advagraf your doctor may want to carry out a number of tests (including
blood, urine, heart function, visual and neurological tests) from time to time.
This is quite normal and will help your doctor to decide on the most appropriate dose of Advagraf for you.
- Please avoid taking any herbal remedies, e. g.
St.
John´s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) or any
other herbal products as this may affect the effectiveness and the dose of Advagraf that you
61 need to receive.
If in doubt please consult your doctor prior to taking any herbal products or remedies.
- If you have liver problems or have had a disease which may have affected your liver, please tell
your doctor as this may affect the dose of Advagraf that you receive.
- If you have diarrhoea for more than one day, please tell your doctor, because it might be
necessary to adapt the dose of Advagraf that you receive.
- Limit your exposure to sunlight and UV light whilst taking Advagraf by wearing appropriate
protective clothing and using a sunscreen with a high sun protection factor.
This is because of the potential risk of malignant skin changes with immunosuppressive therapy.
- If you need to have any vaccinations, please inform your doctor beforehand.
Your doctor will
advise you on the best course of action.
Taking other medicines Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription and herbal remedies.
Advagraf must not be taken with ciclosporin.
Advagraf blood levels can be affected by other medicines you take, and blood levels of other medicines can be affected by taking Advagraf which may require an increase or decrease in Advagraf dose.
In particular, you should tell your doctor if you are taking or have recently taken medicines with active substances like:
- antifungal medicines and antibiotics, particularly so-called macrolide antibiotics, used to treat
infections e. g. ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole, clotrimazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin, josamycin, and rifampicin
- HIV protease inhibitors e. g ritonavir
- omeprazol, lansoprazol or cimetidine, used to prevent and to treat stomach ulcers
- metoclopramide, used to treat nausea and vomiting
- cisapride or magnesium-aluminium-hydroxide, used to treat heartburn
- the contraceptive pill or other hormone treatments with ethinylestradiol, hormone treatments
with danazol
- nifedipine, nicardipine, diltiazem and verapamil or other medicines used to treat high blood
pressure or heart problems
- medicines known as “ statins” used to treat elevated cholesterol and triglycerides
- phenytoin or phenobarbital, used to treat epilepsy
- prednisolone and methylprednisolone, belonging to the class of corticosteroids
- nefazodone, used to treat depression
- St.
John’ s Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
Tell your doctor if you are taking or need to take ibuprofen, amphotericin B or antivirals (e. g. aciclovir).
These may worsen kidney or nervous system problems when taken together with Advagraf.
Your doctor also needs to know if you are taking potassium supplements or potassium-sparing diuretics (e. g. amiloride, triamterene, or spironolactone), certain pain killers (so-called NSAIDs, e. g. ibuprofen), anticoagulants, or oral medication for diabetic treatment, while you take Advagraf.
If you need to have any vaccinations, please inform your doctor beforehand.
Taking Advagraf with food and drink You should generally take Advagraf on an empty stomach or at least 1 hour before or 2 to 3 hours after a meal.
Grapefruit and grapefruit juice should be avoided while taking Advagraf.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding If you plan to become pregnant or think that you may be pregnant, ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking any medicine.
Advagraf is excreted into breast milk.
Therefore you should not breast-feed whilst receiving Advagraf.
62 Driving and using machines Do not drive or use any tools or machines if you feel dizzy or sleepy, or have problems seeing clearly after taking Advagraf.
These effects are more frequently observed if Advagraf is taken in conjunction with alcohol use.
Important information about some of the ingredients of Advagraf If you have been told by your doctor that you have an intolerance to some sugars, contact your doctor before taking this medicine.
3.
HOW TO TAKE ADVAGRAF
Always take Advagraf exactly as your doctor has told you.
You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure.
Make sure that you receive the same tacrolimus medicine every time you collect your prescription, unless your transplant specialist has agreed to change to a different tacrolimus medicine.
This medicine should be taken once a day.
If the appearance of this medicine is not the same as usual, or if dosage instructions have changed, speak to your doctor or pharmacist as soon as possible to make sure that you have the right medicine.
The starting dose to prevent the rejection of your transplanted organ will be determined by your doctor calculated according to your body weight.
Initial daily doses just after transplantation will generally be in the range of 0.10 – 0.30 mg per kg body weight per day
depending on the transplanted organ.
Your dose depends on your general condition and on which other immunosuppressive medication you are taking.
Following the initiation of your treatment with Advagraf frequent blood tests will be taken by your doctor to define the correct dose.
Afterwards regular blood tests by your doctor will be required to define the correct dose and to adjust the dose from time to time.
Your doctor will usually reduce your Advagraf dose once your condition has stabilised.
Your doctor will tell you exactly how many capsules to take and how often.
Advagraf is taken orally once daily in the morning.
You should generally take Advagraf on an empty stomach or at least 1 hour before or 2 to 3 hours after the meal.
The capsules should be swallowed whole with a glass of water.
Avoid grapefruit and grapefruit juice while taking Advagraf.
Do not swallow the desiccant contained in the foil wrapper.
If you take more Advagraf than you should If you have accidentally taken too much Advagraf see your doctor or contact your nearest hospital emergency department immediately.
If you forget to take Advagraf If you have forgotten to take your Advagraf capsules in the morning, take them as soon as possible on the same day.
Do not take a double dose the next morning.
If you stop taking Advagraf Stopping your treatment with Advagraf may increase the risk of rejection of your transplanted organ.
Do not stop your treatment unless your doctor tells you to do so.
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
63 4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, Advagraf can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.
Immunosuppressants, including Advagraf, reduce your body´s own defence mechanisms to stop you rejecting your transplanted organ.
Consequently your body will not be as good as normal at fighting infections.
So if you are taking Advagraf you may therefore catch more infections than usual such as infections of the skin, mouth, stomach and intestines, lungs and urinary tract.
Severe effects may occur, including allergic and anaphylactic reactions.
Benign and malignant tumours have been reported following Advagraf treatment as a result of immunosuppression.
Possible side effects are listed according to the following categories:
Very common side effects are experienced in at least 1 in 10 patients.
Common side effects are experienced in less than 1 in 10 patients but in at least 1 per 100 patients.
Uncommon side effects are experienced in less than 1 in 100 patients but in at least 1 per 1,000 patients.
Rare side effects are experienced in less than 1 per 1,000 patients but in at least 1 per 10,000 patients.
Very rare side effects are experienced in less than 1 per 10,000 patients.
Very common side effects:
- Increased blood sugar, diabetes mellitus, increased potassium in the blood
- Difficulty in sleeping
- Trembling, headache
- Increased blood pressure
- Diarrhoea, nausea
- Kidney problems
Common side effects:
- Reduction in blood cell counts (platelets, red or white blood cells), increase in white blood cell
counts, changes in red blood cell counts
- Reduced magnesium, phosphate, potassium, calcium or sodium in the blood, fluid overload,
increased uric acid or lipids in the blood, decreased appetite, increased acidity of the blood, other changes in the blood salts
- Anxiety symptoms, confusion and disorientation, depression, mood changes, nightmare,
hallucination, mental disorders
- Fits, disturbances in consciousness, tingling and numbness (sometimes painful) in the hands and
feet, dizziness, impaired writing ability, nervous system disorders
- Blurred vision, increased sensitivity to light, eye disorders
- Ringing sound in your ears
- Reduced blood flow in the heart vessels, faster heartbeat
- Bleeding, partial or complete blocking of blood vessels, reduced blood pressure
- Shortness in breath, changes in the lung tissue, collection of liquid around the lung,
inflammation of the pharynx, cough, flu-like symptoms
- Inflammations or ulcers causing abdominal pain or diarrhoea, bleedings in the stomach,
inflammations or ulcers in the mouth, collection of fluid in the belly, vomiting, abdominal pains, indigestion, constipation, flatulence, bloating, loose stools, stomach problems
- Changes in liver enzymes and function, yellowing of the skin due to liver problems, liver tissue
damage and inflammation of the liver
- Itching, rash, hair loss, acne, increased sweating
- Pain in joints, limbs or back, muscle cramps
- Insufficient function of the kidneys, reduced production of urine, impaired or painful urination
- General weakness, fever, collection of fluid in your body, pain and discomfort, increase of the
enzyme alkaline phosphatase in your blood, weight gain, feeling of temperature disturbed
- Insufficient function of your transplanted organ
Uncommon side effects:
64
- Changes in blood clotting, reduction in all blood cell counts
- Dehydration, reduced protein or sugar in the blood, increased phosphate in the blood
- Coma, bleeding in the brain, stroke, paralysis, brain disorder, speech and language
abnormalities, memory problems
- Opacity of the lens
- Impaired hearing
- Irregular heartbeat, stop of heartbeat, reduced performance of your heart, disorder of the heart
muscle, enlargement of the heart muscle, stronger heartbeat, abnormal ECG, heart rate and pulse abnormal
- Blood clot in a vein of a limb, shock
- Difficulties in breathing, respiratory tract disorders, asthma
- Obstruction of the gut, increased blood level of the enzyme amylase, reflux of stomach content
in your throat, delayed emptying of the stomach
- Dermatitis, burning sensation in the sunlight
- Joint disorders
- Inability to urinate, painful menstruation and abnormal menstrual bleeding
- Failure of some organs, influenza like illness, increased sensitivity to heat and cold, feeling of
pressure on your chest, jittery or abnormal feeling, increase of the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase in your blood, weight loss
Rare side effects:
- Small bleedings in your skin due to blood clots
- Increased muscle stiffness
- Blindness
- Deafness
- Collection of fluid around the heart
- Acute breathlessness
- Cyst formation in your pancreas
- Problems with blood flow in the liver
- Serious illness with blistering of skin, mouth, eyes and genitals; increased hairiness
- Thirst, fall, feeling of tightness in your chest, decreased mobility, ulcer
Very rare side effects:
- Muscular weakness
- Echocardiogram abnormal
- Liver failure, narrowing of the bile vessel
- Painful urination with blood in the urine
- Increase of fat tissue
If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
5.
HOW TO STORE ADVAGRAF
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
Store in the original package and in a dry place in order to protect from moisture.
Take the prolonged-release capsules immediately following removal from the blister.
Do not use Advagraf after the expiry date which is stated on the carton after “ Exp”.
The expiry date refers to the last day of that month.
Use all the prolonged-release capsules within 1 year of opening the aluminium wrapping.
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
65 What Advagraf contains
- The active substance is tacrolimus.
Each capsule of Advagraf 0.5 mg contains 0.5 mg of tacrolimus.
Each capsule of Advagraf 1 mg contains 1 mg of tacrolimus.
Each capsule of Advagraf 5 mg contains 5 mg of tacrolimus.
- The other ingredients are:
Capsule content:
Hypromellose, Ethylcellulose, Lactose, Magnesium stearate.
Capsule shell:
Titanium dioxide (E171), Yellow iron oxide (E 172), Red iron oxide (E 172), Gelatin.
Printing ink:
Shellac, Lecithin (soya), Simethicone, Red iron oxide (E 172), Hydroxypropyl Cellulose.
What Advagraf looks like and contents of the pack
Advagraf 0.5 mg Prolonged-release capsules are hard gelatin capsules imprinted in red with “ 0.5 mg” on the light yellow capsule cap and “ 647” on the orange capsule body, containing white powder.
Advagraf 0.5 mg is supplied in blisters containing 10 capsules within a protective foil wrapper, including a desiccant.
Packs of 30, 50 and 100 prolonged-release capsules are available.
Advagraf 1 mg Prolonged-release capsules are hard gelatin capsules imprinted in red with “ 1 mg” on the white capsule cap and “ 677” on the orange capsule body, containing white powder.
Advagraf 1 mg is supplied in blisters containing 10 capsules within a protective foil wrapper, including a desiccant.
Packs of 30, 50, 60 and 100 prolonged-release capsules are available.
Advagraf 5 mg Prolonged-release capsules are hard gelatin capsules imprinted in red with “ 5 mg” on the greyish red capsule cap and “ 687” on the orange capsule body, containing white powder.
Advagraf 5 mg is supplied in blisters containing 10 capsules within a protective foil wrapper, including a desiccant.
Packs of 30, 50 and 100 prolonged-release capsules are available.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
Marketing Authorisation Holder and Manufacturer
Marketing Authorisation Holder:
Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 2353 EW Leiderdorp Netherlands
Manufacturer:
Astellas Ireland Co., Ltd.
Killorglin, County Kerry Ireland
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder:
66 België/ Belgique/ Belgien Astellas Pharma B. V.
Branch Erasmus Park/ Parc Erasme Square Marie Curie 50 B-1070 Brüssel/ Bruxelles Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 5580710
Luxembourg/ Luxemburg Astellas Pharma B. V. Branch Erasmus Park/ Parc Erasme Square Marie Curie 50 B-1070 Brüssel/ Bruxelles Belgique/ Belgien Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 5580710
България Астелас Фарма Юръп Б .В. /ЕВАГ ул. ”Бигла” 6 София 1407 Teл.: + 359 2 862 53 72
Magyarország Astellas Pharma Kft.
Kelenhegyi út 43 H-1118 Budapest Tel.: + 36 (06)1 3614673
Č eská republika Astellas Pharma s. r. o.
Sokolovská 100/ 94 CZ – 18600 Praha 8 Tel: +420 236 080300
Malta Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 NL-2353 EW Leiderdorp L-Olanda Tel: + 31 (0)71 5455745
Danmark Astellas Pharma a/ s Naverland 4 DK-2600 Glostrup Tlf: + 45 43 430355
Nederland Astellas Pharma B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 NL-2353 EW Leiderdorp Tel: + 31 (0)71 5455745
Deutschland Astellas Pharma GmbH Georg-Brauchle-Ring 64 – 66 D-80992 München Tel: + 49 (0)89 454401
Norge Astellas Pharma Solbråveien 47 N-1383 Asker Tlf: + 47 66 76 46 00
Eesti Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 NL-2353 EW Leiderdorp Holland Tel: +31 (0)71 5455745
Österreich Astellas Pharma Ges. m. b. H.
Linzer Straße 221/ E02 A-1140 Wien Tel: + 43 (0)1 8772668
Ελλάδα Astellas Pharmaceuticals AEBE Θουκυδίδου 1 GR-14565 Άγιος Στέφανος Αττικής Τηλ: +30 210 8189900
Polska Astellas Pharma Sp. z. o. o. ul.
Poleczki 21 PL – 02-822 Warszawa Tel.: + 48 (0) 225451 111
España Astellas Pharma S. A.
Paseo del Club Deportivo n° 1 Bloque 14-2a E-28223 Pozuelo de Alarcón, Madrid Tel: + 34 91 4952700
Portugal Astellas Farma, Lda.
Edifício Cinema Rua José Fontana, n. °1, 1°Andar P-2770− 101 Paço de Arcos Tel: + 351 21 4401320
67 France Astellas Pharma S. A. S.
114 rue Victor Hugo F-92300 Levallois Perret Tél: + 33 (0)1 55917500
România Astellas Pharma Internaţ ional Detalii de contact pentru România Ş oseaua Bucureş ti-Ploieş ti 42-44, Clă dire 1, Parter, 013696-Bucureş ti Tel: +40 (0)21 361 0495
Ireland Astellas Pharma Co.
Ltd.
25, The Courtyard Kilcarbery Business Park, Clondalkin IRL – Dublin 22 Tel: + 353 (0)1 4671555
Slovenija Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 NL-2353 EW Leiderdorp Nizozemska Tel: +31 (0)71 5455745
Ísland Vistor hf Hörgatúni 2 IS-210 Garðabæ Sími: + 354 535 7000
Slovenská republika Astellas Pharma s. r. o., organizač ná zlož ka Galvániho 15/ C SK-821 04 Bratislava 2 Tel: +421 2 4444 2157
Italia Astellas Pharma S. p. A.
Via delle Industrie 1 I-20061 Carugate (Milano) Tel: + 39 (0)2 921381
Suomi/ Finland Astellas Pharma / Algol Pharma Oy Ab PL/ Box 13 FIN-02611 Espoo/ Esbo Puh/ Tel: + 358 9 50991
Κύπρος Astellas Pharmaceuticals AEBE Θουκυδίδου 1 GR-14565 Άγιος Στέφανος Αττικής Τηλ: +30 210 8189900
Sverige Astellas Pharma AB Per Albin Hanssons väg 41 S-205 12 Malmö Tel: + 46 (0)40-650 15 00
Latvija Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 NL-2353 EW Leiderdorp Nī derlande Tel: + 31 (0)71 5455745
United Kingdom Astellas Pharma Ltd.
Lovett House Lovett Road, Staines Middlesex TW18 3AZ – UK Tel: + 44 (0) 1784 419615
Lietuva Astellas Pharma Europe B. V.
Elisabethhof 19 NL-2353 EW Leiderdorp Nyderlandai Tel. +31 (0)71 5455745
This leaflet was last approved in {MM/ YYYY}.
68