# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
TRIZIVIR 300 mg/ 150 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each film-coated tablet contains 300 mg of abacavir (as sulfate), 150 mg lamivudine and 300 mg zidovudine.
For a full list of excipients see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Film-coated tablet.
Blue-green capsule-shaped film-coated tablets engraved with “ GX LL1” on one side.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Trizivir is indicated for the treatment of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection in adults.
This fixed combination replaces the three components (abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine) used separately in similar dosages.
It is recommended that treatment is started with abacavir, lamivudine, and zidovudine separately for the first 6-8 weeks (see section 4.4).
The choice of this fixed combination should be based not only on potential adherence criteria, but mainly on expected efficacy and risk related to the three nucleoside analogues.
The demonstration of the benefit of Trizivir is mainly based on results of studies performed in treatment naive patients or moderately antiretroviral experienced patients with non-advanced disease.
In patients with high viral load (> 100,000 copies/ ml) choice of therapy needs special consideration (see section 5.1).
Before initiating treatment with abacavir, screening for carriage of the HLA-B*5701 allele should be performed in any HIV-infected patient, irrespective of racial origin.
Abacavir should not be used in patients known to carry the HLA-B*5701 allele, unless no other therapeutic option is available in these patients, based on the treatment history and resistance testing (see section 4.4 and 4.8).
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Therapy should be prescribed by a physician experienced in the management of HIV infection.
The recommended dose of Trizivir in adults (18 years and over) is one tablet twice daily.
Trizivir can be taken with or without food.
Where discontinuation of therapy with one of the active substances of Trizivir is indicated, or where dose reduction is necessary separate preparations of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine are available.
Renal impairment:
Whilst no dosage adjustment of abacavir is necessary in patients with renal dysfunction, lamivudine and zidovudine concentrations are increased in patients with renal impairment due to decreased clearance.
Therefore, as dosage adjustments of these may be necessary, it is recommended that separate preparations of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine be administered to
2 patients with reduced renal function (creatinine clearance ≤ 50 ml/ min).
Physicians should refer to the individual summary of product characteristics of these medicinal products.
Trizivir should not be administered to patients with end-stage renal disease (see sections 4.3 and 5.2).
Hepatic impairment:
Trizivir is contra-indicated in patients with hepatic impairment (see sections 4.3 and 5.2).
Elderly:
No pharmacokinetic data are currently available in patients over 65 years of age.
Special care is advised in this age group due to age associated changes such as the decrease in renal function and alteration of haematological parameters.
Dosage adjustments in patients with haematological adverse reactions:
Dosage adjustment of zidovudine may be necessary if the haemoglobin level falls below 9 g/ dl or 5.59 mmol/ l or the neutrophil count falls below 1.0 x 109/ l (see sections 4.3 and 4.4).
As dosage adjustment of Trizivir is not possible, separate preparations of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine should be used.
Physicians should refer to the individual summary of product characteristics of these medicinal products.
4.3 Contraindications
Trizivir is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to abacavir, lamivudine or zidovudine, or to any of the excipients.
See BOXED INFORMATION ON HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS in section 4.4 and section 4.8.
Trizivir is contraindicated in patients with end-stage renal disease.
Trizivir is contraindicated in patients with hepatic impairment.
Due to the active substance zidovudine, Trizivir is contraindicated in patients with abnormally low neutrophil counts (< 0.75 x 109/ l), or abnormally low haemoglobin levels (< 7.5 g/ dl or 4.65 mmol/ l) (see section 4.4).
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
The special warnings and precautions relevant to abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine are included in this section.
There are no additional precautions or warnings relevant to the combination Trizivir.
Hypersensitivity Reaction (see also section 4.8):
In clinical studies approximately 5% of subjects receiving abacavir (which is also the active substance of Ziagen) develop a hypersensitivity reaction.
Some of these cases were life-threatening and resulted in a fatal outcome despite taking precautions.
Studies have shown that carriage of the HLA-B*5701 allele is associated with a significantly increased risk of a hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir.
Based on the prospective study CNA106030 (PREDICT-1), use of pre-therapy screening for the HLA-B*5701 allele and subsequently avoiding abacavir in patients with this allele significantly reduced the incidence of abacavir hypersensitivity reactions.
In populations similar to that enrolled in the PREDICT-1 study, it is estimated that 48% to 61% of patients with the HLA-B*5701 allele will develop a hypersensitivity reaction during the course of abacavir treatment compared with 0% to 4% of patients who do not have the HLA-B*5701 allele.
These results are consistent with those of prior retrospective studies.
As a consequence, before initiating treatment with abacavir, screening for carriage of the HLA- B*5701 allele should be performed in any HIV-infected patient, irrespective of racial origin.
Abacavir should not be used in patients known to carry the HLA-B*5701 allele, unless no other therapeutic option is available based on the treatment history and resistance testing (see section 4.1).
3 In any patient treated with abacavir, the clinical diagnosis of suspected hypersensitivity reaction must remain the basis of clinical decision-making.
It is noteworthy that among patients with a clinically suspected hypersensitivity reaction, a proportion did not carry HLA-B*5701.
Therefore, even in the absence of HLA-B*5701 allele, it is important to permanently discontinue abacavir and not rechallenge with abacavir if a hypersensitivity reaction cannot be ruled out on clinical grounds, due to the potential for a severe or even fatal reaction.
Skin patch testing was used as a research tool for the PREDICT-1 study but has no utility in the clinical management of patients and therefore should not be used in the clinical setting.
• Clinical Description
Hypersensitivity reactions are characterised by the appearance of symptoms indicating multi-organ system involvement.
Almost all hypersensitivity reactions will have fever and/ or rash as part of the syndrome.
Other signs and symptoms may include respiratory signs and symptoms such as dyspnoea, sore throat, cough, and abnormal chest x-ray findings (predominantly infiltrates, which can be localised), gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, or abdominal pain, and may lead to misdiagnosis of hypersensitivity as respiratory disease (pneumonia, bronchitis, pharyngitis), or gastroenteritis.
Other frequently observed signs or symptoms of the hypersensitivity reaction may include lethargy or malaise and musculoskeletal symptoms (myalgia, rarely myolysis, arthralgia).
The symptoms related to this hypersensitivity reaction worsen with continued therapy and can be life- threatening.
These symptoms usually resolve upon discontinuation of abacavir.
4 symptoms of a hypersensitivity reaction.
If a hypersensitivity reaction cannot be ruled out, Trizivir or any other medicinal product containing abacavir (i. e.
Kivexa, Ziagen) must not be restarted.
Hypersensitivity reactions with rapid onset, including life-threatening reactions have occurred after restarting abacavir in patients who had only one of the key symptoms of hypersensitivity (skin rash, fever, gastrointestinal, respiratory or constitutional symptoms such as lethargy and malaise) prior to stopping abacavir.
The most common isolated symptom of a hypersensitivity reaction was a skin rash.
Moreover, on very rare occasions hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in patients who have restarted therapy, and who had no preceding symptoms of a hypersensitivity reaction.
In both cases if a decision is made to restart Trizivir this must be done in a setting where medical assistance is readily available.
• Essential patient information
Prescribers must ensure that patients are fully informed regarding the following information on the hypersensitivity reaction:
- Patients must be made aware of the possibility of a hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir
that may result in a life-threatening reaction or death.
- Patients developing signs or symptoms possibly linked with a hypersensitivity reaction
MUST CONTACT their doctor IMMEDIATELY.
- Patients who are hypersensitive to abacavir should be reminded that they must never
take Trizivir or any other medicinal product containing abacavir (i. e.
Kivexa, Ziagen) again.
- In order to avoid restarting Trizivir, patients who have experienced a hypersensitivity reaction
should dispose of their remaining Trizivir tablets in their possession in accordance with the local requirements, and ask their doctor or pharmacist for advice.
- Patients who have stopped Trizivir for any reason, and particularly due to possible adverse
- reactions or illness, must be advised to contact their doctor before restarting.
Patients should be advised of the importance of taking Trizivir regularly.
- Each patient should be reminded to read the Package Leaflet included in the Trizivir pack.
They should be reminded of the importance of removing the Alert Card included in the pack, and keeping it with them at all times.
Lactic acidosis: lactic acidosis, usually associated with hepatomegaly and hepatic steatosis, has been reported with the use of nucleoside analogues.
Early symptoms (symptomatic hyperlactatemia) include benign digestive symptoms (nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain), non-specific malaise, loss of appetite, weight loss, respiratory symptoms (rapid and/ or deep breathing) or neurological symptoms (including motor weakness).
Lactic acidosis has a high mortality and may be associated with pancreatitis, liver failure, or renal failure.
Lactic acidosis generally occurred after a few or several months of treatment.
Treatment with nucleoside analogues should be discontinued in the setting of symptomatic hyperlactatemia and metabolic/ lactic acidosis, progressive hepatomegaly, or rapidly elevating aminotransferase levels.
Caution should be exercised when administering nucleoside analogues to any patient (particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis or other known risk factors for liver disease and hepatic
5 steatosis (including certain medicinal products and alcohol).
Patients co-infected with hepatitis C and treated with alpha interferon and ribavirin may constitute a special risk.
Patients at increased risk should be followed closely.
Mitochondrial dysfunction: nucleoside and nucleotide analogues have been demonstrated in vitro and in vivo to cause a variable degree of mitochondrial damage.
There have been reports of mitochondrial dysfunction in HIV-negative infants exposed in utero and/ or post-natally to nucleoside analogues.
The main adverse events reported are haematological disorders (anaemia, neutropenia), metabolic disorders (hyperlactatemia, hyperlipasemia).
These events are often transitory.
Some late-onset neurological disorders have been reported (hypertonia, convulsion, abnormal behaviour).
Whether the neurological disorders are transient or permanent is currently unknown.
Any child exposed in utero to nucleoside and nucleotide analogues, even HIV-negative children, should have clinical and laboratory follow-up and should be fully investigated for possible mitochondrial dysfunction in case of relevant signs or symptoms.
These findings do not affect current national recommendations to use antiretroviral therapy in pregnant women to prevent vertical transmission of HIV.
Lipodystrophy: combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with the redistribution of body fat (lipodystrophy) in HIV patients.
The long-term consequences of these events are currently unknown.
Knowledge about the mechanism is incomplete.
A connection between visceral lipomatosis and protease inhibitors (PIs) and lipoatrophy and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) has been hypothesised.
A higher risk of lipodystrophy has been associated with individual factors such as older age, and with drug related factors such as longer duration of antiretroviral treatment and associated metabolic disturbances.
Clinical examination should include evaluation for physical signs of fat redistribution.
Consideration should be given to the measurement of fasting serum lipids and blood glucose.
Lipid disorders should be managed as clinically appropriate (see section 4.8).
Haematological adverse reactions: anaemia, neutropenia and leucopenia (usually secondary to neutropenia) can be expected to occur in patients receiving zidovudine.
These occurred more frequently at higher zidovudine dosages (1200-1500 mg/ day) and in patients with poor bone marrow reserve prior to treatment, particularly with advanced HIV disease.
Haematological parameters should therefore be carefully monitored (see section 4.3) in patients receiving Trizivir.
These haematological effects are not usually observed before four to six week’ s therapy.
For patients with advanced symptomatic HIV disease, it is generally recommended that blood tests are performed at least every two weeks for the first three months of therapy and at least monthly thereafter.
In patients with early HIV disease haematological adverse reactions are infrequent.
Depending on the overall condition of the patient, blood tests may be performed less often, for example every one to three months.
Additionally dosage adjustment of zidovudine may be required if severe anaemia or myelosuppression occurs during treatment with Trizivir, or in patients with pre-existing bone marrow compromise e. g. haemoglobin < 9 g/ dl (5.59 mmol/ l) or neutrophil count < 1.0 x 109/ l (see section 4.2).
As dosage adjustment of Trizivir is not possible separate preparations of zidovudine, abacavir and lamivudine should be used.
Physicians should refer to the individual prescribing information for these medicinal products.
Pancreatitis: cases of pancreatitis have occurred rarely in patients treated with abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine.
However it is not clear whether these cases were due to treatment with these medicinal products or to the underlying HIV disease.
Treatment with Trizivir should be stopped immediately if clinical signs, symptoms or laboratory abnormalities suggestive of pancreatitis occur.
Liver disease: if lamivudine is being used concomitantly for the treatment of HIV and HBV, additional information relating to the use of lamivudine in the treatment of hepatitis B infection is available in the Zeffix SPC.
The safety and efficacy of Trizivir has not been established in patients with significant underlying liver disorders.
Trizivir is contraindicated in patients with hepatic impairment (see section 4.3).
6 Patients with chronic hepatitis B or C and treated with combination antiretroviral therapy are at an increased risk of severe and potentially fatal hepatic adverse events.
In case of concomitant antiviral therapy for hepatitis B or C, please refer also to the relevant product information for these medicinal products.
If Trizivir is discontinued in patients co-infected with hepatitis B virus, periodic monitoring of both liver function tests and markers of HBV replication is recommended, as withdrawal of lamivudine may result in an acute exacerbation of hepatitis (see Zeffix SPC).
Patients with pre-existing liver dysfunction including chronic active hepatitis have an increased frequency of liver function abnormalities during combination antiretroviral therapy and should be monitored according to standard practice.
If there is evidence of worsening liver disease in such patients, interruption or discontinuation of treatment must be considered.
Patients co-infected with hepatitis C virus:
The comcomitant use of ribavirin with zidovudine is not recommended due to an increased risk of anaemia (see section 4.5).
Children and adolescents: because insufficient data are available, the use of Trizivir in children or adolescents is not recommended.
In this patient population, hypersensitivity reactions are particularly difficult to identify.
Immune Reactivation Syndrome: in HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of institution of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic pathogens may arise and cause serious clinical conditions, or aggravation of symptoms.
Typically, such reactions have been observed within the first few weeks or months of initiation of CART.
Relevant examples are cytomegalovirus retinitis, generalised and/ or focal mycobacterium infections, and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Any inflammatory symptoms should be evaluated and treatment instituted when necessary.
Osteonecrosis:
Although the etiology is considered to be multifactorial (including corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe immunosuppression, higher body mass index), cases of osteonecrosis have been reported particularly in patients with advanced HIV-disease and/ or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
Patients should be advised to seek medical advice if they experience joint aches and pain, joint stiffness or difficulty in movement.
Opportunistic infections: patients should be advised that Trizivir or any other antiretroviral therapy does not cure HIV infection and that they may still develop opportunistic infections and other complications of HIV infection.
Therefore patients should remain under close clinical observation by physicians experienced in the treatment of these associated HIV diseases.
Miscellaneous: patients should be advised that current antiretroviral therapy, including Trizivir, has not been proven to prevent the risk of transmission of HIV to others through sexual contact or blood contamination.
Appropriate precautions should continue to be taken.
To date there are insufficient data on the efficacy and safety of Trizivir given concomitantly with NNRTIs or PIs (see section 5.1).
The concomitant use of stavudine with zidovudine should be avoided (see section 4.5).
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
As Trizivir contains abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine, any interactions that have been identified with these agents individually may occur with Trizivir.
The likelihood of metabolic interactions with lamivudine is low due to limited metabolism and plasma protein binding, and almost complete renal clearance.
Zidovudine is primarily eliminated by hepatic
7 conjugation to an inactive glucuronidated metabolite.
Medicinal products that are primarily eliminated by hepatic metabolism especially via glucuronidation may have the potential to inhibit metabolism of zidovudine.
Based on the results of in vitro experiments and the known major metabolic pathways of abacavir, the potential for P450 mediated interactions with other medicinal products involving abacavir are low.
Clinical studies have shown that there are no clinically significant interactions between abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine.
The interactions listed below should not be considered exhaustive but are representative of the classes of medicinal products where caution should be exercised.
Interactions relevant to abacavir
Based on the results of in vitro experiments and the known major metabolic pathways of abacavir, the potential for P450 mediated interactions with other medicinal products involving abacavir is low.
P450 does not play a major role in the metabolism of abacavir, and abacavir does not inhibit metabolism mediated by CYP 3A4.
Abacavir has also been shown in vitro not to inhibit CYP 3A4, CYP 2C9 or CYP 2D6 enzymes at clinically relevant concentrations.
Therefore, there is little potential for interactions with antiretroviral PIs and other medicinal products metabolised by major P450 enzymes.
Potent enzymatic inducers such as rifampicin, phenobarbital and phenytoin may via their action on UDP-glucuronyltransferases slightly decrease the plasma concentrations of abacavir.
The metabolism of abacavir is altered by concomitant ethanol resulting in an increase in AUC of abacavir of about 41%.
These findings are not considered clinically significant.
Abacavir has no effect on the metabolism of ethanol.
Retinoid compounds are eliminated via alcohol dehydrogenase.
Interaction with abacavir is possible but has not been studied.
In a pharmacokinetic study, coadministration of 600 mg abacavir twice daily with methadone showed a 35% reduction in abacavir Cmax and a 1 hour delay in tmax, but the AUC was unchanged.
The changes in abacavir pharmacokinetics are not considered clinically relevant.
In this study, abacavir increased the mean methadone systemic clearance by 22%.
The induction of drug metabolizing enzymes cannot therefore be excluded.
Patients being treated with methadone and abacavir should be monitored for evidence of withdrawal symptoms indicating under dosing, as occasionally methadone re-titration may be required.
Interactions relevant to lamivudine
The possibility of interactions with other medicinal products administered concurrently with Trizivir should be considered, particularly when the main route of elimination is active renal secretion especially via the cationic transport system e. g. trimethoprim.
Nucleoside analogues (e. g. zidovudine, didanosine and zalcitabine) and other medicinal products (e. g. ranitidine, cimetidine) are eliminated only in part by this mechanism and were shown not to interact with lamivudine.
Administration of trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole 160 mg/ 800 mg results in a 40% increase in lamivudine exposure, because of the trimethoprim component; the sulfamethoxazole component does not interact.
However, unless the patient has renal impairment, no dosage adjustment of lamivudine is necessary (see section 4.2).
Lamivudine has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of trimethoprim or sulfamethoxazole.
When concomitant administration with co-trimoxazole is warranted, patients should be monitored clinically.
Co-administration of Trizivir with high doses of co-trimoxazole for the treatment of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) and toxoplasmosis should be avoided.
Co-administration of lamivudine with intravenous ganciclovir or foscarnet is not recommended until further information is available.
8 Lamivudine may inhibit the intracellular phosphorylation of zalcitabine when the two medicinal products are used concurrently.
Trizivir is therefore not recommended to be used in combination with zalcitabine.
Lamivudine metabolism does not involve CYP 3A, making interactions with medicinal products metabolised by this system (e. g.
PIs and non-nucleosides) unlikely.
Interactions relevant to zidovudine
Limited data suggests that co-administration of zidovudine and rifampicin decreases the AUC of zidovudine by 48% ± 34%.
However the clinical significance of this is unknown.
Dose modifications of zidovudine in this situation have not been formally evaluated.
Limited data suggest that probenecid increases the mean half-life and area under the plasma concentration curve of zidovudine by decreasing glucuronidation.
Renal excretion of the glucuronide (and possibly zidovudine itself) is reduced in the presence of probenecid.
Patients receiving both drugs should be closely monitored for haematological toxicity.
Phenytoin blood levels have been reported to be low in some patients receiving zidovudine, while in one patient a high level was noted.
These observations suggest that phenytoin concentrations should be carefully monitored in patients receiving Trizivir and phenytoin.
In a pharmacokinetic study co-administration of zidovudine and atovaquone tablets showed a decrease in zidovudine clearance after oral dosing leading to a 35% ± 23% increase in plasma zidovudine AUC.
The mode of interaction is unknown and as higher concentrations of atovaquone can be achieved with atovaquone suspension it is possible that greater changes in the AUC values for zidovudine might be induced when atovaquone is administered as a suspension.
Given the limited data available the clinical significance of this is unknown.
Valproic acid, fluconazole or methadone when co-administered with zidovudine have been shown to increase the AUC of zidovudine, with a corresponding decrease in its clearance.
As only limited data are available the clinical significance of this is not known.
If zidovudine is used concurrently with either valproic acid, fluconazole or methadone, patients should be monitored closely for potential toxicity of zidovudine.
Zidovudine and stavudine in combination are antagonistic in vitro, therefore, the concomitant use of stavudine with Trizivir should be avoided (see Section 4.4).
Exacerbation of anaemia due to ribavirin has been reported when zidovudine is part of the regimen used to treat HIV although the exact mechanism remains to be elucidated.
The concomitant use of ribavirin with zidovudine is not recommended due to an increased risk of anaemia (see section 4.4).
Consideration should be given to replacing zidovudine in a combination ART regimen if this is already established.
This would be particularly important in patients with a known history of zidovudine induced anaemia.
Concomitant treatment, especially acute therapy, with potentially nephrotoxic or myelosuppressive medicinal products (e. g. systemic pentamidine, dapsone, pyrimethamine, co-trimoxazole, amphotericin, flucytosine, ganciclovir, interferon, vincristine, vinblastine and doxorubicin) may also increase the risk of adverse reactions to zidovudine.
If concomitant therapy with Trizivir and any of these medicinal products is necessary then extra care should be taken in monitoring renal function and haematological parameters and, if required, the dosage of one or more agents should be reduced.
Limited data from clinical trials do not indicate a significantly increased risk of adverse reactions to zidovudine with co-trimoxazole (see interaction information above relating to lamivudine and cotrimoxazole) aerosolised pentamidine, pyrimethamine and acyclovir at doses used in prophylaxis.
Co-administration of Trizivir with high doses of co-trimoxazole for the treatment of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) and toxoplasmosis should be avoided.
9 Clarithromycin tablets reduce the absorption of zidovudine.
This can be avoided by separating the administration of Trizivir and clarithromycin by at least two hours.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Pregnancy
Trizivir is not recommended during pregnancy.
There are no data on the use of Trizivir in pregnancy.
Placental transfer of lamivudine and zidovudine occurs in humans, and for abacavir has been confirmed in animals.
Studies with abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine in animals have shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3).
As the active substances of Trizivir may inhibit DNA replication any use, especially during the first trimester, presents a potential risk to the foetus.
Lactation
Both lamivudine and zidovudine are excreted in human milk at similar concentrations to those found in serum.
It is expected that abacavir will also be secreted into human milk, although this has not been confirmed.
It is therefore recommended that mothers do not breast-feed their babies while receiving treatment with Trizivir.
Additionally, it is recommended that HIV infected women do not breast-feed their infants under any circumstances in order to avoid transmission of HIV.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
The clinical status of the patient and the adverse event profile of Trizivir should be borne in mind when considering the patient’ s ability to drive or operate machinery.
4.8 Undesirable effects
Overview
Adverse reactions have been reported with abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine used separately or in combination for therapy of HIV disease.
Because Trizivir contains abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine, the adverse reactions associated with these compounds may be expected.
Hypersensitivity to abacavir (see also section 4.4):
In clinical studies, approximately 5% of subjects receiving abacavir developed a hypersensitivity reaction; some of these were life-threatening and resulted in fatal outcome despite taking precautions.
This reaction is characterised by the appearance of symptoms indicating multi-organ/ body-system involvement.
Almost all patients developing hypersensitivity reactions will have fever and/ or rash (usually maculopapular or urticarial) as part of the syndrome, however hypersensitivity reactions have occurred without rash or fever.
The signs and symptoms associated with hypersensitivity to abacavir are summarised in Table 1.
These have been identified either from clinical studies or post marketing surveillance.
Some patients with hypersensitivity reactions were initially thought to have gastroenteritis, respiratory disease (pneumonia, bronchitis, pharyngitis) or a flu-like illness.
This delay in diagnosis of hypersensitivity has resulted in abacavir being continued or re-introduced, leading to more severe hypersensitivity reactions or death.
Therefore, the diagnosis of hypersensitivity reaction should be carefully considered for patients presenting with symptoms of these diseases.
10 Symptoms usually appeared within the first six weeks (median time to onset 11 days) of initiation of treatment with abacavir, although these reactions may occur at any time during therapy.
Close medical supervision is necessary during the first two months, with consultations every two weeks.
It is likely that intermittent therapy may increase the risk of developing sensitisation and therefore occurrence of clinically significant hypersensitivity reactions.
Consequently, patients should be advised of the importance of taking Trizivir regularly.
Restarting Trizivir, or any other medicinal product containing abacavir, following a hypersensitivity reaction would result in a prompt return of symptoms within hours.
This recurrence of the hypersensitivity reaction was usually more severe than on initial presentation and may include life- threatening hypotension and death.
Patients who develop this hypersensitivity reaction must discontinue Trizivir and must never be rechallenged with Trizivir, or any other medicinal product containing abacavir (i. e.
Kivexa, Ziagen).
To avoid a delay in diagnosis and minimise the risk of a life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction, Trizivir must be permanently discontinued if hypersensitivity cannot be ruled out, even when other diagnoses are possible (respiratory disease, flu-like illness, gastroenteritis or reactions to other medications).
Hypersensitivity reactions with rapid onset, including life-threatening reactions have occurred after restarting abacavir in patients who had only one of the key symptoms of hypersensitivity (skin rash, fever, gastrointestinal, respiratory or constitutional symptoms such as lethargy and malaise) prior to stopping abacavir.
The most common isolated symptom of a hypersensitivity reaction was a skin rash.
Moreover, on very rare occasions hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in patients who have restarted therapy and who had no preceding symptoms of a hypersensitivity reaction.
In both cases if a decision is made to restart Trizivir this must be done in a setting where medical assistance is readily available.
Each patient must be warned about this hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir.
Table 1:
Summary of signs and symptoms associated with hypersensitivity to abacavir (Signs and symptoms reported in at least 10% of patients with a hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir are in bold text).
Body system
Adverse reactions
Gastrointestinal tract
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, mouth ulceration
Neurological/ psychiatry
Headache, paraesthesia
Haematological
Lymphopenia
Liver/ pancreas
Elevated liver function tests, hepatitis, hepatic failure
Musculoskeletal
Myalgia, rarely myolysis, arthralgia, elevated creatine phosphokinase
Respiratory tract
Dyspnoea, sore throat, cough, adult respiratory distress syndrome, respiratory failure
Skin
Rash (usually maculopapular or urticarial)
Urology
Elevated creatinine, renal failure
Miscellaneous
Fever, lethargy, malaise, oedema, lymphadenopathy, hypotension, conjunctivitis, anaphylaxis
11 Undesirable effects reported with the individual substances The adverse reactions reported with abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine are presented in Table 2.
They are listed by body system, organ class and absolute frequency.
Frequencies are defined as very common (> 1/ 10), common (> 1/ 100 ,< 1/10), uncommon (> 1/ 1000 ,< 1/100), rare (> 1/ 10,000, < 1/ 1000), very rare (< 1/ 10,000).
Care must be taken to eliminate the possibility of a hypersensitivity reaction if any of these symptoms occur.
Table 2:
Adverse reactions reported with the individual components of Trizivir
Abacavir
Lamivudine
Zidovudine
IMPORTANT: for information on abacavir hypersensitivity, see the description above in the boxed information and Table 1
Blood and lymphatic system disorders
Uncommon: neutropenia, anaemia (both occasionally severe), thrombocytopenia Very rare: pure red cell aplasia
Common: anaemia, neutropenia and leucopenia Uncommon: thrombocytopenia and pancytopenia with marrow hypoplasia Rare: pure red cell aplasia Very rare: aplastic anaemia
Immune system disorders
Common: hypersensitivity
Metabolism and nutrition disorders
Common: anorexia
Rare: anorexia, lactic acidosis in the absence of hypoxaemia
Psychiatric disorders
Rare: anxiety, depression
Nervous system disorders Common: headache
Common: headache, insomnia
Very common: headache
Cardiac disorders
Very rare: peripheral neuropathy (paraesthesiae)
Common: dizziness Rare: insomnia, paraesthesia, somnolence, loss of mental acuity, convulsions
Rare: cardiomyopathy
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders
12
Common: cough, nasal symptoms
Uncommon: dyspnoea Rare: cough
Abacavir
Lamivudine
Zidovudine
Gastrointestinal disorders
Common: nausea, vomiting, Common: nausea, vomiting,
Very common:
Nausea
diarrhoea Rare: pancreatitis
abdominal pain, diarrhoea Rare: rises in serum amylase, pancreatitis
Common: vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhoea Uncommon: flatulence Rare: oral mucosa pigmentation, taste disturbance dyspepsia, pancreatitis
Hepatobiliary disorders
Uncommon: transient rises in liver enzymes (AST, ALT) Rare: hepatitis
Common: raised blood levels of liver enzymes and bilirubin Rare: liver disorders such as severe hepatomegaly with steatosis,
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
Common: rash (without systemic symptoms) Very rare: erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis
Common: rash, alopecia
Uncommon: rash and pruritus Rare: nail and skin pigmentation, urticaria and sweating
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders
Common: arthralgia, muscle disorders Rare: rhabdomyolysis
Common: myalgia Uncommon: myopathy
Renal and urinary disorders
Rare: urinary frequency
Reproductive system and breast disorders
Rare: gynaecomastia
General disorders and administration site conditions
Common: fever, lethargy, fatigue
Common: fatigue, malaise, fever
Common: malaise Uncommon: fever, generalised pain and asthenia Rare: chills, chest pain, and influenza-like syndrome
Adverse reactions associated with
abacavir:
13 Many of the adverse reactions listed above occur commonly (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fever, lethargy, rash) in patients with abacavir hypersensitivity.
Therefore, patients with any of these symptoms should be carefully evaluated for the presence of this hypersensitivity reaction.
If Trizivir has been discontinued in patients due to experiencing any one of these symptoms and a decision is made to restart a medicinal product containing abacavir, this must be done in a setting where medical assistance is readily available (see Section 4.4).
Very rarely cases of erythema multiforme, Stevens Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis have been reported where abacavir hypersensitivity could not be ruled out.
In such cases medicinal products containing abacavir should be permanently discontinued.
Haematological adverse reactions with zidovudine
Anaemia, neutropenia and leucopenia occurred more frequently at higher dosages (1200-1500 mg/ day) and in patients with advanced HIV disease (especially when there is poor bone marrow reserve prior to treatment) and particularly in patients with CD4 cell counts less than 100/ mm3.
Dosage reduction or cessation of therapy may become necessary (see section 4.4).
The anaemia may necessitate transfusions.
The incidence of neutropenia was also increased in those patients whose neutrophil counts, haemoglobin levels and serum vitamin B12 levels were low at the start of zidovudine therapy.
Lactic acidosis
Treatment with nucleoside analogues has been associated with cases of lactic acidosis, sometimes fatal, usually associated with severe hepatomegaly and hepatic steatosis, (see section 4.4).
Lipodystrophy/ metabolic abnormalities
Combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with redistribution of body fat (lipodystrophy) in HIV patients including the loss of peripheral and facial subcutaneous fat, increased intra-abdominal and visceral fat, breast hypertrophy and dorsocervical fat accumulation (buffalo hump).
Combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with metabolic abnormalities such as hypertriglyceridaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, insulin resistance, hyperglycaemia and hyperlactataemia (see section 4.4).
Immune Reactivation Syndrome
In HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of initiation of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic infections may arise (see section 4.4).
Osteonecrosis
Cases of osteonecrosis have been reported, particularly in patients with generally acknowledged risk factors, advanced HIV disease or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
The frequency of this is unknown (see section 4.4).
4.9 Overdose
There is no experience of overdose with Trizivir.
No specific symptoms or signs have been identified following acute overdose with zidovudine or lamivudine apart from those listed as undesirable effects.
No fatalities occurred, and all patients recovered.
Single doses up to 1200 mg and daily doses up to 1800 mg of abacavir have been administered to patients in clinical studies.
No unexpected adverse reactions were reported.
The effects of higher doses are not known.
14 If overdose occurs the patient should be monitored for evidence of toxicity (see section 4.8), and standard supportive treatment applied as necessary.
Since lamivudine is dialysable, continuous haemodialysis could be used in the treatment of overdose, although this has not been studied.
Haemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis appear to have a limited effect on elimination of zidovudine, but enhance the elimination of the glucuronide metabolite.
It is not known whether abacavir can be removed by peritoneal dialysis or haemodialysis.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Antivirals for treatment of HIV infections, combinations.
ATC Code:
J05AR04.
Mechanism of action: Abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine are all NRTIs, and are potent selective inhibitors of HIV-1 and HIV-2. All three medicinal products are metabolised sequentially by intracellular kinases to the respective 5′ -triphosphate (TP).
Lamivudine-TP, carbovir-TP (the active triphosphate form of abacavir) and zidovudine-TP are substrates for and competitive inhibitors of HIV reverse transcriptase (RT).
However, their main antiviral activity is through incorporation of the monophosphate form into the viral DNA chain, resulting in chain termination.
Abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine triphosphates show significantly less affinity for host cell DNA polymerases.
Lamivudine has been shown to be highly synergistic with zidovudine, inhibiting the replication of HIV in cell culture.
Abacavir shows synergy in vitro in combination with nevirapine and zidovudine.
It has been shown to be additive in combination with didanosine,, stavudine and lamivudine.
In vitro resistance:
HIV-1 resistance to lamivudine involves the development of a M184I or, more commonly, M184V amino acid change close to the active site of the viral RT.
Abacavir-resistant isolates of HIV-1 have been selected in vitro and are associated with specific genotypic changes in the RT codon region (codons M184V, K65R, L74V and Y115F).
Viral resistance to abacavir develops relatively slowly in vitro, requiring multiple mutations for a clinically relevant increase in EC50 over wild-type virus.
In vivo resistance (Therapy naïve patients):
The M184V or M184I variants arise in HIV-1 infected patients treated with lamivudine-containing antiretroviral therapy.
Most patients experiencing virological failure with a regimen containing abacavir in a pivotal clinical trial with Combivir (fixed dose combination of lamivudine and zidovudine) showed either no NRTI-related changes from baseline (15%) or only M184V or M184I selection (78%).
The overall selection frequency for M184V or M184I was high (85%), and selection of L74V, K65R and Y115F was not observed (see Table).
Thymidine analogue mutations (TAMs) which are selected by zidovudine (ZDV) were also found (8%).
15
Therapy
Abacavir + Combivir
Number of Subjects
282
Number of Virological Failures
43
Number of On-Therapy Genotypes
40 (100%)
K65R L74V Y115F M184V/ I TAMs1 1.
Number of subjects with ≥ 1 TAM.
0 0 0 34 (85%) 3 (8%)
TAMs might be selected when thymidine analogs are associated with abacavir.
In a meta-analysis of six clinical trials, TAMs were not selected by regimens containing abacavir without zidovudine (0/ 127), but were selected by regimens containing abacavir and the thymidine analogue zidovudine (22/ 86, 26%).
In addition, the selection of L74V and K65R was reduced when co-administered with ZDV (K65R: without ZDV:
13/ 127, 10%; with ZDV:
1/ 86, 1%; L74V: without ZDV:
51/ 127, 40%; with ZDV:
2/ 86, 2%).
In vivo resistance (Therapy experienced patients):
The M184V or M184I variants arise in HIV-1 infected patients treated with lamivudine-containing antiretroviral therapy and confers high-level resistance to lamivudine.
In vitro data tend to suggest that the continuation of lamivudine in anti- retroviral regimen despite the development of M184V might provide residual anti-retroviral activity (likely through impaired viral fitness).
The clinical relevance of these findings is not established.
Indeed, the available clinical data are very limited and preclude any reliable conclusion in the field.
In any case, initiation of susceptible NRTIs should always be preferred to maintenance of lamivudine therapy.
Therefore, maintaining lamivudine therapy despite emergence of M184V mutation should only be considered in cases where no other active NRTIs are available.
Similarly, the presence of TAMs gives rise to resistance to ZDV.
Clinically significant reduction of susceptibility to abacavir has been demonstrated in clinical isolates of patients with uncontrolled viral replication, who have been pre-treated with and are resistant to other nucleoside inhibitors.
In a meta-analysis of five clinical trials where abacavir was added to intensify therapy, of 166 subjects, 123 (74%) had M184V/ I, 50 (30%) had T215Y/ F, 45 (27%) had M41L, 30 (18%) had K70R and 25 (15%) had D67N.
K65R was absent and L74V and Y115F were uncommon (≤ 3%).
Logistic regression modelling of the predictive value for genotype (adjusted for baseline plasma HIV-1 RNA [vRNA], CD4+ cell count, number and duration of prior antiretroviral therapies) showed that the presence of 3 or more NRTI resistance-associated mutations was associated with reduced response at Week 4 (p=0.015) or 4 or more mutations at median Week 24 (p≤ 0.012).
In addition, the 69 insertion complex or the Q151M mutation, usually found in combination with A62V, V75I, F77L and F116Y, cause a high level of resistance to abacavir.
16 Week 4
Baseline Reverse Transcriptase
Median
(n = 166) Percent with
Mutatio
n n
Change vRNA (log10 c/ mL)
< 400 copies/ mL vRNA
None
15
-0.96
40%
M184V alone
75
-0.74
64%
Any one NRTI
mutation
82
-0.72
65%
Any two NRTI-
associated mutations Any three NRTI-
22
-0.82
32%
associated mutations Four or more NRTI-
19
-0.30
5%
associated mutations
28
-0.07
11%
Phenotypic resistance and cross-resistance:
Phenotypic resistance to abacavir requires M184V with at least one other abacavir-selected mutation, or M184V with multiple TAMs.
Phenotypic cross- resistance to other NRTIs with M184V or M184I mutation alone is limited.
Zidovudine, didanosine, stavudine and tenofovir maintain their antiretroviral activities against such HIV-1 variants.
The presence of M184V with K65R does give rise to cross-resistance between abacavir, tenofovir, didanosine and lamivudine, and M184V with L74V gives rise to cross-resistance between abacavir, didanosine and lamivudine.
The presence of M184V with Y115F gives rise to cross-resistance between abacavir and lamivudine.
Appropriate use of abacavir can be guided using currently recommended resistance algorithms.
Cross-resistance between abacavir, lamivudine or zidovudine and antiretrovirals from other classes e. g.
PIs or NNRTIs is unlikely.
Clinical experience
One randomised, double blind, placebo controlled clinical study has compared the combination of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine to the combination of indinavir, lamivudine and zidovudine in treatment naive patients.
Due to the high proportion of premature discontinuation (42% of patients discontinued randomised treatment by week 48), no definitive conclusion can be drawn regarding the equivalence between the treatment regimens at week 48.
Although a similar antiviral effect was observed between the abacavir and indinavir containing regimens in terms of proportion of patients with undetectable viral load (≤ 400 copies/ ml; intention to treat analysis (ITT), 47% versus 49%; as treated analysis (AT), 86% versus 94% for abacavir and indinavir combinations respectively), results favoured the indinavir combination, particularly in the subset of patients with high viral load (> 100,000 copies/ ml at baseline; ITT, 46% versus 55%; AT, 84% versus 93% for abacavir and indinavir respectively).
ACTG5095 was a randomised (1:1:1), double-blind, placebo-controlled trial performed in 1147 antiretroviral naïve HIV-1 infected adults, comparing 3 regimens: zidovudine (ZDV), lamivudine (3TC), abacavir (ABC), efavirenz (EFV) vs ZDV/ 3TC/ EFV vs ZDV/ 3TC/ ABC.
After a median follow-up of 32 weeks, the tritherapy with the three nucleosides ZDV/ 3TC/ ABC was shown to be virologically inferior to the two other arms regardless of baseline viral load (< or > 100 000 copies/ml) with 26% of subjects on the ZDV/3TC/ABC arm, 16% on the ZDV/3TC/EFV arm and 13% on the 4 drug arm categorised as having virological failure (HIV RNA > 200 copies/ml).
At week 48 the proportion of subjects with HIV RNA < 50 copies/ ml were 63%, 80% and 86% for the ZDV/ 3TC/ ABC, ZDV/ 3TC/ EFV and ZDV/ 3TC/ ABC/ EFV arms, respectively.
The study Data Safety Monitoring Board stopped the ZDV/ 3TC/ ABC arm at this time based on the higher proportion of patients with virologic failure.
The remaining arms were continued in a blinded fashion.
After a median follow-up of 144 weeks, 25% of subjects on the ZDV/ 3TC/ ABC/ EFV arm and 26% on the ZDV/ 3TC/ EFV arm were categorised as having virological failure.
There was no significant
17 difference in the time to first virologic failure (p=0.73, log-rank test) between the 2 arms.
In this study, addition of ABC to ZDV/ 3TC/ EFV did not significantly improve efficacy.
ZDV/ 3TC/ ABC
ZDV/ 3TC/ EFV
ZDV/ 3TC/ ABC/ EFV
Virologic failure (HIV 32 weeks RNA > 200 copies/ ml) 144 weeks Virologic success (48 weeks HIV RNA < 50 copies/ ml)
26% - 63%
16% 26% 80%
13% 25% 86%
In an ongoing clinical study over 16 weeks in treatment-naive patients, the combination of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine showed a similar antiviral effect to the combination with nelfinavir, lamivudine and zidovudine.
In antiretroviral-naïve patients the triple combination of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine was superior in terms of durability of viral load response over 48 weeks to lamivudine and zidovudine.
In a similar patient population durability of antiviral response over 120 weeks was demonstrated in approximately 70% of subjects.
In antiretroviral-naive patients treated with a combination of abacavir, lamivudine, zidovudine and efavirenz in a small, ongoing, open label pilot study, the proportion of patients with undetectable viral load (< 400 copies/ ml) was approximately 90% with 80% having < 50 copies/ ml after 24 weeks of treatment.
In patients with a low baseline viral load (< 5,000 copies/ ml) and moderate exposure to antiretroviral therapy, addition of abacavir to previous treatment including lamivudine and zidovudine, produced a moderate impact on viral load at 48 weeks.
Currently there are no data on the use of Trizivir in heavily pre-treated patients, patients failing on other therapies or patients with advanced disease (CD4 cells < 50 cells/ mm3).
The degree of benefit of this nucleoside combination in heavily pre-treated patients will depend on the nature and duration of prior therapy that may have selected for HIV-1 variants with cross-resistance to abacavir, lamivudine or zidovudine.
To date there are insufficient data on the efficacy and safety of Trizivir given concomitantly with NNRTIs or PIs.
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption
Abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine are rapidly and well absorbed from the gastro-intestinal tract following oral administration.
The absolute bioavailability of oral abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine in adults is about 83%, 80 - 85% and 60 - 70% respectively.
In a pharmacokinetic study in HIV-1 infected patients, the steady state pharmacokinetic parameters of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine were similar when either Trizivir alone or the combination tablet lamivudine/ zidovudine and abacavir in combination were administered, and also similar to the values obtained in the bioequivalence study of Trizivir in healthy volunteers.
A bioequivalence study compared Trizivir with abacavir 300 mg, lamivudine 150 mg and zidovudine 300 mg taken together.
The effect of food on the rate and extent of absorption was also studied.
Trizivir was shown to be bioequivalent to abacavir 300 mg, lamivudine 150 mg and zidovudine 300 mg given as separate tablets for AUC0-∞ and Cmax.
Food decreased the rate of absorption of Trizivir (slight decrease Cmax (mean 18 - 32%) and increase tmax (approximately 1 hour), but not the
18 extent of absorption (AUC0-∞).
These changes are not considered clinically relevant and no food restrictions are recommended for administration of Trizivir.
At a therapeutic dosage (one Trizivir tablet twice daily) in patients, the mean (CV) steady-state Cmax of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine in plasma are 3.49 µg/ ml (45%), 1.33 µg/ ml (33%) and 1.56 µg/ ml (83%), respectively.
Corresponding values for Cmin could not be established for abacavir and are 0.14 µg/ ml (70%) for lamivudine and 0.01 µg/ ml (64%) for zidovudine.
The mean (CV) AUCs for abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine over a dosing interval of 12 hours are 6.39 µg. h/ ml (31%), 5.73 µg. h/ ml (31%) and 1.50 µg. h/ ml (47%), respectively.
A modest increase in Cmax (28%) was observed for zidovudine when administered with lamivudine, however overall exposure (AUC) was not significantly altered.
Zidovudine has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of lamivudine.
An effect of abacavir is observed on zidovudine (Cmax reduced with 20%) and on lamivudine (Cmax reduced with 35%).
Distribution
Intravenous studies with abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine showed that the mean apparent volume of distribution is 0.8, 1.3 and 1.6 l/ kg respectively.
Lamivudine exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over the therapeutic dose range and displays limited binding to the major plasma protein albumin (< 36% serum albumin in vitro).
Zidovudine plasma protein binding is 34% to 38%.
Plasma protein binding studies in vitro indicate that abacavir binds only low to moderately (~ 49%) to human plasma proteins at therapeutic concentrations.
This indicates a low likelihood for interactions with other medicinal products through plasma protein binding displacement.
Interactions involving binding site displacement are not anticipated with Trizivir.
Data show that abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine penetrate the central nervous system (CNS) and reach the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
The mean ratios of CSF/ serum lamivudine and zidovudine concentrations 2 - 4 hours after oral administration were approximately 0.12 and 0.5 respectively.
The true extent of CNS penetration of lamivudine and its relationship with any clinical efficacy is unknown.
Studies with abacavir demonstrate a CSF to plasma AUC ratio of between 30 to 44%.
The observed values of the peak concentrations are 9 fold greater than the IC50 of abacavir of 0.08 µg/ ml or 0.26 µM when abacavir is given at 600 mg twice daily.
Metabolism
Metabolism of lamivudine is a minor route of elimination.
Lamivudine is predominately cleared by renal excretion of unchanged lamivudine.
The likelihood of metabolic drug interactions with lamivudine is low due to the small extent of hepatic metabolism (5 - 10%) and low plasma binding.
The 5’ -glucuronide of zidovudine is the major metabolite in both plasma and urine, accounting for approximately 50 - 80% of the administered dose eliminated by renal excretion.
3’ -amino-3’ - deoxythymidine (AMT) has been identified as a metabolite of zidovudine following intravenous dosing.
Abacavir is primarily metabolised by the liver with approximately 2% of the administered dose being renally excreted, as unchanged compound.
The primary pathways of metabolism in man are by alcohol dehydrogenase and by glucuronidation to produce the 5’ -carboxylic acid and 5’ -glucuronide which account for about 66% of the dose excreted in the urine.
Elimination
The observed lamivudine half-life of elimination is 5 to 7 hours.
The mean systemic clearance of lamivudine is approximately 0.32 l/ h/ kg, with predominantly renal clearance (> 70%) via the organic
19 cationic transport system.
Studies in patients with renal impairment show lamivudine elimination is affected by renal dysfunction.
Dose reduction is required for patients with creatinine clearance ≤ 50 ml/ min (see section 4.2).
From studies with intravenous zidovudine, the mean terminal plasma half-life was 1.1 hours and the mean systemic clearance was 1.6 l/ h/ kg.
Renal clearance of zidovudine is estimated to be 0.34 l/ h/ kg, indicating glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion by the kidneys.
Zidovudine concentrations are increased in patients with advanced renal failure.
The mean half-life of abacavir is about 1.5 hours.
Following multiple oral doses of abacavir 300 mg twice a day there is no significant accumulation of abacavir.
Elimination of abacavir is via hepatic metabolism with subsequent excretion of metabolites primarily in the urine.
The metabolites and unchanged abacavir account for about 83% of the administered abacavir dose in the urine the remainder is eliminated in the faeces.
Special populations
Hepatically impaired:
There are no data available on the use of Trizivir in hepatically impaired patients.
Limited data in patients with cirrhosis suggest that accumulation of zidovudine may occur in patients with hepatic impairment because of decreased glucuronidation.
Data obtained in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment show that lamivudine pharmacokinetics are not significantly affected by hepatic dysfunction.
Abacavir is metabolised primarily by the liver.
The pharmacokinetics of abacavir have been studied in patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score 5-6) receiving a single 600 mg dose.
The results showed that there was a mean increase of 1.89 fold [1.32; 2.70] in the abacavir AUC, and 1.58 [1.22; 2.04] fold in the elimination half-life.
No recommendation on dosage reduction is possible in patients with mild hepatic impairment due to substantial variability of abacavir exposure in this patient population.
The pharmacokinetics of abacavir have not been studied in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment.
Plasma concentrations of abacavir are expected to be variable and substantially increased in these patients (see section 4.3).
Renally impaired:
The observed lamivudine half-life of elimination is 5 to 7 hours.
The mean systemic clearance of lamivudine is approximately 0.32 l/ h/ kg, with predominantly renal clearance (> 70%) via the organic cationic transport system.
Studies in patients with renal impairment show lamivudine elimination is affected by renal dysfunction.
From studies with intravenous zidovudine, the mean terminal plasma half-life was 1.1 hours and the mean systemic clearance was 1.6 l/ h/ kg.
Renal clearance of zidovudine is estimated to be 0.34 l/ h/ kg, indicating glomerular filtration and active tubular secretion by the kidneys.
Zidovudine concentrations are increased in patients with advanced renal failure.
Abacavir is primarily metabolised by the liver with approximately 2% of abacavir excreted unchanged in the urine.
The pharmacokinetics of abacavir in patients with end-stage renal disease is similar to patients with normal renal function, and, therefore, no dose reduction is required in patients with renal impairment.
As dosage adjustments of lamivudine and zidovudine may be necessary it is recommended that separate preparations of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine be administered to patients with reduced renal function (creatinine clearance ≤ 50 ml/ min).
Trizivir is contraindicated in patients with end-stage renal disease (see section 4.3).
Elderly:
No pharmacokinetic data are available in patients over 65 years of age.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
20 There are no data available on treatment with the combination of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine in animals.
The clinically relevant toxicological effects of these three medicinal products are anaemia, neutropenia and leucopenia.
Mutagenicity and carcinogenicity
Neither abacavir, lamivudine nor zidovudine is mutagenic in bacterial tests, but like many nucleoside analogues they show activity in the in vitro mammalian tests such as the mouse lymphoma assay.
This is consistent with the known activity of other nucleoside analogues.
Lamivudine has not shown any genotoxic activity in the in vivo studies at doses that gave plasma concentrations up to 40 - 50 times higher than clinical plasma levels.
Zidovudine showed clastogenic effects in oral repeated dose micronucleus tests in mice and rats.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes from AIDS patients receiving zidovudine treatment have also been observed to contain higher numbers of chromosome breakages.
A pilot study has demonstrated that zidovudine is incorporated into leukocyte nuclear DNA of adults, including pregnant women, taking zidovudine as treatment for HIV-1 infection, or for the prevention of mother to child viral transmission.
Zidovudine was also incorporated into DNA from cord blood leukocytes of infants from zidovudine-treated mothers.
A transplacental genotoxicity study conducted in monkeys compared zidovudine alone with the combination of zidovudine and lamivudine at human- equivalent exposures.
The study demonstrated that foetuses exposed in utero to the combination sustained a higher level of nucleoside analogue-DNA incorporation into multiple foetal organs, and showed evidence of more telomere shortening than in those exposed to zidovudine alone.
The clinical significance of these findings is unknown.
Abacavir has a weak potential to cause chromosomal damage both in vitro and in vivo at high test concentrations and therefore any potential risk to man must be balanced against the expected benefits of treatment.
The carcinogenic potential of a combination of abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine has not been tested.
In long-term oral carcinogenicity studies in rats and mice, lamivudine did not show any carcinogenic potential.
In oral carcinogenicity studies with zidovudine in mice and rats, late appearing vaginal epithelial tumours were observed.
A subsequent intravaginal carcinogenicity study confirmed the hypothesis that the vaginal tumours were the result of long term local exposure of the rodent vaginal epithelium to high concentrations of unmetabolised zidovudine in urine.
There were no other zidovudine-related tumours observed in either sex of either species.
In addition, two transplacental carcinogenicity studies have been conducted in mice.
In one study, by the US National Cancer Institute, zidovudine was administered at maximum tolerated doses to pregnant mice from day 12 to 18 of gestation.
One year postnatally, there was an increase in the incidence of tumours in the lung, liver and female reproductive tract of offspring exposed to the highest dose level (420 mg/ kg term body weight).
In a second study, mice were administered zidovudine at doses up to 40 mg/ kg for 24 months, with exposure beginning prenatally on gestation day 10.
Treatment related findings were limited to late- occurring vaginal epithelial tumours, which were seen with a similar incidence and time of onset as in the standard oral carcinogenicity study.
The second study thus provided no evidence that zidovudine acts as a transplacental carcinogen.
It is concluded that as the increase in incidence of tumours in the first transplacental carcinogenicity study represents a hypothetical risk, this should be balanced against the proven therapeutic benefit.
Carcinogenicity studies with orally administered abacavir in mice and rats showed an increase in the incidence of malignant and non-malignant tumours.
Malignant tumours occurred in the preputial gland of males and the clitoral gland of females of both species, and in rats in the thyroid gland of males and and in the liver, urinary bladder, lymph nodes and the subcutis of females.
21 The majority of these tumours occurred at the highest abacavir dose of 330 mg/ kg/ day in mice and 600 mg/ kg/ day in rats.
The exception was the preputial gland tumour which occurred at a dose of 110 mg/ kg in mice.
The systemic exposure at the no effect level in mice and rats was equivalent to 3 and 7 times the human systemic exposure during therapy.
While the carcinogenic potential in humans is unknown, these data suggest that a carcinogenic risk to humans is outweighed by the potential clinical benefit.
Repeat-dose toxicity:
In toxicology studies abacavir was shown to increase liver weights in rats and monkeys.
The clinical relevance of this is unknown.
There is no evidence from clinical studies that abacavir is hepatotoxic.
Additionally, autoinduction of abacavir metabolism or induction of the metabolism of other medicinal products hepatically metabolised has not been observed in man.
Mild myocardial degeneration in the heart of mice and rats was observed following administration of abacavir for two years.
The systemic exposures were equivalent to 7 to 24 times the expected systemic exposure in humans.
The clinical relevance of this finding has not been determined.
Reproductive toxicology
Lamivudine was not teratogenic in animal studies but there were indications of an increase in early embryonic deaths in the rabbit at relatively low systemic exposures, comparable to those achieved in humans.
A similar effect was not seen in rats even at very high systemic exposure.
Zidovudine had a similar effect in both species, but only at very high systemic exposures.
At maternally toxic doses, zidovudine given to rats during organogenesis resulted in an increased incidence of malformations, but no evidence of foetal abnormalities was observed at lower doses.
Abacavir demonstrated toxicity to the developing embryo and foetus in rats, but not in rabbits.
These findings included decreased foetal body weight, foetal oedema, and an increase in skeletal variations/ malformations, early intra-uterine deaths and still births.
No conclusion can be drawn with regard to the teratogenic potential of abacavir because of this embryo-foetal toxicity.
A fertility study in the rat has shown that abacavir had no effect on male or female fertility.
Likewise, neither lamivudine nor zidovudine had any effect on fertility.
Zidovudine has not been shown to affect the number of sperm, sperm morphology and motility in man.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Core: microcrystalline cellulose, sodium starch glycollate (type A), magnesium stearate.
Coating:
Opadry Green 03B11434 containing: hypromellose, titanium dioxide, polyethylene glycol, indigo carmine aluminium lake, iron oxide yellow.
6.2 Incompatibilities
Not applicable
6.3 Shelf life
22 2 years
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Do not store above 30°C
6.5 Nature and contents of container
Trizivir tablets are available in opaque PVC/ Aclar blister packs containing 60 tablets or child-resistant HDPE bottles containing 60 tablets.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal and other handling
Any unused product should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 00/ 156/ 002 - Blister pack (60 Tablets) EU/ 1/ 00/ 156/ 003 -Bottle pack (60 Tablets)
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
Date of first authorisation:
28 December 2000
Date of renewal:
28 December 2005
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) http: / /www. emea. europa. eu
23 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
24 A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturer(s) responsible for batch release
Glaxo Operations UK Ltd (trading as Glaxo Wellcome Operations), Priory Street, Ware, Hertfordshire, SG 12 0DJ, UK
Manufacturing Authorisation issued on 30 June 1995 by Medicines Control Agency, Market Towers, 1 Nine Elms Lane, Vauxhall.
London SW8 5 NQ.
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (See Annex I:
Summary of Product Characteristics, section 4.2).
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable.
• OTHER CONDITIONS
The Marketing Authorisation Holder will continue to submit periodic safety update reports and safety information related to updates on activities and investigations on the mechanisms of hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir at six-monthly intervals.
25 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
26 A.
LABELLING
27 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
BLISTER CARTON x 60 FILM-COATED TABLETS
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Trizivir 300 mg/ 150 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine/ zidovudine
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains: abacavir 300 mg (as sulfate) lamivudine 150 mg zidovudine 300 mg
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
60 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use
Read the package leaflet before use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Detach enclosed Alert Card, it contains important safety information
WARNING!
In case of any symptoms suggesting hypersensitivity reactions, contact your doctor IMMEDIATELY.
“ Pull here” (with Alert card attached)
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
28 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 30°C
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 00/ 156/ 002
13.
BATCH NUMBER
LOT
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
29 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS
BLISTER x 60 FILM-COATED TABLETS
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Trizivir 300 mg/ 150 mg/ 300 mg tablets abacavir/ lamivudine/ zidovudine
2.
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
4.
BATCH NUMBER
LOT
5.
OTHER
30 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
BOTTLE CARTON x 60 FILM COATED TABLETS
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Trizivir 300 mg/ 150 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine/ zidovudine
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains: abacavir 300 mg (as sulfate) lamivudine 150 mg zidovudine 300 mg
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
60 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use
Read the package leaflet before use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Detach enclosed Alert Card, it contains important safety information
WARNING!
In case of any symptoms suggesting hypersensitivity reactions, contact your doctor IMMEDIATELY.
“ Pull here” (with Alert card attached)
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
31 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 30°C
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 00/ 156/ 003
13.
BATCH NUMBER
LOT
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
32 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE IMMEDIATE PACKAGING
BOTTLE LABEL x 60 FILM-COATED TABLETS
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Trizivir 300 mg/ 150 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine/ zidovudine
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains: abacavir 300 mg (as sulfate) lamivudine 150 mg zidovudine 300 mg
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
60 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use
Read the package leaflet before use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 30°C
33 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 00/ 156/ 003
13.
BATCH NUMBER
LOT
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
34 TRIZIVIR TABLETS ALERT CARD (blister and bottle pack)
SIDE 1
IMPORTANT - ALERT CARD TRIZIVIR (abacavir sulfate / lamivudine / zidovudine) Tablets Carry this card with you at all times
Since Trizivir contains abacavir (Ziagen) some patients taking Trizivir may develop a hypersensitivity reaction (serious allergic reaction) which can be life-threatening if treatment with Trizivir is continued.
CONTACT YOUR DOCTOR IMMEDIATELY for advice on whether you should stop taking Trizivir if:
1) you get a skin rash OR 2) you get one or more symptoms from at least TWO of the following groups
- fever
- shortness of breath, sore throat or cough
- nausea or vomiting or diarrhoea or abdominal pain
- severe tiredness or achiness or generally feeling ill
If you have discontinued Trizivir due to this reaction, YOU MUST NEVER TAKE Trizivir, or any medicine containing abacavir (Kivexa, Ziagen) again as within hours you may experience a life-threatening lowering of your blood pressure or death.
(see reverse of card)
SIDE 2
You should immediately contact your doctor if you think you are having a hypersensitivity reaction to Trizivir.
Write your doctor's details below:
Doctor:...................... .……………………………………………
Tel:.................. .…………………………………………
If your doctor is not available, you must urgently seek alternative medical advice (e. g. the emergency unit of the nearest hospital).
For general Trizivir information enquiries, contact (local company name and telephone number inserted here)
35 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
36 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR USER
Trizivir 300 mg/ 150 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine/ zidovudine
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine.
- Keep this leaflet, you may need to read it again.
- If you have any further questions ask your doctor or pharmacist.
- This medicine has been prescribed for you.
Do not pass it on to others.
It may harm them, even
if their symptoms are the same as yours.
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTION
Since Trizivir contains abacavir (which is also the active substance of Ziagen) some patients taking Trizivir may develop a hypersensitivity reaction (serious allergic reaction) which can be life-threatening if you continue to take Trizivir.
It is essential you read the information on this reaction in the “ Take special care with” section of this leaflet.
There is also an Alert Card included in the Trizivir pack, to remind you and medical staff about Trizivir hypersensitivity.
This card should be removed and kept with you at all times.
CONTACT YOUR DOCTOR IMMEDIATELY for advice on whether you should stop taking Trizivir if:
1) 2)
you get a skin rash OR you get one or more symptoms from at least TWO of the following groups - fever - shortness of breath, sore throat or cough - nausea or vomiting or diarrhoea or abdominal pain - severe tiredness or achiness or generally feeling ill
If you have discontinued Trizivir due to a hypersensitivity reaction, YOU MUST NEVER TAKE Trizivir, or any other medicine containing abacavir (i. e.
Kivexa, Ziagen) again as within hours you may experience a life-threatening lowering of your blood pressure or death.
If you are hypersensitive to Trizivir you should return all of your unused Trizivir tablets for disposal.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice.
In this leaflet:
1.
What Trizivir is and what it is used for 2.
Before you take Trizivir 3.
How to take Trizivir 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store Trizivir 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT TRIZIVIR IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
Trizivir contains abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine.
All of these belong to a group of antiretroviral medicines called nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), which are used to treat Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection.
These three medicines can be used separately with other medicines for combination treatment of HIV infection, or can be used together.
The dose of each active ingredient in Trizivir is the same as that recommended for the medicines when used separately.
Trizivir is used for the treatment of HIV infection in adults.
It is not recommended for use in children or adolescents, as there is insufficient information available.
It reduces HIV viral load, and keeps it at a
37 low level.
It also increases CD4 cell counts.
CD4 cells are a type of white blood cell that play an important role in maintaining a healthy immune system to help fight infection.
Response to treatment with Trizivir varies between patients.
Your doctor will be monitoring the effectiveness of your treatment.
2.
BEFORE YOU TAKE TRIZIVIR
Do not take Trizivir
- if you have previously suffered an allergic reaction to Trizivir or any other medicine containing
abacavir (Kivexa, Ziagen), lamivudine or zidovudine, or any of the other ingredients found in Trizivir
- if you have liver disease
- if you have severe kidney disease
- if you have a very low red blood cell count (anaemia) or very low white blood cell count
(neutropenia).
If you are not sure about any of these please consult your doctor.
Take special care with Trizivir
Hypersensitivity reaction (serious allergic reaction):
About 5 in every 100 patients, who are treated with abacavir, develop a hypersensitivity reaction.
Research has found that people with a gene called HLA-B (type 5701) are more likely to have a hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir.
However, even if you do not have this gene type it is still possible for you to get this reaction.
If you know you have this gene type, be sure to tell your doctor before you take abacavir.
The most common symptoms of this reaction are high temperature (fever) and a skin rash.
Other frequently observed signs are nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and severe tiredness.
Other symptoms may include joint or muscle pain, swelling of the neck, shortness of breath, sore throat, cough and headache.
Occasionally inflammation of the eye (conjunctivitis), mouth ulcers or low blood pressure may occur.
The symptoms of this allergic reaction can occur at any time during treatment with abacavir.
However they usually occur in the first six weeks of treatment.
The symptoms worsen with continued treatment and may be life-threatening if treatment is continued.
CONTACT YOUR DOCTOR IMMEDIATELY for advice on whether you should stop taking Trizivir if:
1) you get a skin rash OR 2) you get one or more symptoms from at least TWO of the following groups
- fever
- shortness of breath, sore throat or cough
- nausea or vomiting or diarrhoea or abdominal pain
- severe tiredness or achiness or generally feeling ill
If you have discontinued Trizivir due to a hypersensitivity reaction, YOU MUST NEVER TAKE Trizivir or any other medicine containing abacavir (i. e.
Kivexa, Ziagen) again as within hours you may experience a life-threatening lowering of your blood pressure or death.
If you have stopped taking Trizivir for any reason, particularly because you think you are having side effects or for other illness, it is important that you contact your doctor before restarting.
Your doctor will check whether any symptoms you had may be related to this hypersensitivity reaction.
If your doctor thinks there is a possibility that they were related, you will be instructed never to take Trizivir
38 or any other medicine containing abacavir (i. e.
Kivexa, Ziagen) again.
It is important that you follow this advice.
Occasionally life-threatening hypersensitivity reactions have occurred when abacavir was restarted in patients who reported only one of the symptoms on the Alert Card before stopping.
On very rare occasions hypersensitivity has been reported when abacavir was restarted in patients who had no symptoms of hypersensitivity before stopping.
If you are hypersensitive to Trizivir you should return all of your unused Trizivir tablets for disposal.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice.
Lactic acidosis: the class of medicines to which Trizivir belongs (NRTIs) can cause a condition called lactic acidosis (excess of lactic acid in your blood), together with an enlarged liver.
Lactic acidosis, if it occurs, usually develops after a few months of treatment.
Deep rapid breathing, drowsiness, and non-specific symptoms such as nausea, vomiting and stomach pain, might indicate the development of lactic acidosis.
This rare but serious side effect occurs more often in women, particularly if very overweight.
If you have liver disease you may also be more at risk of getting this condition.
While you are being treated with Trizivir, your doctor will monitor you closely for any signs that you may be developing lactic acidosis.
Fat redistribution: redistribution, accumulation or loss of body fat may occur in patients receiving combination antiretroviral therapy.
Contact your doctor if you notice changes in body fat.
Liver disease/ hepatitis: please tell your doctor if you have a history of liver disease.
Patients with chronic hepatitis B or C and treated with antiretroviral agents are at increased risk of severe and potentially fatal liver adverse events and may require blood tests for monitoring of liver function.
If you have hepatitis B infection, you should not stop your Trizivir without instructions from your doctor, as you may have a recurrence of your hepatitis.
This recurrence may be more severe if you have serious liver disease.
Pancreatitis: inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) has been reported in some patients treated with lamivudine and zidovudine, although it was not clear whether this was due to the medicine or the HIV infection itself.
If your doctor detects clinical signs, symptoms or laboratory abnormalities suggestive of pancreatitis they will stop treatment with Trizivir immediately.
Anaemia and neutropenia: zidovudine can reduce the number of red blood cells, resulting in anaemia.
If this happens, the symptoms are tiredness and shortness of breath.
Less commonly, the production of a certain type of white blood cell may be reduced (neutropenia) which can make you more prone to infections.
Your doctor may want you to have a blood test from time to time to check the blood cell count.
These effects are generally reversible.
If you take ribavirin and zidovudine together it may cause or worsen anaemia.
Please contact your doctor if you notice symptoms of anaemia.
Your doctor will advise you whether you should stop taking Trizivir.
Immune Reactivation Syndrome: in some patients with advanced HIV infection (AIDS) and a history of opportunistic infection, signs and symptoms of inflammation from previous infections may occur soon after anti-HIV treatment is started.
It is believed that these symptoms are due to an improvement in the body’ s immune response, enabling the body to fight infections that may have been present with no obvious symptoms.
If you notice any symptoms of infection, please inform your doctor immediately.
Bone problems:
Some patients taking combination antiretroviral therapy may develop a bone disease called osteonecrosis (death of bone tissue caused by loss of blood supply to the bone).
The length of combination antiretroviral therapy, corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe
39 immunosuppression, higher body mass index, among others, may be some of the many risk factors for developing this disease.
Signs of osteonecrosis are joint stiffness, aches and pains (especially of the hip, knee and shoulder) and difficulty in movement.
If you notice any of these symptoms please inform your doctor.
General:
Trizivir helps to control your condition but is not a cure for HIV infection.
You will need to take it every day.
Do not stop taking your medicine without first talking to your doctor.
If however, you suspect you are developing a hypersensitivity reaction (see above) contact your doctor immediately who will advise you whether you should stop taking Trizivir.
Treatment with Trizivir has not been shown to reduce the risk of passing HIV infection on to others by sexual contact or by blood transfer.
You should continue to use appropriate precautions to prevent this.
You may continue to develop other infections and other illnesses associated with HIV disease.
You should therefore keep in regular contact with your doctor while taking Trizivir.
Taking other medicines Please inform your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, even those not prescribed.
Trizivir should not be taken with stavudine, zalcitabine, injections of ganciclovir or foscarnet.
Trizivir may interact with certain other medicines, which may make side effects worse.
It is important that you tell your doctor if you are taking any of the following medicines (ask your doctor if you are not sure).
- Phenytoin, sodium valproate, phenobarbital.
- Methadone, rifampicin, probenecid.
- Pentamidine, pyrimethamine, co-trimoxazole, fluconazole, dapsone, atovaquone, amphotericin,
flucytosine, interferon, clarithromycin.
- Vincristine, vinblastine and doxorubicin.
Alcohol increases the amount of abacavir in your blood.
If you are taking oral vitamin A related medicines, e. g. isotretinoin, you should inform your doctor since these may also increase the amount of abacavir in your blood.
As abacavir increases the rate at which methadone is removed from the body, patients taking methadone will be checked for any withdrawal symptoms, and may have their methadone dose changed.
Pregnancy Trizivir is not recommended for use during pregnancy.
If you become pregnant, or are planning to become pregnant, you must contact your doctor to discuss the potential adverse effects and the benefits and risks of your antiretroviral therapy to you and your child.
If you have taken Trizivir during your pregnancy, your doctor may request regular visits to monitor the development of your child.
Such visits may include blood tests and other diagnostic tests.
In children whose mother took nucleoside and nucleotide analogues during pregnancy, the benefit from the reduced chance of being infected with HIV is greater than the risk of suffering from side effects.
Breast-feeding You are recommended NOT to breast-feed your baby while taking Trizivir.
Additionally it is recommended that HIV infected women do not breast-feed their infants under any circumstances in order to avoid transmission of HIV from mother to child.
If you are breast-feeding you must inform your doctor.
40 Driving and using machines No studies on the effects of Trizivir on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
However, you should take into account the state of your health and the possible side effects of Trizivir before considering driving or using machines.
3.
HOW TO TAKE TRIZIVIR
Always take Trizivir exactly as your doctor has told you, and take great care not to miss any doses if at all possible.
You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure.
The usual dose in adults is one tablet twice a day.
Each tablet of Trizivir should be taken approximately 12 hours apart.
Swallow the tablet whole with water.
Trizivir can be taken with or without food.
If your doctor wants to reduce your dose of Trizivir, for example if you have kidney problems, then your medicine may be changed to lamivudine, zidovudine and abacavir taken as separate medicines.
If you take more Trizivir than you should If you accidentally take too much of your medicine you should tell your doctor or your pharmacist, or contact your nearest hospital emergency department for further advice.
If you forget to take Trizivir It is important to take the total daily dose prescribed to ensure you get maximum benefit.
If you forget to take a dose of your medicine, take it as soon as you remember, and then continue as before.
Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose.
It is important to take Trizivir regularly because irregular intake may increase the risk of hypersensitivity reactions.
If you stop taking Trizivir If you have stopped taking Trizivir for any reason, particularly because you think you are having side effects or for other illness, it is important that you contact your doctor before restarting.
In some cases your doctor will ask you to restart Trizivir in a place where you will be able to get ready access to medical care if needed.
4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, Trizivir can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.
When treating HIV infection, it is not always possible to tell whether some of the side effects that occur are caused by Trizivir, by other medicines you are taking at the same time or by the HIV disease.
For this reason it is very important that you inform your doctor about any changes in your health.
A hypersensitivity reaction (serious allergic reaction) has been reported in about 5 in every 100 patients who have been treated with abacavir.
This is described in section 2 of this leaflet under “ Take special care with Trizivir”.
It is important that you read and understand the information about this serious reaction.
Trizivir contains abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine.
The side effects listed below have been reported with one or more of these medicines and therefore may occur also when taking Trizivir Very common side effects (reported in greater than 10 out of 100 patients)
− headache, nausea
Common side effects (reported in 1 to 10 out of 100 patients)
− anaemia (low red blood cell count) and neutropenia / leucopenia (low white blood cell count).
If the production of red blood cells is reduced you may have symptoms of tiredness or
41 breathlessness.
A reduction in your white blood cell count can make you more prone to infection.
Increase in enzymes produced by the liver. − tiredness, high temperature, dizziness, malaise, general feeling of being unwell, lethargy, difficulty in sleeping, joint pain, muscle disorders. − cough, nasal symptoms, (irritation, runny nose). − loss of appetite, vomiting, stomach pain and cramps, diarrhoea, − abacavir hypersensitivity, skin rash (without any other illness), hair loss.
Uncommon side effects (reported in 1 to 10 out of 1000 patients)
− Reduction in platelets (blood cells important for blood clotting) has been reported.
If you have a low platelet count you may notice that you bruise more easily. − Breathlessness, flatulence, itching.
Rare side effects (reported in less than 1 in 1000 patients)
− anxiety, depression, drowsiness, convulsions (fits). − taste changes, patchy colour changes in the mouth, indigestion, inflammation of the pancreas, liver disorders such as enlarged liver, fatty liver, jaundice and inflammation (hepatitis), increase in an enzyme called amylase. − urinary frequency, enlargement of the breasts in men, chest pain may occur, possibly indicating a heart muscle disease called cardiomyopathy. numbness, tingling sensation or sensation of weakness in the limbs, breakdown of muscle tissue. − nail and skin colour changes, sweating, chills, flu-like symptoms.
Very rare side effects (reported in less than 1 in 10, 000 patients)
− serious skin reactions, severe anaemia and neutropenia.
Cases of a condition called lactic acidosis, which is a build up of lactic acid in the body have been reported in some patients taking NRTIs (see “ Take special care with Trizivir” under section 2 for use for more information).
Combination antiretroviral therapy may cause changes in body shape due to changes in fat distribution.
These may include loss of fat from legs, arms and face, increased fat in the abdomen (belly) and other internal organs, breast enlargement and fatty lumps on the back of the neck ('buffalo hump ').
The cause and long-term health effects of these conditions are not known at this time.
Combination antiretroviral therapy may also cause raised lactic acid and sugar in the blood, hyperlipaemia (increased fats in the blood) and resistance to insulin.
If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
5.
HOW TO STORE TRIZIVIR
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
Do not store above 30°C.
Do not use Trizivir after the expiry date which is stated on the packaging.
The expiry date refers to the last day of that month.
Medicines should not be disposed of via wastewater or household waste.
Ask your pharmacist how to dispose of medicines no longer required.
These measures will help to protect the environment.
42 6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What Trizivir contains The active substances in each Trizivir film-coated tablet are 300 mg of abacavir (as sulfate), 150 mg lamivudine and 300 mg zidovudine.
The other ingredients are microcrystalline cellulose, sodium starch glycollate and magnesium stearate in the core of the tablet.
The tablet coating contains hypromellose, titanium dioxide, polyethylene glycol, indigo carmine aluminium lake, iron oxide yellow.
What Trizivir looks like and contents of the pack The capsule-shaped film-coated tablets are blue/ green and engraved with ‘ GX LL1’ on one side.
They are provided in blister packs containing 60 tablets or bottles containing 60 tablets with child-resistant tops.
Marketing Authorisation Holder and Manufacturer Marketing Authorisation Holder:
Glaxo Group Ltd, Greenford, Middlesex UB6 0NN, United Kingdom
Manufacturer:
Glaxo Operations UK Ltd (trading as Glaxo Wellcome Operations), Priory Street, Ware, Hertfordshire, SG 12 0DJ, UK
For any information about this medicinal product, please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder.
België/ Belgique/ Belgien GlaxoSmithKline s. a. / n. v.
Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11
Luxembourg/ Luxemburg GlaxoSmithKline s. a. / n. v.
Belgique/ Belgien Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11
България ГлаксоСмитКлайн ЕООД Teл.: + 359 2 953 10 34
Magyarország GlaxoSmithKline Kft.
Tel.: + 36 1 225 5300
Č eská republika GlaxoSmithKline s. r. o.
Tel: + 420 222 001 111 gsk. czmail@gsk. com
Malta GlaxoSmithKline Malta Tel: + 356 21 238131
Danmark GlaxoSmithKline Pharma A/ S Tlf: + 45 36 35 91 00 info@glaxosmithkline. dk
Nederland GlaxoSmithKline BV Tel: + 31 (0)30 6938100 nlinfo@gsk. com
Deutschland GlaxoSmithKline GmbH & Co.
KG Tel.: + 49 (0)89 36044 8701 produkt. info@gsk. com
Norge GlaxoSmithKline AS Tlf: + 47 22 70 20 00 firmapost@gsk. no
Eesti GlaxoSmithKline Eesti OÜ Tel: + 372 6676 900 estonia@gsk. com
Österreich GlaxoSmithKline Pharma GmbH Tel: + 43 (0)1 97075 0 at. info@gsk. com
43 Ελλάδα GlaxoSmithKline A. E. B. E.
Τηλ: + 30 210 68 82 100
Polska GSK Commercial Sp. z o. o.
Tel.: + 48 (0)22 576 9000
España GlaxoSmithKline, S. A.
Tel: + 34 902 202 700 es-ci@gsk. com
Portugal Glaxo Wellcome Farmacêutica, Lda.
Tel: + 351 21 412 95 00 FI. PT@gsk. com
France Laboratoire GlaxoSmithKline Tél.: + 33 (0)1 39 17 84 44 diam@gsk. com
România GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) S. R. L.
Tel: + 4021 3028 208
Ireland GlaxoSmithKline (Ireland) Limited Tel: + 353 (0)1 4955000
Slovenija GlaxoSmithKline d. o. o.
Tel: + 386 (0)1 280 25 00 medical. x. si@gsk. com
Ísland GlaxoSmithKline ehf.
Sími: + 354 530 3700
Slovenská republika GlaxoSmithKline Slovakia s. r. o.
Tel: + 421 (0)2 49 10 33 11 recepcia. sk@gsk. com
Italia GlaxoSmithKline S. p. A.
Tel: + 39 (0)45 9218 111
Suomi/ Finland GlaxoSmithKline Oy Puh/ Tel: + 358 (0)10 30 30 30 Finland. tuoteinfo@gsk. com
Κύπρος GlaxoSmithKline Cyprus Ltd Τηλ: + 357 22 89 95 01
Sverige GlaxoSmithKline AB Tel: + 46 (0)8 638 93 00 info. produkt@gsk. com
Latvija GlaxoSmithKline Latvia SIA Tel: + 371 7312687 lv-epasts@gsk. com
United Kingdom GlaxoSmithKline UK Tel: + 44 (0)800 221441 customercontactuk@gsk. com
Lietuva GlaxoSmithKline Lietuva UAB Tel: + 370 5 264 90 00 info. lt@gsk. com
This leaflet was last approved in
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) web site: http: / /www. emea. europa. eu
44