# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

PNG compression:
The compression value for PNG images: 1: low compression (large file size but short compression duration - default) 5: medium compression 9: high compression (small file size but long compression duration) Note: PNG is always a lossless image compression format.
Compress TIFF files
Toggle compression for TIFF images. If this option is enabled, the final size of the TIFF image is reduced. A lossless compression format (Deflate) is used to save the file.
Lossless JPEG 2000 files
Toggle lossless compression for JPEG 2000 images. If this option is enabled, a lossless method will be used to compress JPEG 2000 pictures.
JPEG 2000 quality:
The quality value for JPEG 2000 images: 1: low quality (high compression and small file size) 50: medium quality 75: good quality (default) 100: high quality (no compression and large file size) Note: JPEG 2000 is not a lossless image compression format when you use this setting.
JPEG quality:
The JPEG quality: 1: low quality (high compression and small file size) 50: medium quality 75: good quality (default) 100: high quality (no compression and large file size) Note: JPEG always uses lossy compression.
Warning: JPEG is a lossy image compression format.
Chroma subsampling:
None
Medium
High
JPEG Chroma subsampling level (color is saved with less resolution than luminance): None =best: uses 4:4:4 ratio. Does not employ chroma subsampling at all. This preserves edges and contrasting colors, whilst adding no additional compression Medium: uses 4:2:2 ratio. Medium compression: reduces the color resolution by one-third with little to no visual difference High: use 4:1:1 ratio. High compression: suits images with soft edges but tends to alter colors Note: JPEG always uses lossy compression.
Lossless PGF files
Toggle lossless compression for PGF images. If this option is enabled, a lossless method will be used to compress PGF pictures.
PGF quality:
The quality value for PGF images: 1: high quality (no compression and large file size) 3: good quality (default) 6: medium quality 9: low quality (high compression and small file size) Note: PGF is not a lossless image compression format when you use this setting.
Threshold: Adjusts the threshold for denoising of the image in a range from 0.0 (none) to 10.0. The threshold is the value below which everything is considered noise.
Softness: This adjusts the softness of the thresholding (soft as opposed to hard thresholding). The higher the softness the more noise remains in the image.
Threshold:
Softness:
Advanced adjustments
Luminance
Chrominance Red
Chrominance Blue
Photograph Noise Reduction Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Photograph Noise Reduction settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Photograph Noise Reduction text file.
Photograph Noise Reduction Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Photograph Noise Reduction text file.
Caption/ Tags
unavailable
Unknown
%1x%2 (%3Mpx)
%1 bpp
%1 (35mm: %2)
%1 ISO
EXIF
Makernote
IPTC
XMP
File:
Folder:
Date:
Size:
Owner:
Permissions:
File Properties
Type:
Dimensions:
Compression:
Bit depth:
Color mode:
Image Properties
Make:
Model:
Created:
Lens:
Aperture:
Focal:
Exposure:
Sensitivity:
Mode/ Program:
Flash:
White balance:
Photograph Properties
Readable:
Writable:
New Name:
Downloaded:
Camera File Properties
unknown
No
Yes
%1 (%2)
RAW Image
unchanged
Captions:
Enter caption text here.
Enter caption author name here.
Date:
Rating:
Enter new tag here...
Enter the text used to create new tags here. '/ 'can be used to create a hierarchy of tags.', 'can be used to create more than one hierarchy at the same time.
Tags already assigned
Recent Tags
Revert all changes
Apply
Apply all changes to images
More
Description
Information
Apply changes?
Do you want to apply your changes?
caption
date
rating
tags
Do you want to apply your changes?
Always apply changes without confirmation
Applying changes to images. Please wait...
Writing metadata to files. Please wait...
Reading metadata from files. Please wait...
Tags
New Tag...
Create Tag From Address Book
Reset Tag Icon
All Tags
Children
Parents
Select
Deselect
Invert Selection
Toggle Auto
Both
Delete Tag
Properties...
No address book entries found
Read metadata from file to database
Write metadata to each file
Read metadata from each file to database
You are currently viewing items in the tag '%1 'that you are about to delete. You will need to apply change first if you want to delete the tag.
Delete '%1 'tag?
Delete
No Recently Assigned Tags
Found Tags
Assigned Tags
Properties
Metadata
Geolocation
Zoom in
Zoom out
Geolocation using Marble not available
Pan mode
Filter images
Select images
Zoom into a group
Map settings
Atlas
OpenStreetMap
Previews single images
Preview grouped images
Show highest rated first
Show youngest first
Show oldest first
Show numbers
& Move Here
Cancel
Set as Tag Thumbnail
Assign Tag '%1 'to Items
Assigning image tags. Please wait...
Select from which region the histogram will be computed here: Full Image: Compute histogram using the full image. Selection: Compute histogram using the current image selection.
Full Image
Selection
Range:
Select the minimal intensity value of the histogram selection here.
Select the maximal intensity value of the histogram selection here.
Statistics
Here you can see the statistical results calculated from the selected histogram part. These values are available for all channels.
Pixels:
Count:
Mean:
Std. deviation:
Median:
Percentile:
Color depth:
Alpha Channel:
Histogram
ICC profile
16 bits
8 bits
Colors
Uncalibrated
JPEG quality %1
Altitude:
Latitude:
Longitude:
Date:
See more info on the Internet
List of files that are about to be deleted.
This is the list of items that are about to be deleted.
If checked, files will be permanently removed instead of being placed in the Trash.
If this box is checked, files will be permanently removed instead of being placed in the Trash. Use this option with caution: most filesystems are unable to undelete deleted files reliably.
& Delete files instead of moving them to the trash
Do not & ask again
If checked, this dialog will no longer be shown, and files will be directly and permanently deleted.
If this box is checked, this dialog will no longer be shown, and files will be directly and permanently deleted.
If checked, this dialog will no longer be shown, and files will be directly moved to the Trash.
If this box is checked, this dialog will no longer be shown, and files will be directly moved to the Trash.
These items will be permanently deleted from your hard disk.
These items will be moved to Trash.
These albums will be permanently deleted from your hard disk.
These albums will be moved to Trash.
These albums will be permanently deleted from your hard disk. Note that all subalbums are included in this list and will be deleted permanently as well.
These albums will be moved to Trash. Note that all subalbums are included in this list and will be moved to Trash as well.
& Move to Trash
About to delete selected files
About to delete selected albums
Shared Libraries and Components Information
LibQt
LibKDE
LibKdcraw
Dcraw program
LibRaw
Parallelized demosaicing
LibKExiv2
LibExiv2
Exiv2 supports XMP metadata
Exiv2 can write to Jpeg
Exiv2 can write to Tiff
Exiv2 can write to Png
Exiv2 can write to Jp2
Exiv2 can write to Pgf
LibPNG
LibTIFF
LibJPEG
LibJasper
LibCImg
LibLCMS
LibPGF
Marble widget
Component
Info
List of supported RAW cameras
Settings for Saving Image File
Color Profile Info - %1
Make:
Model:
Created:
Aperture:
Focal:
Exposure:
Sensitivity:
%1|Camera RAW files
%1|Camera RAW files
*. pgf|Progressive Graphics file
Select an Image
Select Images
Copy to Clipboard
%1 Version %2 %3
The driver "SQLITE" for SQLite3 databases is not available. digiKam depends on the drivers provided by the SQL module of Qt4.
Error opening database backend.
The database is not valid: the "DBVersion" setting does not exist. The current database schema version cannot be verified. Try to start with an empty database.
The database has been used with a more recent version of digiKam and has been updated to a database schema which cannot be used with this version. (This means this digiKam version is too old, or the database format is to recent) Please use the more recent version of digikam that you used before.
Failed to create tables in database.
Failed to open a database transaction on your database file "%1". This is unusual. Please check that you can access the file and no other process has currently locked the file. If the problem persists you can get help from the digikam-devel@kde. org mailing list. As well, please have a look at what digiKam prints on the console.
The schema updating process from version 4 to 5 failed, caused by an error that we did not expect. You can try to discard your old database and start with an empty one. (In this case, please move the database files "%1" and "%2" from the directory "%3"). More probably you will want to report this error to the digikam-devel@kde. org mailing list. As well, please have a look at what digiKam prints on the console.
Failed to copy the old database file ("%1") to its new location ("%2"). Error message: "%3". Please make sure that the file can be copied, or delete it.
Copied database file
The old database file ("%1") has been copied to the new location ("%2") but it cannot be opened. Please delete both files and try again, starting with an empty database.
Opened new database file
Could not update from the old SQLite2 file ("%1"). Please delete this file and try again, starting with an empty database.
Updated from 0.7 database
Prepared table creation
Created tables
No album library path has been found in the configuration file. Giving up the schema updating process. Please try with an empty database, or repair your configuration.
There was an error associating your albumLibraryPath ("%1") with a storage volume of your system. This problem may indicate that there is a problem with your installation. If you are working on Linux, check that HAL is installed and running. In any case, you can seek advice from the digikam-devel@kde. org mailing list. The database updating process will now be aborted because we do not want to create a new database based on false assumptions from a broken installation.
Configured one album root
Imported albums
Imported images information
Last Search
Last Search (0.9)
Initialized and imported file suffix filter
Did the initial full scan
Imported creation dates
Imported comments
Imported ratings
Dropped v3 tables
Folder "%1" on the volume with the id "%2"
Folder "%1" on the volume labeled "%2"
Sorry, digiKam does not support remote URLs as collections.
The selected folder does not exist or is not readable
There is already a collection containing the folder "%1"
The storage media can be uniquely identified.
The collection is located on your harddisk
This is a CD/ DVD, which is identified by the label that you can set in your CD burning application. There is already another entry with the same label. The two will be distinguished by the files in the top directory, so please do not append files to the CD, or it will not be recognized. In the future, please set a unique label on your CDs and DVDs if you intend to use them with digiKam.
This is a CD/ DVD. It will be identified by the label ("%1")that you have set in your CD burning application. If you create further CDs for use with digikam in the future, please remember to give them a unique label as well.
This is a removable storage medium that will be identified by its label ("%1")
This entry will only be identified by the path where it is found on your system ("%1"). No more specific means of identification (UUID, label) is available.
It is not possible on your system to identify the storage medium of this path. It will be added using the file path as the only identifier. This will work well for your local hard disk.
You need to locally mount your Samba share. Sorry, digiKam does currently not support smb: / / URLs.
Your network storage must be set up to be accessible as files and folders through the operating system. DigiKam does not support remote URLs.
There is already a collection for a network share with the same path.
The network share will be identified by the path you selected. If the path is empty, the share will be considered unavailable.
RAW image file (%1)
RGB
Grayscale
Monochrome
Indexed
YCbCr
CMYK
CIE L*a*b*
Uncalibrated (RAW)
General
Detail preservation:
Preservation of details to set the sharpening level of the small features in the target image. Higher values leave details sharp.
Anisotropy:
Anisotropic (directional) modifier of the details. Keep it small for Gaussian noise.
Smoothing:
Total smoothing power: if the Detail Factor sets the relative smoothing and the Anisotropy Factor the direction, the Smoothing Factor sets the overall effect.
Regularity:
This value controls the evenness of smoothing to the image. Do not use a high value here, or the target image will be completely blurred.
Iterations:
Sets the number of times the filter is applied to the image.
Noise:
Sets the noise scale.
Advanced Settings
Angular step:
Set here the angular integration step (in degrees) analogous to anisotropy.
Integral step:
Set here the spatial integral step.
Gaussian:
Set here the precision of the Gaussian function.
Tile size:
Sets the tile size.
Tile border:
Sets the size of each tile border.
Interpolation:
Nearest Neighbor
Linear
Runge-Kutta
Select the right interpolation method for the desired image quality.
Fast approximation
Enable fast approximation when rendering images.
No or invalid size specified
Thumbnail is null
File does not exist
Cannot create thumbnail for %1
Use standard reference code
Use custom definition
I. P. R:
Reference:
Name:
Matter:
Detail:
& Add
& Delete
& Replace
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
American Samoa
Andorra
Angola
Anguilla
Antarctica
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Bouvet Island
Brazil
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Christmas Island
Cocos Islands
Colombia
Comoros
Zaire
Congo
Cook Islands
Costa Rica
Ivory Coast
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Faeroe Islands
Falkland Islands
Fiji Islands
Finland
France
French Guiana
French Polynesia
French Southern Territories
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Gibraltar
Greece
Greenland
Grenada
Guadaloupe
Guam
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Heard and McDonald Islands
Vatican
Honduras
Hong Kong
Croatia
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
North-Korea
South-Korea
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao
Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Martinique
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montserrat
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands Antilles
Netherlands
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Niue
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Palestinian Territory
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Pitcairn Island
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Reunion
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
St. Helena
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Pierre and Miquelon
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and Montenegro
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Svalbard & Jan Mayen Islands
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Taiwan
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tokelau Islands
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Turks and Caicos Islands
Tuvalu
US Virgin Islands
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States Minor Outlying Islands
United States of America
Uruguay, Eastern Republic of
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Wallis and Futuna Islands
Western Sahara
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
United Nations
European Union
Space
At Sea
In Flight
England
Scotland
Northern Ireland
Wales
Palestine
Gaza
Jericho
Author Names:
Enter the names of the photograph's creators. Use semi-colons as separator here.
This field should contain the names of the persons who created the photograph. If it is not appropriate to add the name of the photographer (for example, if the identity of the photographer needs to be protected) the name of a company or organization can also be used. Once saved, this field should not be changed by anyone. To enter more than one name, use semi-colons as separators. With IPTC, this field is limited to 32 ASCII characters.
Authors' Positions:
Enter the job titles of the authors here.
This field should contain the job titles of the authors. Examples might include titles such as: Staff Photographer, Freelance Photographer, or Independent Commercial Photographer. Since this is a qualifier for the Author field, the Author field must also be filled out. With IPTC, this field is limited to 32 ASCII characters.
Credit:
Enter the photograph credit here.
(synonymous to Provider): Use the Provider field to identify who is providing the photograph. This does not necessarily have to be the author. If a photographer is working for a news agency such as Reuters or the Associated Press, these organizations could be listed here as they are "providing" the image for use by others. If the image is a stock photograph, then the group (agency) involved in supplying the image should be listed here. With IPTC, this field is limited to 32 ASCII characters.
Copyright:
Enter the copyright notice to identify the current owner(s) of the copyright here.
The Copyright Notice should contain any necessary copyright notice for claiming the intellectual property, and should identify the current owner(s) of the copyright for the photograph. Usually, this would be the photographer, but if the image was done by an employee or as work-for-hire, then the agency or company should be listed. Use the form appropriate to your country. USA: & copy; {date of first publication} name of copyright owner, as in "copy; 2005 John Doe." Note, the word "copyright" or the abbreviation "copr" may be used in place of the & copy; symbol. In some foreign countries only the copyright symbol is recognized and the abbreviation does not work. Furthermore the copyright symbol must be a full circle with a "c" inside; using something like (c) where the parentheses form a partial circle is not sufficient. For additional protection worldwide, use of the phrase, "all rights reserved" following the notice above is encouraged. In Europe you would use: Copyright {Year} {Copyright owner}, all rights reserved. In Japan, for maximum protection, the following three items should appear in the copyright field of the IPTC Core: (a) the word, Copyright; (b) year of the first publication; and (c) name of the author. You may also wish to include the phrase "all rights reserved". With XMP, you can include more than one copyright string using different languages. With IPTC, this field is limited to 128 ASCII characters.
Right Usage Terms:
Enter the list of instructions on how a resource can be legally used here.
The Right Usage Terms field should be used to list instructions on how a resource can be legally used. With XMP, you can include more than one right usage terms string using different languages. This field does not exist with IPTC.
Source:
Enter the original owner of the photograph here.
The Source field should be used to identify the original owner or copyright holder of the photograph. The value of this field should never be changed after the information is entered following the image's creation. While not yet enforced by the custom panels, you should consider this to be a "write-once" field. The source could be an individual, an agency, or a member of an agency. To aid in later searches, it is suggested to separate any slashes "/" with a blank space. Use the form "photographer / agency" rather than "photographer/ agency." Source may also be different from Creator and from the names listed in the Copyright Notice. With IPTC, this field is limited to 32 ASCII characters.
Instructions:
Enter the editorial notice here.
The Instructions field should be used to list editorial instructions concerning the use of photograph. With IPTC, this field is limited to 256 ASCII characters.
Rights
Country:
Select here the country where the photograph was taken.
Province/ State:
Enter the province or state of contents here.
This field should contain the province or state where the photograph was taken.
City:
Enter the city of contents here.
This field should contain the name of the city where the photograph was taken.
Sublocation:
Enter the city sublocation of contents here.
This field should contain the sublocation of the city where the photograph was taken.
Location
Enter the city name of the lead author here.
This field should contain the city name where the lead author lives.
Enter the country name of the lead author here.
This field should contain the country name where the lead author lives.
Address:
Enter the address of the lead author here.
This field should contain the address where the lead author lives.
Postal Code:
Enter the postal code of the lead author here.
This field should contain the postal code where the lead author lives.
Province:
Enter the province of the lead author here.
This field should contain the province where the lead author lives.
Email:
Enter the email of the lead author here.
This field should contain the email of the lead author.
Phone:
Enter the phone number of the lead author here.
This field should contain the phone number of the lead author.
URL:
Enter the web site URL of the lead author here.
This field should contain the web site URL of the lead author.
Contact
Subjects
Default Language
Afrikaans (South Africa)
Amharic (Ethiopia)
Arabic (UAE)
Arabic (Bahrain)
Arabic (Algeria)
Arabic (Egypt)
Arabic (Iraq)
Arabic (Jordan)
Arabic (Kuwait)
Arabic (Lebanon)
Arabic (Libya)
Arabic (Morocco)
Arabic (Oman)
Arabic (Qatar)
Arabic (Saudi Arabia)
Arabic (Syria)
Arabic (Tunisia)
Arabic (Yemen)
Assamese (India)
Bashkir (Russia)
Belarusian (Belarus)
Bulgarian (Bulgaria)
Bengali (India)
Tibetan (Bhutan)
Tibetan (PRC)
Breton (France)
Catalan (Andorra)
Catalan (Spain)
Catalan (France)
Corsican (France)
Czech (Czech Republic)
Welsh (United Kingdom)
Danish (Denmark)
German (Austria)
German (Switzerland)
German (Germany)
German (Liechtenstein)
German (Luxembourg)
Greek (Greece)
English (Australia)
English (Belize)
English (Canada)
English (Caribbean)
English (United Kingdom)
English (Ireland)
English (India)
English (Jamaica)
English (Malaysia)
English (New Zealand)
English (Philippines)
English (Singapore)
English (Trinidad)
English (United States)
English (South Africa)
English (Zimbabwe)
Spanish (Argentina)
Spanish (Bolivia)
Spanish (Chile)
Spanish (Colombia)
Spanish (Costa Rica)
Spanish (Dominican Republic)
Spanish (Ecuador)
Spanish (Spain)
Spanish (Guatemala)
Spanish (Honduras)
Spanish (Mexico)
Spanish (Nicaragua)
Spanish (Panama)
Spanish (Peru)
Spanish (Puerto Rico)
Spanish (Paraguay)
Spanish (El Salvador)
Spanish (Uruguay)
Spanish (United States)
Spanish (Venezuela)
Estonian (Estonia)
Basque (Basque Country)
Persian (Iran)
Finnish (Finland)
Faeroese (Faero Islands)
French (Belgium)
French (Canada)
French (Switzerland)
French (France)
French (Luxembourg)
French (Monaco)
Frisian (Netherlands)
Irish (Ireland)
Galician (Galicia)
Gujarati (India)
Hebrew (Israel)
Hindi (India)
Croatian (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Latin)
Croatian (Croatia)
Hungarian (Hungary)
Armenian (Armenia)
(Indonesian)
Yi (PRC)
Icelandic (Iceland)
Italian (Switzerland)
Italian (Italy)
Japanese (Japan)
Georgian (Georgia)
Kazakh (Kazakhstan)
Greenlandic (Greenland)
Khmer (Cambodia)
Kannada (India)
Korean (South Korea)
Kyrgyz (Kyrgyzstan)
Luxembourgish (Luxembourg)
Lao (Lao PDR)
Lithuanian (Lithuania)
Latvian (Latvia)
Maori (New Zealand)
Macedonian (Macedonia)
Malayalam (India)
Mongolian (PRC)
Mongolian (Mongolia)
Marathi (India)
Malay (Brunei Darussalam)
Malay (Malaysia)
Maltese (Malta)
Norwegian Bokmål (Norway)
Nepali (Nepal)
Dutch (Belgium)
Dutch (Netherlands)
Norwegian Nynorsk (Norway)
Sesotho sa Leboa (South Africa)
Occitan (France)
Oriya (India)
Punjabi (India)
Polish (Poland)
Pashto (Afghanistan)
Portuguese (Brazil)
Portuguese (Portugal)
Romansh (Switzerland)
Romanian (Romania)
Russian (Russia)
Kinyarwanda (Rwanda)
Sanskrit (India)
Sami (Northern, Finland)
Sami (Northern, Norway)
Sami (Northern, Sweden)
Sinhala (Sri Lanka)
Slovak (Slovakia)
Slovenian (Slovenia)
Albanian (Albania)
Swedish (Finland)
Swedish (Sweden)
Swahili (Kenya)
Tamil (India)
Telugu (India)
Thai (Thailand)
Turkmen (Turkmenistan)
Setswana Tswana (South Africa)
Urdu (India)
Turkish (Turkey)
Tatar (Russia)
Uighur (PRC)
Ukrainian (Ukraine)
Urdu (Pakistan)
Vietnamese (Vietnam)
Wolof (Senegal)
isiXhosa Xhosa (South Africa)
Yoruba (Nigeria)
Chinese (PRC)
Chinese (Hong Kong SAR, PRC)
Chinese (Macao SAR)
Chinese (Singapore)
Chinese (Taiwan)
isiZulu Zulu (South Africa)
Remove entry for this language
Select item language here.
Template:
Open metadata template editor
Select here the action to perform using the metadata template. To remove: delete already-assigned template. Do not change: Do not touch template information. All other values are template titles managed by digiKam. Selecting one will assign information as well.
To remove
Do not change
Here you can see the metadata template list managed by digiKam.
Title
Authors
Names:
Position:
Usages:
Enter the Informative Provider Reference here. I. P. R is a name registered with the XMP/ NAA, identifying the provider that provides an indicator of the content. The default value for the I. P. R is "XMP" if a standard Reference Code is used.
Enter the Subject Reference Number here. Provides a numeric code to indicate the Subject Name plus optional Subject Matter and Subject Detail Names in the language of the service. Subject Reference is a number from the range 01000000 to 17999999 and represent a language independent international reference to a Subject. A Subject is identified by its Reference Number and corresponding Names taken from a standard lists given by XMP/ NAA. If a standard reference code is used, these lists are the English language reference versions. This field is limited to 8 digit code.
Enter the Subject Name here. English language is used if you selected a standard XMP/ NAA reference code.
Enter the Subject Matter Name here. English language is used if you selected a standard XMP/ NAA reference code.
Enter the Subject Detail Name here. English language is used if you selected a standard XMP/ NAA reference code.
Unspecified
Normal
Flipped Horizontally
Rotated by 180 Degrees
Flipped Vertically
Flipped Horizontally and Rotated Left
Rotated Left
Flipped Vertically and Rotated Left
Rotated Right
%1 K
West
East
North
South
%L1m
Flash has been fired
Flash with red-eye reduction mode
My Albums
My Tags
Album
Default
XMP Schema
No description available
XMP File to Save
XMP text Files (*. xmp)
Standard EXIF Tags
EXIF File to Save
EXIF binary Files (*. exif)
Switch the tags view to a custom human-readable list. To customize the tag filter list, go to the Metadata configuration panel.
Custom list
Switch the tags view to a human-readable list
Human-readable list
Switch the tags view to a full list
Full list
Save metadata to a binary file
Save metadata
Print metadata to printer
Print metadata
Copy metadata to clipboard
File name: %1 (%2)
File name: %1 (%2)
MakerNote EXIF Tags
IPTC Records
IPTC File to Save
IPTC binary Files (*. iptc)
Interoperability
Image Information
Photograph Information
Global Positioning System
Embedded Thumbnail
IIM Envelope
IIM Application 2
Additional Exif Properties
Camera Raw
Dublin Core
digiKam schema
Exif-specific Properties
IPTC Core
IPTC Extension schema
Microsoft Photo
Adobe PDF
Adobe Photoshop
PLUS License Data Format Schema
TIFF Properties
Basic Schema
Basic Job Ticket
Dynamic Media
Media Management
Rights Management
Paged-Text
Title: %1 Value: %2 Description: %3
Unavailable
Name
Select All
Clear
EXIF viewer
Makernotes viewer
IPTC viewer
XMP viewer
Perceptual intent causes the full gamut of the image to be compressed or expanded to fill the gamut of the destination device, so that gray balance is preserved but colorimetric accuracy may not be preserved. In other words, if certain colors in an image fall outside of the range of colors that the output device can render, the image intent will cause all the colors in the image to be adjusted so that the every color in the image falls within the range that can be rendered and so that the relationship between colors is preserved as much as possible. This intent is most suitable for display of photographs and images, and is the default intent. Absolute Colorimetric intent causes any colors that fall outside the range that the output device can render to be adjusted to the closest color that can be rendered, while all other colors are left unchanged. This intent preserves the white point and is most suitable for spot colors (Pantone, TruMatch, logo colors,....) Relative Colorimetric intent is defined such that any colors that fall outside the range that the output device can render are adjusted to the closest color that can be rendered, while all other colors are left unchanged. Proof intent does not preserve the white point. Saturation intent preserves the saturation of colors in the image at the possible expense of hue and lightness. Implementation of this intent remains somewhat problematic, and the ICC is still working on methods to achieve the desired effects. This intent is most suitable for business graphics such as charts, where it is more important that the colors be vivid and contrast well with each other rather than a specific color.
Loading image...
No profile available...
The ICC profile product name
The ICC profile product description
Additional ICC profile information
Manufacturer
Raw information about the ICC profile manufacturer
Model
Raw information about the ICC profile model
Copyright
Raw information about the ICC profile copyright
Profile ID
The ICC profile ID number
Color Space
The color space used by the ICC profile
Connection Space
The connection space used by the ICC profile
Device Class
The ICC profile device class
Rendering Intent
The ICC profile rendering intent
Profile Version
The ICC version used to record the profile
CMM Flags
The ICC profile color management flags
This area contains a CIE or chromaticity diagram. A CIE diagram is a representation of all the colors that a person with normal vision can see. This is represented by the colored sail-shaped area. In addition you will see a triangle that is superimposed on the diagram outlined in white. This triangle represents the outer boundaries of the color space of the device that is characterized by the inspected profile. This is called the device gamut. In addition there are black dots and yellow lines on the diagram. Each black dot represents one of the measurement points that were used to create this profile. The yellow line represents the amount that each point is corrected by the profile, and the direction of this correction.
ICC Color Profile Information
Lab
Luv
GRAY
HSV
HLS
CMY
Input device
Display device
Output device
Color space
Link device
Abstract
Named color
Perceptual
Relative Colorimetric
Saturation
Absolute Colorimetric
ICC color profile File to Save
ICC Files (*. icc; *. icm)
Histogram calculation...
Histogram calculation failed.
Mean:
Pixels:
Std dev.:
Count:
Median:
Percent:
x: %1
unavailable
System Font
Custom Font
Choose...
Visit digiKam project website
Search...
No options available
Pan the image to a region
Drag to reposition
Size:
Type:
Dimensions:
Make/ Model:
Created:
Aperture/ Focal:
Exposure/ Sensitivity:
Mode/ Program:
Flash:
White Balance:
Show Thumbbar
Channel:
Select the histogram scale. If the image's maximal counts are small, you can use the linear scale. Logarithmic scale can be used when the maximal counts are big; if it is used, all values (small and large) will be visible on the graph.
Logarithmic
Here you can see the target preview image histogram drawing of the selected image channel. This one is re-computed at any settings changes.
Select the histogram channel to display:
Luminosity
Luminosity: display the image's luminosity values.
Red
Red: display the red image-channel values.
Green
Green: display the green image-channel values.
Blue
Blue: display the blue image-channel values.
Colors: Display all color channel values at the same time.
Alpha
Alpha: display the alpha image-channel values. This channel corresponds to the transparency value and is supported by some image formats, such as PNG or TIF.
Curve free mode
With this button, you can draw your curve free-hand with the mouse.
Curve smooth mode
With this button, the curve type is constrained to be a smooth line with tension.
All channels shadow tone color picker
With this button, you can pick the color from original image used to set Shadow Tone smooth curves point on Red, Green, Blue, and Luminosity channels.
All channels middle tone color picker
With this button, you can pick the color from original image used to set Middle Tone smooth curves point on Red, Green, Blue, and Luminosity channels.
All channels highlight tone color picker
With this button, you can pick the color from original image used to set Highlight Tone smooth curves point on Red, Green, Blue, and Luminosity channels.
& Reset
Reset current channel curves' values.
If you press this button, all curves' values from the currently selected channel will be reset to the default values.
Zoom Out
Zoom In
Go to the first item
Go to the previous item
Go to the next item
Go to the last item
x: %1 y: %2
No Album Selected
No Tag Selected
Removing image tags. Please wait...
Assigning image ratings. Please wait...
Updating orientation in database. Please wait...
Revising Exif Orientation tags. Please wait...
Database Statistics
Format
Count
Total Items
Albums
Set as Album Thumbnail
Open With
Other...
Open With...
Assign Tag
Remove Tag
Assign Rating
Import
Export
Batch Process
Date
Tag
Go To
Batch Queue Manager
Add to Existing Queue
tomorrow
today
yesterday
This shows the progress of the scan. During the scan, all files on disk are registered in a database.
Preparing collection scan
Scanning for removed albums
Scanning images in individual albums
Error
Initializing database
Manage your photographs like a professional with the power of open source.
Manage your photographs like a professional, with the power of open source.
(c) 2002-2010, digiKam developers team
Caulier Gilles
Main developer and coordinator
Marcel Wiesweg
Developer
Andi Clemens
Matthias Welwarsky
Julien Nardoux
Julien Pontabry
Patrick Spendrin
Developer and Windows port
Arnd Baecker
Renchi Raju
Developer (2002-2005)
Joern Ahrens
Developer (2004-2005)
Tom Albers
Ralf Holzer
Developer (2004)
Francisco J. Cruz
Developer (2005-2006)
Pieter Edelman
Holger Foerster
Michael G. Hansen
Johannes Wienke
Risto Saukonpaa
Design, icons, logo, banner, mockup, beta tester
Mikolaj Machowski
Bug reports and patches
Achim Bohnet
Luka Renko
Angelo Naselli
Fabien Salvi
Webmaster
Todd Shoemaker
Gregory Kokanosky
Gerhard Kulzer
Handbook writer, alpha tester, webmaster
Oliver Doerr
Beta tester
Charles Bouveyron
Richard Groult
Plugin contributor and beta tester
Richard Taylor
Feedback and patches. Handbook writer
Hans Karlsson
digiKam website banner and application icons
Aaron Seigo
Various usability fixes and general application polishing
Yves Chaufour
digiKam website, Feedback
Tung Nguyen
Bug reports, feedback and icons
Rename...
Reset Album Icon
Find Duplicates...
Rename Album (%1)
Enter new album name:
& Copy Here
Download From Camera
Download & & Delete From Camera
Uncategorized Albums
Deselect Item
Select Item
created: %1
modified: %1
New Album
Edit Album
Create new Album in "%1"
"%1" Album Properties
& Title:
Category:
Caption:
Album & date:
& Oldest
& Average
Newest
Uncategorized Album
Could not calculate an average.
Could Not Calculate Average
Category
Travel
Holidays
Friends
Nature
Party
Todo
Miscellaneous
Designed from the ground-up for KDE4, using KDE4 technology: Hardware handling with Solid interface; More comprehensive multimedia file handling using Phonon interface; Easy Geolocation with Marble interface; Social Semantic Desktop synchronization using Nepomuk interface.
XMP metadata support;
TIFF/ EP RAW metadata editing;
Customizable file storage for the digiKam database, supporting remote albums;
Support of multiple root album paths (no more importing into one giant album);
Thumbnail-bar integration for easy navigation and editing;
Supports the latest camera RAW files using LibRaw;
New/ revamped tools: Batch queue manager; Revamped camera import wizard; LensFun integration: auto-correction of lens distortion; Fuzzy searches based on hand-drawn sketches; Advanced searches using image meta-information, such as keywords and dates; User-friendly map searching that gives you the power to search for global photo locations; Advanced searches for duplicate and similar images;
... and much more.
%1
Welcome to digiKam %1 digiKam is an open source photo management program designed to import, organize, enhance, search and export your digital images to and from your computer. Currently, you are in the Album view mode of digiKam. Albums are the places where your files are stored, and are identical to the folders on your hard disk. digiKam has many powerful features which are described in the documentation The digiKam homepage provides information about new versions of digiKam. %7 Some of the new features in this release of digiKam include (compared to digiKam %4): %5 %6 We hope that you will enjoy digiKam. Thank you, The digiKam team
digiKam
Fuzzy Sketch Search
Fuzzy Image Search
Map Search
Current Search
Search By Time Line
%1 %2
& Today
Tomorrow
Next & Week
Next Month
Yesterday
Last & Monday
Last & Friday
Last & Week
Last Month
No Date
Open camera dialog at< p ath >
Open camera dialog for the device with Solid UDI < udi >
Automatically detect and open a connected gphoto2 camera
Start digikam with the database file found in the directory < dir >
Run-time Qt4 SQLite database plugin is not available - please install it. There is no database plugin installed on your computer.
Run-time Qt4 SQLite database plugin is not available - please install it. Database plugins installed on your computer are listed below:
& New Album
Create new album
New Album Name
Creating new album in '%1 'Enter album name:
Create New Album
Failed to backup the existing database file ("%1"). Refusing to replace file without backup, using the existing file.
Failed to copy the old database file ("%1") to its new location ("%2"). Starting with an empty database.
Create New Database
Upgrade Database
You have chosen the folder "%1" as the place to store the database. A database file from an older version of digiKam is found in this folder. Would you like to upgrade the old database file - confirming that this database file was indeed created for the pictures located in the folder "%2" - or ignore the old file and start with a new database?
Database Folder
Copy Current Database
You have chosen the folder "%1" as the new place to store the database. A database file from an older version of digiKam is found in this folder. Would you like to upgrade the old database file, start with a new database, or copy the current database to this location and continue using it?
New database folder
Failed to copy the old database file ("%1") to its new location ("%2"). Trying to upgrade old databases.
You have chosen the folder "%1" as the new place to store the database. Would you like to copy the current database to this location and continue using it, or start with a new database?
Use Existing File
You have chosen the folder "%1" as the new place to store the database. There is already a database file in this location. Would you like to use this existing file as the new database, or remove it and copy the current database to this place?
Failed to open the database. You cannot use digiKam without a working database. digiKam will attempt to start now, but it will not be functional. Please check the database settings in the configuration menu.
Failed to open the database. Error message from database: %1You cannot use digiKam without a working database. digiKam will attempt to start now, but it will not be functional. Please check the database settings in the configuration menu.
Your locale has changed since this album was last opened. Old Locale: %1, New Locale: %2 If you have recently changed your locale, you need not be concerned. Please note that if you switched to a locale that does not support some of the filenames in your collection, these files may no longer be found in the collection. If you are sure that you want to continue, click'Yes'. Otherwise, click'No 'and correct your locale setting before restarting digiKam.
The collection %1 (%2) is currently not found on your system. Please choose the most appropriate option to handle this situation:
The collection is still available, but the identifier changed. This can be caused by restoring a backup, changing the partition layout or the file system settings. The collection is now located at this place:
The collection is located on a storage device which is not always attached. Mark the collection as a removable collection.
Take no action now. I would like to solve the problem later using the setup dialog
Collection not found
My Searches
The collection location supplied is invalid or currently not available.
No parent found for album.
Album name cannot be empty.
Album name cannot contain '/ '.
createPAlbum does not accept the root album as parent.
An existing album has the same name.
Failed to create directory,
Failed to add album to database
No such album
Cannot rename root album
Cannot rename album root album
Album name cannot contain '/ '
Another album with the same name already exists. Please choose another name.
Failed to rename Album
Cannot edit root album
No parent found for tag
Tag name cannot be empty
Tag name cannot contain '/ '
Tag name already exists
Failed to add tag to database
Cannot delete Root Tag
Cannot edit root tag
Another tag with the same name already exists. Please choose another name.
Cannot move root tag
No such tag
All Files
Image Files
No RAW Files
JPEG Files
PNG Files
TIFF Files
DNG Files
RAW Files
Movie Files
Audio Files
Filter by file type
Select the file types (mime types) that you want shown
View
Rename Item (%1)
Enter new name (without extension):
Album "%1"
Assign '%1 'to & Selected Items
Assign '%1 'to & This Item
Assign '%1 'to & All Items
& Cancel
Assign Tags to & Selected Items
Assign Tags to & This Item
Assign Tags to & All Items
Failed to revise Exif orientation for file %1.
Failed to revise Exif orientation these files:
Please select the destination album from the digiKam library to move the selected images into.
LibGphoto2
LibKipi
Not Tagged
Tag Filters
Matching Condition
Or Between Tags
And Between Tags
Restore Tag Filters
On
Off
digiKam Properties
Album:
Caption:
Tags:
Album Properties
Items:
Collection:
Category:
Select Album
Back to Album
Back
Forward
Cannot display preview for "%1"
Reduced Size Preview
Calendar
Select the rating value used to filter albums contents. Use the context pop-up menu to set rating filter conditions.
Rating Filter
Greater Than or Equals Condition
Equals Condition
Less Than or Equals Condition
Rating greater than or equal to %1.
Rating equal to %1.
Rating less than or equal to %1.
Scan Albums
Initializing...
Checking ICC repository
Checking dcraw version
Reading database
The ICC profiles folder seems to be invalid. If you want to try setting it again, choose "Yes" here, otherwise choose "No", and the "Color Management" feature will be disabled until you solve this issue.
Auto Detect Camera
Opening Download Dialog
Initializing Main View
Exit Preview Mode
Next Image
Previous Image
First Image
Last Image
& Themes
& Back
& New...
Creates a new empty Album in the collection.
& Move to Album...
Move selected images into an album.
Edit album properties and collection information.
Refresh
Refresh the contents of the current album.
Write Metadata to Images
Updates metadata of images in the current album with the contents of digiKam database (image metadata will be overwritten with data from the database).
Reread Metadata From Images
Updates the digiKam database from the metadata of the files in the current album (information in the database will be overwritten with data from the files' metadata).
Open in File Manager
Open in Terminal
New...
View...
Edit...
Open the selected item in the image editor.
Place onto Light Table
Place the selected items on the light table thumbbar.
Add to Light Table
Add selected items to the light table thumbbar.
Add to Current Queue
Add selected items to current queue from batch manager.
Add to New Queue
Add selected items to a new queue from batch manager.
Write Metadata to Selected Images
Reread Metadata From Selected Images
Find Similar...
Find similar images using selected item as reference.
Change the filename of the currently selected item.
Move to Trash
Delete Permanently
Delete permanently without confirmation
Move to trash without confirmation
& Sort Albums
Sort Albums in tree-view.
By Folder
By Category
By Date
Include Album Sub-Tree
Activate this option to show all sub-albums below the current album.
Include Tag Sub-Tree
Activate this option to show all images marked by the given tag and all its sub-tags.
& Sort Images
The value by which the images in one album are sorted in the thumbnail view
By Name
By Path
By File Size
By Rating
Image Sorting & Order
Defines whether images are sorted in ascending or descending manner.
Ascending
Descending
& Group Images
The categories in which the images in the thumbnail view are displayed
Flat List
By Album
By Format
Select None
Zoom to 100%
Fit to & Window
Slideshow
All
With All Sub-Albums
Supported RAW Cameras
Components Information
Kipi Plugins Handbook
Donate...
Contribute...
Assign Rating "No Stars"
Assign Rating "One Star"
Assign Rating "Two Stars"
Assign Rating "Three Stars"
Assign Rating "Four Stars"
Assign Rating "Five Stars"
Advanced Search...
Light Table
Scan for New Images
Rebuild Thumbnails...
Rebuild Fingerprints...
Write Metadata to All Images
Add Camera Manually...
Loading cameras
No item selected
(%1 of %2)
Cameras
USB Storage Devices
Card Readers
Add Images...
Adds new items to an Album.
Add Folders...
Adds new folders to Album library.
Images found in %1
The specified device ("%1") is not valid.
The specified camera ("%1") is not supported.
Images on %1
Cannot access the storage device.
CompactFlash Card Reader
Memory Stick Reader
SmartMedia Card Reader
SD / MMC Card Reader
xD Card Reader
KIPI-Plugins
Loading Kipi Plugins
Loading themes
This action will update the metadata of all available files from information stored in the database. This can take some time. Do you want to continue?
Image thumbnailing can take some time. Which would you prefer? - Scan for missing thumbnails (quick) - Rebuild all thumbnails (takes a long time)
Warning
Scan
Rebuild All
Image fingerprinting can take some time. Which would you prefer? - Scan for changed or non-cataloged items in the database (quick) - Rebuild all fingerprints (takes a long time)
Size: %1
zoom: %1%
Select folder to parse
Select folders to import into album
Please select the destination album from the digiKam library to import folders into.
Adjust Exif Orientation Tag
Rotated Upside Down
Rotated Right / Horiz. Flipped
Rotated Right / Vert. Flipped
This LED indicates the global image filter status, encompassing all status-bar filters and all tag filters from the right sidebar. GRAY: no filter is active, all items are visible. RED: filtering is on, but no items match. GREEN: filter(s) match(es) at least one item. Any mouse button click will reset all filters.
Text quick filter (search)
Enter search patterns to quickly filter this view on file names, captions (comments), and tags
Text
Mime Type
Rating
Tags
Active filters:
Active filter:
No active filter
Rotate Left
Rotate Right
An error has occurred with the media player....
New Tag
Edit Tag
Enter tag name here...
To create new tags, you can use the following rules: '/ 'can be used to create a tags hierarchy. Ex.: "Country/ City/ Paris"', 'can be used to create more than one tags hierarchy at the same time. Ex.: "City/ Paris, Monument/ Notre-Dame" If a tag hierarchy starts with '/', root tag album is used as parent.
& Icon:
Reset
Create New Tag
Create New Tag in "%1"
Properties of Tag "%1"
Tag creation Error
An error occurred during tag creation:
Tag Path
Timeline
Searches
Fuzzy Searches
Map Searches
Cannot start the "konsole" application. Please make sure that it is installed and in your path.
Add New Tag...
Assign this Tag
Remove this Tag
Go to this Tag
EXIF Actions
Show images/ thumbnails & rotated according to orientation tag.
Set orientation tag to normal after rotate/ flip.
Visit Exiv2 project website
EXIF - a standard used by most digital cameras today to store technical information (like aperture and shutter speed) about an image.
IPTC - an older standard used in digital photography to store photographer information in images.
XMP - a new standard used in digital photography, designed to replace IPTC.
Behavior
Interface Options
& Use current theme background color
Enable this option to use the current background theme color in the image editor area
& Background color:
Select background color to use for image editor area.
Hide toolbar in fullscreen mode
Hide & thumbbar in fullscreen mode
& Deleted items should go to the trash
& Show splash screen at startup
Use Raw Import Tool to handle Raw images
Set this option to use Raw Import tool to load a RAW image. With this tool you are able to customize advanced settings.
Sidebar tab title:
Only For Active Tab
For All Tabs
Set this option to configure how sidebars tab title are visible.
Exposure Indicators
& Under-exposure color:
Customize the color used in the image editor to identify under-exposed pixels.
& Over-exposure color:
Customize the color used in the image editor to identify over-exposed pixels.
Sort order for images
Sort images by:
File Size
Here, select whether newly-loaded images are sorted by their date, name, or size on disk.
Reverse ordering
If this option is enabled, newly-loaded images will be sorted in descending order.
Configure
General Settings Customize general behavior
Embedded Image Information Management Setup relations between images and metadata
Tool Tip
Thumbbar Items Tool-Tip Settings Customize information in tool-tips
RAW Decoding
RAW Files Decoding Settings Customize default RAW decoding settings
Color Management
Settings for Color Management Customize color management settings
Save Images
Settings for Saving Image Files Set default configuration used to save images
Slide Show
Slide Show Settings Customize slideshow settings
Show Thumbbar items' tooltips
Set this option to display the image information when the mouse hovers over a thumbbar item.
Font:
Select here the font used to display text in tooltips.
File/ Image Information
Show file name
Set this option to display the image file name.
Show file date
Set this option to display the image file date.
Show file size
Set this option to display the image file size.
Show image type
Set this option to display the image type.
Show image dimensions
Set this option to display the image dimensions in pixels.
Show camera make and model
Set this option to display the make and model of the camera with which the image has been taken.
Show camera date
Set this option to display the date when the image was taken.
Show camera aperture and focal length
Set this option to display the camera aperture and focal settings used to take the image.
Show camera exposure and sensitivity
Set this option to display the camera exposure and sensitivity used to take the image.
Show camera mode and program
Set this option to display the camera mode and program used to take the image.
Show camera flash settings
Set this option to display the camera flash settings used to take the image.
Show camera white balance settings
Set this option to display the camera white balance settings used to take the image.
showFoto
File(s) or folder(s) to open
The ICC profile path seems to be invalid. If you want to set it now, select "Yes", otherwise select "No". In this case, "Color Management" feature will be disabled until you solve this issue
Open folder
Delete File
%1 (%2 of %3)
There are no images in this folder.
Open Images From Folder
About to delete file "%1" Are you sure?
Preparing slideshow. Please wait...
Destination album %1 not found in database.
Database parameters of source and destination do not match.
Source album %1 not found in database
Destination album %1 not found in database
Source image %1 not found in database
No album ids passed
digiKam Theme Designer
Theme color scheme file to open.
Photo caption
Events, Places, Vacation
Album Banner
July 2008 - 10 Items
Load theme
Save theme
Close the theme designer
Property:
Bevel:
Gradient:
Start Color:
End Color:
Add Border
Border Color:
Failed to open file for writing
Your names
Your emails
& Album
Tag
& Image
& Edit
& View
& Tools
Import
& Export
& Settings
& Help
Main Toolbar
& File
& Color
Enhance
Transform
& Decorate
Filters
& Lens
& Depth
From:
to the end
To:
Replace:
With:
Options
Case Sensitive
Regular Expression
Length:
Alignment:
Character:
Digits:
Custom Range
Start:
Step:
Format:
Time:
Image Settings
Image Position
Auto rotate
Scaling
& No scaling
& Fit image to page
Enlarge smaller images
& Scale to:
x
Millimeters
Centimeters
Inches
Keep ratio
& Queues
& Device
Use Metadata
Make:
Model:
Lens:
Set this option to try to guess the right camera/ lens settings from the image metadata (as Exif or XMP).
Focal Length:
Aperture:
Subject Distance:
Lens Auto-Correction
Show grid
Set this option to visualize the correction grid to be applied.
Chromatic Aberration
Chromatic aberration is easily recognized as color fringes towards the image corners. CA is due to a varying lens focus for different colors.
Vignetting
Vignetting refers to an image darkening, mostly in the corners. Optical and natural vignetting can be canceled out with this option, whereas mechanical vignetting will not be cured.
Color Correction
All lenses have a slight color tinge to them, mostly due to the anti-reflective coating. The tinge can be canceled when the respective data is known for the lens.
Distortion
Distortion refers to an image deformation, which is most pronounced towards the corners. These Seidel aberrations are known as pincushion and barrel distortions.
Geometry
Four geometries are handled here: Rectilinear (99 percent of all lenses), Fisheye, Cylindrical, Equirectangular.
Lens Distortion
You can see here a thumbnail preview of the distortion correction applied to a cross pattern.
Main:
This value controls the amount of distortion. Negative values correct lens barrel distortion, while positive values correct lens pincushion distortion.
Edge:
This value controls in the same manner as the Main control, but has more effect at the edges of the image than at the center.
Zoom:
This value rescales the overall image size.
Brighten:
This value adjusts the brightness in image corners.
Vignetting Correction
Add vignetting
This option add vignetting to the image instead for removing it. Use it for creative effects.
You can see here a thumbnail preview of the anti-vignetting mask applied to the image.
Amount:
This value controls the degree of intensity attenuation by the filter at its point of maximum density.
Feather:
This value is used as the exponent controlling the fall-off in density from the center of the filter to the periphery.
Radius:
This value is the radius of the center filter. It is a multiple of the half-diagonal measure of the image, at which the density of the filter falls to zero.
X offset:
X offset
Y offset:
Y offset
Brightness:
Set here the brightness re-adjustment of the target image.
Contrast:
Set here the contrast re-adjustment of the target image.
Gamma:
Set here the gamma re-adjustment of the target image.
Lens Correction
Auto-Correction...
Distortion...
Vignetting Correction...
Channel Mixer...
Channel Mixer
You can see here the image's color channels' gain adjustments preview. You can pick a color on the image to see the corresponding color level on the histogram.
Red:
Select the red color gain, as a percentage, for the current channel.
Green:
Select the green color gain, as a percentage, for the current channel.
Blue:
Select the blue color gain, as a percentage, for the current channel.
Reset color channels' gains settings from the currently selected channel.
Enable this option if you want the image rendered in monochrome mode. In this mode, the histogram will display only luminosity values.
Preserve luminosity
Enable this option is you want preserve the image luminosity.
Select Gimp Gains Mixer File to Load
Cannot load settings from the Gains Mixer text file.
Gimp Gains Mixer File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Gains Mixer text file.
Color Effects...
Color Effects
This is the color effects preview
Solarize
Vivid
Neon
Find Edges
Select the effect type to apply to the image here. Solarize: simulates solarization of photograph. Vivid: simulates the Velvia(tm) slide film colors. Neon: coloring the edges in a photograph to reproduce a fluorescent light effect. Find Edges: detects the edges in a photograph and their strength.
Level:
Set here the level of the effect.
Iteration:
This value controls the number of iterations to use with the Neon and Find Edges effects.
ColorFX
Hot Pixels
Filter:
Average
Quadratic
Cubic
Black Frame...
Use this button to add a new black frame file which will be used by the hot pixels removal filter.
Loading:
Select Black Frame Image
Hot Pixels Correction
Preview
Size
HP
Hot Pixels...
Film Grain
Sensitivity (ISO):
Set here the film ISO-sensitivity to use for simulating the film graininess.
Add Film Grain...
White Balance...
White Balance
The image's white-balance adjustments preview is shown here. Pick a color on the image to see the corresponding color level on the histogram.
Color Temperature (K):
Adjustment:
Set here the white balance color temperature in Kelvin.
Preset:
40W Lamp
100W Lamp
200W Lamp
Candle
Daylight D50
Daylight D65
Moonlight
Neutral
Photo Flash
Studio Lamp
Sun
Sunrise
Xenon Lamp
Select the white balance color temperature preset to use.
40 Watt incandescent lamp
100 Watt incandescent lamp
200 Watt incandescent lamp
candle light
sunny daylight around noon
overcast sky light
moon light
neutral color temperature
electronic photo flash
tungsten lamp used in photo studio or light at 1 hour from dusk/ dawn
effective sun temperature
sunrise or sunset light
xenon lamp or light arc
no preset value
Temperature tone color picker.
With this button, you can pick the color from the original image used to set the white color balance temperature and green component.
Black point:
Set here the black level value.
Shadows:
Set here the shadow noise suppression level.
Saturation:
Set here the saturation value.
Set here the gamma correction value.
Set here the green component to control the magenta color cast removal level.
Exposure Compensation (E. V):
Auto exposure adjustments
With this button, you can automatically adjust Exposure and Black Point values.
Set here the main exposure compensation value in E. V.
Fine:
This value in E. V will be added to main exposure compensation value to set fine exposure adjustment.
White Color Balance Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a White Color Balance settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the White Color Balance text file.
White Color Balance Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the White Color Balance text file.
Charcoal
Pencil size:
Set here the charcoal pencil size used to simulate the drawing.
Smooth:
This value controls the smoothing effect of the pencil under the canvas.
Charcoal Drawing...
Adjust Curves
This is the image's curve-adjustments preview. You can pick a spot on the image to see the corresponding level in the histogram.
Here you can see the target preview image histogram drawing of the selected image channel. This one is re-computed at any curves settings changes.
Adjust Curve
Select Gimp Curves File to Load
Cannot load from the Gimp curves text file.
Gimp Curves File to Save
Cannot save to the Gimp curves text file.
Curves Adjust...
Apply Texture...
Texture
Paper
Paper 2
Fabric
Burlap
Bricks
Bricks 2
Canvas
Marble
Marble 2
Blue Jean
Cell Wood
Metal Wire
Modern
Wall
Moss
Stone
Set here the texture type to apply to image.
Relief:
Set here the relief gain used to merge texture and image.
Insert Text...
Insert Text
This previews the text inserted in the image. You can use the mouse to move the text to the right location.
Here, enter the text you want to insert in your image.
Here you can choose the font to be used.
Align text to the left
Align text to the right
Align text to center
Align text to a block
Rotation:
90 Degrees
180 Degrees
270 Degrees
Select the text rotation to use here.
Color:
Set here the font color to use.
Add border
Add a solid border around text using current text color
Semi-transparent
Use semi-transparent text background under image
Enter your text here.
Adjust Levels
Here you can see the image's level-adjustments preview. You can pick a spot on the image to see the corresponding level in the histogram.
This is the histogram drawing of the selected channel from the original image.
Select the input intensity of the histogram here.
Input intensity.
Select the output intensity of the histogram here.
Output intensity.
Select the minimal input intensity value of the histogram here.
Minimal input intensity.
Gamma input value.
Select the gamma input value here.
Maximal input intensity.
Select the maximal input intensity value of the histogram here.
Minimal output intensity.
Select the minimal output intensity value of the histogram here.
Maximal output intensity.
Select the maximal output intensity value of the histogram here.
With this button, you can pick the color from the original image used to set Shadow Tone input levels on the Red, Green, Blue, and Luminosity channels.
With this button, you can pick the color from the original image used to set Middle Tone input levels on the Red, Green, Blue, and Luminosity channels.
With this button, you can pick the color from the original image used to set Highlight Tone input levels on the Red, Green, Blue, and Luminosity channels.
Adjust all levels automatically.
If you press this button, all channel levels will be adjusted automatically.
Reset current channel levels' values.
If you press this button, all levels' values from the currently selected channel will be reset to the default values.
Adjust Level
Select Gimp Levels File to Load
Cannot load from the Gimp levels text file.
Gimp Levels File to Save
Cannot save to the Gimp levels text file.
Levels Adjust...
Raindrops
This is the preview of the Raindrop effect. Note: if you have previously selected an area in the editor, this will be unaffected by the filter. You can use this method to disable the Raindrops effect on a human face, for example.
Drop size:
Set here the raindrops' size.
Number:
This value controls the maximum number of raindrops.
Fish eyes:
This value is the fish-eye-effect optical distortion coefficient.
RainDrop
Raindrops...
Blur FX
Zoom Blur
Radial Blur
Far Blur
Motion Blur
Softener Blur
Shake Blur
Focus Blur
Smart Blur
Frost Glass
Mosaic
Select the blurring effect to apply to image. Zoom Blur: blurs the image along radial lines starting from a specified center point. This simulates the blur of a zooming camera. Radial Blur: blurs the image by rotating the pixels around the specified center point. This simulates the blur of a rotating camera. Far Blur: blurs the image by using far pixels. This simulates the blur of an unfocalized camera lens. Motion Blur: blurs the image by moving the pixels horizontally. This simulates the blur of a linear moving camera. Softener Blur: blurs the image softly in dark tones and hardly in light tones. This gives images a dreamy and glossy soft focus effect. It is ideal for creating romantic portraits, glamour photographs, or giving images a warm and subtle glow. Shake Blur: blurs the image by shaking randomly the pixels. This simulates the blur of a random moving camera. Focus Blur: blurs the image corners to reproduce the astigmatism distortion of a lens. Smart Blur: finds the edges of color in your image and blurs them without muddying the rest of the image. Frost Glass: blurs the image by randomly disperse light coming through a frosted glass. Mosaic: divides the photograph into rectangular cells and then recreates it by filling those cells with average pixel value.
Distance:
Set here the blur distance in pixels.
This value controls the level to use with the current effect.
Blur Effects
Blur Effects...
Solid
Beveled
Decorative Pine
Decorative Wood
Decorative Paper
Decorative Parquet
Decorative Ice
Decorative Leaf
Decorative Marble
Decorative Rain
Decorative Craters
Decorative Dried
Decorative Pink
Decorative Stone
Decorative Chalk
Decorative Granite
Decorative Rock
Decorative Wall
Select the border type to add around the image here.
Preserve Aspect Ratio
Enable this option if you want to preserve the aspect ratio of image. If enabled, the border width will be a percentage of the image size, else the border width will be in pixels.
Width (%):
Set here the border width as a percentage of the image size.
Width (pixels):
Set here the border width in pixels to add around the image.
First:
Second:
Set here the foreground color of the border.
Set here the Background color of the border.
Set here the color of the main border.
Set here the color of the line.
Set here the color of the upper left area.
Set here the color of the lower right area.
Set here the color of the first line.
Set here the color of the second line.
Add Border...
Emboss...
Emboss
Depth:
Set here the depth of the embossing image effect.
Restoration
Preset
Visit CImg library website
Filtering type:
Reduce Uniform Noise
Reduce JPEG Artifacts
Reduce Texturing
Select the filter preset to use for photograph restoration here: None: Most common values. Puts settings to default. Reduce Uniform Noise: reduce small image artifacts such as sensor noise. Reduce JPEG Artifacts: reduce large image artifacts, such as a JPEG compression mosaic. Reduce Texturing: reduce image artifacts, such as paper texture, or Moire patterns on scanned images.
Photograph Restoration Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Photograph Restoration settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Photograph Restoration text file.
Photograph Restoration Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Photograph Restoration text file.
Restoration...
Free Rotation
Set Point 1
Set Point 2
Auto Adjust
This is the free rotation operation preview. If you move the mouse cursor on this preview, a vertical and horizontal dashed line will be drawn to guide you in adjusting the free rotation correction. Release the left mouse button to freeze the dashed line's position.
New width:
px
New height:
Main angle:
An angle in degrees by which to rotate the image. A positive angle rotates the image clockwise; a negative angle rotates it counter-clockwise.
Fine angle:
This value in degrees will be added to main angle value to set fine target angle.
Anti-Aliasing
Enable this option to apply the anti-aliasing filter to the rotated image. In order to smooth the target image, it will be blurred a little.
Auto-crop:
Widest Area
Largest Area
Select the method to process image auto-cropping to remove black frames around a rotated image here.
Select a point in the preview widget, then click this button to assign the point for auto-correction.
Adjust
Correct the rotation of your images automatically by assigning two points in the preview widget and clicking Adjust. You can either adjust horizontal or vertical lines.
Automatic Adjustment
Manual Adjustment
Settings
Click to set
Okay
Distortion Effects...
Distortion Effects
This is the preview of the distortion effect applied to the photograph.
Fish Eyes
Twirl
Cylindrical Hor.
Cylindrical Vert.
Cylindrical H/ V.
Caricature
Multiple Corners
Waves Hor.
Waves Vert.
Block Waves 1
Block Waves 2
Circular Waves 1
Circular Waves 2
Polar Coordinates
Unpolar Coordinates
Tile
Here, select the type of effect to apply to an image. Fish Eyes: warps the photograph around a 3D spherical shape to reproduce the common photograph'Fish Eyes' effect. Twirl: spins the photograph to produce a Twirl pattern. Cylinder Hor.: warps the photograph around a horizontal cylinder. Cylinder Vert.: warps the photograph around a vertical cylinder. Cylinder H/ V.: warps the photograph around 2 cylinders, vertical and horizontal. Caricature: distorts the photograph with the'Fish Eyes' effect inverted. Multiple Corners: splits the photograph like a multiple corners pattern. Waves Horizontal: distorts the photograph with horizontal waves. Waves Vertical: distorts the photograph with vertical waves. Block Waves 1: divides the image into cells and makes it look as if it is being viewed through glass blocks. Block Waves 2: like Block Waves 1 but with another version of glass blocks distortion. Circular Waves 1: distorts the photograph with circular waves. Circular Waves 2: another variation of the Circular Waves effect. Polar Coordinates: converts the photograph from rectangular to polar coordinates. Unpolar Coordinates: the Polar Coordinate effect inverted. Tile: splits the photograph into square blocks and moves them randomly inside the image.
This value controls the iterations to use for Waves, Tile, and Neon effects.
Local Contrast
Function:
Power
Function: This function combines the original RGB channels with the desaturated blurred image. This function is used in each of the tonemapping stages. It can be linear or power. Basically, this function increases the values where both the original and blurred image's value are low and do the opposite on high values.
Stretch contrast
Stretch contrast: This stretches the contrast of the original image. It is applied before the tonemapping process.
Highlights saturation:
Highlights saturation: Usually the (perceived) saturation is increased. The user can choose to lower the saturation on original highlight and shadows from the image with these parameters.
Shadow saturation:
Shadow saturation: Usually the (perceived) saturation is increased. The user can choose to lower the saturation on original highlight and shadows from the image with these parameters.
Fast mode
Fast mode: There are available two ways to do the tonemapping: using a very fast algorithm, which might produce artifacts on the image or a more precise algorithm, which is slower.
Enabled
Check to enable this stage.
Power:
Power: How strong the effect is applied.
Blur:
Blur: How strong the image is blurred before combining with the original image and with the tonemapping function.
General settings
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
Photograph Local Contrast Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Photograph Local Contrast settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Photograph Local Contrast text file.
Photograph Local Contrast Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Photograph Local Contrast text file.
Local Contrast...
Oil Paint...
Oil Paint
Brush size:
Set here the brush size to use for simulating the oil painting.
This value controls the smoothing effect of the brush under the canvas.
Infrared
Set here the ISO-sensitivity of the simulated infrared film. Increasing this value will increase the proportion of green color in the mix. It will also increase the halo effect on the highlights, and the film graininess (if that box is checked). Note: to simulate an Ilford SFX200 infrared film, use a sensitivity excursion of 200 to 800. A sensitivity over 800 simulates Kodak HIE high-speed infrared film. This last one creates a more dramatic photographic style.
Add film grain
This option adds infrared film grain to the image depending on ISO-sensitivity.
Infrared Film...
Liquid Rescale
Maintain aspect ratio
Enable this option to maintain aspect ratio with new image sizes.
Width (px):
Set here the new image width in pixels.
Height (px):
Set here the new image height in pixels.
New image width, as a percentage (%).
Height (%):
New image height, as a percentage (%).
Specify here your desired content-aware rescaling percentage.
Add weight masks
Enable this option to add suppression and preservation masks.
Suppression weight mask:
Draw a suppression mask
Click on this button to draw zones marking which areas of the image are less important. These zones will be deleted when reducing the picture, or duplicated when enlarging the picture.
Preservation weight mask:
Draw a preservation mask
Click on this button to draw zones marking which areas of the image you want to preserve.
Erase mask:
Erase mask
Click on this button to erase mask regions.
Specify here the size of the brush used to paint masks.
Norm of brightness gradient
Sum of absolute values of brightness gradients
Absolute value of brightness gradient
Norm of luma gradient
Sum of absolute values of luma gradients
Absolute value of luma gradient
This option allows you to choose a gradient function. This function is used to determine which pixels should be removed or kept.
Preserve Skin Tones
Enable this option to preserve pixels whose color is close to a skin tone.
Overall rigidity of the seams:
Use this value to give a negative bias to the seams which are not straight. May be useful to prevent distortions in some situations, or to avoid artifacts from pixel skipping (it is better to use low values in such case). This setting applies to the whole selected layer if no rigidity mask is used. Note: the bias is proportional to the difference in the transversal coordinate between each two successive points, elevated to the power of 1.5, and summed up for the whole seam.
Maximum number of transversal steps:
This option lets you choose the maximum transversal step that the pixels in the seams can take. In the standard algorithm, corresponding to the default value step = 1, each pixel in a seam can be shifted by at most one pixel with respect to its neighbors. This implies that the seams can form an angle of at most 45 degrees with respect to their base line. Increasing the step value lets you overcome this limit, but may lead to the introduction of artifacts. In order to balance the situation, you can use the rigidity setting.
Side switch frequency:
During the carving process, at each step the optimal seam to be carved is chosen based on the relevance value for each pixel. However, in the case where two seams are equivalent (which may happen, for instance, when large portions of the image have the same color), the algorithm always chooses the seams from one side. In some cases, this can pose problems, e. g. an object centered in the original image might not be centered in the resulting image. In order to overcome this effect, this setting allows the favored side to be switched automatically during rescaling, at the cost of slightly worse performance.
Resize Order:
Horizontally first
Vertically first
Here you can set whether to resize horizontally first or vertically first.
Target size
Content-aware rescale percentage
Mask Settings
Energy function
Liquid Rescale...
Perspective Adjustment...
Perspective Adjustment
Perspective
This is the perspective transformation operation preview. You can use the mouse for dragging the corner to adjust the perspective transformation area.
Angles (in degrees):
Top left:
Top right:
Bottom left:
Bottom right:
Draw preview while moving
Draw grid
Inverse transformation
Template Superimpose
This previews the template superimposed onto the image.
Move
Root Directory...
Set here the current templates' root directory.
Select Template Root Directory to Use
Super Impose
Template Superimpose...
Hue / Saturation / Lightness
The Hue/ Saturation/ Lightness adjustment preview is shown here. Picking a color on the image will show the corresponding color level on the histogram.
Select the hue and saturation adjustments of the image.
You can see here a color preview of the hue and saturation adjustments.
Hue:
Set here the hue adjustment of the image.
Set here the saturation adjustment of the image.
Lightness:
Set here the lightness adjustment of the image.
HSL Adjustments
Resize Image
New Size
Width:
Height:
New image height in pixels (px).
New image width in percent (%).
New image height in percent (%).
Restore photograph (slow)
Enable this option to scale-up an image to a huge size. Warning: This process can take some time.
Note: use Restoration Mode to scale-up an image to a huge size. This process can take some time.
Resize
Photograph Resizing Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Photograph Resizing settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Photograph Resizing text file.
Photograph Resizing Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Photograph Resizing text file.
Brightness/ Contrast/ Gamma...
Hue/ Saturation/ Lightness...
Color Balance...
Invert
Color Space Conversion
Blur...
Sharpen...
Red Eye...
This filter can be used to correct red eyes in a photo. Select a region including the eyes to use this option.
Noise Reduction...
Black & & White...
Aspect Ratio Crop...
& Resize...
This image is already using a depth of 8 bits / color / pixel.
Performing this operation will reduce image color quality. Do you want to continue?
This image is already using a depth of 16 bits / color / pixel.
Red-Eye Correction Tool
You need to select a region including the eyes to use the red-eye correction tool
This image is not color managed.
Color Management is disabled...
Color Balance
The image color-balance adjustment preview is shown here. Picking a color on the image will show the corresponding color level on the histogram.
Cyan
Set here the cyan/ red color adjustment of the image.
Magenta
Set here the magenta/ green color adjustment of the image.
Yellow
Set here the yellow/ blue color adjustment of the image.
Sharpen
Method:
Simple sharp
Unsharp mask
Refocus
Select the sharpening method to apply to the image.
Sharpness:
A sharpness of 0 has no effect, 1 and above determine the sharpen matrix radius that determines how much to sharpen the image.
Radius value is the Gaussian blur matrix radius value used to determines how much to blur the image.
The value of the difference between the original and the blur image that is added back into the original.
The threshold, as a fraction of the maximum luminosity value, needed to apply the difference amount.
Circular sharpness:
This is the radius of the circular convolution. It is the most important parameter for using this plugin. For most images the default value of 1.0 should give good results. Select a higher value when your image is very blurred.
Correlation:
Increasing the correlation may help to reduce artifacts. The correlation can range from 0-1. Useful values are 0.5 and values close to 1, e. g. 0.95 and 0.99. Using a high value for the correlation will reduce the sharpening effect of the plugin.
Noise filter:
Increasing the noise filter parameter may help to reduce artifacts. The noise filter can range from 0-1 but values higher than 0.1 are rarely helpful. When the noise filter value is too low, e. g. 0.0 the image quality will be very poor. A useful value is 0.01. Using a high value for the noise filter will reduce the sharpening effect of the plugin.
Gaussian sharpness:
This is the sharpness for the Gaussian convolution. Use this parameter when your blurring is of a Gaussian type. In most cases you should set this parameter to 0, because it causes nasty artifacts. When you use non-zero values, you will probably also have to increase the correlation and/ or noise filter parameters.
Matrix size:
This parameter determines the size of the transformation matrix. Increasing the matrix width may give better results, especially when you have chosen large values for circular or Gaussian sharpness.
Unsharp Mask
Photograph Refocus Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Photograph Refocus settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Photograph Refocus text file.
Photograph Refocus Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Photograph Refocus text file.
Noise Reduction
Brightness / Contrast / Gamma
The image brightness-contrast-gamma adjustment preview is shown here. Picking a color on the image will show the corresponding color level on the histogram.
Set here the brightness adjustment of the image.
Set here the contrast adjustment of the image.
Set here the gamma adjustment of the image.
Aspect Ratio Crop
Here you can see the aspect ratio selection preview used for cropping. You can use the mouse to move and resize the crop area. Press and hold the CTRL key to move the opposite corner too. Press and hold the SHIFT key to move the closest corner to the mouse pointer.
Max. Aspect
Set selection area to the maximum size according to the current ratio.
Aspect ratio:
Custom
Golden Ratio
Select your constrained aspect ratio for cropping. Aspect Ratio Crop tool uses a relative ratio. That means it is the same if you use centimeters or inches and it does not specify the physical size. You can see below a correspondence list of traditional photographic paper sizes and aspect ratio crop: 2:3: 10x15cm, 20x30cm, 30x45cm, 4x6 ", 8x12", 12x18 ", 16x24", 20x30 "3:4: 6x8cm, 15x20cm, 18x24cm, 30x40cm, 3.75x5", 4.5x6 ", 6x8", 7.5x10 ", 9x12" 4:5: 20x25cm, 40x50cm, 8x10 ", 16x20" 5:7: 15x21cm, 30x42cm, 5x7 "7:10: 21x30cm, 42x60cm, 3.5x5" The Golden Ratio is 1:1.618. A composition following this rule is considered visually harmonious but can be unadapted to print on standard photographic paper.
Exact aspect
Enable this option to force exact aspect ratio crop.
Orientation:
Landscape
Portrait
Select constrained aspect ratio orientation.
Auto
Enable this option to automatically set the orientation.
Custom ratio:
Set here the desired custom aspect numerator value.
Set here the desired custom aspect denominator value.
Set here the top left selection corner position for cropping.
X:
Set here the width selection for cropping.
Set width position to center.
Y:
Set here the height selection for cropping.
Set height position to center.
Crop Settings
Geometric form:
Rules of Thirds
Diagonal Method
Harmonious Triangles
Golden Mean
With this option, you can display guide lines to help compose your photograph.
Golden sections
Enable this option to show golden sections.
Golden spiral sections
Enable this option to show golden spiral sections.
Golden spiral
Enable this option to show a golden spiral guide.
Golden triangles
Enable this option to show golden triangles.
Flip horizontally
Enable this option to flip the guidelines horizontally.
Flip vertically
Enable this option to flip the guidelines vertically.
Color and width:
Set here the color used to draw composition guides.
Set here the width in pixels used to draw composition guides.
Composition Guides
Blur
Smoothness:
A smoothness of 0 has no effect, 1 and above determine the Gaussian blur matrix radius that determines how much to blur the image.
Gaussian Blur
A preview of the image after applying a color profile is shown here.
General Settings
Here you can set general parameters.
Soft-proofing
Rendering emulation of the device described by the "Proofing" profile. Useful to preview the final result without rendering to a physical medium.
Check gamut
You can use this option if you want to show the colors that are outside the printer's gamut
Assign profile
You can use this option to embed the selected workspace color profile into the image.
Use BPC
The Black Point Compensation (BPC) feature works in conjunction with Relative Colorimetric Intent. With Perceptual Intent, it should make no difference, since BPC is always on, and with Absolute Colorimetric, Intent it is always turned off. BPC compensates for a lack of ICC profiles for rendering dark tones. With BPC the dark tones are optimally mapped (no clipping) from original the medium to the destination rendering medium, e. g. the combination of paper and ink.
Rendering Intent:
Perceptual intent causes the full gamut of the image to be compressed or expanded to fill the gamut of the destination media, so that gray balance is preserved but colorimetric accuracy may not be preserved. In other words, if certain colors in an image fall outside of the range of colors that the output device can render, the image intent will cause all the colors in the image to be adjusted so that every color in the image falls within the range that can be rendered and so that the relationship between colors is preserved as much as possible. This intent is most suitable for display of photographs and images, and is the default intent. Absolute Colorimetric intent causes any colors that fall outside the range that the output device can render to be adjusted to the closest color that can be rendered, while all other colors are left unchanged. This intent preserves the white point and is most suitable for spot colors (Pantone, TruMatch, logo colors,...). Relative Colorimetric intent is defined such that any colors that fall outside the range that the output device can render are adjusted to the closest color that can be rendered, while all other colors are left unchanged. Proof intent does not preserve the white point. Saturation intent preserves the saturation of colors in the image at the possible expense of hue and lightness. Implementation of this intent remains somewhat problematic, and the ICC is still working on methods to achieve the desired effects. This intent is most suitable for business graphics such as charts, where it is more important that the colors be vivid and contrast well with each other rather than a specific color.
Visit Little CMS project website
Input Profile
Set here all parameters relevant to Input Color Profiles.
Use embedded profile
Use built-in sRGB profile
Use default profile
Use selected profile
Info...
Camera information
Workspace Profile
Set here all parameters relevant to Color Workspace Profiles.
Use default workspace profile
Proofing Profile
Set here all parameters relevant to Proofing Color Profiles.
Use default proof profile
Lightness Adjustments
Set here all lightness adjustments to the target image.
This is the curve adjustment of the image luminosity
The ICC profiles path seems to be invalid. You will not be able to use "Default profile" options. Please fix this in the digiKam ICC setup.
The selected ICC input profile path seems to be invalid. Please check it.
The selected ICC proof profile path seems to be invalid. Please check it.
The selected ICC workspace profile path seems to be invalid. Please check it.
Your settings are not sufficient. To apply a color transform, you need at least two ICC profiles: An "Input" profile. A "Workspace" profile. If you want to do a "soft-proof" transform, in addition to these profiles you need a "Proof" profile.
Sorry, there is no selected profile
Profile Error
No profile data can be found.
You have not enabled Color Management in the digiKam preferences.
"Use of default profile" options will be disabled now.
Color Management Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Color Management settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Color Management text file.
Color Management Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Color Management text file.
Red Eye
Here you can see the image selection preview with red eye reduction applied.
Sensitivity:
Control the red pixel selection threshold. Low values will select more red pixels (aggressive correction), high values will select fewer (mild correction). Use a low value if an eye has been selected exactly. Use a high value if other parts of the face have been selected too.
Sets the smoothness value when blurring the border of the changed pixels. This leads to a more naturally looking pupil.
Coloring Tint:
Sets a custom color when re-colorizing the eyes.
Tint Level:
Set the tint level to adjust the luminosity of the new color of the pupil.
Red Eyes Correction
Black & & White
The black and white conversion tool preview is shown here. Picking a color on the image will show the corresponding color level on the histogram.
Generic
Generic: Simulate a generic black and white film.
Agfa 200X
Agfa 200X: Simulate the Agfa 200X black and white film at 200 ISO.
Agfa Pan 25
Agfa Pan 25: Simulate the Agfa Pan black and white film at 25 ISO.
Agfa Pan 100
Agfa Pan 100: Simulate the Agfa Pan black and white film at 100 ISO.
Agfa Pan 400
Agfa Pan 400: Simulate the Agfa Pan black and white film at 400 ISO.
Ilford Delta 100
Ilford Delta 100: Simulate the Ilford Delta black and white film at 100 ISO.
Ilford Delta 400
Ilford Delta 400: Simulate the Ilford Delta black and white film at 400 ISO.
Ilford Delta 400 Pro 3200
Ilford Delta 400 Pro 3200: Simulate the Ilford Delta 400 Pro black and white film at 3200 ISO.
Ilford FP4 Plus
Ilford FP4 Plus: Simulate the Ilford FP4 Plus black and white film at 125 ISO.
Ilford HP5 Plus
Ilford HP5 Plus: Simulate the Ilford HP5 Plus black and white film at 400 ISO.
Ilford PanF Plus
Ilford PanF Plus: Simulate the Ilford PanF Plus black and white film at 50 ISO.
Ilford XP2 Super
Ilford XP2 Super: Simulate the Ilford XP2 Super black and white film at 400 ISO.
Kodak Tmax 100
Kodak Tmax 100: Simulate the Kodak Tmax black and white film at 100 ISO.
Kodak Tmax 400
Kodak Tmax 400: Simulate the Kodak Tmax black and white film at 400 ISO.
Kodak TriX
Kodak TriX: Simulate the Kodak TriX black and white film at 400 ISO.
No Lens Filter
No Lens Filter: Do not apply a lens filter when rendering the image.
Green Filter
Black & White with Green Filter: Simulate black and white film exposure using a green filter. This is useful for all scenic shoots, especially portraits photographed against the sky.
Orange Filter
Black & White with Orange Filter: Simulate black and white film exposure using an orange filter. This will enhance landscapes, marine scenes and aerial photography.
Red Filter
Black & White with Red Filter: Simulate black and white film exposure using a red filter. This creates dramatic sky effects, and simulates moonlight scenes in the daytime.
Yellow Filter
Black & White with Yellow Filter: Simulate black and white film exposure using a yellow filter. This has the most natural tonal correction, and improves contrast. Ideal for landscapes.
Yellow-Green Filter
Black & White with Yellow-Green Filter: Simulate black and white film exposure using a yellow-green filter. A yellow-green filter is highly effective for outdoor portraits because red is rendered dark while green appears lighter. Great for correcting skin tones, bringing out facial expressions in close-ups and emphasizing the feeling of liveliness. This filter is highly effective for indoor portraits under tungsten lighting.
Blue Filter
Black & White with Blue Filter: Simulate black and white film exposure using a blue filter. This accentuates haze and fog. Used for dye transfer and contrast effects.
Strength:
Here, set the strength adjustment of the lens filter.
No Tone Filter
No Tone Filter: Do not apply a tone filter to the image.
Sepia Tone
Black & White with Sepia Tone: Gives a warm highlight and mid-tone while adding a bit of coolness to the shadows - very similar to the process of bleaching a print and re-developing in a sepia toner.
Brown Tone
Black & White with Brown Tone: This filter is more neutral than the Sepia Tone filter.
Cold Tone
Black & White with Cold Tone: Start subtly and replicate printing on a cold tone black and white paper such as a bromide enlarging paper.
Selenium Tone
Black & White with Selenium Tone: This effect replicates traditional selenium chemical toning done in the darkroom.
Platinum Tone
Black & White with Platinum Tone: This effect replicates traditional platinum chemical toning done in the darkroom.
Green Tone
Black & White with greenish tint: This effect is also known as Verdante.
Film
Lens Filters
Tone
Lightness
Convert to Black & & White
Black & White Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Black & White settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Black & White text file.
Black & White Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Black & White text file.
Color Profile Conversion
Current Color Space:
Convert to:
Select the profile of the color space to convert to.
Auto Correction
The auto-color correction tool preview is shown here. Picking a color on the image will show the corresponding color level on the histogram.
Auto Levels
Auto Levels: This option maximizes the tonal range in the Red, Green, and Blue channels. It searches the image shadow and highlight limit values and adjusts the Red, Green, and Blue channels to a full histogram range.
Normalize
Normalize: This option scales brightness values across the active image so that the darkest point becomes black, and the brightest point becomes as bright as possible without altering its hue. This is often a "magic fix" for images that are dim or washed out.
Equalize
Equalize: This option adjusts the brightness of colors across the active image so that the histogram for the value channel is as nearly as possible flat, that is, so that each possible brightness value appears at about the same number of pixels as each other value. Sometimes Equalize works wonderfully at enhancing the contrasts in an image. Other times it gives garbage. It is a very powerful operation, which can either work miracles on an image or destroy it.
Stretch Contrast
Stretch Contrast: This option enhances the contrast and brightness of the RGB values of an image by stretching the lowest and highest values to their fullest range, adjusting everything in between.
Auto Exposure
Auto Exposure: This option enhances the contrast and brightness of the RGB values of an image to calculate optimal exposition and black level using image histogram properties.
Shear...
Shear Tool
This is the shear operation preview. If you move the mouse cursor on this preview, a vertical and horizontal dashed line will be drawn to guide you in adjusting the shear correction. Release the left mouse button to freeze the dashed line's position.
Main horizontal angle:
The main horizontal shearing angle, in degrees.
Fine horizontal angle:
This value in degrees will be added to main horizontal angle value to set fine adjustments.
Main vertical angle:
The main vertical shearing angle, in degrees.
Fine vertical angle:
This value in degrees will be added to main vertical angle value to set fine adjustments.
Enable this option to apply the anti-aliasing filter to the sheared image. To smooth the target image, it will be blurred a little.
In-painting...
This filter can be used to in-paint a part in a photo. To use this option, select a region to in-paint.
In-Painting Photograph Tool
To use this tool, you need to select a region to in-paint.
In-painting
The image selection preview with in-painting applied is shown here.
Remove Small Artifact
Remove Medium Artifact
Remove Large Artifact
Select the filter preset to use for photograph restoration here: None: Most common values. Puts settings to default. Remove Small Artifact: in-paint small image artifacts, such as image glitches. Remove Medium Artifact: in-paint medium image artifacts. Remove Large Artifact: in-paint large image artifacts, such as unwanted objects.
In-Painting
Photograph In-Painting Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Photograph In-Painting settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Photograph In-Painting text file.
Photograph In-Painting Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Photograph In-Painting text file.
... that digiKam supports Drag'n'Drop? So you can easily move images from Dolphin to digiKam or from digiKam to K3b simply by using "Drag'n'Drop".
... that you can use nested albums in digiKam?
... that you can view the Exif, MakerNotes, IPTC and XMP photo information by using the Metadata sidebar tab on the right side?
... that each photo has a context menu that can be reached by clicking on it with the right mouse button?
... that albums in digiKam are folders in your Collection? So you can easily import your photos by simply copying those folders to your Collection.
... that you can customize your digiKam toolbars using Settings - > Configure Toolbars...?
... that you can reach other users through the digiKam-users mailing list? Subscribe to it at this site.
... that digiKam has multiple Tools available from kipi-plugins project with extra features like HTML export, Flickr Export, OpenGL Slideshow,... and many more? You can even write your own! Find more information at this site.
... that you can use remote computer repository as images Collection? Go to Setup dialog and Collection section for details.
... that you can print images using the Print Wizard? You can start it using Image - > Print Wizard.
... that you can save your images as PNG file format instead TIFF format and get good compression without losing image quality and metadata?
... that most of the settings in a dialog box have small explanation text, called "What's this?" information, available when you hover over an item and right click with your mouse?
... that because the PNG file format uses a lossless compression algorithm, you can use the max compression level when you save your images and not lose any quality?
... that you can print the current image opened in the digiKam image editor?
... that you can edit multiples language comments of the current image opened in the digiKam image editor by using the Caption/ Tags sidebar tab?
... that you could use & lt; Page Downgt; and & lt; Page Upgt; on your keyboard to switch between photos in the image editor?
... that you can Import RAW files in Image Editor which support a lots of options for advanced users?
... that Image Editor support 16 bits color depth image to be able to edit RAW files in high quality?
Enter your renaming pattern here. Use the access buttons to quickly add renaming options and modifiers. For further explanations, use the information toolbutton.
Show a list of all available options
Renaming Options
Add a modifier to a renaming option. To activate this button, place the cursor behind a renaming option or an already assigned modifier.
Modifiers
Modifiers can be applied to every renaming option. It is possible to assign multiple modifiers to an option, they are applied in the order you assign them.
Current Name
New Name
This list shows the results for your renaming pattern. Red items indicate a a name collision, either because the new name is equal to the current name, or because the name has already been assigned to another item.
Range...
Add only a specific range of a renaming option
Extract a specific range (if omitted, '||to|| '= end of string)
Trimmed
Remove leading, trailing and extra whitespace
Change Case
change the case of a renaming option
Convert to uppercase
Uppercase
Convert to lowercase
Lowercase
Convert the first letter of each word to uppercase
First Letter of Each Word Uppercase
Fill...
Fill the string with a character to match a specific length
(||align||: ||l|| = left, ||r|| = right)
Unique
Add a suffix number to have unique strings in duplicate values
Add a suffix number, ||n|| specifies the number of digits to use
Replace...
Replace text in a renaming option
Replace text (||options||: ||r|| = regular expression, ||i|| = ignore case)
Default Value
Set a default value for empty strings. When applied to a renaming option, an empty string will be replaced by the value you specify here.
Default Value...
Set a default value for empty strings
File
Add file properties
Filename
File extension, prepend with a '.' character, to modify the real file extension
Extension
Owner of the file
Owner
Group of the file
Group
Directory
Add the directory name
Directory name
Directory name of the parent, additional '.' characters move up in the directory hierarchy
Keyword separator:
Metadata...
Add metadata information from Exif, IPTC and XMP
Add metadata information
format settings
Image
Fixed Date
Enter custom format
Date & & Time...
Add date and time information
Date and time (standard format)
Date and time (||key|| = ISO|Text|Locale)
Date and time
Camera
Add the camera name
Camera name
Number...
Add a sequence number
Sequence number
Sequence number (custom start)
Sequence number (custom start + step)
To perform a search over the map, use CTRL+left mouse button to draw a rectangle where you want to find items.
Once you have found items, click on an item using SHIFT+left mouse button to select it, click using CTRL+left mouse button to filter using an item (add SHIFT to filter using multiple items) and click using CTRL+right mouse button to zoom into an item.
Enter the name of the current map search to save in the "My Map Searches" view.
Save current map search to a new virtual album.
If this button is pressed, the current map search will be saved to a new search virtual album using the name set on the left side.
Search name already exists. Please enter a new name:
Name exists
Use CTRL+left mouse button to select a search area.
My Map Searches
Are you sure you want to delete the selected Map Search "%1"?
Delete Map Search?
Current Map Search
Rebuild All Fingerprints
Rebuild Changed Fingerprints
Updating fingerprints database. Please wait...
& Abort
Processing...
Update of fingerprint database complete.
Duration: %1
& Close
Update of fingerprint database complete.
Synchronizing image metadata with database. Please wait...
Updating database from image metadata. Please wait...
Rebuild All Thumbnails
Build Missing Thumbnails
Updating thumbnails database. Please wait...
The thumbnails database has been updated.
The thumbnails database has been updated.
Sync All Images' Metadata
Syncing the metadata of all images with the digiKam database. Please wait...
Parsing all albums
The metadata of all images has been synchronized with the digiKam database.
Images' metadata synchronization with database is done.
Synchronize panels automatically
Set this option to automatically synchronize zooming and panning between left and right panels if the images have the same size.
Selecting a thumbbar item loads the image to the right panel
Set this option to automatically load an image into the right panel when the corresponding item is selected on the thumbbar.
Load full-sized image
Set this option to load the full-sized image into the preview panel instead of one at a reduced size. As this option will make it take longer to load images, only use it if you have a fast computer.
Clear the light table on close
Set this option to remove all images from the light table when you close it, or unset it to preserve the images currently on the light table.
Common Metadata Actions
& Save image tags as "Keywords" tags in metadata embedded in files
Turn on this option to store the image tags in the XMP and IPTC tags.
& Save metadata template as metadata embedded in files
Turn on this option to store the metadata template in the XMP and the IPTC tags. You can set template values to Template setup page.
& Save image captions in metadata embedded in files
Turn on this option to store image captions in the JFIF Comment section, the EXIF tag, the XMP tag, and the IPTC tag.
& Save image timestamps in metadata embedded in files
Turn on this option to store the image date and time in the EXIF, XMP, and IPTC tags.
& Save image rating in metadata embedded in files
Turn on this option to store the image rating in the EXIF tag and the XMP tags.
& Write Metadata to RAW files (experimental)
Turn on this option to write metadata into RAW TIFF/ EP files. This feature requires the Exiv2 shared library, version > = 0.18.0. It is still experimental, and is disabled by default.
& Update file timestamp when metadata are saved
Turn on this option to update file timestamps when metadata are saved.
Nepomuk Semantic Desktop
Store metadata from digiKam in Nepomuk
Turn on this option to push rating, comments and tags from digiKam into the Nepomuk storage
Read metadata from Nepomuk
Turn on this option if you want to apply changes to rating, comments and tags made in Nepomuk to digiKam's metadata storage. Please note that image metadata will not be edited automatically.
Nepomuk
Nepomuk provides the basis to handle all kinds of metadata on the KDE desktop in a generic fashion. It allows you to tag, rate and comment your files in KDE applications like Dolphin. Please set here if you want to synchronize the metadata stored by digiKam desktop-wide with the Nepomuk Semantic Desktop. If you have enabled writing of metadata to files, please note that changes done through Nepomuk are not automatically applied to the image's metadata when read into digiKam's database.
You can add or remove Album category types here to improve how your Albums are sorted in digiKam.
& Add...
& Remove
A list of available Kipi plugins appears below.
& Delay between images:
The delay, in seconds, between images.
Start with current image
If this option is enabled, the Slideshow will be started with the current image selected in the images list.
Slideshow runs in a loop
Run the slideshow in a loop.
Show image file name
Show the image file name at the bottom of the screen.
Show image creation date
Show the image creation time/ date at the bottom of the screen.
Show the camera aperture and focal length at the bottom of the screen.
Show the camera exposure and sensitivity at the bottom of the screen.
Show the camera make and model at the bottom of the screen.
Show image caption
Show the image caption at the bottom of the screen.
Show image rating
Show the digiKam image rating at the bottom of the screen.
Failed to auto-detect camera; please make sure it is connected properly and is turned on. Would you like to try again?
It was not possible to add a collection for the following paths:
Choose the folder containing your collection
You have previously added a collection that contains the path "%1".
Problem Adding Collection
Adding Collection
Your new collection will be created with this name:
Remove Collection
Do you want to remove the collection "%1" from your list of collections?
Remove Collection?
Local Collections
Collections on Removable Media
Collections on Network Shares
Add Collection
Col. %1
This collection is currently not available.
No problems found, enjoy this collection.
This collection is hidden.
Remove collection
Path
Status
digiKam attempts to support all of the image formats that digital cameras produce, while being able to handle a few other important video and audio formats. You can add to the already-appreciable list of formats that digiKam handles by adding the extension of the type you want to add. Multiple extensions need to be separated by a space.
Additional & image file extensions (Currently-supported types):
Here you can add the extensions of image files (including RAW files) to be displayed in the Album view. Just put "xyz abc" to display files with the xyz and abc extensions in your Album view. You can also remove file formats that are shown by default by putting a minus sign in front of the extension: e. g. "-gif" would remove all GIF files from your Album view and any trace of them in your database. They would not be deleted, just not shown in digiKam. Warning: Removing files from the database means losing all of their tags and ratings.
Revert to default settings
Additional & movie file extensions (Currently-supported types):
Here you can add extra extensions of video files to be displayed in your Album view. Just write "xyz abc" to support files with the *. xyz and *. abc extensions. Clicking on these files will play them in an embedded KDE movie player. You can also remove file formats that are supported by default by putting a minus sign in front of the extension: e. g. "-avi" would remove all AVI files from your Album view and any trace of them in your database. They would not be deleted, just not shown in digiKam. Warning: Removing files from the database means losing all of their tags and ratings.
Additional & audio file extensions (Currently-supported types):
Here you can add extra extensions of audio files to be displayed in your Album view. Just write "mp7" to support files with the *. mp7 extension. Clicking on these files will play them in an embedded KDE audio player. You can also remove file formats that are supported by default by putting a minus sign in front of the extension: e. g. "-ogg" would remove all OGG files from your Album view and any trace of them in your database. They would not be deleted, just not shown in digiKam. Warning: Removing files from the database means losing all of their tags and ratings.
You have chosen to remove the following image formats from the list of supported formats: %1. These are very common formats. If you have images in your collection with these formats, they will be removed from the database and you will lose all information about them, including rating and tags. Are you sure you want to apply your changes and lose the support for these formats?
Files with these extensions will be recognized as images and included into the database: %1
Files with these extensions will be recognized as movie files and included into the database: %1
Files with these extensions will be recognized as audio files and included into the database: %1
Icon-View Options
Show filename
Set this option to show the filename below the image thumbnail.
Show file size
Set this option to show the file size below the image thumbnail.
Show camera creation & date
Set this option to show the camera creation date below the image thumbnail.
Show file & modification date
Set this option to show the file modification date below the image thumbnail.
Show image dimensions
Set this option to show the image size in pixels below the image thumbnail.
Show digiKam & captions
Set this option to show the digiKam captions below the image thumbnail.
Show digiKam & tags
Set this option to show the digiKam tags below the image thumbnail.
Show digiKam & rating
Set this option to show the digiKam rating below the image thumbnail.
Show rotation overlay buttons
Set this option to show overlay buttons on the image thumbnail for image rotation.
Thumbnail click action:
Show embedded preview
Start image editor
Choose what should happen when you click on a thumbnail.
Icon View font:
Select here the font used to display text in Icon Views.
Folder View Options
Tree View thumbnail size:
Set this option to configure the size in pixels of the Tree View thumbnails in digiKam's sidebars.
Tree View font:
Select here the font used to display text in Tree Views.
Show a count of items in Tree Views
Misc Options
Embedded preview loads full-sized images.
Set this option to load images at their full size for preview, rather than at a reduced size. This loads more data and will be slow on older computers.
Confirm when moving items to the & trash.
Confirm when permanently deleting items.
Do not confirm when applying changes in the & right sidebar.
& Show splash screen at startup.
& Scan for new items at startup (makes startup slower.)
Set this option to configure how sidebar tab titles are visible.
Root Album Folders
Below are the locations of your root albums used to store your images. Write access is necessary to be able to edit images in these albums. Note: Removable media (such as USB drives or DVDs) and remote file systems (such as NFS, or Samba mounted with cifs/ smbfs) are supported.
Below are the locations of your root albums used to store your images. Write access is necessary to be able to edit images in these albums.
Database File Path
The location where the database file will be stored on your system. There is one common database file for all root albums. Write access is required to be able to edit image properties. Note: a remote file system, such as NFS, cannot be used here.
You do not seem to have write access to this database folder. Without this access, the caption and tag features will not work.
& Use theme background color
Enable this option to use the background theme color in the image editor area.
Customize the background color to use in the image editor area.
Set this option to use the Raw Import tool to load RAW images. With this tool you are able to customize indeep decoding settings.
Customize color used in image editor to identify under-exposed pixels.
Customize color used in image editor to identify over-exposed pixels.
Here you can see the digital camera list used by digiKam via the Gphoto interface.
Port
& Edit...
Auto-Detect
Visit Gphoto project website
Device detection under progress, please wait...
Failed to auto-detect camera. Please check if your camera is turned on and retry or try setting it manually.
Camera '%1 '(%2) is already in list.
Found camera '%1 '(%2) and added it to the list.
Collections
Collections Settings Set root albums and database locations
Album View
Album View Settings Customize the look of the albums list
Album Category
Album Category Settings Assign categories to albums used to sort them
Tool-Tip
Album Items Tool-Tip Settings Customize information in tool-tips
Templates
Metadata templates Manage your collection of metadata templates
MIME Types
Supported File Settings Add new file types to show as album items
Light Table Settings Customize tool used to compare images
Image Editor
Image Editor Settings Customize image editor behavior
Image Editor: Settings for Saving Image Files Set default configuration used to save images with the image editor
Image Editor: RAW Files Decoding Settings Customize the default RAW decoding settings of the image editor
Image Editor: Settings for Color Management Customize the color management settings of the image editor
Kipi Plugins
Main Interface Plug-in Settings Set which plugins will be accessible from the main interface
Camera Settings Manage your camera devices
Miscellaneous Settings Customize behavior of the other parts of digiKam
The Exif auto-rotate thumbnails option has been changed. Do you want to rebuild all albums' items' thumbnails now? Note: thumbnail processing can take a while. You can start this job later from the "Tools" menu.
Show Settings Dialog when Saving Image Files
Checked: A dialog where settings can be changed when saving image files Unchecked: Default settings are used when saving image files
Enable Color Management
Checked: Color Management is enabled Unchecked: Color Management is disabled
Working Color Space
This is the color space all the images will be converted to when opened (if you choose to convert) and the profile that will be embedded when saving. Good and safe choices are Adobe RGB (1998) and sRGB IEC61966-2.1
You can use this button to get more detailed information about the selected workspace profile.
When the profile of an image does not match the working color space
Ask when opening the image
If an image has an embedded color profile not matching the working space profile, digiKam will ask if you want to convert to the working space, keep the embedded profile or discard the embedded profile and assign a different one.
Convert the image to the working color space
If an image has an embedded color profile not matching the working space profile, digiKam will convert the image's color information to the working color space. This changes the pixel data, but not the appearance of the image.
When an image has no color profile information
If an image has no embedded color profile, digiKam will ask which color space shall be used to interpret the image and to which color space it shall be transformed for editing.
Assume it is using the sRGB color space (Internet standard)
and convert it to the working color space
Assume it is using the working color space
Convert it from default input color space to working space
When loading a RAW file with uncalibrated colors
Ask for the input profile
Automatic color correction
Convert it from the default input profile
Color Managed View
Monitor profile:
Select the color profile for your monitor here.
You can use this button to get more detailed information about the selected monitor profile.
Use color managed view in editor
Turn on this option if you want to use your Monitor Color Profile to show your pictures in the Image Editor window with a color correction adapted to your monitor. You can at any time toggle this option from the Editor window. Warning: This can slow down rendering of the image, depending on the speed of your computer.
Use color managed view for previews and thumbnails
Camera and Scanner
Default input color profile:
This is the default color profile for your input device (that is your camera - or your scanner). A camera input profile is recommended for correct conversion of RAW images in 16bit. Some of the options about loading behavior above refer to this profile.
You can use this button to get more detailed information about the selected input profile.
Printing and Proofing
Output device profile:
Select the profile for your output device (usually, your printer). This profile will be used to do a soft proof, so you will be able to preview how an image will be rendered via an output device.
You can use this button to get more detailed information about the selected proofing profile.
Color Profiles Repository
digiKam looks for ICC profiles in a number of default locations. You can specify an additional folder:
digiKam searches ICC profiles in default system folders and ships itself a few selected profiles. Store all your additional color profiles in the directory set here.
Use black point compensation
Black Point Compensation is a way to make adjustments between the maximum black levels of digital files and the black capabilities of various digital devices.
Rendering Intents:
Profiles
Advanced
Monitor Profile From System Settings
No ICC profiles files found.
No Profile Available
No Display Profile Available
No Input Profile Available
No Output Profile Available
No profile is selected.
none
On Linux, the default search paths include / usr/ share/ color/ icc / usr/ local/ share/ color/ icc ~/. local/ share/ color/ icc/ ~/. local/ share/ icc/ ~/. color/ icc/ On your system, currently these paths exist and are scanned: %1
Tool-Tips Font:
Select here the font used to display text in tool-tips.
Show icon-view and thumb-bar items' tool-tips
Set this option to display image information when the mouse hovers over an icon-view or thumb-bar item.
digiKam Information
Show album name
Set this option to display the album name.
Set this option to display the image captions.
Show image tags
Set this option to display the image tags.
Set this option to display the image rating.
Show album items' tool-tips
Album Information
Set this option to display album information when the mouse hovers over a folder-view item.
Show album date
Set this option to display the album date.
Show album collection
Set this option to display the album collection.
Show album category
Set this option to display the album category.
Show album caption
Set this option to display the album caption.
Icon Items
Album Items
Camera Configuration
Mounted Camera
Camera List
Select the camera name that you want to use here. All default settings on the right panel will be set automatically. This list has been generated using the gphoto2 library installed on your computer.
Camera Title
Set here the name used in digiKam interface to identify this camera.
Camera Port Type
USB
Select this option if your camera is connected to your computer using a USB cable.
Serial
Select this option if your camera is connected to your computer using a serial cable.
Camera Port Path
Note: only for serial port cameras.
Select the serial port to use on your computer here. This option is only required if you use a serial camera.
Camera Mount Path
Note: only for USB/ IEEE mass storage cameras.
Set here the mount path to use on your computer. This option is only required if you use a USB Mass Storage camera.
To set a USB Mass Storage camera (which looks like a removable drive when mounted on your desktop), please use %1 from the camera list.
To set a Generic PTP USB Device (which uses Picture Transfer Protocol), please use %1 from the camera list.
A complete list of camera settings to use is available at this URL.
Template Title:
Enter the metadata template title here.
Enter the metadata template title here. This title will be used to identify a template in your collection.
Note: These information are used to set XMP and IPTC tag contents. There is no limitation with XMP, but note that IPTC text tags only support the printable ASCII character set, and tag sizes are limited. Use contextual help for details.
& Replace...
Cannot register new metadata template without title.
A metadata template named '%1 'already exists.
Soft Proofing Options
Soft Proofing On
Enable soft-proofing color managed view
Soft Proofing Off
Disable soft-proofing color managed view
Configure the Soft Proofing View
Profile of the output device to simulate:
Press this button to get detailed information about the selected proofing profile.
Rendering intent:
Highlight out-of-gamut colors
Highlighting color:
Color Profile Mismatch
Missing Color Profile
Image with Uncalibrated Color
%1 - %2
Do n't know
Take the safest and most appropriate action
This image has an embedded color profile which does not match your working space color profile. How do you want to proceed?
This image has no information about the color space that was used when creating the image. How do you want to proceed?
The color information of this image is uncalibrated. How do you want to proceed?
Embedded Color Profile:
Input Color Profile:
Working Color Space:
Original Colors:
Uncorrected Colors:
Raw Colors:
Resulting Colors:
Correction Applied:
Corrected Colors:
Keep the embedded profile, do not convert
Convert to working color space
Ignore embedded profile, assign this profile:
and then convert to working space
Assign profile and convert to working color space
Assign and keep color profile
Leave the file untagged, do not color manage
Which color space shall be used to interpret the colors of this image?
sRGB (Internet standard)
Current working color space
This profile:
Please select the input color profile of the device (camera) used to create this image:
Assigned Color Profile:
No Profile
unknown
Rotate 90 Degrees
Rotate 180 Degrees
Rotate 270 Degrees
Flip Horizontal
Flip Vertical
Failed to load image "%1"
Loading Image Plugins
& First
& Last
Print Image...
Undo
Redo
Fit to & Selection
This option can be used to zoom the image to the current selection area.
Zoom
Under-Exposure Indicator
Set this option to display black overlaid on the image. This will help you to avoid under-exposing the image.
Over-Exposure Indicator
Set this option to display white overlaid on the image. This will help you to avoid over-exposing the image.
Color-Managed View
Soft Proofing Options...
Soft Proofing View
Crop
This option can be used to crop the image. Select a region of the image to enable this action.
Flip Horizontally
Flip Vertically
Donate Money...
Close Tool
No selection
Information about image size
Image Plugins
About to overwrite file "%1" Are you sure?
Overwrite
The image '%1 'has been modified. Do you want to save it?
Please wait while the image is being saved...
Cannot open the specified working space profile ("%1"). No color transformation will be applied. Please check the color management configuration in digiKam's setup.
Saving:
Failed to save file "%1" to "%2".
Could not open a temporary file in the folder "%1": %2 (%3)
JPEG 2000 image
Progressive Graphics File
New Image File Name
Unable to determine the format to save the target image with.
A file named "%1" already exists. Are you sure you want to overwrite it?
Overwrite File?
You do not have write permissions for the file named "%1". Are you sure you want to overwrite it?
Failed to overwrite original file
Error Saving File
Failed to save file: %1
Color-Managed View is enabled.
Color-Managed View is disabled.
Color Management is not configured, so the Color-Managed View is not available.
Under-Exposure indicator is enabled
Under-Exposure indicator is disabled
Over-Exposure indicator is enabled
Over-Exposure indicator is disabled
Delete File Permanently
Delete Permanently without Confirmation
Move to Trash without Confirmation
Image Editor - %1
There is no image to show in the current album. The image editor will be closed.
No Image in Current Album
(%1, %2) RGBA: %3, %4, %5, %6
Guide:
Set here the color used to draw dashed guide lines.
Set here the width in pixels used to draw dashed guide lines.
Reset all settings to their default values.
Load...
Load all parameters from settings text file.
Save all parameters to settings text file.
Try
Try all settings.
Raw Import
Post Processing
Raw Decoding
Cannot decode RAW image for "%1"
Abort
Abort the current Raw image preview.
Update
Generate a Raw image preview using current settings.
Set here the gamma adjustment of the image
Set here the color saturation correction.
Exposure (E. V):
This value in E. V will be used to perform an exposure compensation of the image.
Reset curve to linear
Exposure
Luminosity Curve
Reset all settings to default values.
Import image to editor using current settings.
Use Default
Use general Raw decoding settings to load this image in editor.
Use Color Management for Printing
Settings...
Color Management is disabled. You can enable it now by clicking on the "Settings" button.
Print Image
Original
Target
If this option is enabled, the original image will be shown.
Original image
If this option is enabled, the preview area will split vertically. A contiguous area of the image will be shown, with one half from the original image, the other half from the target image.
Vertical split with contiguous image
If this option is enabled, the preview area will split horizontally. A contiguous area of the image will be shown, with one half from the original image, the other half from the target image.
Horizontal split with contiguous image
If this option is enabled, the preview area will split vertically. The same part of the original and the target image will be shown side by side.
Vertical split with same image region
If this option is enabled, the preview area will split horizontally. The same part of the original and the target image will be shown side by side.
Horizontal split with same image region
If this option is enabled, the target image will be shown.
Target image
If this option is enabled, the original image will be shown when the mouse is over image area; otherwise, the target image will be shown.
Mouse-over mode
Here you can see the original clip image which will be used for the preview computation. Click and drag the mouse cursor in the image to change the clip focus.
Convert To JP2
A tool to convert images to JPEG-2000 format.
Convert To JPEG
A tool to convert images to JPEG format.
Convert To TIFF
A tool to convert images to TIFF format.
Convert To PGF
A tool to convert images to PGF format.
Convert To PNG
A tool to convert images to PNG format.
Apply Metadata Template
A tool to apply template metadata
A tool to resize images with a customized length.
Preset Length:
Use Custom Length
Rotate
A tool to rotate images by 90/ 180/ 270 degrees.
Use Exif Orientation
90 degrees
180 degrees
270 degrees
Angle:
Flip
A tool to flip images horizontally or vertically.
Horizontal
Vertical
Flip:
Sharpen Image
A tool to sharpen images
Color Auto-correction
A tool to automatically correct image colors.
A tool to remove photograph noise using wavelets.
A tool to restore photographs based on Greystoration.
Add Watermark
A tool to add a visible watermark
Enter your watermark string here.
Text:
Font Color:
Top left
Top right
Bottom left
Bottom right
Corner:
Enter the string length as a percent of the image width here.
length (%):
This is the list of images to batch process.
Thumbnail
File Name
This is the list of batch tools assigned.
Reset current tool settings to default values.
Custom renaming rules are invalid for Queues listed below. Please fix them.
Assigned batch tools list is empty for Queues listed below. Please assign tools.
Queues
Queue Settings
Batch Tools Available / History
Assigned Tools
Tool Settings
Run
Stop
New Queue
Remove Queue
Remove items
Remove processed items
Clear Queue
Move up
Move down
Remove tool
Clear List
Current Queue:
No items
No tasks
Ready
There are no items to process in the queues.
Batch queue is completed...
Save Queued Image from '%1 'as
Process Cancelled...
Item skipped...
Item renamed to %1...
Item overwritten...
Failed to save item...
Item processed successfully...
Failed to process item...
Album to host processed items from queue "%1" is not set. Please select one from Queue Settings panel.
Processed items album settings
Album to host processed items from queue "%1" is not available or not writable. Please set another one from Queue Settings panel.
Item "%1" from queue "%2": %3
This is the list of digiKam batch tools available.
Base Tools
You can see below the history of last batch operations processed.
History
If Target File Exists:
Overwrite automatically
Open rename-file dialog
Use original filenames
Turn on this option to use original filenames without modifications.
Customize filenames:
File Renaming
Kipi-plugins
Custom Tools
Assign tools
Advanced Search
(Advanced Search)
New Search
Search:
Enter keywords here...
Save Current Search
Enter a name for the current search to save it in the "Searches" view
Save current search to a new virtual Album
If you press this button, the current search will be saved to a new virtual Search Album using the name set on the left side.
Edit Stored Search
(No Value Selected)
No Rating assigned
File, Album, Tags
Picture Properties
Caption, Comment, Title
Find Pictures
Meet All of the following conditions
Meet Any of the following conditions
None of these conditions are met
At least one of these conditions is not met
Search your collection for pictures meeting the following conditions
Remove Group
Options > >
AND
OR
Are you sure you want to delete the selected search "%1"?
Delete Search?
New...
Search pictures located in
The album name contains
The album caption contains
The album collection contains
Return pictures with tag
A tag of the picture contains
Image has no tags
Return pictures whose file name contains
Modification
Return pictures modified between
and
Size of the file
Rating
Return pictures rated at least
at most
Return pictures created between
Digitization
Return pictures digitized between
Exif Orientation
Find pictures with orientation flag
Width
Find pictures with a width between
px
Height
Find pictures with a height between
Orientation
Find pictures with
File Format
Return pictures with the image file format
Color Depth
Color Model
Find pictures with the color model
The make of the camera
The model of the camera
Aperture
Lens aperture as f-number
Focal length
Focal length of the lens
35mm equivalent focal length
Exposure time
Automatic exposure program
Automatic or manual exposure
Sensitivity
ISO film speed (linear scale, ASA)
Flash
Flash mode
Automatic or manual white balance
White balance
Color temperature used for white balance
Metering Mode
Method to determine the exposure
Subject Distance
Distance of the subject from the lens
Macro, close or distant view
Caption
Return pictures whose comment contains
Author
Return pictures commented by
Headline
Return pictures with the IPTC headline
Return pictures with the IPTC title
Find pictures that have associated all these words:
Reset contents
Any
Any of: %1
Any Album
Any Tag
any color depth
8 bits per channel
16 bits per channel
Any Orientation
Landscape Orientation
Portrait orientation
Add Search Group
Scan Your Collection
Congratulations. Your minimal setup is done. Remember, you can customize more settings using the digiKam configuration panel. To learn more about the digiKam world, we recommend reading the digiKam handbook using the Help/ Handbook menu entry (you need to install the separate digiKam documentation package.) You can also read the manual online from the digikam. org website. Press Finish to close this assistant. digiKam will scan your collection to register all items in the database. Note: depending of your collection size, this operation can take a while. If you cancel the scanning operation, it will start again at next digiKam session. When scanning has completed, at next start-up, digiKam will only check your collection to identify new items - which is much faster. Scanning for images can also be started manually using the Tool/ Scan for New Images menu entry.
Configure Open File Behavior
Specify how images should be opened when right-clicked on in the icon view:
Open a preview
Open in the editor
Note: using a preview is always faster than using the editor, especially when checking a series of shots. However, you cannot change or fix the image in preview mode. Note that if you want to compare images quickly, it is often better to use the light table: images can be displayed side-by-side, and synchronized zooming and panning can be performed.
Configure Preview Behavior
Set here how images are displayed in preview mode and on the light table:
Load reduced version of image
Load image
Note: loading a reduced version of an image is faster but can differ from the original, especially with Raw. In this case, a JPEG version of Raw pre-processed by camera is loaded, instead of the real image data. This JPEG image is embedded in the file metadata and is used by the camera to display a Raw image faster to a TV screen.
Configure Raw File Handling
Set here how you want to open Raw images in the editor:
Open directly, with adjustments made automatically
Use the Raw import tool to adjust corrections manually
Note: the Raw import tool is designed for advanced users who want to have the best control over the image. This requires more time in your workflow.
Enabled Contextual Tooltips
Set here if you want to show contextual tooltips in icon-view and folder-view:
Do not show tooltips
Use Tooltips
Note: tooltips show photograph and digiKam metadata on the fly, as the mouse moves over items. This can be useful when selecting items. Tooltips are displayed in the album folder view, album icon view, camera icon view, batch queue list, and thumb bar. From the digiKam configuration dialog, you can customize the contents of these tooltips and the fonts used.
Configure Metadata Storage to Files
Set here if you want to store the information assigned to items in digiKam in the files' metadata, to improve interoperability with others photo management programs:
Do nothing
Add information to files
Note: recording information to the files' metadata can slow down photo management operations.
Welcome to digiKam %1
Welcome to digiKam %1 digiKam is an advanced digital photo management application published as open-source. This assistant will help you to configure first run settings to be able to use digiKam quickly.
Configure where images and metadata are stored
/ Pictures
Please enter a location where you want to store your images. You can choose any local folder, even one that already contains images. More folders can be added later under the Settings menu. Note: removable media (such as USB drives or DVDs) and remote file systems (such as NFS, or Samba mounted with cifs/ smbfs) are supported.
Please enter a location where you want to store your images. You can choose any local folder, even one that already contains images. More folders can be added later under the Settings menu.
digiKam stores information and metadata about your images in a database file. Please set the location of this file or accept the default. Note: you need to have write access to the folder used here, and you cannot use a remote location on a networked server, using NFS or Samba.
You must select a folder for digiKam to use as the root album. All of your images will go there.
The folder to use as the root album path does not exist: %1 Would you like digiKam to create it for you?
Create Root Album Folder?
digiKam could not create the folder to use as the root album. Please select a different location. %1
Create Root Album Folder Failed
You do not seem to have write access for the folder selected to be the root album. Warning: Without write access, items cannot be edited.
You must select a folder for digiKam to store information and metadata in a database file.
The folder to put your database in does not seem to exist: %1 Would you like digiKam to create it for you?
Create Database Folder?
digiKam could not create the folder to host your database file. Please select a different location. %1
Create Database Folder Failed
You do not seem to have write access for the folder to host the database file. Please select a different location. %1
No Database Write Access
Tag: %1
Target URL %1 is not valid.
Target album is not in the album library.
Show on left panel
Show on right panel
Edit
Remove item
Clear all
Drag and drop images here
Drag and drop an image here
Unable to display preview for "%1"
On left
Show item on left panel
On right
Show item on right panel
Remove item from LightTable
Remove all items from LightTable
Delete immediately
Synchronize
Synchronize preview from left and right panels
By Pair
Navigate by pairs with all items
Clear On Close
Clear light table when it is closed
Remove all images from the light table when it is closed
Device Information
Summary
Device Summary
Manual
Device Manual
About
About Driver
Mounted Camera driver for USB/ IEEE1394 mass storage cameras and Flash disk card readers.
Title: %1 Model: %2 Port: %3 Path: %4 UUID: %5
yes
no
Thumbnails: %1 Capture image: %2 Delete items: %3 Upload items: %4 Create directories: %5 Delete directories: %6
For more information about the Mounted Camera driver, please read the Supported Digital Still Cameras section in the digiKam manual.
The Mounted Camera driver is a simple interface to a camera disk mounted locally on your system. It does not use libgphoto2 drivers. To report any problems with this driver, please contact the digiKam team at: http: / /www. digikam. org/ ?q=contact
Camera Folders
Capture from %1
Capture
Camera Media
Album Library
Capacity:
Available:
Require:
%1 - Select Camera Folder
Please select the camera folder where you want to upload the images.
Camera filenames
Turn on this option to use the camera provided image filenames without modifications.
Change case to:
Leave as-is
Upper
Lower
Set the method to use to change the case of the image filenames.
Customize
Button (not supported by KControl)
Date (not supported by KControl)
auto-detected
Connecting to camera...
Connection established.
Connection failed.
Getting camera information...
Getting available free space on camera...
Getting preview...
Capture image...
Listing folders...
The folders have been listed.
Listing files in %1...
Failed to list files in %1.
The files in %1 have been listed.
Getting thumbnails for %1...
Getting EXIF information for %1...
Downloading file %1...
Failed to download %1...
EXIF rotating file %1...
Fix Internal date to file %1...
Apply Metadata template to file %1...
Converting %1 to lossless file format...
Retrieving file %1 from camera...
Failed to retrieve file %1 from camera.
Uploading file %1 to camera...
Deleting file %1...
Toggle lock file %1...
Rename File
Skipped file %1
Download successfully %1...
Failed to download file "%1".
Do you want to continue?
Failed to upload file "%1".
Failed to upload %1...
Failed to delete %1...
Failed to delete file "%1".
Failed to lock %1...
Failed to toggle lock file "%1".
Camera "%1"
Set how digiKam will rename files as they are downloaded.
File Renaming Options
Extension-based sub-albums
Date-based sub-albums
Date format:
ISO
Full Text
Local Settings
Set how digiKam creates albums automatically when downloading.
Enable this option if you want to download your pictures into automatically created file extension-based sub-albums of the destination album. This way, you can separate JPEG and RAW files as they are downloaded from your camera.
Enable this option if you want to download your pictures into automatically created file date-based sub-albums of the destination album.
Select your preferred date format used to create new albums. The options available are: ISO: the date format is in accordance with ISO 8601 (YYYY-MM-DD). E. g.: 2006-08-24 Full Text: the date format is in a user-readable string. E. g.: Thu Aug 24 2006 Local Settings: the date format depending on KDE control panel settings.
Auto-creation of Albums
Fix internal date & & time
Auto-rotate/ flip image
Convert to lossless file format
New image format:
Set here all options to fix/ transform JPEG files automatically as they are downloaded.
Enable this option if you want images automatically rotated or flipped using EXIF information provided by the camera.
Select here which metadata template you want to apply to images.
Enable this option to set date and time metadata tags to the right values if your camera does not set these tags correctly when pictures are taken. The values will be saved in the DateTimeDigitized and DateTimeCreated EXIF, XMP, and IPTC tags.
Enable this option to automatically convert all JPEG files to a lossless image format. Note: Image conversion can take a while on a slow computer.
Select your preferred lossless image file format to convert to. Note: All metadata will be preserved during the conversion.
On the Fly Operations (JPEG only)
Cancel
Select New Items
Select Locked Items
Download Selected
Download All
Download/ Delete Selected
Download/ Delete All
Upload...
Toggle Lock
Mark as downloaded
Delete Selected
Delete All
Show last photo first
Show History
Canceling current operation, please wait...
Do you want to close the dialog and cancel the current operation?
Disconnecting from camera, please wait...
Scanning for new files, please wait...
Failed to connect to the camera. Please make sure it is connected properly and turned on. Would you like to try again?
Connection Failed
Retry
Select Image to Upload
There is not enough free space on the Camera Medium to upload pictures. Space require: %1 Available free space: %2
Camera Folder %1 already contains the item %2. Please enter a new filename (without extension):
File already exists
Please select the destination album from the digiKam library to import the camera pictures into.
Try Anyway
Cancel Download
There is not enough free space on the disk of the album you selected to download and process the selected pictures from the camera. Estimated space required: %1 Available free space: %2
Insufficient Disk Space
Download is completed...
The items listed below are locked by camera (read-only). These items will not be deleted. If you really want to delete these items, please unlock them and try again.
A file with the same name (%1) already exists in folder %2.
Failed to find Album for path '%1 '.
Title: %1 Model: %2 Port: %3 Path: %4
Thumbnails: %1 Capture image: %2 Delete items: %3 Upload items: %4 Create directories: %5 Delete Directories: %6
Download
Download & & Delete
& Upload to camera
Cannot display camera preview
My Date Searches
Are you sure you want to delete the selected Date Search "%1"?
Delete Date Search?
Week #%1 - %2 %3
Time Unit:
Day
Week
Month
Year
Select the histogram time unit. You can change the graph decade to zoom in or zoom out over time.
Select the histogram scale. If the date's maximal counts are small, you can use the linear scale. Logarithmic scale can be used when the maximal counts are big; if it is used, all values (small and large) will be visible on the graph.
Clear current selection
If you press this button, the current date selection on the time-line will be cleared.
Enter the name of the current dates search to save in the "My Date Searches" view
Save current selection to a new virtual Album
If you press this button, the dates selected on the time-line will be saved to a new search virtual Album using the name set on the left.
Cannot display image "%1"
Slideshow Completed.
Click To Exit...
Giving a presentation
Ref. images
Items
This shows all found duplicate items.
Update fingerprints
Use this button to update all image fingerprints.
Find duplicates
Use this button to scan the selected albums for duplicate items.
Search in:
Select all albums that should be included in the search.
Select all tags that should be included in the search.
Similarity:
No albums selected
No tags selected
Sketch
Duplicates
Drag & drop an image here to perform similar items search. You can also use the context menu when browsing through your images.
File:
Folder:
Select here the approximate threshold value, as a percentage. This value is used by the algorithm to distinguish two similar images. The default value is 90.
Enter the name of the current similar image search to save in the "My Fuzzy Searches" view.
Save current similar image search to a new virtual Album
If you press this button, the current similar image search will be saved to a new search virtual album using name set on the left side.
Set here the brush color used to draw sketch.
Undo last draw on sketch
Use this button to undo last drawing action on sketch.
Redo last draw on sketch
Use this button to redo last drawing action on sketch.
Pen:
Set here the brush size in pixels used to draw sketch.
Set here the number of items to find using sketch.
Clear sketch
Use this button to clear sketch contents.
Enter the name of the current sketch search to save in the "My Fuzzy Searches" view.
Save current sketch search to a new virtual Album
If you press this button, the current sketch fuzzy search will be saved to a new search virtual album using the name set on the left side.
Image fingerprints have not yet been generated for your collection. The Fuzzy Search Tools will not be operational without pre-generated fingerprints. Do you want to build fingerprints now? Note: This process can take a while. You can run it any time later using'Tools/ Rebuild all Fingerprints'
No Fingerprints
My Fuzzy Searches
Are you sure you want to delete the selected Fuzzy Search "%1"?
Delete Fuzzy Search?
Current Fuzzy Sketch Search
Current Fuzzy Image Search
You simply draw here a rough sketch of what you want to find and digiKam will displays the best matches in thumbnail view.
Draw a sketch here to perform a Fuzzy search
%1 (rev.: %2)
IRC: irc. freenode. net - #digikam Feedback: digikam-devel@kde. org Build date: %1
Set this option to keep the current zoom level when switching images
Density:
& Save image rating as tags
If this option is enabled, the preview area will be split horizontally, displaying the original and target image at the same time. The target is duplicated from the original below the red dashed line.
If this option is enabled, the preview area will be split vertically, displaying the original and target image at the same time. The target is duplicated from the original to the right of the red dashed line.
If this option is enabled, the preview area will be split horizontally, displaying the original and target image at the same time. The original is above the red dashed line, the target below it.
If this option is enabled, the preview area will be split vertically, displaying the original and target image at the same time. The original is to the left of the red dashed line, the target to the right of it.
If this option is enabled, the preview area will not be split into two.
Here you can see the original image panel which can help you to select the clip preview. Click and drag the mouse cursor in the red rectangle to change the clip focus.
(%1, %2)(%3x%4)
Information about current selection area
Form
Replace
Replace text
Replace text (case insensitive)
MyOption
my option description
Source
From Image
... that you have direct access to the KDE Gamma Configuration using Tools - > Gamma Adjustment?
Colors:
Select the main color displayed with Colors Channel mode here: Red: Draw the red image channel in the foreground. Green: Draw the green image channel in the foreground. Blue: Draw the blue image channel in the foreground.
Quickly add a renaming option
Quickly add a modifier to a renaming option
Range
Replace (case insensitive)
Current
Date & & Time
Date & & Time (key)
Camera Name
Sequence Number
Sequence Number (start)
Sequence Number (start, step)
Metadata Keywords
NoiseReduction
Radius: this control selects the gliding window size used for the filter. Larger values do not increase the amount of time needed to filter each pixel in the image but can cause blurring. This window moves across the image, and the color in it is smoothed to remove imperfections. In any case it must be about the same size as the noise granularity or somewhat more. If it is set higher than necessary, then it can cause unwanted blur.
Threshold: use the slider for coarse adjustment, and the spin control for fine adjustment to control edge detection sensitivity. This value should be set so that edges and details are clearly visible and noise is smoothed out. Adjustment must be made carefully, because the gap between "noisy", "smooth", and "blur" is very small. Adjust it as carefully as you would adjust the focus of a camera.
Texture:
Texture: this control sets the texture accuracy. This value can be used, to get more or less texture accuracy. When decreased, then noise and texture are blurred out, when increased then texture is amplified, but also noise will increase. It has almost no effect on image edges.
Sharpness: This value improves the frequency response for the filter. When it is too strong then not all noise can be removed, or spike noise may appear. Set it near to maximum, if you want to remove very weak noise or JPEG-artifacts, without losing detail.
Edge Lookahead:
Edge: This value defines the pixel distance to which the filter looks ahead for edges. When this value is increased, then spike noise is erased. You can eventually re-adjust the Edge filter, when you have changed this setting. When this value is too high, the adaptive filter can no longer accurately track image details, and noise or blurring can occur.
Erosion:
Erosion: Use this to increase edge noise erosion and spike noise erosion (noise is removed by erosion).
Luminance: this control sets the luminance tolerance of the image. Using either the Color or the Luminance tolerance settings to make an image correction is recommended, but not both at the same time. These settings do not influence the main smoothing process controlled by the Details settings.
Color: this control sets the color tolerance of the image. It is recommended using either the Color or the Luminance tolerance to make image correction, not both at the same time. These settings do not influence the main smoothing process controlled by the Details settings.
Gamma: this control sets the gamma tolerance of the image. This value can be used to increase the tolerance values for darker areas (which commonly are noisier). This results in more blur for shadow areas.
Damping:
Damping: this control sets the phase-jitter damping adjustment. This value defines how fast the adaptive filter-radius reacts to luminance variations. If increased, then edges appear smoother; if too high, then blur may occur. If at minimum, then noise and phase jitter at the edges can occur. It can suppress spike noise when increased, and this is the preferred method to remove it.
Details
Add Date & Time
Add sequence number
Enter renaming string
Target image file format "%1" unsupported.
File extension
File name
Add the current file name
Free Rotation...
Brightness/ Contrast/ Gamma
Increase Gamma
Decrease Gamma
Increase Brightness
Decrease Brightness
Increase Contrast
Decrease Contrast
TextLabel
Brightness, Contrast, Gamma
Use & horizontal thumbbar (needs to restart %1)
If this option is enabled, the thumbnails bar will be displayed horizontally behind the image area. You need to restart the editor for this option take effect.
Pan the image
Sequence Number...
Select the white balance color temperature preset to use here: Candle: candle light (1850K). 40W Lamp: 40 Watt incandescent lamp (2680K). 100W Lamp: 100 Watt incandescent lamp (2800K). 200W Lamp: 200 Watt incandescent lamp (3000K). Sunrise: sunrise or sunset light (3200K). Studio Lamp: tungsten lamp used in photo studio or light at 1 hour from dusk/ dawn (3400K). Moonlight: moon light (4100K). Neutral: neutral color temperature (4750K). Daylight D50: sunny daylight around noon (5000K). Photo Flash: electronic photo flash (5500K). Sun: effective sun temperature (5770K). Xenon Lamp: xenon lamp or light arc (6420K). Daylight D65: overcast sky light (6500K). None: no preset value.
Copy Selected Album Items
Paste Selected Album Items
& New Album From Selection...
%1 Items
Sorry, there is no profile data
supported RAW cameras
This is the list of user customized batch tools.
Remove current item
Update current item
Add new item
Photograph Tone Mapping Settings File to Load
"%1" is not a Photograph Tone Mapping settings text file.
Cannot load settings from the Photograph Tone Mapping text file.
Photograph Tone Mapping Settings File to Save
Cannot save settings to the Photograph Tone Mapping text file.
Tone Mapping...
Map Theme
Current directory name
Image filename
camera name
sequence number
& Load
& Save
Color Management...
Move selected token to the right
Tokens
filename (uppercase)
filename (lowercase)
left
right
Quick access
Turn on this option to customize the image filenames during download.
Prefix:
Set the prefix which will be added to the image filenames.
Suffix:
Set the suffix which will be added to the image filenames.
Set this option to add the original filename.
Add Date & & Time
Set this option to add the camera-provided date and time.
Standard
Advanced...
Select your preferred date format for creating the new albums. The options available are: Standard: the date format that has been used as a standard by digiKam. E. g.: 20060824T142618 ISO: the date format according to ISO 8601 (YYYY-MM-DD). E. g.: 2006-08-24T14:26:18 Full Text: the date format is a user-readable string. E. g.: Thu Aug 24 14:26:18 2006 Local Settings: the date format depending on the KDE control panel settings. Advanced: allows the user to specify a custom date format.
Set this option to add the camera name.
Add Sequence Number
Set this option to add a sequence number starting with the index set below.
Start Index:
Set the starting index value used to rename files with a sequence number.
Enter the format for date and time. Use dd for the day, MM for the month, yyyy for the year, hh for the hour, mm for the minute, ss for the second. Examples: yyyyMMddThhmmss for 20060824T142418, yyyy-MM-dd hh: mm: ss for 2006-08-24 14:24:18.
Change Date and Time Format
author name
Metdata
Use & horizontal thumbbar (will need to restart showFoto)
If this option is enabled, the thumbnail bar will be displayed horizontally behind the image area. You need to restart showFoto for this option to take effect.
To report problems about this driver, please contact the gphoto2 team at: http: / /gphoto. org/ bugs
If this option is enabled, digiKam asks the user before it applies the Workspace default color profile to an image which has no embedded profile or, if the image has an embedded profile, when it is not the same as the workspace profile.
If this option is enabled, digiKam applies the working color profile to an image, without prompting you about missing embedded profiles or embedded profiles different from the workspace profile.
Leave the image as is without conversion
If this option is enabled, digiKam does not apply the workspace color profile to an image, without prompting you about missing embedded profiles or embedded profiles different from the workspace profile.
Select the color profile for your monitor here. You need to enable the Use color managed view option to use this profile.
Input:
Select a default profile for your input device (usually your camera or your scanner)
Soft proof:
Apply the default color workspace profile to the image.
Do Nothing
Do not change the image
Assign
Only embed the color workspace profile in the image, do not change the image.
This image has not been assigned a color profile. Do you want to convert it to your workspace color profile?
Locale Settings
Custom...
System Settings
You have selected the "Default built-in sRGB profile"
This profile is built on the fly, so there is no relevant information about it.
Sorry, it seems there is no embedded profile
Color Management Policy
Apply when opening an image in the Image Editor
Default path to the color profiles folder. You must store all your color profiles in this directory.
Workspace:
All the images will be converted to the color space of this profile, so you must select a profile appropriate for editing. These color profiles are device independent.
You must set a correct default path for your ICC color profiles files.
Invalid Profile
Invalid color profile has been removed.
digiKam has failed to remove the invalid color profile. Remove it manually.
power
linear
Cameras (Manually Added)
More Info...
Synchronize All Images with Database
Synchronize Images with Database
Sort Albums' contents.
Enter here caption text
Simple list
Show images/ thumbs & rotated according to orientation tag
Set orientation tag to normal after rotate/ flip
Exit Full Screen
Exit Fullscreen mode
Select here the language for your caption.
Informations
Country Code:
Instructions
Additional Settings
Edit Metadata
This is the curve drawing of the selected channel from original image
Reset the curve to its default values.
If you press this button, all curves' values will be reset to the default values.
& Save default photographer identity as tags
& Save default credit and copyright identity as tags
Turn on this option to store the default credit and copyright identity in the XMP and the IPTC tags. You can set this value in the Identity setup page.
Photographer Information
Credit and Copyright
Identity
Set default photographer identity
Set default credit and copyright
Enable this option to store the default photographer identity in the XMP and IPTC tags using digiKam's metadata settings.
Enable this option to store the default credit and copyright information in the XMP and IPTC tags using digiKam's metadata settings.
Guide color:
Guide width:
Fast
Threshold (%):
Use this button to scan whole collection to find all duplicate items.
Accurate
Rebuilding all image thumbnails can take some time. Do you want to continue?
Advanced Settings:
File Properties
Image Properties
Photograph Properties
Camera File Properties
Exact
Edit Search...
Delete Search
Pen size:
Gradient norm
First Run
Removing items completed
Move Album to Trash
Delete Album
& Save As...
& Load...
Reset all filter parameters to their default values.
Load all filter parameters from settings text file.
Save all filter parameters to settings text file.
This shows the current progress when you use the Restoration mode.
Points:
Set Angle
horizontal
vertical
Enable this option to flip horizontally guidelines.
Here you can see the black and white conversion tool preview. You can pick color on image to see the color level corresponding on histogram.
Here you can see the auto-color correction tool preview. You can pick color on image to see the color level corresponding on histogram.
If you enable this option, you will see the original image.
If you enable this option, you will see the target image.
You can see here the image's white-balance adjustments preview. You can pick color on image to see the color level corresponding on histogram.
Intensity outputs.
Minimal intensity output.
Select the minimal intensity output value of the histogram here.
Maximal intensity output.
Select the maximal intensity output value of the histogram here.
Here you can see the image color-balance adjustments preview. You can pick color on image to see the color level corresponding on histogram.
Sorry, there is not any selected profile
Select the filter preset to use for photograph restoration here: Reduce Uniform Noise: reduce small image artifacts like sensor noise. Reduce JPEG Artifacts: reduce large image artifacts like JPEG compression mosaic. Reduce Texturing: reduce image artifacts like paper texture or Moire patterns of a scanned image.
New Album...
New Album From Selection
& Batch
Edit Tag Properties...
Album Properties...
Update Metadata Database...
Focal:
Exposure:
digiKam will not use your home folder as the root album. Please select another location.
No item on Light Table
1 item on Light Table
The following profile is invalid:
Comments:
Family:
Family
By Family
Thumbbar Items Tool Tip Settings
RAW Files Decoding Settings
Color Management Settings
Save Images' Files' Settings
Slide Show Settings
Album View Settings
Album Items Tool Tip Settings
Embedded Image Information Management
Default identity information
Album Family
Album Family Settings
Supported File (MIME-Type) Settings
Light Table Settings
Image Editor Album Settings
Image Editor: Settings for Color Management
Main Interface Plug-in Settings
Miscellaneous Settings
Collection:
By Collection
Album Type
Album Type Settings
SlideShow
Thumbnail Information
Modified:
Assign tag to images. Please wait...
Kipi library version: %1
Slide
Toggle lock
Image files
RAW files
Movie files
Audio files
Rotated right
Rotated left
Failed to save file "%1" to "%2".
This shows all root albums used by digiKam as collections.
Type
& New
Path:
Sorry you cannot use your home directory as the root album.
You do n't seem to have write access to this root album. Without this access, image and metadata editing will not work.
A root album in folder "%1" already exists.
Modified:
Size:
Owner:
Type:
Dimensions:
Compression:
Bit depth:
Color mode:
Lens:
Mode/ Program:
Flash:
White balance:
New Name:
Downloaded:
Zoom to 1:1
Designed for KDE4
Hardware handling using KDE4 Solid interface
Multimedia files handling using KDE4 Phonon interface
Geolocation performed using KDE4 Marble interface
A new camera interface
A new tool to perform advanced searches based on photo meta-information
A new tool to perform searches over a map
Copy Album Items Selection
Refresh all album contents.
Digital Cameras
Cameras Added Manually
xD-Picture Card Reader
File size
Display in loop
Print image file name
Print camera aperture and focal length
Print camera exposure and sensitivity
Print camera make and model
Print image caption
Set this option to load the full image size with an embedded preview, instead of a reduced size. Because this option will take more time to load images, use it only if you have a fast computer.
Root Album Paths
A root album set with path "%1" already exist.
Enable this option to restore photograph content. This way is useful to scale-up an image to an huge size. Warning: this process can take a while.
These items will be moved to Trash.
RAW camera supported
digiKam use root album paths to store your photo albums created in My Albums view from left side-bar. Below, please select which folder you would like digiKam to use as first root album path from your local file system. Note: you can set other root album paths later using digiKam settings panel. Removable medias and shared files system are supported.
Below, set the location on your computer where the digiKam database file will be stored. Write access is required to be able to edit image properties. Please note that you cannot use a remote file system here, such as NFS.
digiKam cannot use your home folder as database file path.
Set here the gamma adjustement of the image
Select the histogram scale. If the date count's maximal values are small, you can use the linear scale. Logarithmic scale can be used when the maximal values are big; if it is used, all values (small and large) will be visible on the graph.
Rune Laursen
Danish translations
Jan Toenjes
Marcus Meissner
Czech translations
Janos Tamasi
Hungarian translations
Jasper van der Marel
Anna Sawicka
Polish translations
Select the histogram channel to displayhere: Luminosity: Display luminosity (perceived brightness) values. Red: Display the red image channel. Green: Display the green image channel. Blue: Display the blue image channel. Alpha: Display the alpha image channel. This channel corresponds to the transparency value and is supported by some image formats such as PNG or TIFF. Colors: Display all color channel values at the same time.
Select the histogram scale here. If the image's maximal values are small, you can use the linear scale. Logarithmic scale can be used when the maximal values are big; if it is used, all values (small and large) will be visible on the graph.
Linear
Logarithmic
Selection
This is the histogram drawing of the selected image channel
Here set the zoom factor of the preview area.
This is the percentage of the task which has been completed up to this point.
Here you can see the original image panel which can help you to select the clip preview. Click and drag the mouse cursor in the red rectangle to change the clip focus.
Select the color channel to mix here: Red: display the red image-channel values. Green: display the green image-channel values. Blue: display the blue image-channel values.
Select the histogram scale here. If the image's maximal counts are small, you can use the linear scale. Logarithmic scale can be used when the maximal counts are big; if it is used, all values (small and large) will be visible on the graph.
Here you can see the target preview image histogram drawing of the selected image channel. This one is re-computed at any mixer settings changes.
Select the histogram channel to display here: Luminosity: display the image's luminosity values. Red: display the red image-channel values. Green: display the green image-channel values. Blue: display the blue image-channel values.
Here you can see the target preview image histogram drawing of the selected image channel. This one is re-computed at any filter settings changes.
Select the histogram channel to display here: Luminosity: display the image's luminosity values. Red: display the red image-channel values. Green: display the green image-channel values. Blue: display the blue image-channel values. Alpha: display the alpha image-channel values. This channel corresponds to the transparency value and is supported by some image formats, such as PNG or TIF.
Here you can see the target preview image histogram drawing of the selected image channel. This one is re-computed at any levels settings changes.
Set here the color used to draw guides dashed-lines.
Set here the width in pixels used to draw guides dashed-lines.
Select the histogram channel to display: Luminosity: display the image's luminosity values. Red: display the red image-channel values. Green: display the green image-channel values. Blue: display the blue image-channel values.
Set here the gamma adjustment of the image.
Channel:
Here you can see the target preview image histogram of the selected image channel. This one is updated after setting changes.
Select the histogram channel to display: Luminosity: display the image's luminosity values. Red: display the red image channel values. Green: display the green image channel values. Blue: display the blue image channel values.
Here you can see the target preview image histogram of the selected image channel. It is updated upon setting changes.
Select the histogram channel to display here: Luminosity: display the image's luminosity values. Red: display the red image-channel values. Green: display the green image-channel values. Blue: display the blue image-channel values. Colors: Display all color channel values at the same time.
Abort the current image rendering.
This is the image filter effect preview. If you move the mouse cursor on this area, a vertical and horizontal dashed line will be draw to guide you in adjusting the filter settings. Press the left mouse button to freeze the dashed line's position.
This is the image filter effect preview.
This is the percentage of the task which has completed up to this point.
digiKam Handbook
Lens Distortion Correction
(c) 2004-2006, Gilles Caulier (c) 2006-2008, Gilles Caulier and Marcel Wiesweg
Author and maintainer
David Hodson
Lens distortion correction algorithm.
A noise reduction image filter plugin for digiKam.
(c) 2004-2007, Gilles Caulier
Peter Heckert
Noise Reduction algorithm. Developer
Add Film Grain to Photograph
A digiKam image plugin to apply a film grain effect to an image.
(c) 2004-2005, Gilles Caulier (c) 2006-2007, Gilles Caulier and Marcel Wiesweg
Charcoal Drawing
A digiKam charcoal drawing image effect plugin.
(c) 2004-2008, Gilles Caulier
Apply Texture
A digiKam image plugin to apply a decorative texture to an image.
(c) 2005, Gilles Caulier (c) 2006-2008, Gilles Caulier and Marcel Wiesweg
A digiKam image plugin to apply blurring special effects to an image.
Pieter Z. Voloshyn
Blurring algorithms
Emboss Image
Emboss image effect plugin for digiKam.
Emboss algorithm
Apply Oil Paint Effect
An oil painting image effect plugin for digiKam.
(c) 2004-2005, Gilles Caulier (c) 2006-2008, Gilles Caulier and Marcel Wiesweg
Oil paint algorithm
Simulate Infrared Film to Photograph
Infrared Film
A digiKam image plugin to simulate infrared film.
Sharpening Photograph
Apply Gaussian Blur on Photograph
A digiKam image plugin to automatically fix lens aberrations using LensFun library.
(c) 2008, Adrian Schroeter (c) 2008, Gilles Caulier
A digiKam image plugin to reduce image vignetting.
Anti Vignetting algorithm
Apply Color Special Effects to Photograph
A digiKam plugin to apply special color effects to an image.
(c) 2004-2005, Renchi Raju (c) 2006-2007, Gilles Caulier
White Color Balance Correction
A digiKam image plugin to correct white color balance.
(c) 2005-2008, Gilles Caulier
Pawel T. Jochym
White color balance correction algorithm
Insert Text on Photograph
A digiKam image plugin for inserting text on a photograph.
(c) 2005-2006, Gilles Caulier (c) 2006-2008, Gilles Caulier and Marcel Wiesweg
Add Raindrops to Photograph
A digiKam image plugin to add raindrops to an image.
Raindrops algorithm
Add Border Around Photograph
A digiKam image plugin to add a border around an image.
A digiKam image plugin to process free image rotation.
Free Rotation algorithm
A digiKam image plugin to apply distortion effects to an image.
Distortion algorithms
Adjust Photograph Perspective
A digiKam image plugin to process image perspective adjustment.
Template Superimpose to Photograph
A digiKam image plugin to superimpose a template onto a photograph.
Aspect Ratio Crop & Composition Guide
A digiKam image plugin to shear an image.
Shear algorithm
A digiKam image plugin to inpaint a photograph.
David Tschumperle
CImg library
Feedback and plugin polishing
Color Channel Mixer
An image color channel mixer plugin for digiKam.
(c) 2005-2007, Gilles Caulier
A digiKam image plugin for fixing dots produced by hot/ stuck/ dead pixels from a CCD.
(c) 2005-2006, Unai Garro (c) 2005-2008, Gilles Caulier
Adjust Color Curves
An image-histogram-curves adjustment plugin for digiKam.
Adjust Color Levels
An image-histogram-levels adjustment plugin for digiKam.
Photograph Restoration
A digiKam image plugin to restore a photograph.
Red Eye Reduction
Auto Color Correction
Brightness Contrast Gamma Adjustments
Convert to Black & White
Abort current image rendering.
Launch Color Management plugin with RAW files
Enable this option if you want to launch the color management image plugin when a RAW file is loaded in the editor.
Vignetting...
Histogram calculation in progress...
A Color Theme Designer for digiKam
Apply Blurring Special Effect to Photograph
... that there is a digiKam hotplugging howto available at this url?
Show image dimensions (warning: slow)
Album Library Path
Cannot restart digiKam automatically. Please restart digiKam manually.
Albums Library Folder
Set here the number of similar items to find.
Add & image file extensions:
Add & movie file extensions:
Add & audio file extensions:
Rebuilding all image finger-prints can take some time. Do you want to continue?
Here you can set the extensions of the image files to be displayed in Albums (such as JPEG or TIFF); clicking on these files will open them in the digiKam Image Editor.
Here you can set the extensions of movie files to be displayed in Albums (such as MPEG or AVI); clicking on these files will open them in the default KDE movie player.
Here you can set the extensions of audio files to be displayed in Albums (such as MP3 or OGG); clicking on these files will open them in the default KDE audio player.
Show only & RAW files with extensions:
Here you can set the extensions of the RAW image files to be displayed in Albums (such as CRW, for Canon cameras, or NEF, for Nikon cameras).
Another file or folder with same name exists
Access denied to path
Disk is full
Unknown error
%1 mm
Listing files in %1 is complete
The items listed below are locked by the camera (read-only). These items will not be deleted. If you really want to delete these items, please unlock them and try again.
Select the right action to do when you right click with mouse button on thumbnail here.
(c) 2005, Gilles Caulier (c) 2006-2007, Gilles Caulier and Marcel Wiesweg
(c) 2005-2006, Gilles Caulier (c) 2006-2007, Gilles Caulier and Marcel Wiesweg
(c) 2004-2006, Gilles Caulier (c) 2006-2007, Gilles Caulier and Marcel Wiesweg
You can see here a thumbnail preview of the correction applied to a cross pattern.
A Photo-Management Application for KDE
KDE Photo Viewer and Editor
(c) 2004-2008, digiKam developers team
Search Rules
Here you can review the search rules used to filter image-searching in the album library.
Add/ Delete Option
You can edit the search rules by adding/ removing criteria.
As well as
Or
& Del
Group/ Ungroup Options
You can group or ungroup any search criteria from the Search Rule set.
& Ungroup
& Save search as:
Enter the name used to save the current search in "My Searches" view
Tag Name
Image Name
Image Date
Image Caption
Keyword
Contains
Does Not Contain
Equals
Does Not Equal
After
Before
At most
Enter your search criteria to find items in the album library
Here you can see the items found in the album library, using the current search criteria
Save search as:
Find results
Icon Placeholder, not in GUI
Deletion method placeholder, never shown to user.
Placeholder for number of files, not in GUI
Lens Error Correction
A digiKam image plugin to fix errors caused by lens.
Lens Distortion...
Use Filters
Prepare slideshow. Please wait...
If this box is checked, this dialog will not be shown again in the future, files will be directly moved to the Trash Bin
ICC profiles path seems to be invalid. If you want to set it now, select "Yes", otherwise select "No". In this case, "Color Management" feature will be disabled until you solve this issue
Make a donation...
Sets the size of tile.
& Send to Trash
New Simple Search...
New Advanced Search...
Edit as Advanced Search...
Tag "%1" Properties
unaviable
Using Kipi library version %1
Using KDcraw library version %1
Using Dcraw program version %1
Using PNG library version %1
Using Gphoto2 library version %1
Using KExiv2 library version %1
Using Exiv2 library version %1
XMP support available: %1
(c) 2005-2008, Unai Garro and Gilles Caulier
Make: %1
Model: %1
Created: %1
Aperture: f/ %1
Sensitivity: %1 ISO
Open Images
No media player available...
Albums are Missing
Scanning items, please wait...
Updating items, please wait...
Files are Missing
Thumbnails processing
Processing small thumbs
Processing large thumbs
(c) 2002-2007, digiKam developers team
GPS
Global Positioning System Information
Rating > = %1
Rating < = %1
My Dates
Set the photographer name. This field is limited to 32 ASCII characters with IPTC.
Set the photographer title. This field is limited to 32 ASCII characters with IPTC.
Set the default provider identification of the image, not necessarily the owner/ creator. This field is limited to 32 ASCII characters with IPTC.
Set the default original owner identification of the intellectual content of the image. This could be an agency, a member of an agency or an individual photographer name. This field is limited to 32 ASCII characters with IPTC.
Set the default copyright notice of the images. This field is limited to 128 ASCII characters with IPTC.
Quick Search...
Using dcraw version %1
Sets the red color pixels selection threshold. Low values will select more red color pixels, high values less.
Set here the tint level used to coloring red eye.
Edit Album Properties...
New & Tag...
Album & Library
Here you can set the main path to the digiKam album library in your computer. Write access is required for this path.
Path to store database:
Album & Library Path
Finding non-existing Albums
Finding items not in the database or disk
Updating items without date
The image will not fit on the page, what do you want to do?
Top-Central
Top-Right
Central-Left
Central
Central-Right
Bottom-Left
Bottom-Central
Bottom-Right
Print image in & black and white
Scale image to & fit
Print exact size: