# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	GNOME
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-GNOME/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

@@image: 'figures/evo_gwreceive_a.png'; md5=ef64e581e652d0f03e4e6dd4a3b6d5a2
@@image: 'figures/evo_mereceive_a.png'; md5=THIS FILE DOESN'T EXIST
@@image: 'figures/evo_exchng_mapi.png'; md5=e994b432c31237e2dc8b5ffaabbd2962
@@image: 'figures/evo_imapreceive_a.png'; md5=abaf292ea7b663824123f1f7f171b014
@@image: 'figures/evo_popreceive_a.png'; md5=a635f0e8d9bb4f0bcda34221c258f273
@@image: 'figures/evo_usereceive_a.png'; md5=3c14cafdde81fca95d480851aee9db0f
@@image: 'figures/evo_mhreceive_a.png'; md5=c7b97b4a2e9b9cf1c550244cca15a189
@@image: 'figures/evo_maildirreceive_a.png'; md5=bdd9dfc00800338dc906e2fd12b07f62
@@image: 'figures/evo_mboxreceive_a.png'; md5=a04753f7615eab6ac349f50caa39a7a8
@@image: 'figures/evo_send_setup_a.png'; md5=82760a1733ccb49ffa8424d265278b42
@@image: 'figures/evo_mail_callout_a.png'; md5=4fa6dda9663d554197736dd2feb79575
@@image: 'figures/evo_mail_a.png'; md5=cf315e85737412c6ee3c3202b8807701
@@image: 'figures/evo_cal_callout_a.png'; md5=6de000ad9c7b3fe42ed1996cad46432f
@@image: 'figures/contacts_mainwindow_a.png'; md5=41335f17f056cb0b06e3df4900d08865
@@image: 'figures/evo_backup_warning.png'; md5=c05e6d67bae4ae0b9e7fcb9701cbdfe6
@@image: 'figures/evo_backup_prgsbar.png'; md5=9df6295eb38525fbbfc64cb8928d7fb0
@@image: 'figures/evo_restore.png'; md5=THIS FILE DOESN'T EXIST
@@image: 'figures/evo_newmail.png'; md5=426590d03b7b0bc88b16cc61b2ec1000
@@image: 'figures/evo_mailnotification.png'; md5=THIS FILE DOESN'T EXIST
@@image: 'figures/folder_plus.png'; md5=61548b886beadeec26ef258f2cb1c2aa
@@image: 'figures/ver_view_a.png'; md5=f3075b70b9eebf8f2b8f3b587143ef8b
@@image: 'figures/evo_newmess_a.png'; md5=8d34b2fa682b559f7150e769e0079d17
@@image: 'figures/evo_customheader.png'; md5=THIS FILE DOESN'T EXIST
@@image: 'figures/evo_offline.png'; md5=1efa5688aaa2aa59a37e614e32c4f7eb
@@image: 'figures/attach_reminder_a.png'; md5=e0c90f77e6df9ad52589af09fdbbfdd7
@@image: 'figures/evo_attachreminder_plugin.png'; md5=25f7db7cd7d310110847354c62702ecf
@@image: 'figures/evo_flag_follow_up_a.png'; md5=6a4790a789cf4b3b8b73cb43aa8d065b
@@image: 'figures/evo_adv_search_a.png'; md5=676d35d686745650c9bcfa832763362c
@@image: 'figures/evo_edit_search.png'; md5=2ce150b3eb63cc4ec0f0292e13167be8
@@image: 'figures/filter-new-fig.png'; md5=75a2b8ccfe0f7a4982859827c867d578
@@image: 'figures/evo_rule_a.png'; md5=5f8fb34b77c0d3abe7aff767edd53aaa
@@image: 'figures/evo_contacteditor_a.png'; md5=fba5d6ebd22fceb554dabb0fc8c02cd3
@@image: 'figures/quick_add_a.png'; md5=2a3d3007ec4cd18bb7e3a208bcbfb252
@@image: 'figures/categories_a.png'; md5=362ebe93a74beec4fd820776c7f2db77
@@image: 'figures/evo_Wcal_prop_a.png'; md5=dcd10f32a1ac7cbcb44d67e1a4b71a78
@@image: 'figures/google_cal_view.png'; md5=e9ad85fb604b18447bcf9be09a540989
@@image: 'figures/evo_calender_appointmnt.png'; md5=743dd472bfd9dcda1e7f8021dda97114
@@image: 'figures/local_ics_calendar.png'; md5=2ff81d975384c97ad1b73e8c66bc407d
@@image: 'figures/evo_memo_a.png'; md5=29e23aefd253747b3a42f182825b75bd
@@image: 'figures/exchng-rec-mails.png'; md5=b56dfa570c8d1c9b942c6493fd973d68
@@image: 'figures/exchng-rec-options.png'; md5=31a2bbe7ef9de1dc79da40949e0dc7ae
@@image: 'figures/evo_send_option_a.png'; md5=c1cca904625d1a7de13c851cd15235f6
@@image: 'figures/delgt-add.png'; md5=9bf1f22c67551ad910cd3749f216c2b7
@@image: 'figures/evo_delegate_permission_a.png'; md5=05df38ad69b20f9bd7c1e14044ca10fd
@@image: 'figures/folder_size_preference.png'; md5=8d9067996afa74c865417b5b9171d4c0
@@image: 'figures/folder_size_mapi.png'; md5=4b20ea9d82999051360f14da27e7c15d
@@image: 'figures/evo_shd_memo_a.png'; md5=9a72b7725da27ce1970592cff67f4bbd
@@image: 'figures/groupwise_resend.png'; md5=697ce252ac6f3f2f4f361039818d1262
@@image: 'figures/groupwise_resend_retract.png'; md5=4eac3186389940b8305cf676f9fc3ef4
@@image: 'figures/evo_gwstatustrack.png'; md5=d4eb84e2d55870af1408c430ce8c0e66
@@image: 'figures/evo_sendstatus_a.png'; md5=36ca2211056c859eb776124bfc364705
@@image: 'figures/evo_calstatus_a.png'; md5=99fb98faa3e644f6433c078ba71a0353
@@image: 'figures/evo_proxyadd_a.png'; md5=51357617967f0610eb95dab5814540ad
@@image: 'figures/mailer_preferences.png'; md5=d5b47aa5da56ec9b94188e0f71fc43b1
@@image: 'figures/evolution_contact_preference.png'; md5=cfa45a42e19ea3b09587f08990cf178f
@@image: 'figures/evo_imapheader_a.png'; md5=THIS FILE DOESN'T EXIST
@@image: 'figures/evo_labels_a.png'; md5=e136d81754f7c859713674c09af56ca3
@@image: 'figures/evo_label_a.png'; md5=bc5d8fe2485b9678a4911ac6e1469dfa
@@image: 'figures/evolution_mail_preference.png'; md5=191c1e890aa1cded550c9579d1af06e9
@@image: 'figures/evo_junk_a.png'; md5=635a83cb310a374a041da9e5dad017c9
@@image: 'figures/evo_caltasks_a.png'; md5=88a894d8414c9205da0a6bab34de018c
@@image: 'figures/network_pref.png'; md5=THIS FILE DOESN'T EXIST
@@image: 'figures/quick_reference.png'; md5=86fe7457150de2e7efe735c10cd324f5
Novell, Inc
2002-2009
2.30
September 2009
Akhil Laddha
2.28
Radhika PC
2.26
March 2009
2.12
September 2007
2.10
November 20, 2006
Francisco Serrador
2.8
October 5, 2006
This manual describes version 2.30 of Evolution
A user's guide to Evolution which explains how to use its mail, calendar, address book, and task list features.
Evolution
February 2008
Evolution 2.30 User Guide
About This Guide
This guide describes how to use and manage
Getting Started
Sending and Receiving Email
Organizing Your Email
Evolution Contacts: the Address Book
Evolution Calendar
Connecting to Exchange Servers
Connecting to GroupWise
Advanced Configuration
Synchronizing Your Handheld Device
Migration from Outlook to Evolution
Quick Reference
Known Bugs and Limitations
Authors
Glossary
Additional Documentation:
You can find additional help in three places:
Evolution has a number of command line options that you can use. For information about command line options, open a terminal window and type
In the Evolution interface, click Help &gt; Contents.
Documentation Conventions:
In Novell documentation, a greater-than symbol (gt;) is used to separate actions within a step and items in a cross-reference path. A trademark symbol (

Starting Evolution for the First Time
Using Evolution: An Overview
Start the Evolution client.
GNOME:
Click Applications &gt; Office &gt; Evolution.
KDE:
Click the K menu &gt; Office &gt; More Programs &gt; Evolution.
Command Line:
Enter
Using the First-Run Assistant
The first time you run Evolution, it creates a directory named
Using the first-run assistant takes two to five minutes.
Later on, if you want to change this account, or if you want to create a new one, click Edit &gt; Preferences, then click Mail Accounts. Select the account you want to change, then click Edit. Alternately, add a new account by clicking Add. See
The First-Run Assistant helps you provide the information Evolution needs to get started.
Defining Your Identity
Receiving Mail
Receiving Mail Options
Sending Mail
Account Management
Time Zone
The Identity window is the first step in the assistant.
Here, you enter some basic personal information. You can define multiple identities later by clicking Edit &gt; Preferences, then clicking Mail Accounts.
When the First-Run Assistant starts, the Welcome page is displayed. Click Forward to proceed to the Identity window.
Type your full name in the Full Name field.
Type your email address in the Email Address field.
(Optional) Select if this account is your default account.
(Optional) Type a reply to address in the Reply-To field.
Use this field if you want replies to messages sent to a different address.
(Optional) Type your organization name in the Organization field.
This is the company where you work, or the organization you represent when you send email.
Click Forward.
The Receiving Email option lets you determine where you get your email.
You need to specify the type of server you want to receive mail with. If you are unsure about the type of server to choose, ask your system administrator or ISP.
Select a server type in the Server Type list.
The following is a list of server types that are available:
Novell GroupWise:
Select this option if you connect to a Novell
For configuration instructions, see
Microsoft Exchange:
Available only if the evolution-exchange package is installed. Select this option if you connect to a Microsoft Exchange 2000 or 2003 server.
Email, calendar, and contact information are stored on the server.
MAPI Exchange:
Available only if you have installed the evolution-mapi package and if the Exchange MAPI plugin from the Edit &gt; Plugins menu is enabled. It allows you to connect to a Microsoft Exchange 2007 server.
IMAP:
Keeps the email on your server so you can access your email from multiple systems.
POP:
Downloads your email to your hard disk for permanent storage, freeing up space on the email server.
USENET News:
Connects to a news server and downloads a list of available news digests.
Local Delivery:
Choose this option if you want to move email from the spool (the location where mail waits for delivery) and store it in your home directory. You need to provide the path to the mail spool you want to use. If you want to leave email in your system's spool files, choose the Standard Unix Mbox Spool option instead.
For configuration instructions, see
MH Format Mail Directories:
If you download your email using MH or another MH-style program, you should use this option.
You need to provide the path to the mail directory you want to use.
Maildir Format Mail Directories:
If you download your email using Qmail or another Maildir-style program, you should use this option.
Standard Unix mbox Spool File:
If you want to read and store email in the mail spool file on your local system, choose this option. You need to provide the path to the mail spool file you want to use.
Standard Unix mbox Spool Directory:
If you want to read and store email in the mail spool directory on your local system, choose this option. You need to provide the path to the mail spool directory you want to use.
None:
Select this if you do not plan to check email with this account. If you select this, there are no configuration options.
Remote Configuration Options
If you selected Novell GroupWise, IMAP, POP, or USENET News as your server, you need to specify additional information.
Type the server name of your email server in the Server field.
If you are unsure what your server address is, contact your system administrator.
Type your username in the Username field.
Select if you want to use a secure connection (SSL or TLS).
You should enable this option if your server supports it.
Free webmail providers usually supply information about which of these options can be used. If you are in an organizational environment, you may want to contact your system administrator for more information.
Select your authentication type in the Authentication list.
or
Click Check for Supported Types to have Evolution check for supported authentication mechanisms. Some servers do not announce the authentication mechanisms they support, so clicking this button is not a guarantee that available mechanisms actually work.
Select if you want Evolution to remember your password.
(Conditional) If you chose Microsoft Exchange as the server type, provide your username in the Username field and your Outlook Web Access (OWA) URL in the OWA URL field. The URL and the usernames should use the Outlook format. If the mailbox path is different from the username, the OWA path should also include mailbox path, for example http://
When you have finished, continue with
Local Configuration Options
If you selected Local Delivery, MH-Format Mail Directories, Maildir-Format Mail Directories, Standard Unix mbox spool file or Standard Unix mbox spool directory, you must specify the path to the local files in the path field. Continue with
After you have selected a mail delivery mechanism, you can set some preferences for its behavior.
Novell GroupWise Receiving Options
Microsoft Exchange Receiving Options
IMAP Receiving Options
POP Receiving Options
USENET News Receiving Options
Local Delivery Receiving Options
MH-Format Mail Directories Receiving Options
Maildir-Format Mail Directories Receiving Options
Standard Unix mbox spool file Receiving Options
You need to specify the following options for this server type:
Select if you want Evolution to automatically check for new mail.
If you select this option, you need to specify how often Evolution should check for new messages.
Select if you want to check for new messages in all folders.
Select Apply filters to new messages in inbox on this server if you want to apply filters.
For additional information on filtering, see
Select if you want to check new messages for junk content.
For additional information on junk content, see
Select if you want to only check for junk messages in the Inbox folder.
Select Automatically synchronize remote mail locally to download the messages to your local system.
Evolution, by default, downloads only the header information such as From, Subject, and Date. The body of the message and the attachments are downloaded only when you click the message. Thus you can save time and network usage. This is useful when you don't read all the messages you receive.
If you check this option, Evolution fetches the headers as well as the body of the message simultaneously. In this case, the time taken to open a message is comparatively less. In addition, you can download the mail for reading them offline, when you have checked this option.
Type your Post Office Agent SOAP port in the Post Office Agent SOAP Port field.
If you are unsure what your Post Office Agent SOAP port is, contact your system administrator.
When you have finished, continue with
Specify the Global Catalog server name in the Global Catalog Server Name field.
The Global Catalog Server contains the user information for users. If you are unsure what your Global Catalog server name is, contact your system administrator.
Select if you want to limit the number of Global Address List (GAL) responses.
The GAL contains a list of all email addresses. If you select this option, you need to specify the maximum number of responses.
Select if you want to use a password expiry warning time period.
If you select this option, you need to specify how often Evolution should send the password expire message.
Exchange MAPI Receiving Options
If you select Microsoft Exchange MAPI as your receiving server type, you need to specify the following options:
Select the desired options as given in the following table, then click Forward.
Options
Description
Check for new messages every x minutes
Select this option if you want Evolution to automatically check for new mail. If you select this option, you need to specify how often Evolution should check for new messages.
Check for new messages in all folders
Global Catalog server name
Limit number of GAL responses
Automatically synchronize account locally
Apply filters to new messages in Inbox on this server
Check new messages for Junk contents
Select if you want Evolution to use custom commands to connect to the IMAP server.
If you select this option, specify the custom command you want Evolution to use.
Select if you want Evolution to show only subscribed folders.
Subscribed folders are folders that you have chosen to receive mail from by subscribing to them.
Select if you want Evolution to override server-supplied folder namespaces.
By choosing this option you can rename the folders that the server provides. If you select this option, you need to specify the namespace to use.
Select if you want to check for junk messages in the Inbox folder.
Select if you want to leave messages on the server.
Select if you want to disable support for all POP3 extensions.
Select if you want to show folders in short notation.
For example, comp.os.linux would appear as c.o.linux.
Select if you want to show relative folder names in the subscription dialog box.
If you select to show relative folder names in the subscription page, only the name of the folder is displayed. For example the folder evolution.mail would appear as evolution.
Select if you want to use the
Standard Unix mbox Spool File Receiving Options
Select if you want to store status headers in Elm, Pine, and Mutt formats.
Standard Unix mbox Spool Directory Receiving Options
Now that you have entered information about how you plan to get mail, Evolution needs to know about how you want to send it.
Select a server type from the Server Type list.
The following server types are available:
Sendmail:
Uses the Sendmail program to send mail from your system. Sendmail is more flexible, but is not as easy to configure, so you should select this option only if you know how to set up a Sendmail service.
SMTP:
Sends mail using an outbound mail server. This is the most common choice for sending mail. If you choose SMTP, there are additional configuration options. See
SMTP Configuration
Select if your server requires authentication.
If you selected that your server requires authentication, you need to provide the following information:
Continue with
Now that you have finished the email configuration process you need to give the account a name. The name can be any name you prefer. Type your account name on the Name field, then click Forward.
Continue with
Select your time zone on the map.
Select from the time zone drop-down list.
Click OK, then click Apply.
Evolution opens with your new account created.
If you want to import email from another email client, continue with
Importing Mail (Optional)
After selecting your time zone, if Evolution finds email or address files from another application, it offers to import them. For a full description of the import feature, see
Microsoft Outlook* and versions of Outlook Express after version 4 use proprietary formats that Evolution cannot read or import.
To import information, you might want to use the Export tool under Windows*. See the instructions in
Before importing email from Netscape*, Mozilla and Netscape users need to click File &gt; Compact &gt; All Folders from within the Netscape or Mozilla mail tool. Otherwise, Evolution imports and undeletes the messages in your Trash folders.
Evolution uses standard file types for email and calendar information, so you can copy those files from your
Contacts files are stored in a database, but can be saved as a standard vCard*. To export an address book, click File &gt; Save Address Book As VCard". If you want to export only one contact, click File &gt; Save Contact as VCard.
Now that the first-run configuration has finished, you're ready to begin using Evolution. Here's a quick explanation of what's happening in your main Evolution window.
Menu Bar:
The menu bar gives you access to most Evolution features. For additional information, see
Folder List:
The folder list gives you a list of the available folders for each account. To see the contents of a folder, click the folder name and the contents are displayed in the message list.
Toolbar:
The toolbar gives you fast and easy access to the frequently used features in each component.
Search Tool:
The search tool lets you search your email, contacts, calendar, and tasks to easily find what you're looking for.
Message List:
The message list displays a list of email that you have received. To view an email in the preview pane, click the email in the message list.
Side Bar:
The side bar lets you switch between folders and between Evolution tools. At the bottom of the side bar is the switcher that lets you switch Evolution tools, and above that is a list of all the available folders for the current tool. For additional information, see
Switcher:
The switcher at the bottom of the side bar lets you switch between the Evolution tools - Mail, Contacts, Calendars, Memos and Tasks.
Status Bar:
The status bar periodically displays a message, or tells you the progress of a task. This most often happens when you're checking or sending email. These progress queues are shown in the previous figure. The Online/Offline indicator is here, too, in the lower left of the window.
Preview Pane:
The preview pane displays the contents of the email that is selected in the message list.
The Menu Bar
The menu bar's contents always provide all the possible actions for any given view of your data. If you're looking at your Inbox, most of the menu items relate to email. Some content relates to other components of Evolution and some, especially in the File menu, relates to the application as a whole.
File:
Anything related to a file or to the operations of the application is listed in this menu, such as creating things, saving them to disk, printing them, and quitting the program itself.
Edit:
Holds useful tools that help you edit text and move it around. Also lets you access the settings and configuration options.
View:
Lets you decide how Evolution should look. Some of the features control the appearance of Evolution as a whole, and others the way a particular kind of information appears.
Folder:
Holds actions that can be performed on folders. You can find things like copy, rename, delete, and so on.
Message:
Holds actions that can be applied to a message. If there is only one target for the action, such as replying to a message, you can normally find it in the Message menu.
Search:
Lets you search for messages, or for phrases within a message. You can also see previous searches you have made. In addition to the Search menu, there is a text entry box in the toolbar that you can use to search for messages. You can also create a search folder from a search.
Help:
Opens the Evolution help files.
The Sidebar
The Sidebar is the vertical panel on the left side of the Evolution main window. At the bottom of the Sidebar is the Switcher. This lets you switch between different Evolution tools like Mail, Memo, Tasks, and Contacts. Above the Switcher is a list of folders related to the current Evolution tool.
The folder list organizes your email, calendars, address books, task lists and memo lists in a tree, similar to a
If you get large amounts of email, you might want more folders than just your Inbox. You can also create multiple calendar, task, or contacts folders.
To create a new folder:
Click Folder &gt; New.
Type the name of the folder in the Folder Name field.
Select the location of the new folder.
Click OK.
Changing Switcher Appearance:
To change the appearance of your switcher click
Icons and Text:
Displays buttons with the label and the icon corresponding to it.
Icons Only:
Shows only the icons.
Texts Only:
Displays buttons with the label, not the icons.
Toolbar Style:
Shows buttons using the desktop toolbar settings.
Hide Buttons:
This option hides all the shortcut buttons of switcher.
Folder Management
Right-click a folder or subfolder to display a menu with the following options:
Copy:
Copies the folder to a different location. When you select this item, Evolution offers a choice of locations to copy the folder to.
Move:
Moves the folder to another location. When you select this item, Evolution offers a choice of locations to move the folder to.
Mark Messages As Read:
Marks all the messages in the folder as read.
New Folder:
Creates another folder in the same location.
Delete:
Deletes the folder and all its contents.
Rename:
Lets you change the name of the folder.
Disable:
Disables the account.
Properties:
Checks the number of total and unread messages in a folder, and, for remote folders, lets you select whether to copy the folder to your local system for offline operation.
You can also rearrange folders and messages by dragging and dropping them.
Any time new email arrives in a email folder, that folder label is displayed in bold text, along with the number of new messages in that folder.
Email
Evolution email is like other email programs in several ways:
It can send and receive email in HTML or as plain text, and makes it easy to send and receive multiple file attachments.
It supports multiple email sources, including
It can sort and organize your email in a wide variety of ways with folders, searches, and filters.
It lets you guard your privacy with encryption.
However, Evolution has some important differences from other email programs. First, it is built to handle very large amounts of email. The
The message list displays all the messages that you have. This includes all your read and unread messages, and email that is flagged to be deleted.
The preview pane displays the message that is currently chosen in the message list.
If you find the preview pane too small, you can resize the pane, enlarge the whole window, or double-click the message in the message list to have it open in a new window. To change the size of a pane, drag the divider between the two panes.
As with folders, you can right-click messages in the message list and get a menu of possible actions, including moving or deleting them, creating filters or search folders based on them, and marking them as junk mail.
Most of the email-related actions you want to perform are listed in the Message menu and Folder menu in the menu bar. The most frequently used ones, like Reply and Forward, also appear as buttons in the toolbar. Most of them are also located in the right-click menu and as keyboard shortcuts.
For an in-depth guide to the email capabilities of Evolution, read
The Calendar
To begin using the calendar, click Calendar in the Switcher. By default, the calendar shows today's schedule on a ruled background. At the left bottom, there is a monthly calendar you can use to switch days. At the upper right, there is a task list, where you can keep a list of tasks separate from your calendar appointments. Below that, there is a memo list.
Appointment List:
The appointment list displays all your scheduled appointments.
Month Pane:
The month pane is a small view of a calendar month. To display additional months, drag the column border to the right. You can also select a range of days in the month pane to display a custom range of days in the appointment list.
Task List:
Tasks are distinct from appointments because they generally don't have times associated with them. You can use the list in a larger window by clicking the Tasks button in the side bar.
For more information about the calendar, see
The Contacts
The Evolution contacts can handle all of the functions of an address book or phone book. However, it is easier to update Evolution than it is to change an actual paper book, in part because Evolution can synchronize with Palm OS* devices and use
To use the contacts tool, click Contacts in the Switcher. By default, the display shows all your contacts in alphabetical order, in a minicard view. You can select other views from the View menu, and adjust the width of the columns by clicking and dragging the gray column dividers.
Another advantage of the Evolution contacts is its integration with the rest of the application. For example, you can right-click an email address in Evolution mail to instantly create a contact entry.
Contact List
The largest section of the contacts display shows a list of individual contacts. You can also search the contacts in the same way that you search email folders, using the search tool on the right side of the toolbar.
For detailed instructions on how to use the address book, read
Backing Up and Restoring Evolution
With the Backup and Restore plugin enabled, you can successfully back up Evolution to your machine and restore it whenever it is required. The backup saves your Evolution settings, mail, contacts, tasks, memos, and calendars and creates an archive.
Select File &gt; Backup Settings to select the folder where you want to save the backup.
Evolution is always backed up as evolution-backup.tar.gz.
Before the backup process starts, it asks you to close Evolution and displays a warning as shown below:
Select Restart Evolution after backup to restart Evolution immediately after the backup process.
Click Yes to close Evolution and start the backup.
Evolution will auto-restart after the process.
Restoring Evolution
This feature restores your settings from the archive.
Select File &gt; Restore Settings to open the available evolution-backup.tar.gz files.
Select the evolution-backup.tar.gz and click Save.
Before the process starts, a pop-up window appears and asks you to close Evolution. Close all the windows and then click Restore in the pop-up window.
If you are creating your first account via the Startup Wizard, you can use the option to restore from the archive if it is available locally.
Command Line Options
Evolution has a number of command line options that you can use. For more information about command line options, open a terminal window and type
The most important command line options are:
Command
evolution --offline
Starts Evolution in offline mode.
evolution --disable-preview
Disables all the preview panes when you launch Evolution.
This prevents Evolution from opening the most recently selected message, task or contact, thus providing a way to avoid an application crash caused by previewing the message, task or contact.
evolution mailto:
Starts Evolution and begins composing a message to the email address listed.
evolution -c mail
Starts Evolution in mail mode.
evolution -c calendar
Starts Evolution in calendar mode.
evolution -c contacts
Starts Evolution in contacts mode.
evolution --force-shutdown
Forces every part of Evolution to shut down immediately.
evolution
Makes Evolution your default email handler for your Web browser and in the GNOME* Control Center.
This section, and
Reading Mail
Composing New Email Messages
Templates
Sending Invitations by Mail
IMAP Subscriptions Manager
Encryption
If you are not already viewing mail, switch to the mail tool by clicking the Mail shortcut button, or press Ctrl+1. To read a message, select it in the message list; if you'd like to see it in its own window, either double-click it, press Enter, or press Ctrl+O.
To read mail with the keyboard, you can click the Spacebar to page down and press Backspace to page up while reading an email. Ensure that you use the keys when the message list is enabled.
Navigate the message list by using the arrow keys on the keyboard. To go to the next and previous unread messages, press the period (.) or comma (,) keys. On some keyboards, these keys are also marked with the &gt; and &lt; symbols, which is a convenient way to remember that they move you forward and backward in your message list. You can also use the right square bracket (]) for the next unread message, and the left square bracket ([) for the previous unread message.
Magic Spacebar for Reading Mail
With Magic Spacebar, you can easily read the unread messages in all the mail folders. You can read mail, scroll through mail and switch folders by using the Spacebar on your keyboard.
To enable Magic Spacebar:
Select Edit &gt; Preferences, then select Mail Accounts.
Select the Enable Magic Spacebar check box.
When you are in the Mail view, the Spacebar has the following behavior:
When you press the Spacebar for the first time, it takes you to the next unread message.
If the message is more than one screen long, the Spacebar works as Page Down key.
If you press the Spacebar after you reach the bottom of the page, it takes you to the next unread message.
If there are no more unread messages in the mailbox, pressing the Spacebar takes you to the next unread message in the next folder.
If new messages arrive in a number of folders, the Spacebar toggles between those folders. This feature allows you to switch to the next unread message in a different folder without clicking the folder.
Checking for New Mail
To check your mail, click Send/Receive in the toolbar. If you haven't created any mail accounts yet, the setup assistant asks you for the information it needs to check your email. For information on creating mail accounts, see
If this is your first time checking mail, or you haven't asked Evolution to store your password, you are prompted for the password. Enter your password to download your email.
If you get an error message instead of mail, you probably need to check your network settings. To learn how to do that, see
New Mail Notification
Evolution can notify you of new messages. When you receive a new message in your inbox, a blinking icon appears on the Switcher.
You can also view a blinking icon (
To enable this feature, select Edit &gt; Plugins, then select the Mail Notification check box. You can configure the plugin by specifing the following in the Plugin Manager.
Notify new messages for Inbox only:
Select this option to restrict the mail notification to Inbox. With this option enabled, you are notified of each new message arrival in the Inbox.
New Message Notification For Folders
This feature notifies you of new message arrival in any folder. A folder with new mail is identified by the unread icon.The icon is displayed as long as the folder is accessed.
In a collapsed folder tree, if a new message arrives in the parent folder, the folder name is displayed with a '+' plus sign beside the unread mail count. When a new message arrives in any child folders, the parent folder name turns bold.
Generate D-Bus message:
D-Bus is a fast, lightweight message bus system that allows applications to communicate with each other. Select this option to generate a D-Bus message on the session bus whenever a new message arrives.
Show icon in the notification area:
Select this option to display a new mail icon in the notification area when a new message arrives. You have two options to select from:
Blinking icon in the notification area:
Select this option to make the new mail icon blink in the notification area on arrival of a new message.
Popup message together with the icon:
Select this option to make the new message pop up along with the new mail icon.
Play sound when new messages arrive:
You have two options to select from:
Beep:
Select this option to play a beep sound on the arrival of a new message.
Play sound file:
Select this option to play a sound file of your choice on the arrival of a new message.
To specify the sound file you want to play:
Click None to open the Select Sound File browser window.
Browse to find the sound file of your choice.
Click Open to select the sound file.
Click Play to listen to the file.
Vertical View Versus Classical View
Evolution provides a vertical view in addition to the classical view. In the vertical view, the message preview pane is located at the right side of the message list when compared to the classical view where the message preview pane is placed below the message list. Vertical view enables you to use the extra width of wide screen monitors.
Vertical View:
To switch to vertical view, click View &gt; Preview &gt; Vertical View.
In vertical view, the message list contains double lines of compressed headers, which enables you to consume the extra width in the preview column. The compressed columns have Sender Name and Email, Attachment Icon, Date and Subject in the second line.
Classical View:
To switch to classical view, click View &gt; Preview &gt; Classical View.
Collapsible Message Headers
Evolution compresses the TO, CC and BCC headers of received mail and shows only limited addresses. You can set the limit of the number of addresses to be displayed in the preview pane.
Use the following procedure to set the limit of addresses to be displayed:
Select Edit &gt; Preferences.
Select Mail Preferences.
Check
Enter the limit in the field.
You can expand the message headers by clicking the
Sharing Mailboxes with Other Mail Programs
If you want to use Evolution and another email client, such as Mutt, at the same time, use the following procedure:
Download your mail in the other application as you would normally.
In Evolution:
Select the account you want to use to share mail and click Edit. Instead of Edit, you might want to create a new account just for this source of mail by clicking New.
Under the Receiving Mail tab, select the type of mail file that your other mail application uses, then specify the full path to that location. A typical choice would be mbox files, with the path /home/
You can only use one mail client at a time. The mail files are locked by the mail program that is currently using them, so the mail files can't be accessed by any other mail program.
Working with Attachments and HTML Mail
If someone sends you an
Saving or Opening Attachments
If you get an email message with an attachment, Evolution can help you save the attachment or open it with the appropriate applications.
Evolution shows a right-arrow icon, the number of attachments, and a Save or Save All button to save all the attachments. Click the right-arrow icon to show the attachment bar.
To save an attachment to disk:
Click the down-arrow on the attachment icon or right-click the attachment icon in the attachment bar.
Click Save As.
Select a location and name for the file.
To open an attachment using another application:
Select the application to open the attachment.
The options available for an attachment vary depending on the type of attachment and the applications your system has installed. For example, attached word processor files can be opened in OpenOffice.org or another word processor, and compressed archive files can be opened in the File Roller application.
Inline Images in HTML Mail
When someone sends you HTML mail that includes an image in the body of the message (for example, the welcome message in your Inbox), Evolution displays the image inside the message. You can create messages like this by using the Insert Image tool in the message composer. Alternately, just drag an image into the message composition area.
Some images are links in a message, rather than being part of the message. Evolution can download those images from the Internet, but does not do so unless you request it. This is because remotely hosted images can be slow to load and display, and can even be used by spammers to track who reads the email. Not automatically loading images helps protect your privacy.
To load the images for one message, click View &gt; Load Images.
To set the default action for loading images:
Select Edit &gt; Preferences, then select Mail Preferences.
Click the HTML Mail tab.
Select one of the items: Never Load Images Off the Net, Load Images in Mail From Contacts, or Always Load Images Off the Net.
Click Close.
Using Evolution for News
USENET newsgroups are similar to mail, so it is often convenient to read news and mail side by side. You can add a news source, called an NNTP server, the same way you would add
When you create a newsgroup account, you are not subscribed to any groups. To subscribe to a newsgroup:
Click Folder &gt; Subscriptions.
Select your NNTP account, select the groups you want to subscribe to, then click Subscribe.
Deleting Mail
Evolution allows you to delete unwanted messages. To delete a message, select it and press the Delete key, or click the Delete button in the toolbar, or press Ctrl+D, or right-click the message, then click Delete.
When you press Delete or click the Trash folder, your mail is not actually deleted, but is marked for deletion. Your email is recoverable until you have expunged your mail. When you expunge a folder, you remove all the mail that you have marked for deletion. To show deleted messages, uncheck Hide Deleted Messages option from the View menu. You can view the messages striken off for later deletion. You can also find deleted messages in your Trash folder.
To permanently erase all the deleted messages in a folder, click Folder &gt; Expunge or press Ctrl+E.
Trash folders in GroupWise, local and IMAP accounts are actually virtual search folders that display all messages you have marked for later deletion. Hence, emptying Trash is nothing but expunging deleted mail from all your folders in the account.
However, this is not true for the Trash folder on Exchange servers, which behaves just the same as it does in Outlook. It is a normal folder with actual messages in it. For more information about search folders, see
Undeleting Messages
You can undelete a message that has been deleted but not expunged. To undelete a message, select the message, click Edit &gt; Undelete. Note that View &gt; Hide Deleted messages in the menubar must be disabled for this.
If you have marked a message for deletion, undeleting it unmarks it, and the message is removed from the Trash folder.
You can start writing a new email message by clicking File &gt; New &gt; Mail Message, by pressing Ctrl+N when in the mail tool, or by clicking New in the toolbar.
Enter an address in the To field. If you want to enter multiple email addresses, type in the addresses separated by comma. You can also use a contact list to send messages to multiple recipients. Enter a subject in the Subject field, and a message in the box at the bottom of the window. After you have written your message, click Send.
New mail message window look like this:
This section contains the following topics:
Unicode, ASCII, and Non-Latin Alphabets
Sending Composed Messages Later
Working Offline
Attachments
Specifying Additional Recipients for Email
Choosing Recipients Quickly
Replying to Email Messages
Searching and Replacing with the Composer
Enhancing Your Email with HTML
Mail Send Options
Forwarding Mail
Tips for Email Courtesy
If you want to write in a non-Latin alphabet while using a Latin keyboard, try selecting a different input method in the message composer. Right-click in the message composition area and select an input method from the Input Methods menu, then begin typing. The actual keys vary by language and input style. For example, the Cyrillic input method uses transliterated Latin keyboard combinations to get the Cyrillic alphabet, combining letters where necessary.
For greater language display capabilities, click Edit &gt; Preferences, then select the character set choices in the Mail Preferences and Composer Preferences sections. If you aren't sure which one to use, select UTF-8, which offers the greatest range of character displays for the greatest range of languages.
Using Character Sets
A character set is a computer's version of an alphabet. In the past, the ASCII character set was used almost universally. However, it contains only 128 characters, meaning it is unable to display characters in Cyrillic, Kanjii, or other non-Latin alphabets. To work around language display problems, programmers developed a variety of methods, so many human languages now have their own specific character sets, and items written in other character sets display incorrectly. Eventually, standards organizations developed the UTF-8 Unicode* character set to provide a single compatible set of codes for everyone.
Most email messages state in advance which character set they use, so Evolution usually can display those messages correctly. However, if you find that messages are displayed as rows of incomprehensible characters, try selecting a different character set in the mail settings screen. If your recipients can't read your messages, try selecting a different character set in the composer options dialog box. For some languages, such as Turkish or Korean, it might work best for you to select the language-specific character set. However, the best choice for most users is UTF-8, which offers the widest range of characters for the widest range of languages.
Custom Header
To enable the Custom Header plugin:
Select Edit &gt; Plugins.
Then select Custom Header. You can configure custom headers to set sensitivity and caveats to the outgoing messages.
In the Plugin Manager, select the Configuration tab to customize your header fields. You can add, edit, or remove the header fields. For every header field you add, you can specify the keys and values. The key is used as the title of the Custom Header. You can enter multiple values for the keys. You must use a semicolon to separate every value you enter.
Select New &gt; Mail Message or Shift+Ctrl+M to open a Compose Message window.
Select Insert &gt; Custom Header to open the Email Custom Header window.
In the Email Custom Header window, you can view all the header fields and values you add.
Set the values for the header fields by using the respective drop-down list.
Evolution normally sends mail as soon as you click Send. However, can save a message to be sent later:
If you are offline when you click Send, Evolution adds your message to the Outbox queue. The next time you connect to the Internet and send or receive mail, that message is sent.
Click File &gt; Save Draft to store your messages in the Drafts folder for later revision.
If you prefer to save your message as a text file, click File &gt; Save As, then specify a filename.
Offline mode helps you communicate with remote mail storage systems like
POP mail downloads all messages to your local system, but other connections usually download just the headers, and get the rest only when you want to read the message. Before you go offline, Evolution downloads the unread messages from the folders you have chosen to store.
To mark a folder for offline use,
Right-click the folder, then click Properties.
Click Copy Folder Content Locally for Offline Operation.
Your connection status is shown by the small icon in the lower left corner of the Evolution main window. When you are online, it displays two connected cables. When you go offline, the cables separate.
To cache your selected folders and disconnect from the network,
Click File &gt; Work Offline, or click the connection status icon in the lower left of the screen.
A message pops up and asks you whether you want to go offline immediately or synchronize folders locally before you go offline.
Click Synchronize to download all the messages to the folders marked for offline.
Or
Click Do not synchronize to go offline immediately, without downloading the messages locally for offline operations.
Select Do not show this message again to switch off this popup. The default is to not synchronize while going offline.
When you want to reconnect, click File &gt; Work Online, or click the connection status icon again.
Download Messages for Offline Operations
This features prepares you for going offline and for offline operations. It helps you download all the messages locally before you go offline. If otherwise, by default, it goes offline when you click the offline button without downloading the message.
To download messages for offline operations, select File &gt; Download messages for offline.
Automatic Network State Handling
Evolution automatically understands the network state and acts accordingly. For instance, Evolution switches to offline mode when the network goes down and automatically switches on when the network is up again. Ensure that your system has Network Manager installed on to enable this feature.
To attach a file to your email:
Click the Attach button in the composer.
Select the file you want to attach.
You can also drag a file to the attachment bar of the composer window. If you want to send it as an inline attachment, right-click the attachment and click Properties, then select Automatic Display of Attachments.
When you send the message, a copy of the attached file goes with it. Be aware that large attachments can take a long time to send and receive.
Attachment Reminder
Evolution has an Attachment Reminder plugin you can use to remind yourself to attach a file to an email. If it determines that you have not attached the file, it displays the following message:
Click Continue Editing to attach the missing file, or click Send to send the message without any attachment.
To enable the Attachment Reminder:
Select Edit &gt; Plugins &gt; Attachment Reminder.
Click Configuration, then make sure that Remind Missing Attachments is selected.
Click Add, then enter keywords such as
Based on the keywords you have added here, it searches every mail you are sending. If it finds the keywords such as
To edit any of the existing keywords, select the keyword, click Edit, then modify the word as desired.

Addresses on the Bcc: list are hidden from the other recipients of the message. You can use it to send mail to large groups of people, especially if they don't know each other or if privacy is a concern. If your Bcc: field is absent, click View &gt; Bcc Field.
If you frequently write email to the same groups of people, you can create address lists in the contacts tool, and then send them mail as though they have a single address. To learn how to do that, see
Evolution allows you to specify the Reply-To header in an email. To do this:
Open a compose window.
Open the Reply-To field by clicking View &gt; Reply To.
Specify the address you want as the Reply-To address in the new Reply-To field.
Complete the rest of your message.
Click Send.
Address auto-completion is enabled in Evolution by default when you create contacts. Evolution makes it easy for you to quickly fill in the address field without having to remember the email address of recipients. You can type nicknames or other portions of address data in the address field and Evolution will display a drop-down list of possible address completions from your contacts. If you type a name or nickname that can go with more than one card, Evolution opens a dialog box to ask you which person you meant.
If Evolution does not complete addresses automatically, click Edit &gt; Preferences, then click Autocompletion. Then, select the address book you want to use for address autocompletion in the mailer.
Alternately, you can click the To:, Cc:, or Bcc: buttons to get a list of the email addresses in your contacts. Select addresses and click the arrows to move them into the appropriate address columns.
For more information about using email with the contact manager and the calendar, see
To reply to a message, select the message to reply to in the message list and click the Reply button in the toolbar, or right-click within the message and select Reply to Sender. This opens the message composer. The To: and Subject: fields are already filled, although you can alter them if you prefer. In addition, the full text of the old message is inserted into the new message, either in grey with a blue line on one side (for HTML display) or with the &gt; character before each line (in plain text mode), to indicate that it is part of the previous message.
If you're reading a message with several recipients, you can use Reply to All instead of Reply. If there are large numbers of people in the Cc: or To: fields, this can save substantial amounts of time.
Using the Reply To All Feature
Susan sends an email to a client and sends copies to Tim and to an internal company mailing list of co-workers. If Tim wants to make a comment for all of them to read, he uses Reply to All, but if he just wants to tell Susan that he agrees with her, he uses Reply. His reply does not reach anyone that Susan put on her Bcc list, because that list is not shared with anyone.
If you subscribe to a mailing list, and want your reply to go just to the list rather than to the sender, select Reply to List instead of Reply or Reply to All.
Keyboard shortcuts
Tools
Shortcuts
Reply to Sender
Ctrl+R
Reply to List
Clrl+L
Reply to All
Shift+Ctrl+R
Forward
Ctrl+F
The message composer makes several text searching features available to you.
Find:
Enter a word or phrase, and Evolution finds it in your message.
Find Regex:
You can search for a complex pattern of characters, called a
Find Again:
Select this item to repeat the last search you performed.
Replace:
Find a word or phrase, and replace it with something else.
For all of these menu items, you can choose whether to search backwards in the document from the point where your cursor is. You can also determine whether the search is to be case sensitive in determining a match.
Normally, you can't set text styles or insert pictures in email. However, most newer email programs can display images and text styles in addition to basic alignment and paragraph formatting. They do this with
Some people do not have HTML-capable mail clients, or prefer not to receive HTML-enhanced mail because it is slower to download and display. Because of this, Evolution sends plain text unless you explicitly ask for HTML.
Basic HTML Formatting
You can change the format of an email message from plain text to HTML by choosing Format &gt; HTML from the menu bar.
To send all your mail as HTML by default, set your mail format preferences in the mail configuration dialog box. See
HTML formatting tools are located in the toolbar just above the space where you actually compose the message. They also appear in the Insert and Format menus.
The icons in the toolbar are explained in
Headers and Lists:
At the left edge of the toolbar, you can choose Normal for a default text style or Header 1 through Header 6 for varying sizes of header from large (1) to tiny (6). Other styles include preformat, to use the HTML tag for preformatted blocks of text, and three types of bullet points for lists.
For instance, instead of using asterisks to mark a bulleted list, you can use the Bulleted List style from the style drop-down list. Evolution uses different bullet styles, and handles word wrap and multiple levels of indentation.
Text Styles:
Use these buttons to determine the way your email looks. If you have text selected, the style applies to the selected text. If you do not have text selected, the style applies to whatever you type next.
Button
TT
Typewriter text, which is approximately the same as the Courier monospace font.
Bold A
Bolds the text.
Italic A
Italicizes the text.
Underlined A
Underlines the text.
Strike through A
Marks a line through the text.
Alignment:
Located next to the text style buttons, the three paragraph icons should be familiar to users of most word processing software. The left-most button aligns your text to the left, the center button centers text, and the right button aligns the text to the right.
Indentation Rules:
The button with the arrow pointing left decreases a paragraph's indentation, and the right arrow increases its indentation.
Color Selection:
At the far right is the color section tool, where a box displays the current text color. To choose a new color, click the arrow button to the right. If you have text selected, the color applies to the selected text. If you do not have text selected, the color applies to whatever you type next. You can select a background color or image by right-clicking the message background, then selecting Style &gt; Page Style.
Advanced HTML Formatting
Under the Insert menu, there are several more items you can use to style your email. To use these and other HTML formatting tools, make sure you have enabled HTML mode by using Format &gt; HTML from the menu bar.
Inserting a Link
Use the Insert a Link tool to put hyperlinks in your HTML messages. If you don't want special link text, you can just enter the address directly, and Evolution recognizes it as a link.
Select the text you want to link from.
Right-click in the text, then click Insert Link.
Type the URL in the URL field.
Inserting an Image
Click Insert &gt; Image in the menubar.
Browse to and select the image file.
Inserting a Rule
You can insert a horizontal line into the text to help divide two sections:
Click Insert &gt; Rule in the menubar.
Select the width, size, and alignment.
Select Shade if necessary.
Inserting a Table
You can insert a table into the text:
Click Insert &gt; Table in the menubar.
Select the number of rows and columns.
Select the type of layout for the table.
Select a background for the table.
To insert a picture for the background, click the filechooser button and select the desired image.
You can set the following options when sending mail in Evolution.
Read Receipts:
Evolution allows you to request a receipt for your sent messages to indicate when your message is being viewed by the recipient. Receipts are useful when sending email that is time-sensitive. To request a receipt, click Insert &gt; Request Read Receipt in the composer window.
Prioritize Message:
You can prioritize a message to be sent, so that the recipient sees its relative importance.To prioritize a message, click Insert &gt; Prioritize Message in the composer window.
Evolution will ignore the message priority, because it assumes that the recipient should decide whether the message is important or not.
Default Settings
Evolution allows you to change the default settings. You can organize your Draft folder and Sent folder, set the addresses to which you want to sent carbon copies and blind carbon copies to. You can also change the settings for message receipts.
To change your default settings,
Select the mail account whose settings you want to change.
Click Edit to open the Account Editor.
Click the Default tab.
Click the respective check boxes and enter the email addresses you want to always CC and BCC.
Select the desired option for send message receipts from the drop-down list.
Changing Default Folder for Sent and Draft Items
By default, all the sent messages directly go to the Sent folder and those messages marked as drafts are saved in the Drafts folder. To change the default setting for draft items,
Click the Drafts button to open the folder selection window.
Select the folder you want to save drafts to.
Click the Revert button to revert back to previous settings.
To change the default folder for sent items,
Click the Sent button to open the folder selection window.
Select the desired folder for sent items.
When you receive an email, you can forward it to other individuals or groups that might be interested. You can forward a message as an attachment to a new message (this is the default) or you can send it
To forward a message you are reading:
Click Forward on the toolbar.
If you prefer to forward the message
Select an addressee as you would when sending a new message; the subject is already entered, although you can alter it if you want.
Add your comments on the message in the composition frame
Attachments to a message you are forwarding are forwarded only when you send the original message as an attachment. Inline messages do not forward any attachments.
Don't forward chain letters. If you must, watch out for hoaxes and urban legends, and make sure the message doesn't have multiple layers of greater-than signs (gt;), indicating multiple layers of careless in-line forwarding.
Always begin and close with a salutation. Say
WRITING IN CAPITAL LETTERS MEANS YOU'RE SHOUTING! Don't write a whole message in capital letters. It hurts people's ears.
Check your spelling and use complete sentences. By default, Evolution puts a red line beneath words it doesn't recognize, as you type them.
Don't send nasty emails (flames). If you get one, don't write back.
When you reply or forward, include enough of the previous message to provide context.
Don't send spam.
A message template is a standard message that you can use at any time to send mail with the same pattern. Evolution allows you to create and edit message templates.
Creating a Message Template from an Existing Message
Saving a New Message as a Template
Using a Message Template as a Reply
Configuring Message Templates
To enable the Message Template Plugin:
Select Edit &gt; Plugins, then select Templates.
Select the message.
Right-click &gt; Move to folder / Copy to folder.
Select the Template local folder.
You can also edit an existing message and save it as a template.
Open the message and click Reply.
Edit the message body or the addresses according to your requirements.
Select File &gt; Save as Template.
Click New and enter the information in the New Message window, according to your requirements.
Right-click the message you are replying to, then click Templates.
This option lists all the message templates in the Template folder.
Select Open the message template of your choice and make changes if required.
When you select a message template for replying, the subject of the reply is preserved.
In the Plugin Manager, select the Configuration tab to customize your message templates. You can add, edit or remove the key-value pairs. You can specify any number of key-value pairs.
In any template, the occurrence of every $key is replaced by the value it has in the configuration. For example, if you set the key to Manager and the value to Harry, any occurrence of $Manager is replaced by Harry in the message.
Assume that you have 1000 message templates with your current manager's name has a reference in them. When the current manager is replaced by a new one, it's not easy for you to manually replace the manager's name in all the 1000 messages. If the messages have a $Manager key value, you can reset the value in the Configuration tab of this plugin.
By default, the entire environment variables are used as a key-value pair. An occurrence of $env_variable is replaced by the value it carries. For example, an occurrence of $PATH in your template is replaced by its value when the template is used.
The replacement process uses the following order of precedence:
$key is replaced by the value set for it in the Configuration tab of the Templates plugin.
If the key is not found, it is then replaced with the value of its environment variable.
If key is neither a configuration option nor an environment variable, no changes are made.
If you create an event in the calendar component, you can then send invitations to the attendee list through the Evolution email tool. The invitation card is sent as an attachment in iCal format.
To send an invitation, right click on the calendar item and click Forward as iCalendar.
When you receive an invitation, you have several options:
Accept:
Indicates you will attend the meeting. When you click the OK button, the meeting is entered into your calendar.
Tentatively Accept:
Indicates you will probably attend the meeting. When you click the OK button, the meeting is entered into your calendar, but is marked as tentative.
Decline:
Indicates you are unable to attend the meeting. The meeting is not entered into your calendar when you click OK, although your response is sent to the meeting host if you have selected the Send reply to sender option.
Send reply to sender:
Select this option if you want your response sent to the meeting organizers.
Because IMAP folders exist on the server, and opening them or checking them takes time, you need fine-grained control over the way that you use IMAP folders. You use the IMAP subscriptions manager to do this. If you prefer to have every mail folder displayed, you can select that option as well. However, if you want to choose specific items in your mailbox, and exclude others, you can use the subscription management tool to do that.
Select Folder &gt; Subscriptions.
If you have accounts on multiple IMAP servers, select the server where you want to manage your subscriptions.
Evolution displays a list of available files and folders.
Select a file or folder by clicking it.
You should select at least the Inbox folder. Depending upon the way your IMAP server is configured, the list of available files might include non-mail folders. If it does, you can ignore them.
Enable the corresponding checkbox to add a folder to the subscribed list.
When you have subscribed to the folders you want, close the window.
To protect and encode your email transmissions, Evolution offers two encryption methods:
GPG Encryption
S/MIME Encryption
Evolution helps you protect your privacy by using GNU Privacy Guard (GPG), an implementation of strong
In order to send and receive encrypted emails using GPG, it is necessary to use two kinds of encryption keys: public and private. Public keys are used to encrypt messages and private keys to decrypt them. To send encrypted email, you must have the recepient's public key, which is used to encrypt the message. The recipient then uses his/her private key to decrypt (and read) the encrypted message.
Those who wish to send you encrypted email must first have a copy of your public key on your keyring. To this end, public keys can be shared with those who want to send encrypted messages to you. In order to do this, you may place your public key on a public key server. Private keys should not be shared with others.
Evolution does not support older versions of PGP, such as OpenPGP and Inline PGP.
You can use encryption in two different ways:
You can encrypt the entire message, so that nobody but the recipient can read it.
You can attach an encrypted signature to a plain text message, so that the recipient can read the message without decrypting it, and needs decrypting only to verify the sender's identity.
For example, suppose that Kevin wants to send an encrypted message to his friend Rachel. He looks up her public key on a general key server, and then tells Evolution to encrypt the message. The message now reads
Making a GPG Encryption Key
Before you can get or send encrypted mail, you need to generate your public and private keys with GPG. This procedure covers version 1.2.4 of GPG. If your version is different, these steps might vary slightly. You can find out your version number by entering
Open a terminal and enter
Select an algorithm, then press Enter.
To accept the default algorithm of DSA and ElGamal, press Enter (recommended).
Select a key length, then press Enter. To accept the default, 1024 bits, press Enter.
Enter how long your key should be valid for.
To accept the default of no expiration, press Enter, then press Y when you are prompted to verify the selection.
Type your real name, then press Enter.
Type your email address, then press Enter.
(Optional) Type a comment, then press Enter.
Review your selected user ID. If it is correct, press O.
Type a passphrase, then press Enter.
Move your mouse randomly to generate the keys.
After the keys are generated, you can view your key information by entering
GPG creates one list, or keyring, for your public keys and one for your private keys. All the public keys you know are stored in the file ~/.gnupg/pubring.gpg. If you want to give other people your key, send them that file.
If you want, you can upload your keys to a key server.
Check your public key ID with gpg--list-keys. It is the string after
Enter the command
Key servers store your public keys for you so that your friends can decrypt your messages. If you choose not to use a key server, you can manually send your public key, include it in your signature file, or put it on your own Web page. However, it is easier to publish a key once, and then let people download it from a central place when they want.
If you don't have a key to unlock or encrypt a message, you can set your encryption tool to look it up automatically. If it can't find the key, an error message appears.
Getting and Using GPG Public Keys
To send an encrypted message, you need to use the recipient's public key in combination with your private key. Evolution handles the encryption, but you need to get the public key and add it to your keyring.
To get public keys from a public key server, enter the command
The domain
To avoid this, type
If someone sends you a public key directly, save it as a plain text file and enter the command
Setting up GPG Encryption
Select the account you want to use securely, then click Edit.
Click the Security tab.
Specify your key ID in the PGP/GPG Key ID field.
Evolution requires that you know your key ID. If you don't remember it, you can find it by typing
Encrypting Messages
To encrypt a single message:
Open a Compose Message window.
Click Security &gt; PGP Encrypt.
Compose your message.
The Subject line of the message will not be encrypted and should not be used for sensitive information.
You can set Evolution to always sign your email messages:
Select Always Sign Outgoing Messages When Using This Account.
Unencrypting a Received Message
If you receive an encrypted message, you need to decrypt it before you read it. Remember, the sender must have your public key before they can send you an encrypted message.
When you view the message, Evolution prompts you for your PGP password. Enter it, and the unencrypted message is displayed.
S/MIME encryption also uses a key-based approach, but it has some significant advantages in convenience and security. S/MIME uses certificates, which are similar to keys. The public portion of each certificate is held by the sender of a message and by one of several certificate authorities, who are paid to guarantee the identity of the sender and the security of the message. Evolution already recognizes a large number of certificate authorities, so when you get a message with an S/MIME certificate, your system automatically receives the public portion of the certificate and decrypts or verifies the message.
S/MIME is used most often in corporate settings. In these cases, administrators supply certificates that they have purchased from a certificate authority. In some cases, an organization can act as its own certificate authority, with or without a guarantee from a dedicated authority such as VeriSign* or Thawte*. In either case, the system administrator provides you with a certificate file.
If you want to use S/MIME independently, you can extract an identification certificate from your Mozilla* or Netscape* Web browser. See the
The certificate file is a password-protected file on your computer.
Adding a Signing Certificate
Click Certificates.
Click Import.
Select the file to import, then click Open.
Similarly, you can add certificates that are sent to you independently of any authority by clicking the Contact Certificates tab and using the same import tool. You can also add new certificate authorities, which have their own certificate files, in the same way.
Signing or Encrypting Every Message
After you have added your certificate, you can sign or encrypt a message by clicking Security &gt; S/MIME Sign or S/MIME Encrypt in the message composer.
To have every message signed or encrypted:
Select the account to encrypt the messages in.
Click Edit, then click Security.
Click Select next to Signing Certificate and specify the path to your signing certificate.
Click Select next to Encryption Certificate and specify the path to your encryption certificate.
Select the appropriate options.
Whether you only get a few email messages a day, or you receive hundreds, you probably want to sort and organize them.
Importing Your Old Email
Sorting the Message List
Getting Organized with Folders
Searching for Messages
Create Rules to Automatically Organize Mail
Using Search Folders
Stopping Junk Mail (Spam)
Evolution allows you to import old email and contacts so that you don't need to worry about losing your old information.
Importing Single Files
Evolution can import the following types of files:
vCard (.vcf, .gcrd):
The address book format used by the GNOME, KDE, and many other contact management applications. You should be able to export to vCard format from any address book application.
vCalendar:
A format for storing calendar files, which is generally used by Evolution, Microsoft Outlook, Sunbird, and Korganizer.
iCalendar or iCal (.ics):
A format for storing calendar files. iCalendar is used by Palm OS handhelds, Evolution, and Microsoft Outlook.
Evolution/Mozilla/Outlook CSV/Tab (.csv, .tab):
CSV or Tab files saved by using Evolution, Microsoft Outlook and Mozilla.
Microsoft Outlook Express 4 (.mbx):
The email file format used by Microsoft Outlook Express 4. For other versions of Microsoft Outlook and Outlook Express, see the workaround described in
Personal Storage Table (.pst):
A file format used to store local copies of messages, calendar events, and other items within Microsoft software such as Microsoft Exchange Client, Windows Messaging, and Microsoft Outlook.
LDAP Data Interchange Format (.LDIF):
A standard data format for contact cards.
Berkley Mailbox (.mbox or null extension):
The email format used by Mozilla, Netscape, Evolution, Eudora*, and many other email clients.
To import your old email:
Click File &gt; Import.
Select Import a Single File, then click Forward.
Browse and find the location to save the imported email, then click Forward.
Select the file to import, then click Forward.
Importing Multiple Files
Evolution automates the import process for several applications it can recognize.
Select Import Data and Settings From Older Programs, then click Forward.
Follow the steps
Evolution searches for old mail programs and, if possible, imports the data from them.
One migration method that works well is to use the Outport application. See
While in Windows, import your .pst files into Mozilla Mail (or another mail program such as Netscape or Eudora that uses the standard mbox format).
Copy the files to the system or partition that Evolution is installed on.
Use the Evolution import tool to import the files.
For POP mail, filters are applied as messages are downloaded. For IMAP mail, filters are applied to new messages when you open the Inbox folder. On Exchange servers, filters are not applied until you select your Inbox folder and click Message &gt; Apply Filters, or press Ctrl+Y. To force your filters to act on all messages in the folder, select the entire folder by pressing Ctrl+A, then apply the filters by pressing Ctrl+Y.
Evolution helps you work by letting you sort your email. To sort by sender, subject, or date, click the bars with those labels at the top of the message list. The direction of the arrow next to the label indicates the direction of the sort. Click again, to sort them in reverse order. For example, click Date to sort messages by date from oldest to newest. Click again, and Evolution sorts the list from newest to oldest. You can also right-click the message header bars to get a set of sorting options, and to add to or remove columns from the message list.
To look at the complete headers for a message, click View &gt; All Message Headers. To see all message data, click View &gt; Message Source.
Sorting Mail In Email Threads
You can also choose a threaded message view. Click View &gt; Group By Threads to turn the threaded view on or off. When you select this option, Evolution groups the replies to a message with the original, so you can follow the thread of a conversation from one message to the next.
In a thread of conversation view, each new message is stacked below of the ones that arrived before it, so that the newest message is always the one you see first. Whenever a new message arrives to an old thread as a reply, you will see it below the parent message. You always see the thread based on the date of the recent message received. The threads are sorted by the date of most recent message in the threads.
There is a GConf key to toggle between the collapsed or expanded state of mail thread. By default, it is collapsed and you can change this at /apps/evolution/mail/display/thread_expand. If the value is set to false, expanded state is remembered. When you restart Evolution, all the threads are arranged to this state. This is a highly advanced option only for the advanced users.
Sorting Mail with Column Headers
The message list normally has columns to indicate whether a message has been read, whether it has attachments, how important it is, and the sender, date, and subject. You can change the column order, or add and remove columns by dragging and dropping them.
Sorting Mail With Column Headers
In addition to it, Evolution enables you to sort your messages by using Sort-by list. You can use any of the criteria given in the Sort-by list such as
To sort messages, perform the following procedure:
Right-click message header bar.
Click Sort by to get a list of options.
Sort by:
Sorts the message by different criteria as listed below:
Recipients
Sender
Location
Due By
Follow Up Flag
Flag Status
Size
To
Received
Date
Subject
From
Attachment
Score
Flagged
Status
Custom
Clicking each sort criteria cycles take you through three possibilities. Sort by criteria in ascending or descending order or unsort the message. When you click any of the sort criteria reiteratively, Evolution sorts the messages in a sequential order - ascending, descending and unsort. For example, when you click Recepients for the first time, Evolution sorts the messages by recipients in ascending order and for the second time, sorts in the reverse order. For the next click, messages will be displayed unsorted.
Sort Ascending:
Sorts the messages top to bottom and returns you the sorted message list in the order of oldest to the latest.
Sort Descending:
Sort descending reverts the order and returns you the sorted message list in the order of newest to oldest.
Unsort:
Unsort removes sorting from this column, reverting to the order of messages as they were added to the folder.
Removing a Column:
Remove this column from the display. You can also remove columns by dragging the header off the list and letting it drop.
Adding a Column:
When you select this item, a dialog box appears, listing the possible columns. Drag the column you want into a space between existing column headers. A red arrow shows where the column will be placed.
Best Fit:
Automatically adjusts the widths of the columns for the most efficient use of space.
Customizing the Current View:
Choose this item to pick a more complex sort order for messages, or to choose which columns of information about your messages you want to display.
Select the search criteria from the list.
You can view the messages in the desired order in the message list.
Using the Follow-Up Feature
To make sure you don't forget about a message, you can use the follow-up feature.
Select one or more messages.
Right-click one of the messages.
Click Mark for Follow Up.
You can also open the Flag to Follow Up window by
Selecting the messages.
Selecting the Message menu.
Clicking Mark as.
Selecting Follow Up or pressing Shift+Ctrl+G.
A window opens to allow you to set the type of flag and the due date.
The flag itself is the action you want to remind yourself about. Several are provided for you, such as Call, Forward and Reply, but you can enter your own note or action if you want.
After you have added a flag, you can mark it as complete or remove it entirely by right-clicking the message, then click either Flag Completed or Clear Flag.
When you read a flagged message, its flag status is displayed at the top, before the message headers. An overdue message might tell you
Flags can help you organize your work in a number of ways. For example, you might add a Flag Status column to your message list and sort that way. Alternately, you could create a search folder that displays all your flagged messages, then clear the flags when you're done, so the search folder contains only messages with upcoming deadlines.
Mark as Important Feature:
If you prefer a simpler way to remind yourself about messages, you can mark them as important by right-clicking the message, then click Mark as Important or select Message &gt; Mark as &gt; Important from the menubar.
Evolution, like most other mail systems, stores mail in folders. You start out with a few mail folders, such as Inbox, Outbox, and Drafts, but you can create as many as you like. Create new folders by clicking Folder &gt; New, or by right-clicking in the folder list and selecting New Folder.
When you click OK, your new folder appears in the folder view. You can then move the messages to it by dragging and dropping them, or right click on the message and choose Move to folder, or press Shift+Ctrl+V.
You can also drop the messages to a particular folder by selecting Message &gt; Move to folder. This will open the Select folder window, where you can drop your message to any of the folders listed.
If you want to create a new folder click New at the bottom left of the window. Specify the location and enter the label of the folder in the entry box appeared at the top. You can also move the messages from one folder to another by selecting the message and then press the Move button at the bottom right.
If you create a filter with the filter assistant, you can have mail filed automatically. Select Edit &gt; Message Filters to bring up the Message Filters window.
Click on the Add button to bring up the Add Rule window from where you can set different criteria for filtering messages. For additional information on filtering, see
The Inbox folder on most IMAP servers cannot contain both subfolders and messages. When you create additional folders on your IMAP mail server, branch them from the root of the IMAP account's folder tree, not from the Inbox. If you create subfolders in your Inbox folder, you lose the ability to read messages that exist in your Inbox until you move the folders out of the way.
Most email clients can search for messages for you, but Evolution does it differently and efficiently giving you faster search results with quick search, customized search and advanced search.
Quick Search:
Quick Search displays all the messages that match the built-in criteria you selected from the drop-down list at the top left side, just above the message list.
To perform a quick search:
Click the search icon
Select the search criteria from the list:
All Messages
Unread Messages
No Label
Important
Work
Personal
To do
Later
Read Messages
Recent Messages
Last 5 Days' Messages
Messages with Attachments
Important Messages
Messages Not Junk
Evolution displays the messages matching the criteria present in the shown message list
The following labels need not necessarily be the same as the default names listed here. You can change the name of these labels by selecting Edit &gt; Preferences &gt; Mail Preferences &gt; Colors.
Customized Search:
Evolution allows you to perform customized search. To search for a message:
Subject or Sender Contain:
Finds messages that contain the search text in the subject or sender. It does not search in the message body.
Recipients Contain:
Finds messages with the search text in the To: and Cc: headers.
Message Contains:
Searches the message body and all headers for the specified text.
Subject Contain:
Shows messages where the search text is in the subject line.
Sender Contain:
Finds messages whose From: header contains a match for your search text.
Body Contains:
Searches only in message text, not any other header.
Click the drop-down list to select the scope
Current Folder
Current Account
All Accounts
Current Message
Type the search string in the search entry and press Enter.
The folder list will be disabled while you perform search on All Accounts or Current Account.
Evolution shows your search results in the message list. You might want to create a search folder instead; see
To clear your search you can click the Clear icon in the search string field, or choose Search &gt; Clear from the menubar, or enter a blank search. You can also press Shift+Ctrl+Q to clear the search.
You can even perform a quick search on a customized search results as it just filters and displays the messages in the message list.
Advanced Search:
You can perform an advanced search based on any of the search types.
Select the Search menu.
Click Advanced Search to open the Advanced Search window.
Enter the Search name.
Click Add to add rules. For more information on rules, refer
Click Save to save your search results.
Save Search:
To save your search results other than from advanced search, select Search &gt; Save Search. You can view the label of your search results listed under Search menu.
Edit Saved Searches:
To edit your saved searches,
Select Search from the menu bar.
Click Edit Saved Searches to open the Searches window.
Click the Edit button to open the Edit Rule window.
You can also add or remove searches from the list by using the respective buttons available at the right.
Edit the title or search criteria from the dialog box.
Filters work very much like the mail room in a large company. Their purpose is to bundle, sort, and distribute mail to the various folders. In addition, you can have multiple filters performing multiple actions that might effect the same message in several ways. For example, your filters could put copies of one message into multiple folders, or keep one copy and send one to another person.
Creating New Filter Rules
Click Edit &gt; Message Filters.
Click Add.
Type a name for the filter in the Rule name field.
Define the criteria for the filter in the first section.
For each of the filter criteria, you must first select which parts of the message you want to filter:
Sender:
The sender's email address or the name of the sender.
Recipient:
The recipients of the message.
Subject:
The subject line of the message.
Specific Header:
Any header including custom ones.
If a message uses a header more than once, Evolution pays attention only to the first instance, even if the message defines the header differently the second time. For example, if a message declares the Resent-From: header as
Message Body:
Searches in the actual text of the message.
Expression:
(For programmers only) Match a message according to an expression you write in the Scheme language used to define filters in Evolution.
Date Sent:
Filters messages according to the date on which they were sent. First, choose the conditions you want a message to meet, such as before a given time or after a given time. Then choose the time. The filter compares the message's time stamp to the system clock when the filter is run, or to a specific time and date you choose from a calendar. You can also have it look for a message within a range of time relative to the filter, such as two to four days ago.
Date Received:
This works the same way as the Date Sent option, except that it compares the time you received the message with the dates you specify.
Label:
Messages can have labels of Important, Work, Personal, To Do, or Later. You can set labels with other filters or manually.
Score:
Sets the message score to any whole number greater than 0. You can have one filter set or change a message score, and then set up another filter to move the messages you have scored. A message score is not based on anything in particular: it is simply a number you can assign to messages so other filters can process them.
Size:
Sorts based on the size of the message in kilobytes.
Status:
Filters according to the status of a message. The status can be Replied To, Draft, Important, Read, or Junk.
Flagged:
Checks whether the message is flagged for follow-up.
Attachments:
Creates a filter based on whether there is an attachment for the email.
Mailing List
Filters based on the mailing list the message came from. This filter might miss messages from some list servers, because it checks for the X-BeenThere header, which is used to identify mailing lists or other redistributors of mail. Mail from list servers that do not set X-BeenThere properly are not be caught by these filters.
Regex Match:
If you know your way around a
Source Account:
Filters messages according the server you got them from. This is most useful if you use multiple POP mail accounts.
Pipe to Program:
Evolution can use an external command to process a message, then process it based on the return value. Commands used in this way must return an integer. This is most commonly used to add an external junk mail filter.
Junk Test:
Filters based on the results of the junk mail test.
Select the Criteria for the Condition:
If you want multiple criteria for this filter, click Add and repeat step 4.
Select the Actions for the Filter in the Then Section:
Select any of the following options.
Move to Folder:
Moves the message into a folder you specify.
Copy to Folder:
Puts a copy of the message into a folder you specify.
Marks the message for deletion. The message can be undeleted until you expunge or empty the trash.
Stop Processing:
Select this if you want to all other filters ignore this message. Note that only filters listed after this particular rule will be ignored.
Assign Color:
Marks the message with a color of your choice.
Assign Score:
Assigns the message a numeric score.
Adjust Score:
Changes the numeric score by the amount you set.
Set Status:
Sets the status of the message. The status can be Replied To, Draft, Important, Read, or Junk.
Unset Status:
If the message has a status value, unsets it. If a status value is not set, it does nothing.
Makes the system beep.
Play Sound:
Select a sound file for Evolution to play.
Sends the message to a program of your choice. No return value is expected. This feature can be used to create automatic Web postings from email messages or to perform additional message post processing not supported by Evolution.
Run Program:
Evolution runs an application.
Click Add if you need multiple actions and click OK.
There is an easy shortcut for fast filter or search folder creation:
Right-click the message in the message list.
Select one of the items under the Create Rule From Message submenu.
Creating a rule based on a message opens the filter creation tool with some of the information about the message already filled in for your convenience.
If you have several filters that match a single message, they are all applied to the message in order, unless one of the filters has the Stop Processing action. If you use that action in a filter, the messages that it affects are not touched by other filters.
When you first open the Filters window, you are shown the list of filters sorted in the order in which they will be applied. You can move them up and down in the priority list by clicking the Up and Down buttons.
Editing Filters
Select the filter to edit, then click Edit.
Make the desired corrections, then click OK twice.
Deleting Filters
Select the filter to remove, then click Remove.
If filters aren't flexible enough, or you find yourself performing the same search again and again, consider a search folder. Search folders are an advanced way of viewing your email messages within Evolution. If you get a lot of mail or often forget where you put messages, search folders can help you keep things organized.
A search folder is really a hybrid of all the other organizational tools: it looks like a folder, it acts like a search, and you set it up like a filter. In other words, a conventional folder actually contains messages, but a search folder is a view of messages that might be in several different folders. The messages it contains are determined on the fly using a set of criteria you choose in advance.
As messages that meet the search folder criteria arrive or are deleted, Evolution automatically adjusts the search folder contents. When you delete a message, it is erased from the folder in which it actually exists, as well as any search folders that display it.
The Unmatched Search Folder is the opposite of other search folders: it displays all messages that do not appear in other search folders.
If you use remote email storage like IMAP or Microsoft Exchange, and have created search folders to search through them, the Unmatched Search Folder also searches the remote folders. If you do not create any search folders that search remote mail stores, the Unmatched Search Folder does not search in them either.
As an example of using folders, searches, and search folders, consider the following: To organize his mailbox, Jim sets up a search folder for email from his friend and co-worker Anna. He has another search folder for messages that have novell.com in the address and Evolution in the subject line, so he can keep a record of what people from work send him about Evolution. If Anna sends him a message about anything other than Evolution, it only shows up in the
Creating A Search Folder
Click Message &gt; Create Rule, then select a search folder based on Subject, Sender, Recipient, or Mailing List.
Select Search &gt; Create Search Folder From Search.
Perform this operation from the search results. Create a search folder from search is enabled only when you already have performed a search.
Select Edit &gt; Search Folder
Type the name of the search folder in the Search name field.
Select your search criteria. For each criterion, you must first select which of the following parts of the message you want the search to examine. The criteria are almost similar to those for filters.
Sender's address.
Recipients:
Expression (for programmers only):
Match a message according to an expression you write in the Scheme language used to define filters in Evolution.
Follow Up:
Mailing List:
Match all:
Checks whether the message matchs all the criteria listed.
Select which folders will be used for the search folder. Your options are:
All local folders:
Uses all local folders for the search folder source in addition to individual folders that are selected.
All active remote folders:
Remote folders are considered active if you are connected to the server; you must be connected to your mail server for the search folder to include any messages from that source in addition to individual folders that are selected.
All local and active remote folders:
Uses all local and active remote folders for the search folder source in addition to individual folders that are selected.
Specific folders only:
Uses individual folders for the search folder source.
If you select Specific folders only,
click Add button to open the Select folder window.
Select the folder and press Add button.
You can view the folder added to the list in the entry box at the bottom of the New Search Folder window.
Evolution can check for junk mail for you. Evolution uses SpamAssassin and/or Bogofilter with trainable Bayesian filters to perform the spam check. When the software detects mail that appears to be junk mail, it will flag it and hide it from your view. Messages that are flagged as junk mail are displayed only in the Junk folder.
The junk mail filter can learn which kinds of mail are legitimate and which are not if you train it. When you first start using junk mail blocking, check the Junk folder to be sure that legitimate mail doesn't get flagged as junk mail. If legitimate mail is incorrectly flagged, remove it from the Junk folder by right-clicking it and selecting Mark as Not Junk or pressing Shift+Ctrl+J. If Evolution misses junk mail, right-click the message, then click Mark as Junk or press Ctrl+J. When you correct it, the filter can recognize similar messages in the future, and becomes more accurate as time goes on.
Every filter needs to learn at the least 100 spam and 100 ham to start working. For that, you must mark each message manually by clicking the
To change your junk mail filtering preferences, click Edit &gt; Preferences, then click Mail Preferences.
For additional information on junk content, see
For additional junk mail settings, see
SpamAssassin is an application that scans through the mail box to find junk mail. Evolution uses SpamAssassin as the default spam-filtering application. For more information, see
Bogofilter is a mail filter that classifies mail as spam or ham (non-spam) by a statistical analysis of the message's header and content (body). It is able to learn from the user's classifications and corrections. For more information on Bogofilter, see
This section shows you how to use the
Contacts and Cards
Searching for Contacts
Organizing your Contacts
LDAP: Shared Address Books on a Network
Send Me a Card: Adding New Cards Quickly
Contacts are the individuals you have chosen to add to your address book so you can keep track of information about them and send email to them. In Evolution, an individual contact is called a card. For more information on organizing your contacts see
The Contact Editor
If you want to add or change cards, use the contact editor. You can edit email addresses, telephone numbers, mailing addresses and all other contact information you have entered for a particular contact.
The contact editor window has three tabs:
Contact:
Contains basic contact information.
Personal Information:
Contains a more specific description of the person, including URLs for calendar and free/busy information.
Mailing Address:
Contains the individual's mailing address.
You can also use the Forward Contact menu item in the Action menu, which opens a new message with the card already attached, or Send Message to Contact, which opens a new message to the contact's email address.
You can add a card from within an email message or calendar appointment. In an open email, right-click any email address or message, and click Add to Address Book or select Add Sender to Address Book from the Message menu.
Most of the items in the contact editor simply display the information you enter, but some of them have additional features:
Full Name:
Specify the name of your contact here. You can type a name into the Full Name field, but you can also click the Full Name button to bring up a small dialog box with text boxes for first and last names, titles like
Where:
Select one of your address books as the location for this contact. You might not be able to write to all available address books, especially those on a network.
Categories:
Click the Categories button to select categories for this card. If you assign contact categories, you can then search for contacts using those categories. For more information on contact categories, see
Free/Busy and Calendar URLs:
Click the Personal Information tab to enter Web addresses for the contact. If the contact publishes free/busy or calendar data online, using a server other than Exchange or GroupWise, you can specify the addresses for those servers here. After you do so, you can check their schedules when creating appointments in the calendar.
Creating and Editing Contacts
Follow the steps given below to create a new card.
Click File &gt; New &gt; Contact.
Enter the contact information to the entry boxes provided.
If you want to change a card that already exists,
Go to the Contacts window by selecting View &gt; Window &gt; Contacts from the menubar.
Double click on the card you want to edit.
Edit the information in the Contact Editor window.
You can also edit the contact information from the preview pane.
Right click on the address from Message Header.
Select Add to Address Book to bring up the Contact Quick-Add window.
Press the Edit Full button at the bottom left to bring up the Contact Editor window.
Google Contacts
Evolution allows you to access your Google Address Book. You can view the Google contacts offline and create, modify and delete the contacts online.
To configure your Google Address Book in Evolution contacts:
Click File &gt; New &gt; Address Book.
Select Google from the Type drop-down list.
Specify a name for the address book.
Select or deselect the following options and provide the username for the Google account:
Mark as default address book:
Select this option to make the Google address book as your default address book.
Copy book content locally for offline operations:
Select this option to copy the address book to your machine so you can access the contacts even when you are not connected to the network.
Username:
Specify your username for your Google account.
Use SSL:
Select Use SSL to enable a secure connection between Evolution and the server.
Refresh:
Set the time to automatically refresh the Google address book.
Evolution enables you to find the contact address quickly by using customized search. To find the contact address you are looking for, use the following procedure:
Specify the search criteria from any of the following:
Name contains
Email begins with
Any field contains
Press Enter to begin the search.
For a more complex search, select Search Advanced and select criteria that describe your desired contact:
Name the rule in the Rule Name field.
Set up your criteria in the Find items field.
Select Add to add additional criteria.
Displays all the contacts that match the built-in criteria you have selected from the drop-down list at the top left side, just above the display pane.
To perform quick search, use the following procedure:
Anniversary
Birthday
Business
Competition
Favorites
Gifts
Goals/Objectives
Holiday
Holiday Cards
Hot Contacts
Ideas
International
Key Customer
Miscellaneous
Phone Calls
Strategies
Suppliers
Time & Expenses
VIP
Waiting
Weather: Cloudy
Weather: Fog
Weather: Partly Cloudy
Weather: Rain
Weather: Snow
Weather: Sunny
Weather: Thunderstorms
Evolution displays the desired contacts.
Evolution allows you to organize your contacts. You can create several individual address books, or contact lists. Within a given address book, you can have several categories of contacts.
Contact Groups
Creating a List of Contacts
Grouping with Categories
Configuring Evolution to use LDAP
Contact groups are nothing but address books. The simplest way to organize contacts is to create additional address books. You can create a new one by clicking File &gt; New &gt; Address Book. For contacts groups on your computer, you only need to provide a name. For contacts on the network, you need to provide more information about the contacts server you are trying to access.
To move a card from one group to another, just drag it from the main display of contacts and drop it to a different group. You cannot change the contents of most network contact groups.
Contacts groups are not the same as contact lists. A contact group is like a folder or address book full of contacts. A contact list is a single contact that contains other contacts, and is most often used to email several people at once.
Importing Contacts
You can import contacts from other contact management tools with the Import tool.
Mail yourself a contact as a vCard attachment.
Currently VCF and LDIF are supported. CSV and TAB format files are supported from Microsoft Outlook, Thunderbird, Mozilla, and Evolution.
A contact list is a set of contacts with a single nickname that you create. When you send email to the nickname, it is sent to every member of the list. This differs from a network mailing list in that it exists only on your computer as a convenience to you, rather than as an actual email address managed by a mailing list application on a server.
For example, you could create one card for each family member, then add those cards to a contact list called
To create a list of contacts:
Open the list creation window by clicking the New List button.
Click File &gt; New &gt; Contact List.
Specify a name for the list.
Specify the names or email addresses of contacts.
Drag contacts from the main window into the list.
Choose whether you want to hide the email addresses when you send a message to the list.
Unless it is a very small list, it is recommended that you leave the addresses hidden. This is the same thing as using the
When you are finished, click OK.
The list appears as a contact card, which you can use as you would any other card, including mailing the list to another person and sending email to the list.
To mail the list, open a new email and type the name you chose for the list. Evolution addresses the message to the entire list when you send the message. You can also right-click the list's address card in the contacts tool and select Send Message to List.
Evolution cannot store contact lists on Microsoft Exchange servers.
Another way to group cards is to mark them as belonging to different categories. You can mark a card as being in several categories or no category at all. For example, you put a friend's card in the
To mark a card as belonging to a category,
Double click the card to bring up the Contact Editor window
Click the Categories button at the left.
The Categories window is shown below.
Select the category from the list. You can select as many or as few categories as you like.
If the master list of categories doesn't suit you, you can add your own categories. To add a new category,
Enter the new category in the entry box at the top.
You can view the category name in the field next to Categories button in the Contact Editor window.
You can edit or set the color and icon for each categories available under categories list. To achieve that click the Edit button at the bottom of the Categories window. Press the Delete button to delete the items from the list.
The
To learn how to add a remote LDAP directory to your available address books, see
Network folders are only available when you are connected to the network. If you use a laptop or have a modem connection, you might want to copy or cache some of the network directory. You do this by dragging and dropping your desired contacts into the local address books.
You can also mark the network folder for offline usage. To mark the folder, right-click the folder, click Properties and select Copy Folder Content Locally for Offline Operation.
To prevent excess network traffic, Evolution does not normally load data from the LDAP server upon opening.
Depending on your server settings, you might not be able to edit all the fields in a contact stored on an LDAP server. Some servers prohibit some or all changes, and others use a smaller set of fields than Evolution allows. Check with your system administrator if you need different settings.
For information about setting up Evolution to use LDAP, refer to
When you get information about a person in the mail or in a calendar entry, you can add it to an address card. To do so, right-click any email address or email message, and click Add to Address Book on the menu that appears. If the sender already exists, the Editor button opens and you can edit the address card details. Evolution can also add cards from a hand-held device during a HotSync* operation. For more information, see
This section shows you how to use the
Ways of Looking at your Calendar
Scheduling With the Evolution Calendar
Searching for Calendar Items
Printing Displayed Items
Deleting Old Appointments and Meetings
Delegating Meetings
Multiple Calendars, Web Calendars, and CalDAV
The Task List
Memos
Configuring Time Zones
In Evolution, you can keep multiple calendars and overlay them one over the next. For example, you might have a schedule of events for work, one for home, and one for your favorite sports team. The side bar lists those calendars, and you can select or deselect the boxes next to them to show and hide the appointments in your calendar view. By hiding and showing different sets of appointments, you can be sure to avoid conflicts, while keeping a minimum of clutter in your view.
Appointments for each calendar appear as a different color.
The toolbar offers you five different buttons that can show you different views of your calendar.
Calendar View
Shortcut Keys
Day
control+y
Work Week
control+j
Week
control+k
Month
control+m
List
control+l
You can also select an arbitrary range of days in the small calendar in the side bar. To do this, select the days that you want to view in your calendar.
The Previous and Next buttons move you forward and back in your calendar pages. If you are using a week or month view, you can move by week or month. To return to today's listing, click the Today button in the toolbar.
To visit calendar entries for a specific date, click Go To and select the date in the dialog box that appears.
Calendar Properties
Evolution allows you to edit the label of your calendar, assign color, and copy content for offline use. To set your calendar properties
Select the calendar from the side bar at the left.
Right-click on the calendar.
Select Properties to open Calendar Properties dialog box.
Edit the label from Name field.
To assign a color for the calendar, click the Color button.
Select the color and click OK.
To mark your calendar content for offline use, click Copy calendar contents locally for offline operations.
Right-click on the calendar at the left and select Mark Calendar for offline use. For more information on working offline refer
To export or share or to store a calendar locally in iCal format, right click on the calendar in the calendar view at the left and select Save to Disk.
Click Mark as default folder if you want to mark this folder as your default calendar folder.
Weather Calendar
In the Properties of a Weather calendar you can specify a location for the weather calendar. Click Location to select any world-wide location for the calendar.
The temperature for the selected location appears in units as specified at the top of the Calendar view.
Google Calendar
Evolution allows you to access your Google calendar. You can view the Google calendar offline or create, modify, and delete the calendar items online. Google calendar uses the CalDAV interface.
To integrate the Google calendar to Evolution:
Click New, then select Calendar to open the New Calendar dialog.
Specify the following:
Name:
Specify a name for the Google calendar.
Set the time to automatically refresh the calendar.
If you want to set a color label for the calendar, click the Color tab, select the desired color, then click OK.
If you want to view the calendar items offline, select Copy calendar content locally for offline operation check box.
If you select this option, you cannot modify or create the calendar items.
There are two types of events you can schedule with Evolution: appointments and meetings. An appointment is an event you schedule for yourself only, and a meeting is an event that you schedule multiple people for. You can also use the busy/free search for meetings to determine the availability of invitees.
Appointments
Sending a Meeting Invitation
Accepting and Replying to a Meeting Request
Reading Responses to Meeting Requests
Tool Tip View
Using the Free/Busy View
Publishing Calendar and Free/Busy Information Without a Groupware Server
Accessing Free/Busy Data Without a Groupware Server
In Evolution, an appointment is an event you schedule for yourself.
Creating Appointments
Reminders
Classifications
Recurrence
Click File &gt; New &gt; Appointment.
Click Calendars on the Switcher, then click File, then New &gt; Appointment.
Double-click in a blank space on the calendar view to open an Appointment dialog box. The particular time on the calendar view against which you have double clicked on will be suggested for the new appointment.
Select the required duration on the calendar view and enter the summary.
Select a calendar in the Calendar drop-down list.
Enter a brief summary in the Summary field.
(Optional) Type a location in the Location field.
Select the date and time.
To select this appointment as an all day event, click Options &gt; All Day Event.
Click the All Day Event button on the toolbar.
If the event is an all day event, specify a starting date and an ending date.
If the event is not an all day event, specify a starting time and an ending time.
Select For to specify the duration.
Select Until to specify the ending time of the event.
Type the time zone information in the Time Zone field.
Click the globe to customize the time zone.
To hide or show the Time Zone field, click View &gt; Time Zone.
To show the time as busy, click Options &gt; Show Time as Busy.
(Optional) Type a category in the Categories field.
To show or hide the Categories field, click View &gt; Categories.
(Optional) Enter a description in the Description field.
To create an alarm for this appointment, click Alarms on the toolbar, or click Options &gt; Alarms.
Select Customize to add or remove customized alarms for the event.
For more information on reminders, see
(Optional) To add an attachment, drag and drop the attachment into the attachment bar.
Click the Attach button on the toolbar, or click Insert &gt; Attachment and then browse to the attachment.
(Optional) Click Options &gt; Classifications, then select a classification (as Public, Private or Confidential).
(Optional) Click the Recurrence button on the toolbar.
Click Options &gt; Recurrence, and specify whether you want the appointment to recur and how often.
All Day Event
An All Day event appears at the top of a day's appointment list, in the header under the date, rather than inside. That makes it easy to have appointments that overlap and fit inside each other. For example, a conference might be an All Day appointment, and the meetings at the conference could be timed appointments. Appointments with specific starting and ending times can also overlap. When they do they display as multiple columns in the day view of the calendar.
If you create calendar appointments that overlap, Evolution displays them side by side in your calendar.
You can have several Reminders for individual appointments, any time prior to the appointment you schedule. You can have one reminder of each of the following types:
Display:
A notification pops up on your screen to remind you of your appointment.
Audio:
Your computer delivers a sound alarm.
Program:
You can run a program as a reminder. You can enter its name in the text field, or find it with the Browse button.
Apart from the above notifications, the Evolution alarm icon blinks in the notification area. To pause the alarm or view the event, click the notification icon.
To create a reminder:
To create an alarm for this appointment, click Alarms on the toolbar, or click Options, then Alarms.
If you have stored reminders in a local calendar, they work from the moment you log in. However, for reminders stored on any remote server like GroupWise or Exchange which requires authentication, you must run Evolution at least once after logging in. No matter where the reminders are stored, you can quit Evolution and still be reminded of an upcoming appointment.
If you are using a calendar on a Novell
If you are using a Novell GroupWise or Microsoft Exchange server, other people on the server can check your schedule to see if you are available at any given time. If you have an appointment that is flexible or that you want to designate as Free rather than Busy time, select the Free box in the Show Time As section. Normally, appointments display as Busy.
You can categorize appointments in the same way you can categorize contacts.
Select the check box next to each category that matches the appointment you are creating.
You can add a new category to your category list by clicking Edit Master Category List, then click Click Here To Add A Category.
After you have selected your categories, click OK to assign these categories to the appointment. The categories you selected are now listed in the text box to the right of the Categories button.
Appointments with categories appear with icons in the calendar display, and you can also search for appointments by category. To display only the appointments in a particular category, select the corresponding category in the search bar at the top of the calendar.
The Recurrence tool button lets you describe repetition in appointments ranging from once every day up to once every 100 years. You can then choose a time and date when the appointment stops recurring, and, under Exceptions, pick individual days when the appointment does not recur. Make your selections from left to right, and you form a sentence:
After you have finished settings, click the Save button in the toolbar to save and close the appointment editor window. If you want, you can alter an appointment summary in the calendar view by clicking it and typing. You can change other settings by right-clicking the appointment then choosing Open, or double-clicking the appointment.
A meeting is an event you schedule for multiple people. Evolution can be used to schedule group meetings and help you manage responses to meeting requests.
When you create a meeting or group appointment, you can specify the attendees in several categories, such as
If you don't need to collect attendance information when you're scheduling an event, and would rather just announce the event, right-click the meeting and select Forward as iCalendar. This opens a new email message with the event notification attached as an announcement. Recipients can add the event to their calendars with one click, but it won't automatically send you email about whether they plan to attend.
To schedule a meeting:
Click File &gt; New &gt; Meeting.
If you have multiple email accounts, select the one to use by selecting an item in the Organizer field.
Click Add to add the email addresses of people you want to invite.
To remove an attendee from the list, select an attendee and press Remove.
To edit a field, select the field and click Edit.
Click View on the menu bar to show or hide the Type, Role, Status, and RSVP fields.
To query free/busy information for the attendees, click the Free/Busy button on the toolbar.
Click Options &gt; Free/Busy.
Click Save to save the meeting.
An email is sent out to all the recipients, inviting them to your event.
In Evolution, a meeting can have only one organizer, and only the organizer can add participants to that meeting. Though it is possible to change the organizer of a meeting, this is not recommended as a means to invite additional participants to meetings. If you want to invite additional people to a meeting and are not that meeting's organizer, it is recommended that you forward the invitation message you received from the original meeting organiser to additional participants.
Meeting requests are sent as iCal attachments. To view or respond to one, click the attachment icon and view it inline in the mail window. All the details are shown about the event, including time and dates. Then you can choose how to reply to the invitation. Your choices are:
Accept
Tentatively Accept
Decline
Click OK to send an email to the organizer with your answer. The event is also added to your calendar if you accept.
After you add the meeting to your calendar, you can make changes to the information, but if the original organizer sends out another update, your changes might be overwritten.
When you get a reply to a meeting invitation you sent, you can view it inline by clicking the attachment and selecting View Inline.
If you are in a hurry and you want to see the details of a meeting, mouse over the meeting in the calendar view. A tool tip appears with the details of the meeting. It will provide the agenda of the meeting, venue and time. If you are the organizer of the meeting, you can also view the status of the attendees, e.g. how many of them have accepted or declined the meeting request.
In addition to the standard meeting scheduling tools, you can use the Free/Busy view to check whether people are available in advance. The Free/Busy feature is normally a function of dedicated groupware servers such as Microsoft Exchange and Novell GroupWise. However, you can also publish Free/Busy information online, and access Free/Busy information published elsewhere. If not everyone you collaborate with publishes Free/Busy data, you can still use iCal event invitations to coordinate schedules with other people.
To access the free/busy view:
Click the Free/Busy button on the toolbar, or click Options &gt; Free/Busy.
Adjust the meeting time, either by dragging the meeting borders or by using the Autopick buttons to choose a time automatically, then click Save and Close. Attendees on an Exchange server have the appointment updated automatically; others receive email notification of any change in plans.
Attendee List:
The Attendee List shows the people who have been invited to the appointment.
Schedule Grid:
The Schedule Grid shows the published Free/Busy information for the people you have invited. This is where you compare schedules to find free time to schedule the appointment. Individuals have visible scheduling information only if they use the same Novell GroupWise or Microsoft Exchange server you do (that is, if they are in the same organization as you), or if they publish free/busy information at a URL you can reach and you have entered that URL into their contact cards using the contact editor.
You can publish Calendar and Free/Busy information to a WebDAV, FTP server, or remote machine through secure shell or other Web server with HTTP PUT support. Check with your system administrator if you are not sure you have this functionality.
To set up Calendar or Free/Busy publishing:
Click Edit &gt; Preferences, then click Calendar and Tasks.
Click the Calendar Publishing tab, click Add, then select the information you want to publish.
Select the frequency with which you want to upload data.
Select the calendars you want to display data for.
Specify the publishing location for the upload server.
Type your username and password.
To immediately publish calendar information, go to the Calendar tool and click Actions &gt; Publish Calendar Information.
You can specify a template to use when posting to the Free/Busy server.
If individuals give you a URL for Free/Busy data or for their Web calendar, you can enter it as part of the contact information in the Contacts tool. Then, when you schedule a meeting with them, Evolution looks up the schedule and displays it in the Free/Busy data.
You can use a customized search, an advanced search, or a quick search to search for Calendar items.
Evolution enables you to find the Calendar items by using a Customized Search.
Summary contains
Description contains
Any field Contains
Evolution displays the desired Calendar items.
Select Advanced Search to open Advanced Search dialog box.
Search name field displays the search type you have selected.
Click Add to add rules.
Select the criteria, and then type a search entry in the given field.
Displays all the Calendar items that match the criteria that you have selected from the drop-down list in the Search bar.
Click the Show drop-down list.
Any Category
Unmatched
Active Appointments
Next 7 Days' Appointments
Favourites
You can view the desired items listed in the Calendar view.
To print the displayed calendar items, click File &gt; Print.
Keeping a list of everything you did in the past eventually slows down your calendar. To delete old events, click Actions &gt; Purge, then enter the number of days of past events you want to keep. Click OK to purge the items.
Only attendees of a meeting can delegate a meeting.
In the Calendar, right-click the meeting you want to delegate.
Click Delegate Meeting.
Select the contacts you want to delegate the meeting to.
Each contact receives a copy of the meeting invitation.
Multiple Calendars, Web Calendars and CalDAV
To create a new calendar, click File &gt; New &gt; Calendar. If the calendar is one you plan to store locally, you need only provide a name and color. If it is a remote calendar, specify the name, color, URL, and a refresh frequency. The refresh frequency determines how often Evolution checks to see if the calendar has changed. If you are working with someone who publishes an online calendar, you might want to check for updates every thirty minutes. On the other hand, if you have displayed a sports team schedule in your calendar, you might not need to refresh it more than once a week.
The
Evolution lets you view and manage calendars on remote CalDAV servers. The procedure to create a CalDAV calendar source is similar to that of a remote Web calendar source. You can view and create calendar events on CalDav accounts just like other calendars on Evolution.
You can view and manage local iCal or ics files in the Calendar view. Select the local iCal or ics files as calendar source to manage or view them in Evolution.
To access a local ics or iCal file in the Calendar view:
Select On this computer from the Type drop-down list.
In the Name field, specify a name for the local calendar.
Select customize options.
In the File name field, give ics / ical file location as the calendar source.
In the Refresh field, choose refresh type from the drop-down list.
Select the Force read only option if you want the calendar read-only.
To set a color label for the calendar, click the Color tab, select the desired color, then click OK.
The Task List, located in the upper-right corner of the calendar, lets you keep a list of tasks separate from your calendar appointments.
You can use the list in a larger window by clicking the Tasks button in the side bar.
Task Lists are more easily organized in the dedicated Tasks tool. Each task list is assigned a color, and you can use the Tasks tool switcher to hide and show task lists just like calendars. In the calendar display task pad, tasks from all visible task lists appear, color coded by list.
Creating a New Task List
Creating a New Task
Assigned Tasks
Click File &gt; New &gt; Task List.
Specify the name and color for the task list.
(Optional) If the task is an online list, specify the URL of the task list.
After you have added a task to your to-do list, its summary appears in the Summary section of the task list. To view or edit a detailed description of an item, double-click it, or right-click it and select Open. You can delete items by selecting them, then clicking Delete. The list of tasks is sorted in a similar way to the list of email messages in Evolution Mail. Click once on a message header to change the direction and type of sorting, or right-click to add or remove columns from the display.
Click File &gt; New &gt; Task.
Select a group for the task.
(Optional) Specify a starting date and ending date for the task.
(Optional) Specify a starting time and ending time for the task.
(Optional) To specify a status for the task, click Options &gt; Status Details.
Evolution can be used to assign a task to multiple people.
When you assign a task, you can specify the attendees in several categories, such as
To assign a new task:
Click File &gt; New &gt; Assigned Task.
Click Add, or press Insert key, or right click and then press Add to add the email addresses of people you want to assign the task. To remove an attendee from the list, select an attendee, then press Remove. To edit a field, select the field, then click Edit. Click View on the menu bar to show or hide the Type, Role, Status, and RSVP fields.
(Optional) Specify a starting date and time, and a due date and time for the task.
Searching for Task Items
Evolution enables you to find the task items by using Customized Search.
Evolution displays the desired Task items.
Displays all the task items that match the criteria that you have selected from the drop-down list at the top left side, just above the display pane.
This feature provides the following best quick search options. This allows you to quickly see when tasks are due, as it can become unwieldy for planning if you have a lot of tasks in hand.
Any Category:
Displays all the tasks that fall under any category.
Unmatched:
Displays all the tasks that do not fall under any of the categories listed here.
Next 7 Days' Tasks:
Displays all the active tasks that are due within the next seven days.
Active Tasks:
Displays all the tasks whose due date is yet to come. This allows you to see the date due for tasks due in the future.
Over Due Tasks:
Displays all the tasks whose end date has already passed.
Completed Tasks:
Displays the tasks whose status is 100% completed.
Tasks With Attachment:
Displays all the tasks with attachments.
&lt;List of Categoriesgt;:
Lists all the tasks that belong to a particular category such as Anniversary, Holidays, Gifts, etc.
To perform quick search,
Click the Show drop-down list from the Search bar.
Next 7 Days Tasks
Active Tasks
Over Due Tasks
Completed Tasks
Tasks With Attachments
Holidays
Key Customers
You can view the desired items listed in the Task view.
In Evolution, the Memos component lets you create, edit, and store journal entries without dates, using the filesystem as a backend.
To create a new memo entry:
Click File &gt; New &gt; Memo.
Select the Group in which you would like to create the entry.
To show or hide Categories field, click View &gt; Categories.
In the Start Date field, type the date this reminder note should appear in the recipients' Calendars.
The Memo List
As with calendars and tasks, you can create multiple memo lists. Each memo list is assigned a color, and you can use the side bar to hide and show memo lists.
To create a new memo list:
Click File &gt; New &gt; Memo List.
Enter the type, name and color for the memo list.
Searching for Memo Items
You can use a customized search, an advanced search, or a quick search to search for Memo Items.
Evolution enables you to find the Memo items by using a Customized Search.
Select the desired search type from the drop-down list.
Displays all the Memo items that match the criteria that you have selected from the Show drop-down list in the Search bar.
You can view the desired items listed in the Memo view.
Evolution supports the use of multiple time zones.
If you share calendar files with friends or co-workers, you might need to configure your time zone.
Click the icon next to the Time Zone field, then select your location.
Each red dot represents a major city.
Select a city, then click OK.
You can also configure time zone information specific to each appointment. To do that, simply create a new appointment and click the globe to customize the time zone that the time exists in. For example, if you live in New York but have a telephone meeting set for noon with someone in California, you need to make sure that your schedules are coordinated. Setting time zones on a per-appointment basis helps avoid that potential confusion.
Marcus Bains Line
The Marcus Bains Line is a marker to show the current date and time. This feature is available in the Evolution calendar.

Evolution Exchange Features
Adding Your Exchange Account to Evolution
Accessing the Exchange Server
Settings Exclusive to Evolution Exchange
Scheduling Meetings with Free/Busy
Evolution MAPI Features
Evolution Exchange works only with Exchange 2000 and later, and requires that Outlook Web Access be enabled. Each user needs a valid Microsoft Exchange server account, including a license.
Evolution Exchange supports the following basic Microsoft Exchange features:
General
Remote Exchange Information Store:
Allows you to access mail, address book (including the Global Address List folder), calendars, and task folders on an Exchange server from Evolution.
Palm Synchronization:
Supported for Contacts and Calendars on Exchange.
Password Management:
Allows you to reset your password. If your password has expired, Evolution asks you to change your password at startup.
Mail
Viewing Mail in Exchange Folders:
Mail stored on the Exchange server is visible in the Mail component in Evolution.
Sending Email via Exchange Protocols:
If you use the Microsoft Exchange mail transport protocol to send email, make sure that the address you have entered as your email address is exactly the one that the Exchange server has on file. This might be
Out of Office Message:
You can set
Send Options:
You can set the priority and sensitivity of the sent message so that the recipients will know how important the message is. You can also enable delivery receipt request and read receipt request for the messages sent.
Calendar
Meeting Requests/Proposal:
Allows Evolution users to schedule meetings. You can check when other users are busy according to their calendars and send the meeting requests accordingly.
Adding iCalendar Meeting Requests to the Calendar:
Allows you to add the iCalendar meeting requests you receive to your Exchange calendar. Note that you need to specify the calendar from the list, to which you want to add your meeting schedules.
Contacts
Address Completion:
Supported for your Exchange Contacts folder.
Adding vCards to the Address Book:
Allows you to save the vCards you receive in attachment to your Exchange address book. New Address Book entries can also be created on Exchange from received email messages with a single click.
Work Offline (disconnected mode)
To mark a folder for offline usage, right-click the folder, then click Properties. Click Copy Folder Content Locally for Offline Operation. For more information see
Recall Message function is not available.
After you have installed Evolution Exchange, you need to set up access for your Exchange account on both the Exchange server and within Evolution.
Exchange Server Settings
Standard Configuration Tool for Evolution Exchange
Simple Configuration Tool for Evolution Exchange
Creating a New Exchange Account
Configuring an Existing Account for Evolution Exchange Account
Check with your system administrator to ensure that:
You have a valid account on the Exchange server.
You are permitted to access the account with WebDAV. This is the default setting for the Exchange server, so unless your system administrator has specifically turned it off, no changes should be necessary.
The
When you know that your server is ready for you to connect, you are ready to add your Exchange account to Evolution Exchange.
Evolution Exchange comes with a simple account creation tool for Exchange accounts.
If you have no accounts configured, the simple account configuration assistant starts when you start Evolution. It asks only for the Outlook Web Access URL, and your username and password. Evolution Exchange determines the remaining information for you.
If the simple account configuration tool does not run automatically, you need to create an account manually. For more information on how to do this, see
Create the account following the procedure in
Only one Microsoft Exchange account can be configured in Evolution.
Use the following procedure to configure your existing account for Evolution Exchange:
Select the account you want to convert, then click Edit.
Click the Identity tab.
Change your email address as needed.
Click the Receiving Mail tab, then select Microsoft Exchange as your server type.
Type your user name, and the Outlook Web Access (OWA) URL. Click Authenticate, then enter the password at the prompt. The Exchange server authenticates your account.
Click the Receiving Options tab.
Specify how often to check for new mail, your Global Catalog server name and whether to apply filters to messages in your Inbox, check for junk, set a password expiry period, and any other settings you want to include.
Use the Defaults tab to define folders, send CC or BCC messages to certain email addresses, and set options for message receipts.
Use the Security tab to set PGP and S/MIME options.
Quit Evolution and restart it.
Changes to Evolution Exchange accounts configuration are not active until you have restarted the application.
When you have installed Evolution Exchange, you can access public folders and perform certain Exchange actions like delegation and password management, and subscribing to other user's calendars, tasks, and contact folders. You can also carry out any folder-related operations like adding, deleting, and renaming folders, and selecting folder permissions on calendars, tasks, and contact folders. Use the regular Mail tool for mail, the Contacts tool for contacts, and the Calendar tool for setting schedules.
If you are using both an Exchange account and a local mail account, you should be aware that whenever you save an email address or appointment from an email message, it is saved in your Exchange contacts list or calendar, rather than in your local account. The same is true for synchronization with Palm OS devices; tasks, and appointments. Addresses from your Palm OS device are synchronized in the Exchange folders rather than in local folders.
To avoid unnecessary strain on the server, the Global Address List (GAL) appears empty until you search for something in it.
There are some settings in Evolution that are available only with Evolution Exchange, like delegation and permission handling, creating
Send Options
Access Delegation
Delegating Access to Others
Subscribe to Other Users' Folders
Subscribe to Public Folders
Setting an Out of Office Message
You can set the priority and sensitivity of the sent message from an exchange account so that the recipients will know how important the message is. The priority can have one of the three options: High, Normal or Low; and sensitivity can have one of the four options: Normal, Personal, Private and Confidential. You can also enable delivery receipt request and read receipt request for the messages sent.
Tracking Options
Evolution lets you track the status of an item you have sent. You can enable the Delivery Receipt request as well as Read Receipt request so that you will know when the item reached the recipients or read by them.
To set the importance and sensitivity of the message:
Select the exchange account from the From field.
Click Insert &gt; Send Options.
Select the priority for your sent message from the given three options (Normal, High, Low).
Select the sensitivity for your sent message from the given four options (Normal, Personal, Private, Confidential).
Message Access Delegation:
Click Send as Delegate to send the message to the recipient on behalf of someone else.
To send a calendar item as delegate, you should subscribe to the delegator's message and also you should have necessary rights assigned to you by the delegator.
Click User to open Show Contacts dialog box.
Select the contact from the desired Address book and click Add, then close the dialog box.
You are not permitted to send a message on behalf of more than one person at a time.
When the recipient opens the mail, he or she can also read a message that
Select the Request a delivery receipt for this message check box to get a delivery receipt from your recipient.
Select the Request a read receipt for this message to get a read receipt for the message you have sent.
Delegating Calendar Items
You can send Meetings or Appointments on behalf of someone else if you have subscribed to his or her Calendar.
Select the delegator's Calendar.
Open a new Meeting composer window.
Add the recipients.
Fill in the information.
When the recipient receives the calendar item, a message indicates that the item was created by someone on behalf of the Delegator.
You can allow other people in your organization's Global Address List to access your calendar, address book, and messages, and they can let you manage theirs. Delegation allows people to do anything from check on each other's schedules to completely manage their personal information.
To add someone to your list of delegates:
Click the Exchange Settings tab.
Click Delegation Assistant to open the Delegates dialog box.
Click Add, then search for a contact in the Global Address List.
Remember that the Global Address List (GAL) appears empty until you have searched for something in it.
Select the delegate and click Edit to open the delegate permission dialog box.
Select from the following access levels for each of the four types of folders:
Do not allow this person to access any folders of this type.
Reviewer (read-only):
Allows the delegate to see items in this type of folder, but not create new items or edit existing items.
Author (read, create):
The delegate can view items in your folders, and can create new items, but cannot change any existing items.
Editor (read, create, edit):
The delegate can view, create, and change items in your folders.
The delegate is notified through a separate mail that he or she is being added to your list of delegates. The mail summarizes all the rights that have been assigned to the delegate.
To access the folders delegated to you:
Click File &gt; Subscribe to Other User's Exchange Folder.
Specify the email address of the user who has delegated to you, or click User to select the user from your address book.
Select the folder you want to open.
Folders delegated to you appear in your folder list inside a folder labeled with the name of its owner. For example, if Martha Thompson delegates folders to you, you see a folder called Martha Thompson's Folders in the folder tree at the same level as your Personal Folders and Public Folders.
If the folder fails to open properly, check with the folder owner to make sure that you have been granted the correct access permissions.
You can subscribe to public folders available on the Exchange server.
Select the Exchange account.
Check the folders you want to subscribe to.
The folders you have subscribed to appear in the folder list at the left.
To view contents of a folder, click it.
Reminders for meetings in your Exchange calendar do not work until you have run Evolution at least once after logging in. This is different from locally stored reminders, which work from the moment you log in, regardless of whether you have run Evolution in the session so that you can fix a convenient time for a meeting. To enable Reminder setting in your Exchange account, select
An Out of Office message is an automatic reply that you can send as a reply to messages, explaining why you are not immediately responding to their messages. For example, if you go on vacation for a week and will not access your email, you can set an automatic reply so that people know that you are not ignoring them.
Select the Exchange account, then click Edit.
Select the Exchange Settings tab. The top option allows you to set an Out of Office message.
Click I Am Currently Out of the Office.
Type a short message in the text field.
Your message is automatically sent to anyone who sends you mail until you return and select I Am in the office.
Evolution helps you fix a convenient time for a meeting according to the availability of the attendees. Its Free/Busy feature allows you to perform a check on other user's Exchange calendar to find whether they are busy according to their Exchange calendars, if so, you can reschedule the meeting altogether.
Create a new appointment in the calendar.
Right-click the appointment, then select Schedule Meeting.
Click the Add tab to enter the email addresses into the list.
Click the Attendees tab to select the participants from Global Address List (GAL).
You can directly select the participants from the following address lists.
Global Address List
You can also specify the category as Anniversary, Birthday, Business etc. from the drop-down list for each address list given.
Add the participants to the following categories of attendees.
Chair Persons
Required Participants
Optional Participants
Resources
Click Free/Busy tool at the top right corner.
Click Options &gt; Update Free/Busy to check participant schedules and, if possible, update the meeting in all participants' calendars
If meeting attendees are not available during the times you have scheduled a meeting, you can
With Evolution MAPI providers, you can view the size of a selected folder.
You can view the folder size by using the following methods:
Select Edit &gt; Preferences &gt; MAPI Account &gt; Edit.
Select the Exchange settings tab.
Select Folder size.
Alternatively, right-click the MAPI Account in the folder tree, then select folder size.
A Folder dialog is displayed with details, such as folder name and their respective size. It also provides you the total mailbox size.

GroupWise Features
GroupWise Terminology vs. Evolution Terminology
Adding your GroupWise Account to Evolution
Scheduling Appointments with Free/Busy
Managing Sent Items
Giving Other People Access to Your Mailbox or Calendar
Junk Mail Handling
GroupWise connectivity in Evolution supports the following basic Novell GroupWise features:
Viewing mail and folders stored on the GroupWise system.
Sending mail from you GroupWise account.
Converting mail to a task or meeting.
Tracking the status of a message.
Marking a message as junk mail adds the sender to your GroupWise junk mail list.
Improved Status Tracking.
You can send and receive appointment and meeting requests. Allows Evolution users to schedule meetings and view attendee availability for other users on GroupWise.
You can resend meeting requests. Also, you can edit the fields, and add or delete participants.
You can receive an iCalendar meeting request and add it to your GroupWise calendar.
Address Completion is supported for your GroupWise address books, including the System address book, the Frequent Contacts address book, and your personal address book.
If you receive a card attachment and click Save in Address Book, it is saved to your Personal address book. New Address Book entries can also be added to your personal address book from received Email messages.
To create your GroupWise Frequent contacts and Personal address books, you need to access your GroupWise account once through GroupWise Java client because Evolution currently does not support creating them. The GroupWise system address book is marked for offline use by default. This boosts performance.
Reminder Note
GroupWise Reminder Note is integrated into Memo component. You can view the Reminder notes listed under Memos at the bottom right of the Calendar view given that you have selected them under the Memos component.
Proxy
You can assign Proxy access to other users.
You can view other users' accounts through Proxy access.
There are, however, some features that are not available:
Accepting appointments or meetings in offline mode
Archive
GroupWise and Evolution sometimes uses different terminology for different types of items. The following table compares GroupWise terminology to Evolution terminology.
GroupWise
Appointment
Meeting
Posted Appointment
None; use a task
Discussion Note
None; use an assigned task
Phone Message
None; use a message
Checklist
Creating a New GroupWise Account
Changing an Existing Account to Work with GroupWise
Create the account following the procedure in
If you have an existing email account, and want to convert it to use with GroupWise:
Click the Receiving Email tab, then select Novell GroupWise as your server type.
Type the name of your mail server, your user name, and select whether to use SSL.
Select if you want to automatically synchronize your remote calendar and contacts locally.
It fetches the remote calendar and contact information and stores it on your local drive.
Remote calendar and contacts are typically stored remotely on servers rather than on local hard disk.
Specify your Post Office Agent SOAP port in the Post Office Agent SOAP Port field.
(Optional) Click the Proxy tab, then click Add to add any Proxy users to your account.
Reminder Notes
GroupWise Reminder notes are like mail messages except they are scheduled for a particular day and appear on the Calendar for that date. You can use reminder notes to show vacations, holidays, pay days, birthdays, and so on. Posted reminder notes are placed in your Calendar on the date you specify. They are not placed in your Mailbox or in any other user's Mailbox.
Evolution integrates this feature into its Memo component so that you can view the Reminder notes listed under Memo at the right bottom side of the calendar view.
Select the memo or the Reminder notes under the Memo component to display it on the Calendar view.
To create a new Reminder Note follow
To send a Reminder Note,
Click File, then New &gt; Shared Memo.
Select the Organizer's account name from the drop-down list given next to the Organizer field.
In the To field, type a username, then press Enter. Repeat for additional users.
Specify the category that the Reminder note falls under.
Click Save.
When you schedule a meeting with your calendar on GroupWise, you can check when other local GroupWise users are busy according to their GroupWise calendars.
Reminders for appointments in your GroupWise calendar do not work until you have run Evolution at least once after logging in. This is different from locally stored reminders, which work from the moment you log in, regardless of whether you have run Evolution in the session.
Open a new appointment in the calendar.
Click Actions &gt; Schedule Meeting.
Add attendees, either by entering their email addresses into the list, or by clicking the Invite Others button.
Click Options, then click Update Free/Busy to check participant schedules and, if possible, update the meeting in all participants' calendars.
If meeting attendees are not available during the times you have scheduled a meeting, you can
Resending a GroupWise Meeting Request
Right-click an existing meeting that you have organized.
Select Resend meeting. A confirmation dialog is displayed.
Click OK to resend the meeting.
(Optional) Edit any of the fields: Duration, Summary, Description
(Optional) Add attendees, either by entering their email addresses into the list, or by clicking the Invite Others button.
To remove an attendee from the list, select the attendee and click Remove.
A Dialog is displayed to check whether you want to retract the original item or not. Click OK to confirm. Click Cancel if you want to keep the original item in the recipients' calendar.
An email is send to all the recipients to invite them to your updated event.
GroupWise support for header based threading enabled
There is no need to enable 'Fall back to threading by subject' from Edit &gt; Preferences &gt; Mail preferences &gt; General tab unless other wise you want messages to be threaded on subject basis.
Confirming Delivery of Items You have Sent
Displaying Sent Items
Checking the Status of an Item You Have Sent
Requesting a Reply for Items You Send
You can manage your sent items for GroupWise email only if the recipient is located on the same GroupWise system as you.
Evolution provides several ways for you to confirm that your item was delivered. You can easily track message status of any message you have sent. For example, you can see when an email was delivered and when the recipient opened or deleted the email.
Track an Item You Sent:
You can check the status in the Message Status window of an email you have sent.
Receive Notification When the Item is Opened or Deleted:
You can receive notification when the recipient opens or deletes a message. For information, see
Request a Reply:
You can inform the recipient that you need a reply to an email. Evolution adds a sentence to the item stating that a reply is requested and changes the icon in the recipient's Mailbox to a double arrow. For information, see
Enabling Status Tracking
In the Compose Message window, click Insert &gt; Send Options.
Select Status Tracking.
Select the check box next to Create a sent item to track information.
Select any of the options given (Delivered, Delivered and opened, All information).
Based on this selection, you can view the status of the send message in the Sent Items folder.
For more information, see
(Optional) Select the check box next to Auto-delete sent item to automatically delete the sent item from the Sent folder.
Under Return Notification, specify the type of return receipt you want.
Right-click an email in your Sent folder, then click Track Message Status.
With Message Tracking, you know when the item reaches the recipients or is read by them. You also know exactly who received your message, who read your message, and who deleted it and when.
Changing the Priority of an Email
The small icon next to an item in the Mailbox is red when the priority is high.
Click Reply Requested, then specify when you want to receive the reply.
When convenient:
Select this option to allow the recipients to reply at their convenience. If you select this option,
Within days:
Specify the number of days by when you need a reply.
Click Set Expiration Date, then specify the number of days for this message to remain in the recipient's Inbox.
Setting Message Delivery Options
You can delay the delivery of an individual message by having it held in the Outbox for a specified time.
Click Delay message delivery.
Use the Date and Time options to specify how long the message should remain in the Outbox before it is sent to the recipient.
Click the Sent Items folder in the Folder List.
All sent items reside in this folder unless you select a different folder for sent email in the account editor default settings. For more information, refer to
Delegating an Item
In the Calendar, right-click the meeting or appointment you want to delegate.
Select Delegate Meeting, then select the contacts you want to delegate the meeting/appointment for.
Each contact gets a copy of the appointment or meeting.
In the Compose Meeting window, click Insert &gt; Send Options.
Select any of the options given (Delivered, Delivered and opened, All information)
Use Proxy to manage another user's Mailbox and Calendar. Proxy lets you perform various actions, such as reading, accepting, and declining items on behalf of another user, within the restrictions the other user sets.
You can proxy for a user in a different post office or domain, as long as that person is in the same GroupWise system. You cannot proxy for a user in a different GroupWise system.
Receiving Proxy Rights
Assigning Proxy Rights to Another User
Adding and Removing Proxy Names and Rights in Your Proxy List
Managing Someone Else's Mailbox or Calendar
Marking an Item Private
Two steps must be completed before you can act as someone's proxy. First, the person for whom you plan to act as proxy must grant you rights in the Proxy List in Preferences. Second, you must proxy to the user so you can access his or her Mailbox or Calendar.
Use the Proxy List in the Preferences Account Editor to give other users rights to proxy for you. You can assign each user different rights to your calendaring and messaging information. If you want to let users view specific information about your appointments when they do a Busy Search on your Calendar, give them Read access for appointments. The following table describes the rights you can grant to users:
Permission:
Allows your proxy to do:
Read
Read items you receive. Proxies cannot see your Contacts folder with this or any other proxy right.
Write
Create and send items in your name, including applying your signature if you have one defined. Assign categories to items, and change the subject of items.
Subscribe to my alarms
Receive the same alarms you receive. Receiving alarms is supported only if the proxy is on the same post office you are.
Subscribe to my notifications
Receive notification when you receive items. Receiving notifications is supported only if the proxy is on the same post office you are.
Modify options/rules/folders
Change the options in your Mailbox. The proxy can edit any of your Options settings, including the access given to other users. If the proxy also has Mail rights, he or she can create or modify rules and folders. This right allows a proxy to add, delete, and modify categories.
Read items marked Private
Read the items you marked Private. If you don't give a proxy Private rights, all items marked Private in your Mailbox are hidden from that proxy.
Select the GroupWise account to edit, then click Edit.
Click the Proxy tab, then click Add.
To add a user to the list, type the name in the Name box or import the contact from Contact list.
Select the rights you want to give to the user.
Repeat
To delete a user from the Proxy List, select the user, then click Remove User.
Before you can act as a proxy for someone, that person must give you proxy rights in his or her Proxy List in Preferences. The amount of access you have depends on the rights you have been given.
Right-click on the GroupWise account in the folder list.
Click Proxy Login.
Type the user name of the person who has given you Proxy access, or select from the list.
The user's data appears in the respective components.
You can set different colors to each user to distinguish between each users' appointments. You can also select whether to display the appointments of a particular user or not.
You can limit a proxy's access to individual items in your Mailbox or Calendar by marking items Private.
When you mark an item Private, you prevent unauthorized proxies from opening it. Proxies cannot access items marked Private unless you give them those rights in your Access List.
If you mark an item Private when you send it, neither your proxies nor the recipient's proxies can open the item without rights. If you mark an item Private when you receive it, it cannot be read by your unauthorized proxies, but it can be read by the sender's proxies. Appointments marked Private display in Busy Search according to the status you selected when you accepted the appointment.
In an open item, click Actions, then click Mark Private.
In your Calendar, click an item in the Appointments, Reminder Notes, or Tasks List, click Actions, then click Mark Private.
Junk mail handling for GroupWise accounts is a little different than other junk mail handling. When you mark an item as junk mail in GroupWise, the item is added to your junk list in the GroupWise system. Because these settings are on the GroupWise system, your junk list follows you from computer to computer.
Marking a Message As Junk Mail
Marking a Message As Not Junk Mail
Enabling or Disabling Your Junk Mail List
Adding an Email Address to Your Junk List
Removing an Email Address from Your Junk List
Select the message to mark as junk, then click the Junk icon or press Ctrl+J.
The message is moved to your Junk Mail folder and the user is added to your junk list.
Select the message to mark as not junk in your Junk Mail folder.
Right-click the message, then click Mark as Not Junk.
Or select the message and press Shift+Ctrl+J
The message is moved to your Mailbox folder and the name is removed from your junk list.
Right-click a message, then click Junk Mail Settings.
Select if you want to enable or disable junk mail handling.
Type the email address to block in the Email field.
Click Add, then click OK.
Select the email address to remove, then click Remove.
Perhaps your mail server has changed names. Or you have grown tired of a certain layout for your appointments. Whatever the reason, you can change your
Working with Mail Accounts
Autocompletion
Mail Preferences
Composer Preferences
Calendar and Tasks Settings
Contact Management
Certificates
Debug Logs
You reach the Evolution settings window by clicking Edit &gt; Preferences. In the left part of the settings window is a column, similar to the Evolution switcher, that lets you choose which portion of Evolution to customize. The right part of the window is where you make your actual changes.
There are six items you can customize.
Mail Accounts:
Add or change information about your email accounts, such as the servers you connect to, the way you download mail, and your password authentication mode. This is the most complex item in the list, and is covered in
Autocompletion:
Set the address books to be used when completing email addresses in the message composer. For more information, see
Mail Preferences:
These are overall mail reading preferences, such as display settings, notification options, and security. Settings that vary per account are in the Mail Accounts tool, described in
Composer Preferences:
These are settings for the way that you use the mail composer, such as signatures, and spelling. This includes the ability to substitute graphical emoticons for
Calendar and Tasks:
Use these settings to control how the calendar behaves, including your time zone and the length of your work week. For more information, see
Certificates:
Use these settings for certificate handling for S/MIME security systems. For more information, see
Previous versions of Evolution included directory servers, folder settings, and Exchange delegation in the settings tool. Directory servers can now be set up as contacts groups in the Contacts tool, you can change folder settings in the folder right-click menu, and Exchange delegation is available in the Message Menu of the Exchange tool.
Evolution allows you to maintain multiple accounts, or identities. When you are writing an email message, you can choose which account to use by selecting from the drop-down list next to the From field in the message composer.
Click Send/Receive to update all mail sources that are not disabled. If you don't want to check mail for a given account, select the account in Edit &gt; Preferences, then Mail Accounts page and click the Disable button.
To add a new account, click Add to open the Evolution configuration assistant.
To alter an existing account, select it in the Preferences window.
The account editor dialog box has seven sections:
Identity:
Specify the name and email address for this account. You can also choose a default signature to insert into messages sent from this account.
Receiving Email:
Select the way you receive email. You can download email from a
Your system administrator might ask you to connect to a specific port on a mail server. To specify which port you use, just type a colon and the port number after the server name. For example, to connect to port 143 on the server smtp.example.com, specify smtp.example.com:143 as the server name.
For additional information, see
Receiving Options:
Decide if you want to check for mail automatically and how often, as well as setting other message retrieval options.
For additional information, see
Sending Mail:
Use this section to choose and configure a method for sending mail. You can choose
For additional information, see
Defaults:
Use this section to set where this account stores the messages that it has sent, and the messages that you save as drafts. If you want to revert to the default settings, click Restore.
If you want to send someone a copy of every message from this account, select either Always Carbon-Copy (Cc) To: or Always Blind Carbon-Copy (Bcc) To:, and specify one or more addresses.
You can specify the way you want to receive message receipts. You can set Send message receipts to Never, Always or Ask for each message. For more information refer
You can change the default settings of your sent items. Click Advanced Send Options to prioritize, classify your send messages. You can also set the date for reply request so that recipient will know the immediacy and can accordingly response to your message. Enable status tracking and set Return Notification for Mail, Calendar and Task.
Security:
Use this section to set the security options for this account. If you use encryption, enter your PGP key ID (see
Proxy:
This only displays if you have a GroupWise account. Use this section to set proxy access for other users to access your mailbox or calendar.
The Autocompletion tool lets you choose address books to auto-complete names for you in the mail composer. This functionality requires accessibility to each of the address books you want to use. To enable autocompletion, select each of the address books that you want to use auto completion in the Autocompletion page.
Select the Always show address of the autocompleted contact check box to show the email address along with the username.
IMAP Mail Headers
Evolution allows you to choose the headers that you want to download so that you can reduce the download time and filter or move your mail around the way you like it. Evolution helps you to customize your IMAP Mail header preferences and thus save the download time. The IMAP Mail header options are as follows:
All Headers:
All available IMAP mail headers for all the messages will be downloaded.
Basic Headers:
This will include Date, From, To, CC, Subject, Preferences, In-Reply-To, Message-ID, Mime-Version, and Content-Type. If you want to just fetch and see messages without having to categorically filter messages based on your mailing lists, choose this option. This will make Evolution work faster and is generally recommended for common users.
Mailing List Headers:
Enable this option to have filters based on mailing list headers (like list ID) so that in addition to the basic headers, the headers that correspond to mailing-lists are also fetched. Mailing list headers will have the informations such as the mailinglist-ID, owner of the mailing list, and so on with which you can create mailing list filters.
This is the default Header preference that comes with Evolution. When this option is chosen, Evolution will download a basic set of headers (as described above) along with a set of headers that are needed for client-side filters based on mailing lists. If you do not have any filters on Evolution, it is recommended to switch to the "Basic Headers Only" option.
To set the IMAP Mail headers:
Select the IMAP account.
On the Account Editor, click IMAP Headers tab to open IMAP Headers to the Account Editor.
Click Fetch All Headers to download all the available header information.
The more headers you have, the more time it will consume to download. This option is not recommended.
Click Basic Headers to download basic headers.
Click Basic and Mailing Headers to download both.
Click Add to add any predefined custom headers.
Click Remove to remove the custom headers.
The Mail Preferences tool lets you choose how to display citations, how long to wait before marking a message as read, and other mail display settings.
General Mail Settings
HTML Mail Preferences
Label Preferences
Mail Header Preferences
Junk Mail Preferences
Automatic Contacts Preferences
Calendar and Tasks Preferences
For information on individual email account settings, see
The following options are available:
Message Fonts:
Normally, Evolution uses the same fonts as other GNOME applications. To choose different fonts, deselect Use the same fonts as other applications and select one font for standard typefaces and a second for monospace.
Message Display:
Choose how long you want to wait before marking a message read, how to highlight quotations, and the default encoding. Enable
To group the messages as threads select View &gt; Group By threads or press Ctrl+T.
Deleting Mail:
Choose whether to delete messages automatically when quitting Evolution and how frequently, and whether you want to explicitly confirm the final deletion of messages. Select Confirm when expunging a folder to confirm the final deletion. You can have four different options to set the frequency for deletion: Everytime, Once per day, Once per week, and Once per month.
New Mail Notifications:
Evolution can alert you to the arrival of new mail with a beep or by playing a sound file. Choose your alert noise, or select none, as you prefer. You can choose not to notify on new mail arrival.
Show Image Animations:
Turns image animation (e.g. GIF files) on or off.
Prompt When Sending HTML Messages to Contacts That Don't Want Them:
Some people do not like HTML mail, and you can set Evolution to warn you of this preference. This warning appears only when you send HTML mail to people in your contacts who are listed as disliking HTML.
Loading Images:
You can embed a image in an email and have it load only when the message arrives. However, spammers can use image loading patterns to confirm
If you have chosen not to load images automatically, you can choose to see the images in one message at a time by selecting View &gt; Load Images or press Ctrl+I.
The Label preferences option lets you add color labels for different kinds of messages. You can add, edit, or remove the labels. You can also assign colors to each label you create. You cannot remove the default labels.
To create a label:
Click Add and specify the name in the Label Name dialog box.
Click the color tab and select a color, then click OK.
To edit label properties:
Select the label and click Edit.
Edit name and color, then click OK.
To assign a label to a specific email message:
Right-click the message from the message preview.
Click Label and select the desired label for the message.
The headers on an incoming message are the information about the message that isn't the content of the message itself, such as the sender and the time it was sent. Select the options here to show or hide different amounts of information about the messages you read. You can also add or remove new mail headers to the list. The default mail headers cannot be removed.
Sender Photograph:
This feature adds support for viewing the photograph of the sender at the right side of the preview pane.
To enable this feature, select Edit &gt; Preferences &gt; Mail Preferences &gt; Headers &gt; Show the photograph of sender in the email preview. Deselect this option to disable this feature.
By default it searches only in the local address books enabled for autocompletion. If you deselect the option
This feature is disabled by default as it causes delay in fetching the messages.
Configurable Date and Time Format
Although Evolution components have a set of predefined date and time formats, an advanced user can write acceptable strftime, with new tag %ad for an abbreviated date to show in tables and date headers.
You can check your incoming messages for junk content by using Bogofilter and SpamAssassin* tools, which have trainable Bayesian filters. You need to enable the Junk plugins to start filtering junk mail.
To enable Junk plugins:
Select the junk plugins you want. You can select either Bogofilter or SpamAssassin, or you can select both.
General:
You can check incoming email for junk contents and also decide how often you want to delete junk mail. You also have the option to choose either SpamAssassin or Bogofilter, or you can select both.
Checking Incoming Mail for Junk:
This option turns automatic junk mail filtering on or off.
Delete junk mail on exit:
This option deletes junk messages when you exit. You can also specify when to delete the junk messages (every time, once per day, once per week, once per month).
Default junk plugin:
Select either SpamAssassin or Bogofilter, or both, as your junk filter. You can view them only if you have enabled the respective plugins. When you select any option, it also reports if the underlying binary is available or not.
SpamAssassin Options:
Remote Test performs junk mail filtering on remote servers. It also includes online tests, like checking for blacklisted message senders and ISPs.
This option uses tests that require a network connection, such as checking to see if a message is in a list of known junk messages, or if the sender or gateway are blacklisted by anti-spam organizations. Online tests can make filtering slower, because remote tests add to the amount of time it takes to check for junk mail, but they increase accuracy. When you select this option, you do not need to do any additional setup.
Bogofilter Options:
Select Convert mail text to Unicode to enable Unicode* filtering. For more information on Bogofilter, see the
Check new messages for junk contents option under Edit &gt; Preferences &gt; Mail Accounts &gt; Edit &gt; Receiving options is enabled only for IMAP. Check incoming mail for junk option under Edit &gt; Preferences &gt; Mail Preferences &gt; Junk &gt; General refers only to POP and Local Delivery.
There are two items in this section: Automatic Contacts automatically adds people that you respond to into your address book. You can select the default address book for automatic contacts from the list.
Instant Messaging Contacts periodically synchronizes contact information and images with your instant messaging program. Currently this only works with Pidgin. Your address book must not be a read-only one for both these features to function properly.
Allows you to delete messages after you have acted on an appointment. It also allows you to select calendars to search for meeting conflicts.
There are three tabs for message composer settings where you can set the composer preferences. The General tab covers assorted behavior, the Signature tab sets your signature, and the Spell Checking tab controls spell checking.
Signature
Spell Checking
Default Behavior:
Choose how to normally forward and reply to messages, what character set they will use, whether they are in HTML, and whether that HTML can contain graphic emoticons.
You can forward messages either as an attachment or inline, or else as quoted. Choose reply style from the drop-down list: Quote original message, Do not quote original message, Attach original message.
Top Posting Options:
When replying, you can choose where to place your signature in the message. You can place the signature either above the original message or at the end of the composer window. Top Posting is not recommended because placing the signature other than at the end of the message is against the mailing standards.
Alerts:
There are two optional alerts you can select:
Prompt When Sending Messages With an Empty Subject Line:
The composer warns you if you try to send a message without a subject.
Prompt When Sending Messages with Only Bcc Recipients Defined:
The composer warns you if you try to send a message that has only Bcc recipients. This is important because some mail servers fail to transmit blind carbon copy if you do not have at least one recipient that is visible to all readers.
The signature editor allows you to create several different signatures in plain text or in HTML, and to specify which of them will be added to email you create in the message composer. If you prefer to use an alternate signature or none at all, you can select it from the mail composer itself.
To choose a spell-checking language, select it here. You must install gnome-spell, aspell, and an aspell language package (like for example aspell-en for english language) for spell-checking to be available in Evolution. Additional dictionaries are available through your package manager and are detected automatically if you have installed them. To have the composer automatically check your spelling while you type, select Check Spelling While I Type. You can set the color for misspelled words.
The calendar configuration tool has several pages:
Display
Alarms
Calendar Publishing
Time Zone:
The city you're located in, to specify your time zone.
Time Format:
Choose between twelve-hour (AM/PM) and twenty-four-hour time formats.
Second Zone:
Specify a location for the second time zone.
You can view both the time zones in the calendar view.
Week Starts:
Select the day to display as the first in each week.
Day Begins:
For Evolution, a normal work day begins at 9 a.m. and ends at 5 p.m. You can select your preferred hours.
Day Ends:
Sets the end of a normal workday.
If you want to be warned before you delete any appointment, or to have a reminder automatically appear for each event, select the options here.
The Display page lets you choose how your appointments and tasks appear in your calendar.
Time Divisions:
Sets the time increments shown as fine lines on the daily view in the calendar.
Show appointment end times in week and month views:
If there is space, Evolution shows the end times in the week and month views for each appointment.
Compress weekends in month view:
Select this option to display weekends in one box instead of two in the month view.
Show week numbers in date navigator:
Shows the week numbers next to the respective weeks in the calendar.
Tasks due today:
Select the color for tasks due today.
Overdue tasks:
Select the color for overdue tasks.
Hide completed tasks after:
Select this option to have completed tasks hidden after a period of time measured in days, hours, or minutes. If you don't select this option, completed tasks remain in your task list, marked as complete.
Select the Calendars for Alarm Notification:
Select the calendars for which you want an alarm notification. If you don't select the calendar, you will not have an alarm notification for any event in this calendar.
Click Dismiss to close the alarm. Click Dismiss All to close all the alarm notifications.
Free/Busy
Publishing:
Allows you to select a URL to post your calendar information to. When you add a URL, you can specify the publishing location, the frequency of publishing, which calendar to publish, and who to authenticate as.
Network Preferences
This interface lets you configure your network proxy settings.
Use system defaults:
Select this option to use the system wide proxy settings configured through Control Center &gt; Network Proxies in GNOME. When this option is selected, Evolution uses the proxy settings in the /system/http_proxy and /system/proxy/gconf keys.
If these keys do not reflect the settings configured through Control Center &gt; Network Proxies, Evolution does not work with the proxy and you must either update these gconf keys or choose Manual proxy configuration.
Direct connection to the Internet:
Select this option to connect directly to the internet.
Manual proxy configuration:
This option helps you costomize proxy settings regardless of the desktop you use. Specify hosts and ports for HTTP and optionally for other protocols. In the No Proxy Domain field, specify that comma-separated domain names do not go through the configured proxy server. You can specify patterns like *.example.com or .example.com in the No Proxy Domain list. Specify a username and password, and if the proxy server requires authentication, select Use Authentication to enable the username and password fields. The customized proxy settings are as follows:
Proxy Configuration Settings
HTTP Proxy
The machine name to proxy HTTP through.
Port
The port for the machine defined by the HTTP Proxy field that you proxy through.
Secure HTTP Proxy
The machine name to proxy secure HTTP through.
The port for the machine defined by the Secure HTTP Proxy port field.
SOCKS Host
The machine name to proxy SOCKS through.
The port for the machine defined by the SOCKS host.
No proxy domain
This key contains a list of hosts which are connected to directly, rather than via the proxy (if it is active). The values can be hostnames, domains (using an initial wildcard like *.example.com), IP host addresses (both IPv4 and IPv6) and network addresses with a netmask similar to 192.168.0.0/24.
Use authentication
If this option is enabled, it uses authentication to connect via the proxy server.
Username
Username used to authenticate when performing an HTTP proxying.
Password
Password used to authenticate when performing an HTTP proxying.
Evolution allows you to add certificates for yourself as well as for contacts. This allows you to communicate with others securely over an encrypted connection, or sign a message confirming your identity to the contact. These settings only apply to S/MIME encryption.
Your Certificates:
Click the Your Certificates tab to display a list of certificates that you own. You can import, view and delete your certificates from this page.
Contact Certificates:
Click the Contact Certificates tab to display a list of certificates that you have for contacts. These certificates allow you to decrypt messages as well verify signed messages. You can import, view, edit, and delete your contact certificates from this page.
Authorities:
Click the Authorities tab to display a list of trusted certificate authorities who verify that the certificate you have is valid. You can import, view, edit, and delete certificate authorities from this page.
There are two main tasks for configuring contact information:
Creating a Contact
Creating an Address Book
To add a new contact list, either local or remote:
Click Contacts in the Switcher.
Click the down-arrow next to New.
Select Contact List.
Type a name and location for the Address Book.
Select the type of Address Book.
On This Computer:
Creates a local address book on the computer.
On LDAP Server:
Creates an address book on the LDAP server.
Specific Account:
If you have an account that allows you to create an address book on that server, you can select that account.
If you selected On This Computer, specify the name of the address book, and choose whether you want to the new address book as your default folder.
If you are creating an address book on an
Server Name:
The Internet address of the contact server you are using.
Login Method:
Specify whether your login is anonymous, uses an email address, or uses a distinguished name. If the login is not anonymous, specify the email address or distinguished name (DN) required by the server.
Port:
The Internet port Evolution connects to in order to access the LDAP database. This is normally 389.
Use SSL/TLS:
SSL and TLS are security mechanisms. If you select No Encryption, Evolution will send your password unencrypted. By using SSL or TLS, a secure connection will be used and your password will be sent encrypted.
Details: Search Base:
The
Search Scope:
The
One:
Searches the Search Base and one entry below it.
Sub:
Searches the Search Base and all entries below it.
Timeout (minutes):
The maximum time Evolution attempts to download data from the server before giving up.
Download Limit:
The maximum number of results for a given search. Most servers refuse to send more than 500, but you can set the number lower if you want to shorten downloads for very broad searches.
Display Name:
The name you want to use as a label for this folder. It can be any name you choose.
Search Filter:
The search filter can be set here for all the LDAP queries. For example:
ObjectClass=*: Lists all the objects from the server.ObjectClass=User: Lists only the users. Filter (|(ObjectClass=User)(ObjectClass=groupOfNames)): Retrieves the User and Contact List objects.(amp;(mail=*)(ObjectClass=*)): Lists the objects associated with the email addresses.
If you change any LDAP address book configurations, Evolution and the Evolution Data Server need to be restarted in order to see the changes.
If you are creating the address book for a specific account, type the name of the address book if you want the address book stored locally when offline, and if you want the address book to be your default folder.
Evolution allows you to view the error logs and set the display duration for the error messages that appear in the statusbar. When an error occurs, statusbar displays the error message for the specified time, then it is moved to the debug file.
From the Help menu, select Debug Logs.
Specify for how long error messages will be displayed in the statusbar.
The
Synchronization presents you with three issues you need to address. First, you need to enable synchronization. Second, your computer needs to recognize and access your handheld. At this time,
Enabling Synchronization
Selecting Conduits
Synchronizing Information
If you haven't used a handheld device with your computer before, you need to run the GNOME Control Center by clicking System &gt; Settings, and make sure that Pilot Link is properly configured. Make sure that you have read and write permissions on the device, which is normally in /dev/pilot. If that does not work, check in /dev/ttyS0 if you have a serial connection, or in /dev/ttyUSB1 for a USB connection. You can do this by becoming root and adding your username to the group that owns this device node. For a USB device on sync, two device nodes are created, ttyUSB0 and ttyUSB1. The second node is the one to be used in configuring the device.
After your computer and your Palm OS device are communicating, select the
Click Enable, then click Settings to change what the conduit does when activated. Your options can vary depending on the conduit, but typically they are as follows:
Disabled:
Do nothing.
Synchronize:
Copy new data from the computer to the handheld, and from the handheld to the computer. Remove items that were on both systems but have been deleted on one.
Copy From Pilot:
If there is any new data on the handheld device, copy it to the computer.
Copy To Pilot:
Copy new data from the computer to the handheld.
Select the behavior you want for each conduit you choose to use. If you're not sure, use Synchronize.
Use the following procedure to synchronize the data on your Palm OS device with the data you store in Evolution.
If you want to back up your information before synchronizing, make a copy of the
Put your handheld device in its cradle and press the HotSync button.
If you use Palm OS v. 4.0 and have password protection turned on for your handheld device, you might encounter trouble synchronizing. If this happens, try turning off password protection on your handheld, synchronize it with your desktop computer, and then re-enable password protection on your handheld.
If you have followed the setup instructions properly, your Palm OS device will synchronize data with Evolution.
If you are using Microsoft Outlook, but not Microsoft Exchange, this section helps you switch to
Migrating Local Outlook Mail Folders
Exchange and IMAP mail is stored on the server, so you do not need to migrate it to your Linux* partition. However, if you have stored mail on your computer, you might want to make it accessible to Evolution.
First, while using Windows, prepare your messages for import:
Clean up your mail. Delete messages and folders you do not need, and click File &gt; Folders &gt; Properties &gt; Advanced &gt; Compact to erase old, deleted messages from your PST file.
If you nest your folders one inside another, you might want to rename subfolders so that you can tell which folder they belong to. You must re-nest them after you load them into Evolution.
Import the files into Mozilla Mail (or another mailer, such as Netscape or Eudora, that uses the standard mbox format).
Linux mailers cannot do this task, because it requires a library available only under Windows. In Mozilla, import by selecting Window Mail & Newsgroups Tools Import.
Mozilla creates a set of files in the directory
If you are using Windows Vista*, Windows XP* or Windows 2000*, your Windows hard drive is probably in the NTFS format, which some Linux systems cannot read without additional software. You might find it simpler to copy the mail folders to a different drive or to burn a CD.
When you have your mail in a format Evolution can understand, reboot to Linux. Then continue with the following procedure. To create new folders for your files:
Mount your Windows drive or the disk where you saved the mail files.
Copy all the mail files into your home directory or another convenient place.
Start Evolution.
Select File &gt; New &gt; Mail Folder to create the folders you want.
To import the data files:
In Evolution, open the File Import assistant by clicking File &gt; Import.
Click Next, then select Import a single file.
Click on the filechooser to select the data file.
Remember, the data files are the files that have no file extension.
Select the folder where you want to put the imported data file.
Repeat the import steps until you have imported all your mail.
You can print this section to use it as a quick reference for most of the things you want to do with
Opening or Creating Items
Mail Tasks
Address Book
New Item:
Press Ctrl+N to open a new item for whatever part of Evolution you're working in. In mail, this means you create a new message. If you're looking at your address book, Ctrl+N creates a new contact card, and in the calendar, a new appointment.
Creating a New Email Message:
Select File &gt; New &gt; Mail Message or Shift+Ctrl+M.
Creating a New Appointment:
Click File &gt; New &gt; Appointment or Shift+Ctrl+A.
Entering a New Contact:
Double-click in any blank space in the contact manager to create a new address card. You can also click File &gt; New &gt; Contact or Shift+Ctrl+C.
Creating a New Task:
Click File &gt; New &gt; Task or Shift+Ctrl+T.
Send and Receive Mail:
Press F9, click the Send/Receive button in the toolbar, or click File &gt; Send/Receive.
Navigating the Message List with the Keyboard:
Press (]) or (.) to jump to the next unread message. ([) or (,) goes to the previous unread message. Use the arrow keys to move up and down in the list of all messages.
Moving the Display Up and Down in the Preview Pane:
Press the Spacebar to move down a page. Press Backspace to move up a page.
Replying To a Message:
To reply only to the sender of the message, click Reply in the toolbar, or press Ctrl+R.
To reply to the sender and all the other visible recipients of the message, click Reply to All or select the message and press Shift+Ctrl+R.
Forwarding a Message:
Select the message or messages you want to forward, then click Forward in the toolbar, or press Ctrl+F.
Opening a Message In a New Window:
Double-click the message you want to view, or select it and press Enter or Ctrl+O.
Creating Filters and Search Folders:
Right-click a message and select Create Rule From Message. You can also create filters and Search folders in the Edit menu.
Adding a Sender to the Address Book:
Right-click on any email address to add it to your address book.
You can also click in any blank spot in the calendar and start typing to create a new appointment entry.
Editing a Contact:
Double-click the contact's address card to change details.
Deleting a Contact:
Right-click a contact, then click Delete; or select a contact, then click Delete on the toolbar.
Sending Emails to a Contact:
Right-click a contact, then click Send Message to Contact.
Creating a New Contact:
Double-click in any blank space in the contact manager to create a new address card, or right-click anywhere in the address book and select New Contact. You can also click File &gt; New Contact or press Shift+Ctrl+C.

A complete list of feature requests and other issues with Evolution is available online in the GNOME bug tracking system. You can learn more about the Evolution development process at the
Evolution was written by the
The Evolution code owes a great debt to the GNOME-pim and GNOME-Calendar applications, and to KHTMLW. The developers of Evolution acknowledge the efforts and contributions of all who worked on those projects.
For more information please visit the Evolution
This manual was written by:
Radhika PC (pradhika@novell.com)
Srinivasa Ragavan (sragavan@novell.com)
Andre Klapper (ak-47@gmx.net)
Francisco Javier F. Serrador (serrador@tecknolabs.com)
Mark Moulder (mmoulder@novell.com)
Jessica Prabhakar (jprabhakar@novell.com)
Aaron Weber (aaron@ximian.com)
Kevin Breit (mrproper@ximian.com)
Duncan Mak (duncan@ximian.com)
Ettore Perazzoli (ettore@ximian.com)
Akhil Laddha (lakhil@novell.com)
With the help of the application programmers and the GNOME Documentation Project.
Please file comments and suggestions for this manual as bugs in the GNOME bug tracking system. If you contributed to this project but do not see your name here, please contact Radhika PC (pradhika@novell.com) or Srinivasa Ragavan (sragavan@novell.com) and either of them will list you.
This glossary contains terms that are frequently used in this guide as well as in
Assistant
A tool that guides a user through a series of steps, usually to configure or set up a program. Equivalent to Wizard and Druid.
attachment
Any file sent with an email. Attachments can be embedded in a message or appended to it.
automatic indexing
A feature which allows Evolution to quickly find and sort data.
Bcc (Blind Carbon Copy)
Blind copy recipients (Bcc) receive a copy of an item. Other recipients receive no information about blind copies. Only the sender and the blind copy recipient know that a blind copy was sent. If a recipient replies and chooses Reply to All, the blind copy recipient does not receive the reply.
Cc (Carbon Copy)
Carbon copy recipients (CC) receive a copy of an item. CC recipients are users who would benefit from the information in an item, but are not affected by or directly responsible for it. All recipients can see that a carbon copy was sent. They can also see the names of the CC recipients.
conduit
A small application that controls the transfer of data between a handheld device and a desktop computer.
The GNOME groupware application.
execute
To run a program. Any file that can be run is called an executable. Evolution can download executable attachments, but before they can be run, the files must be marked as executable with a shell or file manager. This security precaution prevents the automatic or accidental execution of malicious programs. For more information on executables and file permissions, see the documentation for your file manager or shell.
expunge
When messages are marked for deletion, they remain until they are expunged. When a message is expunged, it is permanently deleted, as long as it was marked for deletion.
file tree
A way of describing a group of files on a computer. The top of the tree is called the root directory, and is denoted by
filter
Within Evolution, a filter is a method of sorting mail automatically when it is downloaded. You can create filters to perform one or more actions on a message that meets any (or all) of a wide range of criteria.
forward
Forwards a copy of the message and any additional comments to a different email address.
groupware
A term describing an application that helps groups of people work together. Typically, a groupware application has several productivity features built into one program, including email, calendar, and address book tools.
HTML
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) is a language for describing page layout in electronic documents such as Web pages, help files, and email messages. HTML can be used in email and news posts to insert images and apply text treatments.
iCal
iCal is a protocol that Evolution uses to manage the calendar section.
IMAP
Internet Mail Access Protocol. It allows access to email that is typically stored remotely on a server rather than on a local hard disk. Often contrasted with POP.
inline
Displayed as part of a message or other document, rather than attached as a separate file. Contrast with
LDAP
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol. Allows a client to search through a large database of addresses, phone numbers, and people stored on a server.
mail client
The application with which a person reads and sends email. Its counterparts are the various types of mail servers, which handle user authentication and direct messages from the sender to the recipient.
POP
Post Office Protocol. A mechanism for email transport. In contrast to IMAP, it is used only to get mail from a server and store it locally on your hard disk.
protocol
An agreed-upon method of communication, especially one for sending particular types of information between computer systems. Examples include POP (Post Office Protocol), for email, and HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol) for Web pages.
public key encryption
A strong encryption method that uses a set of two keys, one of which is made public, and one of which is kept private. Data encrypted using the public key can only be decrypted using the private key. The longer the keys, the more difficult it is to break the encryption.
regular expression
A regular expression (regex) is a way of describing a string of text using metacharacters or wildcard symbols. For example, the statement fly.*so[au]p means any phrase beginning with
script
A program written in an interpreted (rather than compiled) language. Often used as a synonym for macro, to denote a series of prerecorded commands or actions within an application. Scripts are used to accomplish repetitive and tedious tasks, to save the user time.
search base
LDAP can break contact lists into many groups. The search base tells LDAP the top group to use. How much of the Search Base to search is set by the Search Scope option.
search folder
An email organization tool. Search folders allow you to create a folder that contains the results of a complex search. Search folder contents are updated dynamically.
search scope
Search Scope states how much of the search base to search.
Sendmail
A program that sends mail. Evolution can use it instead of SMTP; some people prefer it because it offers more flexibility; however, it is more difficult to set up.
switcher
An area of Evolution that offers users fast access to the most frequently used features of the application.
signature
Text placed at the end of every email sent, similar to a hand-written signature at the bottom of a written letter. A signature can be anything from a favorite quotation to a link to a Web page; courtesy dictates that it be fewer than four lines long.
SMTP
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol. The most common way of transporting mail messages from your computer to the server.
tooltip
A small box of explanatory text that appears when the mouse pointer is held over a button or other interface element.
virus
A program that inserts itself into other files or programs. When executed, it spreads to more programs and other computers. A virus can cause substantial damage by clogging networks or disk drives, deleting files, or opening security holes.
vCard
A file format for the exchange of contact information. When you get an address card attached to an email, it is probably in vCard format.
Legal Notices
Novell, Inc. makes no representations or warranties with respect to the contents or use of this documentation, and specifically disclaims any express or implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose. Further, Novell, Inc. reserves the right to revise this publication and to make changes to its content, at any time, without obligation to notify any person or entity of such revisions or changes.
Further, Novell, Inc. makes no representations or warranties with respect to any software, and specifically disclaims any express or implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose. Further, Novell, Inc. reserves the right to make changes to any and all parts of Novell software, at any time, without any obligation to notify any person or entity of such changes.
You may not use, export, or re-export this product in violation of any applicable laws or regulations including, without limitation, U.S. export regulations or the laws of the country in which you reside.
Copyright 2007 Novell, Inc. Permission is granted to copy, distribute, and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), Version 1.2 or any later version, published by the Free Software Foundation with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the GFDL can be found at http://www.fsf.org/licenses/fdl.html.
THIS DOCUMENT AND MODIFIED VERSIONS OF THIS DOCUMENT ARE PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THE GNU FREE DOCUMENTATION LICENSE WITH THE FURTHER UNDERSTANDING THAT:
1. THE DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES THAT THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS FREE OF DEFECTS, MERCHANTABLE, FIT FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGING. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY, ACCURACY, AND PERFORMANCE OF THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS WITH YOU. SHOULD ANY DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION PROVE DEFECTIVE IN ANY RESPECT, YOU (NOT THE INITIAL WRITER, AUTHOR OR ANY CONTRIBUTOR) ASSUME THE COST OF ANY NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. THIS DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY CONSTITUTES AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THIS LICENSE. NO USE OF ANY DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS AUTHORIZED HEREUNDER EXCEPT UNDER THIS DISCLAIMER; AND
2. UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES AND UNDER NO LEGAL THEORY, WHETHER IN TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE), CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, SHALL THE AUTHOR, INITIAL WRITER, ANY CONTRIBUTOR, OR ANY DISTRIBUTOR OF THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT, OR ANY SUPPLIER OF ANY OF SUCH PARTIES, BE LIABLE TO ANY PERSON FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY CHARACTER INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF GOODWILL, WORK STOPPAGE, COMPUTER FAILURE OR MALFUNCTION, OR ANY AND ALL OTHER DAMAGES OR LOSSES ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO USE OF THE DOCUMENT AND MODIFIED VERSIONS OF THE DOCUMENT, EVEN IF SUCH PARTY SHALL HAVE BEEN INFORMED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
Novell, Inc.
404 Wyman Street, Suite 500
Waltham, MA 02451
U.S.A.
www.novell.com
July 2007
To access the online documentation for this and other Novell products, and to get updates, see www.novell.com/documentation
Evolution is a trademark of Novell, Inc.
GroupWise is a registered trademark of Novell, Inc. in the United States and other countries.
Novell is a registered trademark of Novell, Inc. in the United States and other countries.
SUSE is a registered trademark of SUSE AG, a Novell company.
Ximian is a registered trademark of Novell, Inc. in the United States and other countries.
All third-party trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
translator-credits
@@image: 'figures/evo_identity_a.png'; md5=51fef803bd3083b0b2c2583221d1c151
@@image: 'figures/evo_receive_setup_a.png'; md5=5add6d290b2df212516dda2463930759
@@image: 'figures/evo_mereceive_a.png'; md5=c3c759f902c2584ee218dc40d6e46806
@@image: 'figures/evo_timezone_a.png'; md5=4ee80aae45be18c238c25329ab5ce59a
@@image: 'figures/evo_restore.png'; md5=95ef78344a50e05dbf01da9633dcd71f
@@image: 'figures/evo_mailnotification.png'; md5=3ec09c3f9b49aee5be6f5fc2df69350d
@@image: 'figures/collap_head_a.png'; md5=82c5d5ae3f5499f17bdb08eebfe9c557
@@image: 'figures/evo_account_editor_a.png'; md5=39b83104a4e6ecb9473cbb84121e6be3
@@image: 'figures/account_editor_a.png'; md5=9d0ad61b553325e9a85ea074fa091703
@@image: 'figures/evo_import_asst_a.png'; md5=e86638d0b3a01478fd4f12e33781a8a0
@@image: 'figures/mail-threaded.png'; md5=ab1b9eb0f0735f4fcc4c51ead5ce1ff2
@@image: 'figures/evo_message_filters_a.png'; md5=3b7067638063c6aad2c316db838d2273
@@image: 'figures/evo_edit_rule_a.png'; md5=0ae423517b27dfd34cfcb54550335fbb
@@image: 'figures/evo_cal_prop_a.png'; md5=f28511f098847b4fc9278ba6c54c9c3d
@@image: 'figures/evo_allday_a.png'; md5=3641b70c5110bb275d553c00d559636f
@@image: 'figures/exchng-identity.png'; md5=51fef803bd3083b0b2c2583221d1c151
@@image: 'figures/exchng-settings.png'; md5=THIS FILE DOESN'T EXIST
@@image: 'figures/sub-others-folder.png'; md5=5e385ee9524f93b65b307f83e1888138
@@image: 'figures/sub-pub-fold.png'; md5=e8e8b7d0b6ae8214ca1ef51dac06a1f7
@@image: 'figures/evo_identityedit_a.png'; md5=78418c3f6214b7494c323df12bc6921f
@@image: 'figures/evo_gwreceiveedit_a.png'; md5=3f5fc5b802eba3ef1a68e6ff675577b0
@@image: 'figures/evo_gwreceiveoptedit_a.png'; md5=1c9e818bb39bb288511cf1cebdd83569
@@image: 'figures/evo_rmdrnotes_a.png'; md5=ae24ed3554b8359af96ef2374ccd261a
@@image: 'figures/evo_imapheader_a.png'; md5=b11aa6167ce03769ce3084d32f4b4459
@@image: 'figures/evo_debuglogs_a.png'; md5=07f28e4574670558cf11897915b2ce7e