# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	GNOME
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-GNOME/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

@@image: 'figures/camelot-goal.png'; md5=401d912730bd0fb4e9197582f3121401
@@image: 'figures/clock-rules.png'; md5=f84ad70ff4c8de139e7f9965b126f2bb

AisleRiot is a collection of over 80 card games programmed in GNOME's scripting language, Scheme.
2001
Rosanna Yuen
GNOME Documentation Project
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. You can find a copy of the GFDL at this
This manual is part of a collection of GNOME manuals distributed under the GFDL. If you want to distribute this manual separately from the collection, you can do so by adding a copy of the license to the manual, as described in section 6 of the license.
Many of the names used by companies to distinguish their products and services are claimed as trademarks. Where those names appear in any GNOME documentation, and the members of the GNOME Documentation Project are made aware of those trademarks, then the names are in capital letters or initial capital letters.
DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES THAT THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS FREE OF DEFECTS MERCHANTABLE, FIT FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGING. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY, ACCURACY, AND PERFORMANCE OF THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS WITH YOU. SHOULD ANY DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION PROVE DEFECTIVE IN ANY RESPECT, YOU (NOT THE INITIAL WRITER, AUTHOR OR ANY CONTRIBUTOR) ASSUME THE COST OF ANY NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. THIS DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY CONSTITUTES AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THIS LICENSE. NO USE OF ANY DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS AUTHORIZED HEREUNDER EXCEPT UNDER THIS DISCLAIMER; AND
UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES AND UNDER NO LEGAL THEORY, WHETHER IN TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE), CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, SHALL THE AUTHOR, INITIAL WRITER, ANY CONTRIBUTOR, OR ANY DISTRIBUTOR OF THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT, OR ANY SUPPLIER OF ANY OF SUCH PARTIES, BE LIABLE TO ANY PERSON FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY CHARACTER INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF GOODWILL, WORK STOPPAGE, COMPUTER FAILURE OR MALFUNCTION, OR ANY AND ALL OTHER DAMAGES OR LOSSES ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO USE OF THE DOCUMENT AND MODIFIED VERSIONS OF THE DOCUMENT, EVEN IF SUCH PARTY SHALL HAVE BEEN INFORMED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
DOCUMENT AND MODIFIED VERSIONS OF THE DOCUMENT ARE PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THE GNU FREE DOCUMENTATION LICENSE WITH THE FURTHER UNDERSTANDING THAT:
Rosanna
Yuen
zana@webwynk.net
Telsa
Gwynne
hobbit@aloss.ukuu.org.uk
AisleRiot Manual V2.12
July 2005
Rosanna Yuen
This manual describes version 2.12 of AisleRiot.
Feedback
To report a bug or make a suggestion regarding the
Introduction
AisleRiot

Playing
Use the mouse to move cards. Click a card and drag it somewhere. Release the mouse button to deposit the card.
Alternatively, you can move a card by clicking once to pick it up and clicking again to place it. To enable this way of moving cards, choose
If a card can be moved to the foundation(s), you do not need to drag it. You can double-click on it and it will move. If a sequence of cards can be moved to the foundations, you can generally move the sequence as one move.
Double clicking a card will send it to a foundation, if that is possible. This is useful for cleaning up large numbers of cards at the end of a successful game.
In games which have a stock pile you can redeal it by clicking on the empty space where it was. Be warned that some games only let you do this a limited number of time. Watch for the
A useful tip to know is that right-clicking on a face-up card which is partially obscured by a card laid over it will raise it so that you can see what it is.
Some games have options to change the way the game is played. For example Klondike can be played with either single card deals or three-card deals. In these games there is a separate menu with the game's name. You can only change the rules of the game at the beginning of the game - the menu will be inactive during the game.
Statistics on how well you have done at a particular game are available by selecting
The Games
Accordion
Written by Ed Sirett
Setup
Type of Deck
Standard Deck
Tableau
Fifty-four spaces in five rows of nine and a last row of seven. Deal cards face up one per space. The spaces should be considered as one continuous line, the rows simply arrange the tableau so all of it can be seen at once. Thus the rightmost space of a row is to be considered to the left of the leftmost space of the row below.
Goal
To remove all cards except one.
Rules
Cards are moved singly. Any card can be moved over another card of the same suit or rank that is in the space immediately to its left or three spaces to its left. The card that is covered is removed from play. All the cards (if any) in spaces to the right of the resulting gap are moved to the left one space so as to close the gap. Double-clicking causes the card to move three spaces, if possible, or failing that one space to the left.
Scoring
Each card removed scores 1 point.
Maximum possible score: 51
Strategy
This is a diffcult game. Try to find two or three cards of the same rank at or near the last row. Try not to remove any card of this rank. At the end you can move these cards onto each other to win.
Agnes
Written by Rosanna Yuen
Stock
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Cards are dealt in batches of seven, one on every Tableau pile.
Foundation
Four piles top right. To be built in suit and sequence, wrapping from King to Ace when necessary. One card is dealt on to the first Foundation pile. The other Foundation piles must be started with cards of the same rank.
Seven piles. Deal card face up in first pile. Place one card face down on all other piles. Place one card face up on next pile followed by one card face down on all the covered piles. Repeat until there are seven cards in last pile. Tableau can be built down in same colors. Groups of cards can be moved. Empty piles can only be filled by the next deal from the Stock.
Move all cards to the Foundation piles.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by same color. Groups of cards in sequence and same color can be moved as a unit.
Each deal flips one card from the Stock to each pile of the Tableau. There are no redeals.
Foundations are built up in suit in sequence, wrapping from King to Ace when necessary. Cards in Foundations are still in play. Double clicking on a card in the Tableau will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
Each card in Foundation scores one point.
Maximum possible score: 52
Try to build down in suit whenever possible. Try to score as many points as you can as this game is very hard to win.
Athena
Written by Alan Horkan, based on work by Jonathan Blandford
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing on to the Tableau. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. Two redeals.
Waste
To be taken from Stock. Top card available for play.
Foundations
Four piles top right. To be built up in suit from Ace to King. Topmost card in each Foundation can be played back on to the Tableau.
Seven piles. Four rows, the first row is face down, the second row is face up, the third row is face down, and the fourth and final row is face up. Essentially Athena is the same as Klondike only the opening layout is different. Tableau can be built down in alternating colors. Builds of cards can be moved. Empty piles can only be filled by Kings or group of cards starting with a King.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating color. Builds of cards can be moved. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with a King or a group of cards with a King on the bottom.
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste individually. Top card in Waste is in play. When Stock is empty, move all cards in Waste back to the Stock, maintaining order. You can go through the deck three times.
Foundations are built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundations are still in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
Each card in the Foundation piles scores one point.
Don't give up the ship! Try brute force methods when the game seems over. Sometimes a combination of using cards already in the Foundation and rearranging sequences will free up some needed cards.
Auld Lang Syne
Top left pile. All cards except the Aces are placed here at the start of play. Clicking on the Stock will deal one card to each of the four Reserve piles.
Four piles on top, to the right of Stock. Place an Ace on each Foundation to begin the game. The Foundation piles are to be built up regardless of suit.
Reserve
Four piles placed underneath Foundations. Each time Stock is clicked, one card will be placed on each Reserve pile. Top card is available for play. Reserve cards can only be moved on to Foundations.
Move all cards on to Foundations.
Play begins by dealing four cards to the Reserve. If possible, play cards on to the Foundation from the Reserve. Continue this process until no cards are left in stock and no more moves on to Foundation can be made. A similar game that is a bit easier is Scuffle.
Each card removed scores one point.
Do you believe in Luck? Although this game takes more skill to play than Clock, the skill involved entails paying attention. A great game for brainless play.
Backbone
Written by Vincent Povirk
Double Deck
Single pile below the foundations on the left. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing on to the Tableau and Reserve. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. One redeal.
Single pile to the right of the Stock. To be taken from Stock. Top card available for play.
Eight piles top right. To be built up in suit from Ace to King.
Two stacks of 9 cards each, with a single above both stacks. Cards that are not obscured are available for play to anywhere except empty tableau spaces.
Eight piles, four on each side of the reserve. A card is dealt to each tableau pile when the game starts. Build down in suit. Empty spaces can be filled with any card. Only one card can be moved at a time.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by suit. Only one card can be moved at a time. Empty slots can be filled with any card except from the reserve.
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste individually. Top card in Waste is in play. When Stock is empty, move all cards in Waste back to the Stock, maintaining order. You can go through the deck twice.
Foundations are built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in the Foundations are no longer in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
Maximum possible score: 104
You can use empty spaces in the Tableau to move multiple cards. Be careful with Kings in the Reserve: the only way to remove them is by playing them to a Foundation on top of a Queen.
Bakers Dozen
Four piles at top. To be built in suit from Ace to King. Topmost card in each Foundation can be played back on to the Tableau.
Thirteen piles. Four cards are dealt face up on each pile. Kings are moved to the bottom of their respective piles.
The top card on each Tableau can be moved to another Tableau pile if it has a value of one lower than the top card on the second pile. Suit is not relevant. Empty Tableau piles cannot be filled.
Foundations are built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundations are still in play. Double clicking on a card in the Tableau will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
Each card moved to the Foundation scores one point.
Be careful not to bury low cards. Try to keep Tableau piles from emptying.
Bakers Game
Four piles top right. Built from Ace to King in suit.
Reserves
Four piles at top left. Each reserve can only hold one card.
Eight piles underneath the Foundation and Reserves. The cards are dealt face up on to the Tableau, with seven cards each in the first four slots and six cards each in the last four slots.
The Tableau is built down by suit. Only the top card or build of cards can be moved. A build of cards can only be moved if the number of cards in the build is equal or less than one more than the number of Reserve slots free. Empty spaces in the Tableau can only be filled with a King or a build starting with a King.
Foundations are built up by suit from Ace to King. Although cards in the Foundations are technically still in play, there really is no need as playing these cards are not in any way helpful.
Any top card in the Tableau can be placed in an empty Reserve slot. These cards are available for play back into the Tableau or on to a Foundation pile.
Each card placed on to the Foundation piles scores one point.
Move any card you can on to the Foundations as soon as possible. Leaving them around can only hinder your movement.
Bear River
Written by Bruce and Joel Levin
Four piles at top. One card is dealt face up in the first Foundation pile.
There are 18 Tableau piles arranged in three rows of six piles each. All cards are dealt face up and fanned, such that all cards are visible. The first five piles of each row start with three cards each. The sixth pile of each row starts with two cards each.
One random card has already been dealt to a Foundation pile. The rank of that card becomes the Base Card. The other three cards with the same rank can be moved to an empty Foundation. Foundations are built up in ascending order, matching suit. Cards can "wrap-around" from Queen to King to Ace to Two. Cards on the Foundations may not be moved back onto Tableau piles.
None of the Tableau piles can have more than three cards. The top card of each Tableau pile can be moved to any other Tableau pile if it matches suit and has a face value of one higher or one lower than the top card of the pile it is being moved to. Cards can "wrap-around" between King and Ace.
There are two types of Tableau piles: "Standard" piles, and "Hole" piles. The first five piles of each row (the ones with three cards) are the Standard piles. An empty standard pile CANNOT have a new card placed on it. The last pile of each row (the ones with two cards) are the Hole piles. An empty Hole pile CAN have a new card placed on it.
Try to free up one or more Hole piles early.
There is never a disadvantage in moving cards to the Foundations. Move as many as possible, as soon as possible.
Cards that have a rank one lower than the Base Card can be very difficult to move. Be careful where you place them.
Bear River can be won about one third of the time.
Beleaguered Castle
Four piles in the middle column. Four aces are placed here, one in each pile, before the shuffle. To be built from Ace to King. Topmost card in each Foundation can be played back on to the Tableau.
Eight slots (four to the left and four to the right of Foundations.) Deal all cards face up and extended on to these eight piles so that there are six cards in each pile and all cards are showing.
Cards in the Tableau are built down regardless of suit. Only one card can be moved at a time. Empty piles can be filled with any single card.
Foundations are built up in suit.
Each card in the Foundation piles other than the original Aces scores one point.
Maximum possible score: 48
Build evenly on to Foundations if possible. Try and get an empty slot.
Block Ten
Top left pile. All cards are placed here at beginning of play.
Nine piles in a 3x3 formation. Each Tableau pile is dealt one card face up.
Remove all cards.
Remove cards in pairs that add up to ten. Jacks, Queens and Kings are removed in pairs. Tens cannot be removed. All empty slots are automatically filled by the Stock.
Removing each pair of cards scores two points.
This is a pure luck game. Therefore, any strategy involved would have to do with increasing your luck.
Bristol
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. There are no redeals.
Three piles to the right of Stock. One card is dealt into each of the Reserves every time the Stock is clicked.
Four piles on the top right. Foundations are built up in sequence regardless of suit.
Deal face up eight piles of three cards each.
Cards in the Tableau are built down regardless of suit. Cards can only be moved singly. An empty pile in the Tableau can not be filled.
Cards are flipped from the Stock on to the three Reserve piles, one card each per deal. Top card of each Reserve pile is available for play. Empty Reserve piles cannot be filled except with the next deal from Stock.
Foundation piles are built up regardless of suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundation are no longer in play.
Never look backwards. Cards that are locked in backwards order are to be dealt with as soon as possible. Move as many cards from the Reserve on to the Tableau as you can, for Kings are hard to move.
Camelot
All the cards are placed in the Stock at the beginning of the game. Cards are turned over one at a time to waste. No redeals.
To be taken from Stock. Can only hold one card which must immediately be played on to Tableau.
Four by four grid, each capable of holding one card. Kings can only be placed in a corner space. Queens can only be placed in the middle two spaces of first and last row. Jacks can only be placed in the middle two spaces of first and last column.
Remove all cards but picture cards (Jacks, Queens, and Kings). You have won if your Tableau looks like this --
The Winning Tableau.
-- and your Stock and Waste are empty. The suits do not matter.
There are two phases to this game. Alternate between the two phases until game is lost or won. Start with Phase One until Tableau is completely filled. At that point, move to Phase Two. Please note that you cannot begin Phase Two unless the Tableau is completely filled. At any point, you can return to Phase One, but remember that you cannot go back to Phase Two unless the tableau is once again filled. An exception to this rule is if the stock and waste are empty.
Phase One -- Click on the Stock to move a card into the empty Waste pile. If card is a:
King: Place in one of the empty four corner spaces.
Queen: Place in one of the empty middle two spaces of the top or bottom row.
Jack: Place in any of the empty middle two spaces of the leftmost or rightmost column.
Any other card: Place in any empty space.
Phase Two -- Remove 10's singly by clicking on them. Remove pairs that add up to 10 by dragging one card on top of its pair.
Game is lost if a picture card cannot be put in an appropriate spot or if all the spaces are filled and no cards can be removed.
Maximum possible score: 40
It is always safest in the middle. During Phase One of play, deal in the middle before going to the edges. If you see a possible pair, place that card on the edge so as to free more edge spaces during Phase Two of play.
Canfield
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing. Cards are turned over three at a time to Waste. Unlimited redeals.
Directly to the right of Stock. To be taken from Stock. Top card available for play.
On left under stock. Deal thirteen cards here with top card face up. Top card available for play to Foundations or Tableau.
Four piles below Foundations. Deal one card face up on to each pile. Tableau can be built down in alternating color. Groups of cards can be moved.
Four piles top right. Deal one card face up on first Foundation pile. This card is now the base card. Built up by suit.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating color. Groups of cards can be moved. An empty slot in the Tableau is filled automatically from the Reserve. If the Reserve is empty, an empty slot can be filled by any card or group of cards in sequence.
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste by three. If the last flip has less than three cards, that many cards are flipped for that move only. When Stock is empty, move all cards in Waste back to the Stock, maintaining order.
Foundations are built up in suit from the base card (first card dealt to first Foundation) New Foundations are started when a card of the same rank as the first card placed during the dealing period are placed on empty Foundation piles. Aces are placed on Kings, and twos on Aces. Cards in Foundations are still in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
Each card in the Foundation piles scores one point. This game used to be played in casinos. You would break even if your score is 10.
A bird in hand is worth two in the bush. This game is hard to win. Most people play with the betting rules in mind and try to get as many points as possible. To this end, always move cards into the Foundations as soon as they are available.
Carpet
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. No redeals.
Four piles top right. To be built up in suit from Ace to King. Aces are removed before dealing and placed on the foundations.
The "Carpet". Four rows of five cards dealt face up. Cards on the tableau are available for play. There is no building. Empty spaces are automatically filled from the waste if possible or the stock.
Cards on the tableau are in play.
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste individually. Top card in Waste is in play. There are no redeals.
Each card places in the Foundation piles scores one point.
Just put anything you can on the foundation.
Chessboard
Four piles in the middle. To be built up in suit from base card of your choice, wrapping from King to Ace if necessary. Cards in Foundation piles are no longer in play.
Five piles one each side of the Foundation. Deal five cards face up on to each of these piles and one more on the top two piles. The top card in any Tableau pile is available for play.
Move all cards to Foundation piles.
Cards in Tableau piles can be built up or down in suit. Only the top card in every pile is available for play. Empty slots can be filled with any available card.
The Foundations are built up from the base card of your choice, wrapping from King to Ace if necessary. Cards in Foundation piles are no longer in play.
Each card in Foundation piles scores one point.
Choose your base card wisely. The obvious choice may lead to nought but a dead end.
Clock
Deal cards in a clock shape, for a total of twelve piles with four cards each.
Place last four cards in the Stock pile (middle of the Tableau) Flip over top card.
To have all four cards in each pile be the rank corresponding to the number on a clock face.
Move the top card in the middle to the appropriate pile. The Tableau is in the shape of a clock, and so the numbered cards go where they would on an analog clock. Aces go where the ones go, and the Jacks and Queens go where the elevens and twelves go respectively. For all the people who have never had an analog watch/clock, this is the pattern:
Clock Layout.
Kings are kept in the middle pile. When a card is moved to a new pile (or made to stay in the same pile, as the case is with the King), the bottom card in the new pile is taken and placed on top of the middle pile face up. This new card is ready for play. To move a card to the appropriate pile, either drag the card over or double click on the appropriate receptor pile.
Game is over when there are four kings in the middle. At this point, you've won if goal is achieved. Note that if a card in a pile is in the right place it is okay even if it is faced down.
Each card in the appropriate pile of the clock (not counting Kings, as there are no Kings on real clocks) scores one point.
Find a way to automate this game. There are no decisions ever to be made. If you lose it's not your fault. (Contrariwise, if you win, it's just luck!)
Cover
Top left pile. All remaining cards are placed here after dealing.
Four piles. One card is dealt in each slot at the beginning of the game. Empty slots are immediately filled from the Stock.
Empty the Stock.
Any two cards in the Tableau can be removed if they belong to the same suit. Spaces are immediately filled by cards in the Stock. The game is over when each suit is represented by one card in the Tableau.
Each pair removed from the game scores two points.
A quick short game with not much thought involved, cover is best played with minimal thought and quick reflexes.
Cruel
Written by Zach Keene
Top left slot. Since all remaining cards are always dealt to the tableau, it will always be empty. Redeals are unlimited.
Rightmost piles in the top row; the aces are placed here upon the start of the game. Build up in suit from ace to king.
Up to thirteen piles, dealt four cards at a time until the stock is exhausted. Tableau piles can be built down in suit.
Move all cards to the foundation piles.
Build foundations up in suit and tableau piles down in suit. If no moves are available (or you just feel like it), click on the empty top left slot for a redeal.
Redeals are accomplished by placing the tableau piles on top of each other in order, starting from the last pile. Then the deck is simply turned over and redealt, four cards at a time, back to the tableau. If no moves are made, redealing will not alter the arrangement of the cards. Therefore, the game is lost if no move is possible immediately after a redeal.
Note: a degenerate case occurs whenever, after a redeal, the last tableau pile contains only one card and the only move possible is from the final tableau pile one before it. Making this move and redealing only results in the original card arrangement. AisleRiot will end the game if this situation is detected.
Each card placed in the foundation piles scores one point.
If more than one pile on the tableau can be built upon, choose to build upon the one with the highest rank first.
Diamond Mine
One pile at top. Build in sequence for diamonds starting from any diamond of your choice.
Thirteen piles. Deal three cards face down and one card face up on every pile.
Remove all diamonds to the foundation and have all the other cards in suit and sequence with Aces being low in the Tableau.
Cards (other than diamonds) can be built down in sequence regardless of suit. Builds of cards can be moved as a unit. Empty slots can be filled by any card (except for diamonds) or build of cards.
Diamonds cannot be moved except to be place on to the Foundation. The diamond Foundation must be built up in sequence but can start from any number you want.
Each diamond placed on to the Foundation scores the face value of the card, with Ace as one point, Jacks as eleven points, Queens as twelve points, and Kings as thirteen points.
Each Ace through King in sequence and in suit on the Tableau pile scores three points.
Maximum possible score: 100
Mining for diamonds is hard work. Keep in mind that not all diamonds are worth the same. Don't forget to clean up after yourself and put the other suits in order.
Doublets
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. Two redeals.
Seven piles, forming an arch shape (upside down U) to the right. Deal one card face up on each pile. During this deal, if a King is dealt, remove the King and place it on the bottom of the deck. Deal another card into this pile. Each Reserve pile can only hold one card. When a Reserve pile is empty, it is automatically filled by the Waste, or, if the Waste is empty, from the Stock. Once original deal is over, when a King is placed in a pile of the Reserve, this pile is frozen as Kings cannot be moved.
One pile, the center pile on the bottom row of the Reserve slots. To be built on from original card by doubling, regardless of suit or color.
Move all cards to the Foundation pile.
Cards can be put in the Foundation pile if they are twice the value of the card currently on top of the Foundation. Jacks and Queens are eleven and twelve, respectively. If the doubled number exceeds thirteen, subtract thirteen to find next needed card. The series goes:
A, 2, 4, 8, 3, 6, Q, J, 9, 5, 10, 7, repeat...
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste by one. When the Stock is empty, move all cards in Waste back to the Stock, maintaining order. You can go through the deck three times.
Each card in the Foundation pile scores one point.
Without a King, you can't have regicide. Avoid them.
Eagle Wing
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. Two redeals.
Four piles top right. One card is dealt in the first Fondation at the start of the game, this is the base card. Other Fondations must be started with a card of the same rank as the base card. To be built up in suit from the base card.
Middle (and lowest) slot. Deal thirteen cards face down here. Flip card to fill any spaces in the Tableau. When only one card is left in the Reserve, it will flip up and can be played on Foundation or a Tableau pile.
Eight slots (four to the left and four to the right of Reserve.) Deal one card face up per slot. Tableau can be built down by suit. Cards can be moved singly to other slots on the Tableau, or in a group on to the Foundation. Each Tableau slot can hold a maximum of three cards.
Cards in the tableau are built down by suit. Cards can only be moved singly to another Tableau pile. However, to ease monotony, groups of cards can be moved to Foundation. An empty slot in the Tableau is filled automatically from the Reserve. If the Reserve is empty, an empty slot can be filled by a card from the Waste or from another Tableau pile.
The Reserve exists mainly to deal cards into empty slots of the Tableau. However, when there is only one card left in the Reserve, it will become visible and is in play.
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste singly. When the Stock is empty, move all cards in Waste back to the Stock, maintaining order. You can go through the deck three times.
Foundations are built up in suit from the base card (first card dealt to first Foundation). New Foundations are started when a card of the same rank as the first card placed during the dealing period are placed on empty Foundation piles. Aces are placed on Kings, and twos on Aces. Cards in Foundations are not in play.
A little planning goes a long way. Check before piling cards in a Tableau. Remember the three card in a slot rule.
Easthaven
Top left pile. Deck is placed here after dealing on to the Tableau.
Four piles top right. To be built up in suit from Ace to King.
Seven piles on the bottom. Deal two cards face down and one card face up for every pile.
The Tableau is built down by alternate color. Builds of cards in sequence and alternating color can be moved as a unit. Empty Tableau piles can be filled by Kings or builds starting with a King.
Any empty Tableau slots must be filled if possible before dealing more cards. Clicking on the Stock deals one card face up on to each Tableau pile. The last deal places one card face up on the first three piles. There are no redeals.
The Foundation is built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in the Foundation are no longer in play.
Each card placed on to a Foundation scores one point.
Move cards up to the Foundation when you can because the next deal may block it. However since cards in the Foundation are no longer in play, you may get stuck later needing that card. Hopefully this conundrum will be the most difficult one facing you today.
Eight Off
Four piles on the left. Built from Ace to King in suit.
Eight piles at top. Each reserve can only hold one card. The first four Reserve piles are each dealt one card at the beginning of the game.
Eight piles underneath the Reserves. The cards are dealt face up on to the Tableau, with six cards in each of the slots.
Elevator
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing on to the Tableau. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. No redeals.
To be taken from Stock.
Deal face down seven overlapping rows starting with one card on the first row, increasing by one per row and staggering the piles as to achieve a pyramid. Flip bottom row.
Move all cards to Waste.
All exposed cards in the pyramid are available for play. Build on to the Waste from these available cards whenever possible by playing a card with a rank immediately above or immediately below the rank of the top card in the Waste. Aces are both above Kings and below Deuces.
Cards can be flipped singly from the Stock to the Waste. There is no redeal.
Each card removed from the pyramid scores one point.
Maximum possible score: 28
Every pyramid needs a strong foundation. Get rid of the lower cards first, with an eye out to try to expose as many cards as possible.
Escalator
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing on to the Tableau. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. No redeals
Deal face up seven overlapping rows starting with one card on the first row, increasing by one per row and staggering the piles as to achieve a pyramid.
All exposed cards in the pyramid are available for play. Build on to the Waste from these available cards whenever possible by playing a card with a rank immediately above or immediately below the rack of the top card in the Waste. Aces are both above Kings and below Deuces.
Cards are flipped singly from the Stock to the Waste. There is no redeal.
Each card removed from the Tableau scores one point.
Try to plan ahead so that you can make runs in the future.
First Law
Top left pile. All cards are placed here in beginning. When emptied, cards are brought back from Tableau and put back in the Stock.
Four piles on the right. Each deal from Stock will deal one card to each Tableau pile.
Clicking on the Stock will deal one card to each of the Tableau piles. If any of the cards showing in the Tableau are of the same rank, move the others on to the leftmost of the like cards. Empty piles can only be filled by an ensuing deal from Stock.
If at any point, all four cards showing are the same rank, they are removed.
When Stock is empty, the Tableau piles are gathered, right pile on left, and placed back into stock. The first card dealt will always be the first card dealt until it is removed. There are unlimited redeals.
Each set of four cards removed scores one point.
Maximum possible score: 13
Don't forget to use the brakes! This game might never end unless you decide carefully whether or not to make a move.
Fortress
Four piles in the middle. To be built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundation piles are no longer in play.
The Foundations are built up from Ace to King in suit. Cards in Foundation piles are no longer in play.
Safeguard any empty Tableau slots you may create. They are the key to a successful game.
Fortunes
Top left pile. Deals a card to each Tableau pile when clicked.
Four piles on right. Groups of cards can be moved on to empty piles.
To remove all cards except the four Aces.
Aces are high cards. When two cards of the same suit are available, the one with the lower rank can be removed. When an empty slot appears, it can be filled with an group of cards.
There is no reason to have an empty slot when dealing another batch of cards. However, when you have an empty slot, try to keep it empty as long as possible, as this is a great way to get rid of buried cards.
Forty Thieves
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Cards are dealt singly to the waste, The top card of the waste is available for play.
Eight piles top right. To be built in suit from Ace to King.
Ten piles. Deal four rows face up to start. Tableau can be built down in suit. Cards are moved singly. Empty piles can be filled with any card.
Cards in Tableau are built down in the same suit. Cards can only be moved singly. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with any card. As a short cut you can move more than one if there are enough empty spaces. Cards can also be moved in groups to the Foundation piles.
Cards are played singly from the Stock to the waste pile, whose top card is available for play. There are no redeals.
Foundations are built up in suit from Ace to King. Double clicking on a foundation will autoplay cards. Double clicking on a card in the Tableau or waste will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible, or to the tableau if possible.
Each card in the Foundation scores 5 points. When a Foundation pile is complete (from Ace to King), 60 more points are scored.
Maximum possible score: 1000
Refrain from bringing cards to the tableau in order to obtain an empty space as soon as possible. Then balance the requirements to maintain empty spaces against the need to save low cards from being buried in the waste.
Fourteen
Deal all cards face up evenly on to twelve piles. The first four piles will each have five cards while the other piles will all have four cards. The exposed card in each pile is in play. Empty piles cannot be filled.
Cards can be removed in pairs that add up to fourteen. Aces are worth one and Jacks, Queens, and Kings are worth 11, 12, and 13 respectively.
Watch your step! Try to move cards that are resting on matching pairs as otherwise you might get stuck.
Freecell
Written by Changwoo Ryu
Four left piles on top row. Each Reserve pile can only hold one card.
Four piles top right. To be built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundations are no longer in play.
Eight piles. Deal all cards face up on to these eight piles, ending up with seven cards in each of the first four piles and six cards in the last four piles. Tableau can be built down in alternating colors. Cards can only be moved singly, but as a shortcut, if there are enough Reserve piles free to allow it, cards in sequence can be moved together.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating color. Groups of cards can be moved if there are enough Reserve piles free to allow the move if the cards were moved singly. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with any card or group of cards.
Foundations are built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundations are not in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
Cards in Reserve piles can be played back on to Tableau or on to the Foundation.
Space is a valuable commodity. Keep as many of the Reserve piles free as possible.
Gaps
All cards are dealt into four rows of 13 cards each; the aces are then discarded to leave four gaps. Two redeals are allowed.
To place all cards in sequence from 2 to king, in suit.
Gaps in the leftmost column may be filled by moving a 2 of any suit there. A gap to the right of any non-King card may be filled by placing the card with the same suit but one rank higher into the gap. Gaps following Kings or other gaps may not be filled.
Once a card is placed in a sequence starting with a 2 in the leftmost slot, it can no longer be moved.
If no moves are possible (i.e., all gaps follow Kings), double-clicking any card will cause a redeal. Any cards not in sequence will be removed, shuffled, and redealt. Only two redeals are allowed.
Options
Randomly Placed Gaps on Redeal: Check this to have randomly placed gaps after a redeal. If unchecked, the gaps will always be placed directly to the right of any cards already in sequence after redealing.
Each card placed in sequence, starting with a two in the leftmost slot, is worth one point.
Put off making any move that will add a gap after a king for as long as possible.
Gay Gordons
Top left pile. Deal two cards face up here. The top card is in play. Cannot be refilled or built on.
Ten piles. Deal five cards face up in each pile. The top card in each pile is in play. Empty piles cannot be filled.
Remove cards in pairs that add up to eleven. Kings are paired off with Queens. Jacks are paired off with other Jacks.
Each pair of cards removed scores two points.
Try to uncover cards that are buried under their pair-mate.
Giant
Top left pile. All cards are placed here after dealing on the Tableau. Cards are dealt a row at a time onto the tableau piles. No redeals.
Eight piles top right. To be built up in suit from Ace to King. Topmost card in each Foundation can be played back on to the Tableau.
Eight piles. Deal one card face up to all eight piles.
To the right of the Tableau. Initially empty. May contain any single card.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating-colors. Cards are moved singly or in groups. An empty slot in the Tableau can be filled with any card. There is an option to restrict the movement to only cards of the same suit. See below.
Cards are dealt from the Stock to the Tableau in complete rows. The reserve may be empty or occupied as you wish.
Foundations are built up from suit from Ace to King. Top cards in Foundations are still in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible. Double clicking on a Foundation will automatically move as many cards as possible to the Foundations.
There are two ways to play. The difference between them is in how the cards may be built in the tableau.
Same suit
Cards must be of the same suit to be moved as a group and must be placed on a card of the same suit.
Alternating colors
To be moved as a gorup cards must be in a sequence of alternaing colors. The top card must be placed on a card of the opposite color.
Avoid leaving small cards buried in the tableau. Use the Reserve wisely.
Glenwood
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau and Reserves. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. One redeal.
Four piles top right. First Foundation pile is started by player selecting a card from the Reserves. Built up by suit, wrapping from King to Ace when necessary.
Four piles of three cards each on the left hand side dealt face up. The top card in each Reserve is available for play. No cards can be put in empty Reserve piles.
Four piles below Foundations. Deal one card face up on to each pile. Tableau can be built down in alternating color. Top card can be played on to Foundation. Whole piles can be played on to another Tableau.
The first item of play is to select an available card for the first Foundation. Once selected, all other Foundations must also start with this value.
Foundations are built up by suit, wrapping from King to Ace where necessary. Once a card is placed on a Foundation pile, it is out of play.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating color. Whole piles of cards can be moved on to another Tableau pile. Empty slots in the Tableau can be filled by any available card in the Reserves or, if all the Reserves are empty, from the Waste.
Cards are flipped singly from Stock to Waste. There is one redeal.
Be careful when selecting your first Foundation pile. Try to get the cards out of the Reserves as early as possible. Sometimes keeping cards in play is more important than moving them to the Foundation.
Gold Mine
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing on to the Tableau. Cards are turned over three at a time to Waste. No redeals.
Klondike
Seven piles, all empty to start. Gold Mine is a variation of
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating color. Groups of cards can be moved. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with any card.
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste three at a time. Top card in Waste is in play. When Stock is empty, game over. Only one chance to get it right and establish your gold mine.
Be careful how you fill the empty foundation piles. With skill it is possible to win Gold Mine most of the time. If at first you do not succeed restart and try again.
Golf
Place all remaining cards here. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. No redeals.
Seven piles. Deal five cards face up on every pile.
The Waste can be built up or down from the available cards on the Tableau. Only Deuces can be placed on Aces and nothing can be played on to a King.
Cards are dealt singly from Stock to Waste. There are no redeals.
Every card moved from Tableau to Waste scores one point.
Maximum possible score: 35
Remember that nothing can be played on to a King. Try to generate sequences where many cards can be removed without a new card from Stock.
Gypsy
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Cards are dealt in batches of eight, one on every Tableau.
Eight piles top right. To be built in suit from Ace to King. Topmost card in each Foundation can be played back on to the Tableau.
Eight piles. Deal two rows face down and one row face up to start. Tableau can be built down in alternating colors. Builds of cards can be moved. Empty piles can be filled with any card or build.
Cards in Tableau are built down by alternating color. Builds of cards can be moved. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with any card or build of cards.
Each card in the Foundation scores 5 points. When a Foundation pile is complete (from Ace to King), 60 more points are scored. Each card pair on the Tableau in alternating order scores 2 points.
Try and expose new cards in the Tableau whenever possible. Remember you can always bring cards from the Foundation back into play.
Helsinki
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Cards are automatically placed on to the Tableau whenever a space opens up.
Ten piles. Deal a card face up in every pile.
Remove cards in pairs that add up to thirteen with Aces being one, Jacks being eleven, and Queens being twelve. Kings are removed singly.
Empty Tableau piles are automatically filled from the Stock.
Go as fast as you can.
Hopscotch
Top left pile. All cards except the Ace to four of clubs are placed here at beginning of play. Cards are dealt singly to Waste.
Directly to the right of Stock. Can only hold one card at a time. Card must immediately be placed on either a Foundation pile or on to the Reserve pile of your choice.
Four piles on top, to the right of Stock. Place an Ace on the first pile, a two on the second pile, a three on the third pile, and a four on the fourth pile. The first Foundation pile is built up by one, the second is built up by two, the third by three, and the fourth by four, all of which wrap around to Ace when it reaches past thirteen. cards in Foundations are no longer in play. Suits do not matter.
Four piles placed underneath Foundations. Cards in Reserve can only be played on to Foundation piles. Cards moved from Waste can be placed on any of the Reserve piles.
Build on to Foundations by ones, twos, threes, and fours for piles one, two, three, and four respectively. Cards are dealt singly in to the Waste from the Stock. However, as the Waste pile can only hold one card, this card must immediately be played on to a Foundation pile or on to any of the four Reserve piles. Cards in the Reserve piles cannot be rearranged.
Each card moved to Foundations scores one point.
Hone your skills for this game. Luck will not get you very far here. Try not to cover cards you might need sooner. Consider saving a column just for kings (as they are the last card to be played on each Foundation).
Isabel
Remove cards in pairs of equal rank. Every time a card is removed, the card underneath is flipped face up and becomes playable. Empty slots are not filled.
Each pile starts with four cards. The trick is to remember how many cards each slot has left at any given time so that you can try to remove cards evenly.
Jamestown
Remove pairs of cards with the same rank. Empty piles are automatically filled from the Stock.
Remove pairs of cards as fast as possible. That is the only challenge.
Jumbo
Top left pile. All cards are placed here after dealing on the Tableau. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. One redeal.
Directly to the right of the Stock. Cards to be dealt from the Stock during play one at a time. Top card available for play.
Nine piles. Deal one card face down to all nine piles, then one card to first eight piles, followed by one card to first seven piles, etc. until there are nine cards in the first pile. Flip the last card dealt on each pile.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating color. Groups of cards can be moved. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with a King or a group of cards with a King on the bottom.
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste individually. Top card in Waste is in play. When Stock is empty, move all cards in Waste back to the Stock, maintaining order. There is one redeal.
Foundations are built up from suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundations are still in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
Kansas
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. No redeals.
Four piles on top right. Deal one card on first Foundation pile to start. Other Foundation piles are to be started with the other three cards with the same rank as this base card. All four piles are to be built up, with the ranks continuous.
Pile under Stock. Deal twelve cards here to begin. Top card available for play on to Tableau or Foundation piles.
Three piles bottom right. Deal one card on each pile to start. Piles can be built down regardless of suit. Spaces are automatically filled from Reserve. Once Reserve is empty, Tableau spaces can be filled from the Waste at your leisure.
Move all cards on to Foundation piles.
Cards in the Tableau are built down regardless of suit. Groups of cards can be moved. An empty slot in the Tableau is filled automatically from the Reserve. If the Reserve is empty, an empty slot can be filled by the top card of the Waste at your leisure.
Cards can be flipped singly from the Stock to the Waste. Top card is available for play. There is no redeal.
Foundations are built up in suit from the base card (first card dealt to first Foundation). New Foundations are started when a card of the same rank as this base card is placed on an empty Foundation pile. Aces are built on Kings, and twos on Aces. Cards in Foundations are no longer in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
You can't go digging through junkyards. Once a card is buried in the waste, it is hard to get back. Try and move as many cards from the Waste to the Tableau as possible.
King Albert
Four piles on the top. Foundations are built up in both suit and sequence from Ace to King.
Seven piles on the right. One card is dealt face up on each Reserve pile at the start. There is no building on the Reserves. Empty Reserve piles can not be filled.
Nine piles of cards, with nine cards in the first pile, eight in the second, and so on to the one card in the last pile. These cards are dealt face down. The top card in every pile is then flipped up.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating color. Empty Tableau slots can be filled by any card or build of cards.
Cards in the Reserve can be played on to the Tableau or the Foundation. Empty Reserve piles cannot be filled.
Foundation piles are built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundation are still in play.
Remember that any card can be placed on an empty Tableau slot. Exposing new cards is the top priority in this game.
King's Audience
Reserves (Antechamber)
The outer rectangle of sixteen cards. Cards in the reserve are available to play, and are replenished from the Waste (or the Stock if no cards are currently in the Waste.)
Left slot in the center row. Cards are dealt one at a time to the Waste. There is no redeal.
Slot to the right of the Stock. The top card of the Waste is available to play.
"Thrones"
Top four slots in the "audience chamber" (the area inside the surrounding sixteen cards.) Whenever a King and Queen of the same suit are available, they can be move to one of these slots.
Bottom four slots in the audience chamber. Whenever a Jack and an Ace of the same suit are available, they can be moved to an empty Foundation slot, with the Jack on top. The foundation then may be built down in suit.
Move all cards to the foundation piles or thrones.
Deal cards one at a time from Stock to Waste. Whenever a King and Queen of the same suit are available, they can be moved into a throne slot by either by dragging the King onto the Queen (or vice versa) or double clicking either card. Whenever a Jack and Ace of the same suit are available, they can be moved into a foundation slot in the same manner.
Each card placed in the audience chamber receives one point.
None; King's Audience is pretty much entirely based on luck.
Written by Jonathan Blandford
Seven piles. Deal card face up in first pile. Place one card face down on all other piles. Place one card face up on next pile followed by one card face down on all covered piles. Repeat until there are seven cards in last pile. Tableau can be built down in alternating colors. Groups of cards can be moved. Empty piles can only be filled by Kings or group of cards starting with a King.
Double clicking on a foundation card will move all the cards that can be moved to the foundation to the foundation. This is useful for cleaning up at the end of the game.
There are three possible ways to play. The difference between them is in how the cards are dealt from the stock.
Three card deals
Cards are dealt from the stock three at a time. There is no limit to how many times you can redeal the stock.
Single card deals
Cards are dealt from the stock one at a time. However you can only turn the stock over and redeal twice.
No redeals
Cards are dealt one at a time from the stock. There is no redeal. Play this way if you want a challenge (and some frustration).
Most likely you will consider one of the first two methods traditional - depending on where you live and who taught you. The no redeals option is the one normally found in older sets of rules, but the game is rarely played that way.
Labyrinth
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau.
Four piles top right. Aces are placed in their respective Foundation pile prior to shuffling the deck.
One card is dealt face up in each Tableau pile at the start of the game.
Build any cards from the Tableau in suit and sequence on to the Foundation. Spaces are automatically filled from the Stock.
Once the eight cards in the Tableau piles cannot be played, click on the Stock to deal a card to each pile. Empty slots in the Tableau are no longer filled automatically.
Cards at the top and bottom of each Tableau pile is available for play on to the Foundation piles. There is no building on the Tableau. There is no redeal.
Get plenty of sleep the night before so that you are bright and alert when you play this game. Move any card you possibly can on to the Foundation piles. Have fun!
Lady Jane
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing. Cards are turned on to the Reserve one on each pile per deal. When there are only two cards left in Stock, they are dealt such that both cards are available for play.
Four piles on top right. Deal one card on to first Foundation pile after dealing on to Tableau and Reserve. This card is now the base card. Built up by suit.
Seven piles on the right. Top card of each pile is available for play on to either the Tableau or the Foundation. Empty spaces are not filled except by a deal from Stock.
Seven piles below Stock and Foundation. Deal card face up in first pile. Place one card face down on all other piles. Place one card face up on next pile followed by one card face down on all covered piles. Repeat until there are seven cards in last pile. Tableau can be built down in alternating colors. Groups of cards can be moved. Empty piles can only be filled by the card whose rank is one lower than the base card or group of cards starting with a card of this rank.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by alternating color. Groups of cards can be moved. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with a card whose rank is one lower than the base card or with a group of cards starting with a card with this rank.
Cards are dealt from the Stock to the Reserve. Each deal places one card on each pile of the Reserve.
The top card of each Reserve pile is always available for play on to either the Tableau or the Foundation. There is no building on the Reserve piles.
Foundations are built up in suit from the base card. New Foundations are started when a card of the same rank as the base card is placed on empty Foundation piles. Aces are placed on Kings, and twos on Aces. Cards in Foundations are still in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
The deeper something is, the harder it is to get to. Try and move cards out of the Reserve whenever possible.
Maze
Written by Matthew Wilcox
48 cards: Standard Deck without the kings
Fifty-four spaces in six rows of nine each. Deal cards into spaces one to eight. Leave space nine blank. Deal cards into spaces ten to seventeen. Leave space eighteen blank. Deal the remaining cards similarly. Then remove all the kings (which play no further part in the game), so that six empty spaces remain in total. Any card can be moved into a space to the left of another card of the same suit and face value one higher. Any card can be moved into a space to the right of another card of the same suit and face value one lower. An ace may be moved to the right of a queen or in the top left space. A queen may be moved to the left of an ace or in the bottom right space.
Put each suit of cards into ascending order, with an ace in the top left corner, to create a run of cards: Ace to Queen of one suit, Ace to Queen of another, Ace to Queen of the third, Ace to Queen of the fourth.
Cards are moved singly. Any card can be moved into a space to the left of another card of face value one higher in the same suit. Any card can be moved into a space to the right of another card of face value one lower in the same suit. An ace may be moved to the right of a queen or in the top left space. A queen may be moved to the left of an ace or in the bottom right space.
Each card placed next to another card of the same suit in the correct order scores one point.
Multiple adjacent spaces enable you to generate long sequences of cards. Beware of getting trapped into a situation where you move one card endlessly between two points.
Monte Carlo
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Cards are dealt after concatenating the Tableau onto the empty slots.
Five by five grid, each capable of holding one card. One card dealt to each space at the beginning of game. Empty spaces can be filled by moving cards from the right to the left, from the leftmost card of the row below to the rightmost space, and from the Stock to all otherwise empty spaces by clicking on the Stock.
Cards can be removed in pairs that have the same value as long as the two cards are touching horizontally, vertically, or diagonally.
At any point that there are empty piles in the Tableau, dealing from the Stock moves all the cards already in the Tableau from the right to left and moving them up a row to the far right if necessary making all the empty slots at the end. The Stock is then dealt on to these empty slots.
Keep an eye out as to how the Tableau will shrink when you deal. Sometimes leaving pairs in will allow more pairs to become available after a deal.
Napoleon's Tomb
Written by Kimmo Karlsson
Top left pile.
Next to Stock.
Three by three grid, all face up.
Center pile of the grid is to be built down, corners to be built up. Suit doesn't count.
Four piles on the grid that are not foundations. Each reserve can hold only one card at a time.
Move all cards of 6 or smaller to the center pile, 7 or greater to corner piles.
Click on the stock to flip over cards. Move one card at the time to the tableau. Once placed on a foundation pile, a card cannot be moved. Each corner pile is built up from 7 to king. Center pile is built down from 6 to ace. After ace comes another 6, etc. Suit doesn't count.
Deal Three Cards: If you deal three cards at a time from the stock, you get to go through the deck three times.
Autoplay: If autoplay is activated, cards are automatically placed to foundation piles as soon as possible.
Try to keep reserve. It's not easy to get Napoleon to his tomb, but keep trying.
Neighbor
Top left pile. Dealt to the Tableau in the manner described below.
Five by five grid, each capable of holding one card. One card dealt to each space at the beginning of game. Empty spaces automatically filled by moving cards from the right to the left, from the leftmost card of the row below to the rightmost space, and from the Stock to all otherwise empty spaces.
Click on Kings to remove them. All other cards can be removed in pairs that add up to thirteen as long as the two cards are touching horizontally, vertically, or diagonally.
None
Remove cards higher up on the table first as this creates more movement within the grid.
Odessa
Four piles on left. To be built up in suit from Ace to King.
Seven piles. Deal three rows face down followed by three rows face up. Then deal two more rows face up in the middle five piles.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by suit. Groups of cards can be moved regardless of sequence. Groups of cards in sequence can be moved into an appropriate and receptive Foundation pile. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with a King or a group of cards with a King on the bottom.
Foundations are built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundations are no longer in play.
When game is dealt, any sequence of cards going down in suit is awarded one point per card. Every move within the Tableau will award a point for every card in the newly created sequence. A point is also rewarded for every card placed on to the Foundation.
Maximum possible score: 412
The more you can hold on to, the more you will have. Try to keep cards out of Foundations as long as possible. The larger the sequences, the more points are made.
Osmosis
Four spread piles on left. Deal three cards face down and one card face up in each Reserve pile. No building allowed.
Four piles on right. Deal one card on to first Foundation.
Place all remaining cards here. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. Two redeals.
Any card of the suit in the first Foundation can be played on to this Foundation pile at any time. Each ensuing Foundation can only be started with a card of the same rank as this first card. Once started, these latter foundations can be built on in suit as long as a card of the same rank already exists in the Foundation directly above it. Play cards from Reserves whenever possible following these rules.
Three card deals: Deal three cards at a time from Stock to Waste and enable unlimited redeals.
One point for every card placed on Foundation.
It's no coincidence that solitaire games are also known as "patience games". Do not automatically put first available card on the second (and third) foundation piles. Sometimes it is worth using a different suit so as to free up more cards in the Reserves.
Peek
Four spread piles on left. Deal four cards face up in each Reserve pile. No building allowed.
The Reserves are open for you to see. Choose your suit order wisely.
Pileon
Written by Nick Lamb
Fifteen piles, arranged in rows of four. Deal cards four at a time, face up onto the first thirteen piles. Leave the last two spaces empty. A pile can hold as many as four cards, and as few as none.
Rearrange the cards so that each pile contains all four cards from a single value. This should leave two piles empty, but it doesn't matter whether they are the same piles which were empty at the start.
Cards can be moved on top of any other card or cards of the same value so long as no pile grows to have more than four cards. Groups of cards can be moved if they are of the same value, but it doesn't gain you anything. An empty slot can be filled with any card or group of cards with the same value.
Once a pile contains all four cards of the same value it is frozen, and the top card is flipped to indicate that you need do nothing further to those cards. They are no longer in play, but it would be useless to move them anyway.
When a pile of four cards is frozen you score 4 points, one for each card. There is no other way to score points.
Keep one of the piles clear as much as possible. Don't allow a pile of three cards to build up on top of a single card, especially if the final card from the set is not a bottom card in another pile.
Plait
Written by W. Borgert
Third row from the right side in the middle. Two redeals are allowed.
Fourth row from the right in the middle, directly left of the stock.
Right eight piles. One card is already there at start. This is the base card. All fields have to be started with this card.
The group of cards in the middle of the table. Starts with 20 cards. Only the one top level card can be moved.
Edges
The four fields at the top and bottom, left and right of the plait. These are automatically refilled from the plait.
The eight fields left and right of the plait, between the edge fields. Only one card per pile is possible.
Move all cards to Foundations.
All eight Foundations have to be started with the same card value. At the beginning you can choose whether to build up or down. You can take cards from the plait in the middle of the tableau, from the eight free fields left and right of the plait, from the four edges around the plait, and from the waste.
The game is lost if no available cards can be moved on to the Foundation piles and the Stock is empty.
No scoring. You either win or lose.
Pick the cards from the plait as soon as possible as they are hard to free. Then pick the cards from the tableau as it will give you empty slots to temporarily store some cards.
Poker
Next to Stock. The Waste can only hold one card.
Five by five grid. Each slot can only hold one card.
Score as many points as possible using poker hands. There are twelve hands in the board -- 5 rows, 5 columns, and 2 diagonals. Scoring 75 points or higher is considered a win.
Click on the Stock to flip over cards one at a time. The card must be placed somewhere on to the Tableau before the next card can be flipped. Once placed, a card cannot be moved.
Shuffle mode: If selected, you can move the cards after they have been placed. You need at least 120 points to win this way.
Poker hands are scored using the British point system, which is as follows
Hand
Description
Score
Straight flush
Cards are all in sequence and are the same suit
30
Four of a kind
Contains four cards have the same rank
16
Straight
Cards are all in sequence
12
Full House
Three of one rank and two of another
10
Three of a kind
Contains three cards have the same rank
6
Flush
All five cards are the same suit
5
Two pair
Contains two sets of two cards of the same rank
3
One pair
Contains two cards of the same rank
1
Maximum possible score: 276
Remember you are going to see almost half the deck and plan accordingly. Trying to bluff the computer is not recommended.
Quatorze
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Empty spaces in the Tableau are immediately filled in with cards from the Stock.
Five-by-five grid, each capable of holding one card. One card dealt to each space at the beginning of the game. Empty spaces are filled in from the Stock. Once Stock is exhausted, spaces are filled by moving cards from the right to the left, from the leftmost card of the row below to the the rightmost space, leaving all empty spaces at the end.
Cards can be removed in pairs if they add up to fourteen (with Jacks being 11, Queens 12, and Kings 13) and are in the same row or column.
Empty slots are automatically filled from the Stock. Once the Stock is exhausted, cards to the right of empty piles are automatically moved over to fill the space, with empty piles in the right column filled in by the cards of the leftmost column in the row below.
Oftentimes in the middle of this game, there is only one move. Make it. Once the Stock is exhausted, there is much more movement in the Tableau.
Royal East
Four corner piles of three by three grid. Deal one card on to first Foundation pile. This card is now the base card. Build up in suit, playing Aces on Kings as necessary.
Deal one card face up on each of the five Tableau piles. These piles are the ones forming a cross in the three by three grid.
Cards in Tableau are built down regardless of suit. Kings can be placed on Aces. Cards can only be moved singly. Any available card can be played on an empty Tableau pile.
Each Foundation pile must be started with a card the same rank as the base card. Foundation piles are to be built up in suit from base card, playing Aces on top of Kings if necessary. Cards in Foundation piles are no longer in play.
Cards are flipped singly from Stock to Waste. Top card of Waste pile is always available for play. There are no redeals.
Hidden treasures are wonderful things, but only if you know they are there. Keep track of what cards are in which piles as this information will probably come in handy.
Saratoga
Seven piles. Place one card face up on all piles. Next row skip the first pile and place cards on all the other piles. Continue this process skipping one place to the right each row until there are seven rows with seven cards in the last pile. Essentially Saratoga is the same as Klondike only the all cards are face up to begin with. Being able to see all cards reduces the element of risk and makes Saratoga slightly easier than Klondike. Tableau can be built down in alternating colors. Builds of cards can be moved. Empty piles can only be filled by Kings or group of cards starting with a King.
Scorpion
Top left pile. The last three cards are placed here after the deal.
Seven piles to the right of Stock. * Deal one cards face down on each of the first four rows. Deal one card face up on the last three rows. Repeat from * two more times, dealing a total of three rows. Deal one card face up on each pile for four more rows.
Create four piles of thirteen cards each, each pile consisting of one suit and in rank order.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by suit. Groups of cards can be moved regardless of sequence. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with a King or a group of cards with a King on the bottom.
At any point, clicking on the Stock will deal the last three cards, one each on the first three piles.
For every sequence in suit, points given is (length of sequence - 1). Each time a sequence of thirteen is created and is in its own slot, four extra points are awarded. Reaching a card that was face down gives three points.
Unknotting knots is not often easy. Avoid tangling yourself up with no way out.
Scuffle
Top left pile. All cards except the Aces are placed here at the start of play. Clicking on the Stock will deal one card to each of the four Reserve piles. Two redeals allowed.
Play begins by dealing four cards face up on to the Reserve. If possible, play cards on to the Foundation from the Reserve. Continue this process until no cards are left in stock and no more moves on to the Foundation can be made.
Take all cards left over on the Reserve and reshuffle. Place these cards back to the stock for redealing. There are two redeals.
Try to keep in mind what is underneath the Reserve piles. When given a choice, it is this knowledge which should help you decide which card to play.
Seahaven
Four piles -- two top left, two top right. Built from Ace to King in suit.
Four piles at top in the center. Each reserve can only hold one card. Two of the reserves are each dealt one card to start.
Ten piles underneath the Foundation and Reserves. The other fifty cards are dealt face up here with five in each slot.
As a convenience, sequences of the same suit can be moved onto the matching Foundation pile rather than being moved individually. This is especially useful at the end of the game.
Sir Tommy
Top left pile. All cards are placed here at beginning of play. Cards are dealt singly to Waste.
To the right of the Stock. Can only hold one card. Card must immediately be placed on either a Foundation pile or on to the Reserve pile of your choice.
Four piles on top, to the right of Waste. To be built in sequence from Ace to King regardless of suit.
Four piles placed underneath Foundations. Cards in Reserve can only be played on to Foundation piles.
Move all cards to the Foundations
Build on to Foundations in sequence from Ace to King regardless of suit. Cards in Foundations are no longer in play. Cards are dealt singly in to the Waste from the Stock. However, as the Waste pile can only hold one card, this card must immediately be played on to a Foundation pile or on to any of the four Reserve piles. Cards in the Reserve piles cannot be rearranged.
Try not to place cards of higher rank on to cards of lower rank in the Reserve.
Spider
Top left pile. Deck placed here after dealing onto Tableau. Clicking deals one card face up to every pile.
Top eight piles. Only used to hold sequences of cards going down from King down to Ace once completed.
Ten piles. Four piles (piles 1, 4, 7, and 10) get dealt 5 cards down and one card up while rest of the piles get dealt 4 cards down and one card up. Cards can be built down regardless of suit. Sequences of cards in the same suit can be moved as a unit. Empty piles can be filled with any card or movable unit.
To have eight sequences of cards going down from King down to Ace in the foundation.
If you want an extremely difficult challenge, do not move completed sequences of cards to a foundation. You can also win by leaving the same eight sequences in the tableau. This is harder because there are fewer empty piles available. In fact, it is nearly impossible.
Build down regardless of suit. Sequences of cards in the same suit can be moved as a unit. Empty piles can be filled with any card or legal sequence.
Clicking on the Stock pile at any time deals a card face up to every pile. However, all piles must be non-empty. If an empty pile exists, an error message will appear.
A sequence of cards going down from King down to Ace can be moved to a foundation pile. Once there, these cards are no longer in play.
There are three possible types of deck. Each deck has 104 cards.
One Suit
The deck is an octuple deck of Spades only. This is the simplest of the spider decks and a good way to learn the basics.
Two Suits
The deck is a quadruple deck of Hearts and Spades only. There are four complete sequences of cards for each suit. This is not quite as diabolical as the standard four suit spider deck.
Four Suits
The deck is a standard double deck. There are two complete sequences of cards for each suit. This is the standard Spider deck. It is also the most difficult.
Many traditional implementations of Spider do not use a foundation and simply remove completed sequences of cards. This has no impact upon game play.
For every sequence in suit, points given is (length of sequence - 1).
Maximum possible score: 96
If at first you don't succeed, don't become addicted. Build in suit whenever possible, but expose as many cards as you can.
Spider Three Decks
written by Jonathan Blandford, Daniel Werner
Triple Deck
Top twelve piles. Not part of "official rules".
Twelve piles. The first six piles get dealt 4 cards down and one card up while rest of the piles get dealt 3 cards down and one card up. Cards can be built down regardless of suit. Sequences of cards in the same suit can be moved as a unit. Empty piles can be filled with any card or movable unit.
To have twelve sequences of cards (three for each suit) going down from King down to Ace in the foundation.
If you want an extremely difficult challenge, you can also win by forming the same twelve sequences in the tableau. This is harder because there are fewer empty piles available. In fact, it is nearly impossible.
Clicking on the Stock pile at any time deals a card face up to every pile. Unlike in other Spider variants, empty piles are allowed at redeals.
A sequence of thirteen cards can be moved to a foundation pile. Once there, these cards are no longer in play.
Maximum possible score: 144
Spiderette
Four piles top right.
Seven piles on the bottom. Deal one card face down on all seven piles, then one on the last six piles, followed by one on the last five piles. Continue in this manner until you have seven cards in the last pile. Flip up the top card on every pile.
Create four piles of thirteen cards each built down in suit and sequence.
Cards in Tableau can be built down regardless of suit. Builds of cards in sequence and in the same suit can by moved as a unit. Empty Tableau piles can be filled with any card or build of cards.
Each Tableau pile must be filled before any deal. Clicking on the Stock will deal a card on to every Tableau pile except for the last deal which places one card on each of the first three piles.
A build of all thirteen cards in a suit may be moved on to a Foundation pile. Cards in the Foundation are no longer in play.
Every pair of cards in suit and sequence scores one point.
Try to keep a Tableau pile empty whenever possible to create a swap space for moving around cards.
Straight Up
Four piles on top right. Deal one two on each Foundation pile to start. To be built up in suit to Ace.
Pile under Stock. Deal thirteen cards here to begin. Top card available for play on to Tableau or Foundation piles.
Four piles bottom right. Deal one card on each pile to start. Piles can be built in suit. Spaces are automatically filled from Reserve. Once Reserve is empty, Tableau spaces can be filled from the Waste at your leisure.
Cards in the Tableau are built down in suit. Groups of cards can be moved. An empty slot in the Tableau is filled automatically from the Reserve. If the Reserve is empty, an empty slot can be filled by the top card of the Waste at your leisure.
Cards can be flipped singly from the Stock to the Waste. Top card is available for play. There are two redeals
Foundations are built up in suit from twos to aces. Cards in Foundations are no longer in play. Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
Each card moved to Foundation piles scores one point.
No point lagging behind! Move cards to Foundation piles whenever possible.
Streets and Alleys
Four piles in the middle column. To be built from Ace to King. Topmost card in each Foundation can be played back on to the Tableau.
Eight slots (four to the left and four to the right of Foundations.) Deal all cards face up and extended on to these eight piles so that there are seven cards in each pile on the left flank and six cards in each pile on the right flank and all cards are showing.
Build evenly on to Foundations if possible. Try and get an empty Tableau slot.
Ten Across
Written by James LewisMoss
Temporary Spots
Locations to place one card out of play. The spots begin the game filled. One version of the game does not allow you to put new cards into these spots once they are empty.
Ten piles across the bottom. To deal place 10 cards across going from left to right with the first and last cards face up. Continuing you place ten cards across the piles from right to left (reversed) with the first two and last two cards placed face up. Continue this pattern (reversed and one more card each pass) until 50 cards have been placed. Place the last two cards in the temporary spots at the top.
Form four piles in the tableau all of the same suit running from King to Ace.
Only a King may be moved to a blank tableau spot.
Cards may be moved only onto other cards if the suit matches and the moved card is one less than the moved to. This includes moving a pile of cards of different suits as long as the top card of the moved pile matches the bottom card of the location moved to.
Allow temporary spots use: If checked the temporary spots may be reused.
You win or lose. There is no scoring.
This game is hard to win (being very influenced by how the cards are placed to begin with). Don't forget you have the temporary spots. Try to clear them quickly because they are very useful when you get stuck.
Terrace
Written by David Rogers
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Reserve and on to the Tableau. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. Stock cannot be turned.
To be taken from the Stock. Top card available for play.
Eleven cards dealt face up in a pile. All cards are visible but only top card is in play.
Eight piles in the middle. To be built up in sequence by alternating colours from the base card.
Nine cards dealt face up from the deck once based card is selected.
Cards in the Tableau are built down in sequence by alternating colours building round the corner. Groups of cards can't be moved. An empty pile in the Tableau must be filled by the top card in Waste or the next card from the Stock. Top cards can be moved to the Foundation or other Tableau piles.
Foundations are built up in sequence by alternating colours from the base card. Empty Foundations must be filled with the base card that is selected by the user from four random cards as the first move. Cards in Foundations are out of play.
Top card of the Reserve is in play and can only be moved to Foundations.
Cards are flipped from the Stock to the Waste individually as many times as you like unless there is a space in the tableau. If there is a space in the tableau then only one card may be flipped from the stock to the waste until the tableau is filled or the top card of the waste is moved to the foundation or tableau. While the stock is locked you can still move cards around on the tableau, from the reserve and to the foundation. If the Waste is empty a card from the Stock is automatically dealt. Top card in Waste is in play. Stock cannot be turned.
Double clicking on a card will move it to the appropriate Foundation pile if such a move is possible.
There are seven ways to play. The difference between them is in number of Reserve cards, Tableau piles or choice of Base Card.
Reserve of 11 cards, 9 Tableau piles. Foundations are built up in sequence by alternating colours from the base card. User selection of the base card from a choice of four at the start of the game and one card is dealt to each Tableau pile. Stock cannot be turned.
General Patience
Reserve of 13 cards, 9 Tableau piles. Foundations are built up in sequence by suit from the base card. User selection of the base card from a choice of four at the start of the game and one card is dealt to each Tableau pile. Stock can be turned once but the game is lost if you cannot play each new card after its turned.
Falling Stars
Reserve of 11 cards, 9 Tableau piles. Foundations are built up in sequence by alternating colours from the base card. At the start of the game a base card is selected automatically and one card is dealt to each Tableau pile. Stock cannot be turned.
Signora
Reserve of 11 cards, 9 Tableau piles. Foundations are built up in sequence by alternating colours from the base card. At the start of the game a base card is selected automatically and one card is dealt to each Tableau pile. Spaces in the Tableau are automatically filled from the Waste or Stock if the Waste is empty. Stock cannot be turned.
Redheads
Reserve of 21 cards, 8 Tableau piles. Foundations are built up in sequence by alternating colours from the base card. At the start of the game a base card is selected automatically and one card is dealt to each Tableau pile. Spaces in the Tableau are automatically filled from the Reserve or any card if the Reserve is empty. Stock cannot be turned.
Blondes and Brunettes
Reserve of 10 cards, 8 Tableau piles. Foundations are built up in sequence by alternating colours from the base card. At the start of the game a base card is selected automatically and one card is dealt to each Tableau pile. Stock cannot be turned.
Wood
Reserve of 10 cards, 9 Tableau piles. Foundations are built up in sequence by alternating colours from the base card. At the start of the game a base card is selected automatically and one card is dealt to each Tableau pile. Stock cannot be turned.
When the game starts examine the Reserve carefully before choosing your base card, avoid base cards that have several buried in the Reserve.
Watch for reversed sequences in the Stock, Reserve a Foundation to remove each reversed sequence.
Try to start Tableau piles from the last card needed to complete a Foundation.
Remember that you can continue to flip cards from the stock while it is locked without filling the tableau by using the top card of the waste.
Thieves
Written by Robert Brady
Joker Deck
Seven piles of five cards each, face up.
The Waste can be built up or down from the available cards on the Tableau. Jokers are wild and can be played on any rank as well as be played upon by a card of any rank.
At any point, a card can be dealt from the Stock to the Waste.
The following table shows the points you receive for each type of card. No points are scored for jokers.
Card
Points
Ace
8
2, 3
4, 5
4
6, 7, 8
2
9, 10
Queen
King
Since you can see all the cards on the Tableau, try to engineer `runs', to try and get rid of as many cards up there as possible, as you only have a finite supply of cards in Stock.
Thirteen
To be taken from Stock. The top card is available for play.
All exposed cards in the pyramid are available for play. Kings can be removed singly. All other cards can be removed in pairs that add up to thirteen with Aces equal to 1, Jacks equal to 11, and Queens equal to 12.
Cards can be flipped singly from the Stock to the Waste. The top card is available for play either with the available cards in the pyramid or with the card below. There is no redeal.
Thumb and Pouch
Seven piles. Deal card face up in first pile. Place one card face down on all other piles. Place one card face up on next pile followed by one card face down on all covered piles. Repeat until there are seven cards in last pile. Tableau can be built down in any suit but own. Groups of cards can be moved. Empty piles can be filled by any legal sequence of cards.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by any suit but own. Groups of cards can be moved. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with a any legal sequence of cards.
Cards are flipped from the stock to the Waste individually. Top card in Waste is in play. When Stock is empty, move all cards in Waste back to the Stock, maintaining order. You can go through the deck three times.
Brute force may not always work, but in this case it probably will.
Treize
To be taken from Stock. Top card and bottom card available for play.
Deal cards face up in seven overlapping rows starting with one card on the first row, increasing by one per row and staggering the piles as to achieve a pyramid.
All exposed cards in the pyramid are available for play. Kings can be removed singly. All other cards can be removed in pairs that add up to treize with Aces equal to 1, Jacks equal to 11, and Queens equal to 12.
Cards can be flipped singly from the Stock to the Waste. Top and bottom cards are available for play either by themselves or with the available cards in the pyramid. The top card of the Waste can also be played with the second card on the Waste. There is no redeal.
This game is easier to win than Thirteen. This is because you can plan ahead and avoid blocks by strategic play.
Triple Peaks
Written by Richard Hoelscher
All play is on the Waste pile. Cards faced down are not part of the current scoring run.
Deal 18 cards face down in the form of three triangles, with three rows in each triangle, increasing with one card in the first row to three in the last. Connect the triangles by dealing another 10 cards face up in the bottom row. End cards of each row should overlap the end cards of the row above, and interior cards should overlap two adjacent cards of that row.
Remove all cards from the Tableau.
Exposed cards in the Tableau are available for play. Build on the top card of Waste with cards ranked immediately above or below it from the Tableau, regardless of suit. Aces are ranked both above Kings and below Deuces.
Tableau cards are made available when not covered by other cards.
Cards can be flipped singly from Stock to the top of Waste.
Multiplier Scoring: Points double for every card played in a run. A run of five cards will score 1, 2, 4, 16, and 32 points, for a total of 55 points. Bonuses are worth 25 points. No points are deducted for playing a card from the stock to the waste.
Progressive Rounds: After all cards have been cleared from the tableu, a new round begins. The score from the last round carries over into the new round.
The score for each card played is equal to the number of cards your have played since the last card flipped from the Stock to the Waste. The longer the run, the higher your score.
5 points are deducted when you flip a card from Stock to Waste. Each triangle peak cleared will give a 15 point bonus, and an additional 15 points are awarded when all the cards have been cleared from the Tableau.
Maximum possible score for a single round: 466
Union Square
Deal face up a four by four grid for the Tableau, making sixteen piles. Top card of each pile available for play.
Four piles on the right. Foundation piles are built by suit from Ace to King, then King back to Ace.
Cards in Tableau can be built either up or down in suit. However, each pile must follow only one of these rules. For example, if a Tableau pile has a three of clubs over a two of clubs, one can only play a four of clubs on this pile. Any available card can be played on to an empty Tableau pile.
Foundation piles are to be built in suit from Ace to King, followed by another King, then back down to Ace, giving 26 cards per pile when game is won. Cards in Foundation piles are no longer in play.
Cards can be flipped singly from the Stock to the Waste. Top card of Waste is available for play. There is no redeal.
A string of beads can be added to from both ends, and so should your piles. Make good use of any empty slots to append cards. With a little perseverance, this game can be a lot of fun!
Valentine
Top right pile. Can only hold one card.
Four piles. One card is dealt in each slot at the beginning of the game. Redealing from the stock moves all cards currently in the Tableau to the bottom of the Stock slot.
Have all the cards in the Tableau, each slot containing Ace to King of one suit. Avoid going crazy achieving this.
If any two cards dealt on to the Tableau are the same suit and in sequence, place the lower card on to the higher. Aces are low, Kings are high and sequence does not wrap. Click on the Stock to fill in the empty slots that are made.
When no plays can be made in the Tableau, click on the Stock to deal a card on to the Waste. If this card can be played on to any of the Tableau piles, do so. Repeat this process until there are no more moves in the Tableau or from the Waste.
At this point, clicking on the Foundation again moves all the cards in the Tableau back to the bottom of the Stock. The card in the Waste is put in the first Tableau pile and the rest of the Tableau is filled with one card to each pile from the Stock.
There is no scoring in this game.
A great game for killing time, Valentine really has no strategy, unless the strategy is to play it instead of doing other, more important things, like going to bed.
Westhaven
Four piles on top row. To be built up in suit from Ace to King.
Ten piles of three cards each, with the last row of cards face up.
Cards in Tableau are built down by alternate color. The top card or the complete face up portion of each pile is available for play. Empty piles can be filled with any available card or group of cards.
Foundation piles are to be built up in suit from Ace to King. Cards in Foundation are no longer in play.
Each card moved to Foundation scores one point.
Caution is for those who actually have money at stake. Live dangerously. Make any moves you can, as chance is on your side.
Whitehead
Seven piles. Deal all cards face up such that there is one card in the first pile, two in the second pile, ending with seven in the seventh pile.
Cards in the Tableau are built down by same color. Builds of cards that are the same suit and in sequence can be moved as a unit. Empty Tableau slots can be filled with any card or build of cards.
Empty Tableau slots are a prized commodity in this game. Sometimes keeping them around until you need them is a very good idea.
Will o' the Wisp
Top left pile. When clicked, deal a card on to every Tableau pile except for the last deal which places one card on each of the first three piles.
Seven piles on the bottom. Deal two cards face down and one card face up on every pile.
Tableau piles can be built down regardless of suit. Builds of cards in sequence and in the same suit can by moved as a unit. Empty Tableau piles can be filled with any card or build of cards.
Yield
Deal cards face up in seven overlapping rows starting with seven cards on the first row, decreasing by one per row and staggering the piles as to achieve an inverted pyramid.
Removing the bottom of the inverted pyramid is the hard part. Once that is achieved, it is sometimes better to remove cards from the Waste than the inverted pyramid, as there are more cards in play there.
Yukon
Seven piles. Deal card face up in first pile. Place one card face down on all other piles. Place one card face up on next pile followed by one card face down on all covered piles. Repeat until there are seven cards in last pile. Deal the rest of the cards face up on the second to seventh piles. To be built down in opposite color.
Cards in Tableau are built down in opposite color. Groups of cards can be moved regardless of sequence. A faced-down card is flipped when it is unburied. An empty pile in the Tableau can be filled with a King or a group of cards with a King on the bottom.
Try and uncover as many cards as early on as possible. Doing so will greatly aid your quest to conquer yukon.
Zebra
Top left pile. The rest of the deck is placed here after dealing the Tableau. Cards are turned over one at a time to Waste. One redeal.
Eight piles on top right. Place the eight Aces on to these piles to begin the Foundations. The Foundations are to be built up in alternate color up to Kings. Cards in Foundations are no longer in play.
Eight piles below Foundations. Deal a card to each Tableau pile to start. Tableau piles are to be built down by alternate color. Only the top card of each pile is available for play. Empty spaces are immediately filled from the Waste, or if the Waste is empty, from the Stock.
Cards in Tableau are built down by alternate color. Only the top card of each pile is in play. However, to facilitate play, a whole pile can be moved to an appropriate Foundation with one drag. Double clicking on a pile will move the top card to an appropriate Foundation pile if possible.
Spaces in Tableau are automatically filled from the Waste, or if Waste is empty, from the Stock.
Stock is dealt on to Waste singly. Top card of Waste is available for play. There is one redeal.
Foundations are built up by alternate color from Aces to Kings. Cards in Foundation piles are no longer in play.
There are very few second chances in the real world, so use them when you find them. Chances are you will need to use the second deal to win this game. Remember where the key cards are and you'll be glad you did.
Glossary
Author's note: These definitions are meant as a guideline only. See individual game rules as any game has the right to redefine or modify the rules to make it fun.
Base card
The first card dealt into a foundation pile. Other foundations usually have to start with a card of this rank. See: Foundation
Build by alternate color
Building by placing a card on to another card of the opposite color is permitted. Example: Placing a Diamond on a Spade is good, but placing a Diamond on a Heart is not.
Build by any suit but own
Building by placing a card on to another card of any suit but the suit of the original card is permitted. Example: Placing a Diamond on a Heart is good, but placing a Heart on a Heart is not.
Build by color
Building by placing a card on to another card of the same color is permitted. Example: Placing a Diamond on a Heart is good, but Placing a Diamond on a Club is not.
Build regardless of suit
It's all good.
Build by suit
Building by placing a card on to another card of the same suit is permitted. Example: Placing a Spade on a Spade is good, but placing a Spade on a Club is not.
Build down
Building by placing a card of a lower rank on to a card of a higher rank is permitted. Usually implies a difference of only one ranking between the two cards. Example: Placing a 10 on a Jack is good, but placing a 10 on a 9 is not.
Build down by *
Building by placing a card of a lower rank on to a card of a higher rank by * is permitted. Example: If * is 2, placing a 10 on a Queen is good, but placing a 10 on a Jack is not.
Build up
Building by placing a card of a higher rank on to a card of a lower rank is permitted. Usually implies a difference of only one ranking between the two cards. Example: Placing a Queen on a Jack is good, but placing a Queen on a King is not.
Build up by *
Building by placing a card of a higher rank on to a card of a lower rank by * is permitted. Example: If * is 2, placing a 10 on an 8 is good, but placing a 10 on a 9 is not.
Build up or down
Building by placing a card on to a card of one higher or one lower rank is permitted. Example: Placing a Jack on a Queen or a 10 is good, but placing a 10 on a Queen is not.
Building
The ability to place a card (or group of cards) on another card. In regards to rank, you can build up, build down, or build up/down by *. In regards to suit/color, you can build by suit, build by color, build by alternate color, build by any suit but own, or build regardless of suit. Note that all games that build will follow two of these rules, one from each list.
Deck
The set of cards used. Most games use a Standard deck, but games that use a Double deck, a Joker deck, or a Stripped deck are not uncommon.
Double deck
A deck of cards consisting of two Standard decks making a total of 104 cards.
If a game has a foundation, the game is usually won by placing all the cards in the foundation pile(s).
Joker deck
A deck of cards consisting of a Standard deck and two jokers making a total of 54 cards.
Pile
A designated area where cards can exist.
Rank
The value of the card. Numbered cards usually have the rank of the associated number. Aces can either be high or low. If high, aces are ranked 1. If low, aces are ranked as 14. J, Q, and K are usually ranked 11, 12, and 13 respectively. However, some games may rank these cards as 10. In such a case, a high ace might be ranked as 11.
Cards in the reserve are usually available to play anywhere. Usually cannot be built on.
Slot
See Pile.
Standard deck
A 52 card poker deck. There are four suits of thirteen cards each. Each suit contains an Ace, 2 through 10, Jack, Queen, and King. These suits are usually Clubs, Spades, Hearts and Diamonds. These suits can be grouped into two colors, usually black and red. The Clubs and the Spaces are black while the Hearts and the Diamonds are red. AisleRiot allows the possibility of using different decks. In this case, the new colors and/or suits are substituted into this paradigm.
The remainder of the deck after all the original cards have been dealt and are usually kept faced down.
Suit
Four different kinds in a Standard deck. Usually Clubs, Spades, Hearts, and Diamonds.
The playing field, where the main action occurs. Usually allows building.
A stack of cards face up, usually next to the Stock. Top card usually in play.
translator-credits
Aunt Mary
Six piles, deal card face up in first pile. Place one card face down on all other piles. Place one card face up on the first two piles then one card face down on all covered piles. Place three cards face up and the rest face down and so on. Repeat gradually revealing more cards each time until there are six rows with six cards. Tableau can be built down in alternating colors. Builds of cards can be moved. Empty piles can only be filled by Kings or group of cards starting with a King.
Aunt Mary is extremely difficult and rarely solvable. The real challenge is not finishing but seeing how far you can get.