# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Kivexa 600 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each film-coated tablet contains 600 mg of abacavir (as sulfate) and 300 mg lamivudine.
Excipients
Sunset yellow (E110) 1.7 mg per tablet
For a full list of excipients see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Film-coated tablet.
Orange, film-coated, modified capsule shaped tablets, debossed with GS FC2 on one side.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Kivexa is a fixed-dose combination of two nucleoside analogues (abacavir and lamivudine).
It is indicated in antiretroviral combination therapy for the treatment of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection in adults and adolescents from 12 years of age.
The demonstration of the benefit of the combination abacavir/ lamivudine as a once daily regimen in antiretroviral therapy, is mainly based on results of one study performed in primarily asymptomatic treatment-naïve adult patients (see sections 4.4 and 5.1).
Before initiating treatment with abacavir, screening for carriage of the HLA-B*5701 allele should be performed in any HIV-infected patient, irrespective of racial origin.
Abacavir should not be used in patients known to carry the HLA-B*5701 allele, unless no other therapeutic option is available in these patients, based on the treatment history and resistance testing (see section 4.4 and 4.8).
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Therapy should be prescribed by a physician experienced in the management of HIV infection.
The recommended dose of Kivexa in adults and adolescents is one tablet once daily.
Kivexa should not be administered to adults or adolescents who weigh less than 40 kg because it is a fixed-dose tablet that cannot be dose reduced.
Kivexa can be taken with or without food.
Kivexa is a fixed-dose tablet and should not be prescribed for patients requiring dosage adjustments.
Separate preparations of abacavir or lamivudine are available in cases where discontinuation or dose adjustment of one of the active substances is indicated.
In these cases the physician should refer to the individual product information for these medicinal products.
2 Renal impairment:
Kivexa is not recommended for use in patients with a creatinine clearance < 50 ml/ min (see section 5.2).
Hepatic impairment:
No data are available in patients with moderate hepatic impairment, therefore the use of Kivexa is not recommended unless judged necessary.
In patients with mild and moderate hepatic impairment close monitoring is required, and if feasible, monitoring of abacavir plasma levels is recommended (see sections 4.4 and 5.2).
Kivexa is contraindicated in patients with severe hepatic impairment (see section 4.3).
Elderly:
No pharmacokinetic data are currently available in patients over 65 years of age.
Special care is advised in this age group due to age associated changes such as the decrease in renal function and alteration of haematological parameters.
Children:
Kivexa is not recommended for treatment of children less than 12 years of age as the necessary dose adjustment cannot be made.
4.3 Contraindications
Kivexa is contraindicated in patients with known hypersensitivity to the active substances or to any of the excipients.
See BOXED INFORMATION ON ABACAVIR HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS in section 4.4 and section 4.8.
Patients with severe hepatic impairment.
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
The special warnings and precautions relevant to abacavir and lamivudine are included in this section.
There are no additional precautions and warnings relevant to Kivexa.
Hypersensitivity Reaction (see also section 4.8)
In clinical studies approximately 5% of subjects receiving abacavir develop a hypersensitivity reaction.
Some of these cases were life-threatening and resulted in a fatal outcome despite taking precautions.
Studies have shown that carriage of the HLA-B*5701 allele is associated with a significantly increased risk of a hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir.
Based on the prospective study CNA106030 (PREDICT- 1), use of pre-therapy screening for the HLA-B*5701 allele and subsequently avoiding abacavir in patients with this allele significantly reduced the incidence of abacavir hypersensitivity reactions.
In populations similar to that enrolled in the PREDICT-1 study, it is estimated that 48% to 61% of patients with the HLA-B*5701 allele will develop a hypersensitivity reaction during the course of abacavir treatment compared with 0% to 4% of patients who do not have the HLA-B*5701 allele.
These results are consistent with those of prior retrospective studies.
As a consequence, before initiating treatment with abacavir, screening for carriage of the HLA-B*5701 allele should be performed in any HIV-infected patient, irrespective of racial origin.
Abacavir should not be used in patients known to carry the HLA-B*5701 allele, unless no other therapeutic option is available based on the treatment history and resistance testing (see section 4.1).
In any patient treated with abacavir, the clinical diagnosis of suspected hypersensitivity reaction must remain the basis of clinical decision-making.
It is noteworthy that among patients with a clinically suspected hypersensitivity reaction, a proportion did not carry HLA-B*5701.
Therefore, even in the absence of HLA-B*5701 allele, it is important to permanently discontinue abacavir and not rechallenge with abacavir if a hypersensitivity reaction cannot be ruled out on clinical grounds, due to the potential
3 for a severe or even fatal reaction.
Skin patch testing was used as a research tool for the PREDICT-1 study but has no utility in the clinical management of patients and therefore should not be used in the clinical setting.
• Clinical Description
Hypersensitivity reactions are characterised by the appearance of symptoms indicating multi-organ system involvement.
Almost all hypersensitivity reactions will have fever and/ or rash as part of the syndrome.
Other signs and symptoms may include respiratory signs and symptoms such as dyspnoea, sore throat, cough, and abnormal chest x-ray findings (predominantly infiltrates, which can be localised), gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, or abdominal pain, and may lead to misdiagnosis of hypersensitivity as respiratory disease (pneumonia, bronchitis, pharyngitis), or gastroenteritis.
Other frequently observed signs or symptoms of the hypersensitivity reaction may include lethargy or malaise and musculoskeletal symptoms (myalgia, rarely myolysis, arthralgia).
The symptoms related to this hypersensitivity reaction worsen with continued therapy and can be life- threatening.
These symptoms usually resolve upon discontinuation of abacavir.
• Clinical Management
Hypersensitivity reaction symptoms usually appear within the first six weeks of initiation of treatment with abacavir, although these reactions may occur at any time during therapy.
Patients should be monitored closely, especially during the first two months of treatment with abacavir, with consultation every two weeks.
Patients who are diagnosed with a hypersensitivity reaction whilst on therapy MUST discontinue Kivexa immediately.
Kivexa, or any other medicinal product containing abacavir (Ziagen or Trizivir), MUST NEVER be restarted in patients who have stopped therapy due to a hypersensitivity reaction.
Restarting abacavir following a hypersensitivity reaction results in a prompt return of symptoms within hours.
This recurrence is usually more severe than on initial presentation, and may include life-threatening hypotension and death.
To avoid a delay in diagnosis and minimise the risk of a life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction, Kivexa must be permanently discontinued if hypersensitivity cannot be ruled out, even when other diagnoses are possible (respiratory diseases, flu-like illness, gastroenteritis or reactions to other medicinal products).
Special care is needed for those patients simultaneously starting treatment with Kivexa and other medicinal products known to induce skin toxicity (such as non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors - NNRTIs).
This is because it is currently difficult to differentiate between rashes induced by these products and abacavir related hypersensitivity reactions.
• Management after an interruption of Kivexa therapy
If therapy with Kivexa has been discontinued for any reason and restarting therapy is under consideration, the reason for discontinuation must be established to assess whether the patient had any symptoms of a hypersensitivity reaction.
If a hypersensitivity reaction cannot be ruled out, Kivexa or any other medicinal product containing abacavir (Ziagen or Trizivir) must not be restarted.
Hypersensitivity reactions with rapid onset, including life-threatening reactions have occurred
4 after restarting abacavir in patients who had only one of the key symptoms of hypersensitivity (skin rash, fever, gastrointestinal, respiratory or constitutional symptoms such as lethargy and malaise) prior to stopping abacavir.
The most common isolated symptom of a hypersensitivity reaction was a skin rash.
Moreover, on very rare occasions hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in patients who have restarted therapy, and who had no preceding symptoms of a hypersensitivity reaction.
In both cases if a decision is made to restart abacavir this must be done in a setting where medical assistance is readily available.
• Essential patient information
Prescribers must ensure that patients are fully informed regarding the following information on the hypersensitivity reaction:
- Patients must be made aware of the possibility of a hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir that may
result in a life-threatening reaction or death.
- Patients developing signs or symptoms possibly linked with a hypersensitivity reaction MUST
CONTACT their doctor IMMEDIATELY.
- Patients who are hypersensitive to abacavir should be reminded that they must never take Kivexa
or any other medicinal product containing abacavir (Ziagen or Trizivir) again.
- In order to avoid restarting abacavir, patients who have experienced a hypersensitivity reaction
should dispose of their remaining Kivexa tablets in their possession in accordance with the local requirements, and ask their doctor or pharmacist for advice.
- Patients who have stopped Kivexa for any reason, and particularly due to possible adverse
reactions or illness, must be advised to contact their doctor before restarting.
- Patients should be advised of the importance of taking Kivexa regularly.
- Each patient should be reminded to read the Package Leaflet included in the Kivexa package.
- They should be reminded of the importance of removing the Alert Card included in the package,
and keeping it with them at all times.
Lactic acidosis: lactic acidosis, usually associated with hepatomegaly and hepatic steatosis, has been reported with the use of nucleoside analogues.
Early symptoms (symptomatic hyperlactatemia) include benign digestive symptoms (nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain), non-specific malaise, loss of appetite, weight loss, respiratory symptoms (rapid and/ or deep breathing) or neurological symptoms (including motor weakness).
Lactic acidosis has a high mortality and may be associated with pancreatitis, liver failure, or renal failure.
Lactic acidosis generally occurred after a few or several months of treatment.
Treatment with nucleoside analogues should be discontinued in the setting of symptomatic hyperlactatemia and metabolic/ lactic acidosis, progressive hepatomegaly, or rapidly elevating aminotransferase levels.
Caution should be exercised when administering nucleoside analogues to any patient (particularly obese women) with hepatomegaly, hepatitis or other known risk factors for liver disease and hepatic steatosis (including certain medicinal products and alcohol).
Patients co-infected with hepatitis C and treated with alpha interferon and ribavirin may constitute a special risk.
5 Patients at increased risk should be followed closely.
Lipodystrophy: combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with the redistribution of body fat (lipodystrophy) in HIV patients.
The long-term consequences of these events are currently unknown.
Knowledge about the mechanism is incomplete.
A connection between visceral lipomatosis and protease inhibitors (PIs) and lipoatrophy and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) has been hypothesised.
A higher risk of lipodystrophy has been associated with individual factors such as older age, and with drug related factors such as longer duration of antiretroviral treatment and associated metabolic disturbances.
Clinical examination should include evaluation for physical signs of fat redistribution.
Consideration should be given to the measurement of fasting serum lipids and blood glucose.
Lipid disorders should be managed as clinically appropriate (see section 4.8).
Pancreatitis: pancreatitis has been reported, but a causal relationship to lamivudine and abacavir is uncertain.
Clinical studies: the benefit of the combination of abacavir and lamivudine as a once daily regimen is mainly based on a study performed in combination with efavirenz, in antiretroviral-naïve adults patients (see section 5.1).
Triple nucleoside therapy:
There have been reports of a high rate of virological failure, and of emergence of resistance at an early stage when abacavir and lamivudine were combined with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate as a once daily regimen.
Liver disease: if lamivudine is being used concomitantly for the treatment of HIV and HBV, additional information relating to the use of lamivudine in the treatment of hepatitis B infection is available in the Zeffix SPC.
The safety and efficacy of Kivexa has not been established in patients with significant underlying liver disorders.
Kivexa is contraindicated in patients with severe hepatic impairment (see section 4.3).
Patients with chronic hepatitis B or C and treated with combination antiretroviral therapy are at an increased risk of severe and potentially fatal hepatic adverse events.
In case of concomitant antiviral therapy for hepatitis B or C, please refer also to the relevant product information for these medicinal products.
If Kivexa is discontinued in patients co-infected with hepatitis B virus, periodic monitoring of both liver function tests and markers of HBV replication is recommended, as withdrawal of lamivudine may result in an acute exacerbation of hepatitis (see Zeffix SPC).
Patients with pre-existing liver dysfunction, including chronic active hepatitis have an increased frequency of liver function abnormalities during combination antiretroviral therapy, and should be monitored according to standard practice.
If there is evidence of worsening liver disease in such patients, interruption or discontinuation of treatment must be considered.
Mitochondrial dysfunction: nucleoside and nucleotide analogues have been demonstrated in vitro and in vivo to cause a variable degree of mitochondrial damage.
There have been reports of mitochondrial dysfunction in HIV-negative infants exposed in utero and/ or post-natally to nucleoside analogues.
The main adverse events reported are haematological disorders (anaemia, neutropenia), metabolic disorders (hyperlactatemia, hyperlipasemia).
These events are often transitory.
Some late-onset neurological disorders have been reported (hypertonia, convulsion, abnormal behaviour).
Whether the neurological disorders are transient or permanent is currently unknown.
Any child exposed in utero to nucleoside and nucleotide analogues, even HIV-negative children, should have clinical and laboratory follow-up and should be fully investigated for possible mitochondrial dysfunction in case of relevant signs or
6 symptoms.
These findings do not affect current national recommendations to use antiretroviral therapy in pregnant women to prevent vertical transmission of HIV.
Immune Reactivation Syndrome: in HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of institution of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic pathogens may arise and cause serious clinical conditions, or aggravation of symptoms.
Typically, such reactions have been observed within the first few weeks or months of initiation of CART.
Relevant examples are cytomegalovirus retinitis, generalised and/ or focal mycobacterial infections, and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Any inflammatory symptoms should be evaluated and treatment instituted when necessary.
Osteonecrosis:
Although the etiology is considered to be multifactorial (including corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe immunosuppression, higher body mass index), cases of osteonecrosis have been reported particularly in patients with advanced HIV-disease and/ or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
Patients should be advised to seek medical advice if they experience joint aches and pain, joint stiffness or difficulty in movement.
Excipients:
Kivexa contains the azo colouring agent sunset yellow, which may cause allergic reactions.
Opportunistic infections: patients should be advised that Kivexa or any other antiretroviral therapy does not cure HIV infection and that they may still develop opportunistic infections and other complications of HIV infection.
Therefore patients should remain under close clinical observation by physicians experienced in the treatment of these associated HIV diseases.
Transmission of HIV: patients should be advised that current antiretroviral therapy, including Kivexa, has not been proven to prevent the risk of transmission of HIV to others through sexual contact or blood contamination.
Appropriate precautions should continue to be taken.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Kivexa contains abacavir and lamivudine, therefore any interactions identified for these individually are relevant to Kivexa.
Clinical studies have shown that there are no clinically significant interactions between abacavir and lamivudine.
Abacavir and lamivudine are not significantly metabolised by cytochrome P450 enzymes (such as CYP 3A4, CYP 2C9 or CYP 2D6) nor do they inhibit or induce this enzyme system.
Therefore, there is little potential for interactions with antiretroviral protease inhibitors, non-nucleosides and other medicinal products metabolised by major P450 enzymes.
The interactions listed below should not be considered exhaustive but are representative of the classes of medicinal products where caution should be exercised.
Interactions relevant to abacavir
Potent enzymatic inducers such as rifampicin, phenobarbital and phenytoin may via their action on UDP-glucuronyltransferases slightly decrease the plasma concentrations of abacavir.
The metabolism of abacavir is altered by concomitant consumption of ethanol resulting in an increase in AUC of abacavir of about 41%.
These findings are not considered clinically significant.
Abacavir has no effect on the metabolism of ethanol.
Retinoid compounds are eliminated via alcohol dehydrogenase.
Interaction with abacavir is possible but has not been studied.
In a pharmacokinetic study, coadministration of 600 mg abacavir twice daily with methadone showed
7 a 35% reduction in abacavir Cmax and a 1 hour delay in tmax, but the AUC was unchanged.
The changes in abacavir pharmacokinetics are not considered clinically relevant.
In this study, abacavir increased the mean methadone systemic clearance by 22%.
The induction of metabolizing enzymes cannot therefore be excluded.
Patients being treated with methadone and abacavir should be monitored for evidence of withdrawal symptoms indicating under dosing, as occasionally methadone re-titration may be required.
Interactions relevant to lamivudine
The likelihood of metabolic interactions with lamivudine is low due to limited metabolism and plasma protein binding, and almost complete renal clearance.
The possibility of interactions with other medicinal products administered concurrently with Kivexa should be considered, particularly when the main route of elimination is active renal secretion, especially via the cationic transport system e. g. trimethoprim.
Other medicinal products (e. g. ranitidine, cimetidine) are eliminated only in part by this mechanism and were shown not to interact with lamivudine.
The nucleoside analogues (e. g. zidovudine and didanosine) are not metabolised by this mechanism and are unlikely to interact with lamivudine.
Administration of trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole 160 mg/ 800 mg results in a 40% increase in lamivudine exposure, because of the trimethoprim component.
However, unless the patient has renal impairment, no dosage adjustment of lamivudine is necessary (see section 4.2).
The pharmacokinetics of trimethoprim or sulfamethoxazole are not affected.
When concomitant administration with co- trimoxazole is warranted, patients should be monitored clinically.
Co-administration of Kivexa with high doses of co-trimoxazole for the treatment of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) and toxoplasmosis should be avoided.
Co-administration of lamivudine with intravenous ganciclovir or foscarnet is not recommended until further information is available.
Lamivudine may inhibit the intracellular phosphorylation of zalcitabine when the two medicinal products are used concurrently.
Kivexa is therefore not recommended to be used in combination with zalcitabine.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Kivexa is not recommended during pregnancy.
The safety of abacavir and lamivudine in human pregnancy has not been established.
Studies with abacavir and lamivudine in animals have shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3).
It is recommended that HIV-infected women do not breast-feed their infants under any circumstances in order to avoid transmission of HIV.
Lamivudine is excreted in human milk at similar concentrations to those found in serum.
It is expected that abacavir will also be secreted into human milk, although this has not been confirmed.
It is therefore recommended that mothers do not breast-feed their babies while receiving treatment with Kivexa.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects on ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
The clinical status of the patient and the adverse event profile of Kivexa should be borne in mind when considering the patient’ s ability to drive or operate machinery.
4.8 Undesirable effects
The adverse reactions reported for Kivexa were consistent with the known safety profiles of abacavir and lamivudine when given as separate medicinal products.
For many of these adverse reactions it is
8 unclear whether they are related to the active substance, the wide range of other medicinal products used in the management of HIV infection, or whether they are a result of the underlying disease process.
Abacavir hypersensitivity (see also section 4.4)
In clinical studies, approximately 5% of subjects receiving abacavir developed a hypersensitivity reaction.
In clinical studies with abacavir 600 mg once daily the reported rate of hypersensitivity remained within the range recorded for abacavir 300 mg twice daily.
Some of these hypersensitivity reactions were life-threatening and resulted in fatal outcome despite taking precautions.
This reaction is characterised by the appearance of symptoms indicating multi- organ/ body-system involvement.
Almost all patients developing hypersensitivity reactions will have fever and/ or rash (usually maculopapular or urticarial) as part of the syndrome, however reactions have occurred without rash or fever.
The signs and symptoms of this hypersensitivity reaction are listed below.
These have been identified either from clinical studies or post marketing surveillance.
Those reported in at least 10% of patients with a hypersensitivity reaction are in bold text.
Skin Rash (usually maculopapular or urticarial)
Gastrointestinal tract
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, mouth ulceration
Respiratory tract
Dyspnoea, cough, sore throat, adult respiratory distress syndrome, respiratory failure
Miscellaneous
Fever, lethargy, malaise, oedema, lymphadenopathy, hypotension, conjunctivitis, anaphylaxis
Neurological/ Psychiatry
Headache, paraesthesia
Haematological
Lymphopenia
Liver/ pancreas
Elevated liver function tests, hepatitis, hepatic failure
Musculoskeletal
Myalgia, rarely myolysis, arthralgia, elevated creatine phosphokinase
Urology
Elevated creatinine, renal failure
Some patients with hypersensitivity reactions were initially thought to have gastroenteritis, respiratory disease (pneumonia, bronchitis, pharyngitis) or a flu-like illness.
This delay in diagnosis of hypersensitivity has resulted in abacavir being continued or re-introduced, leading to more severe hypersensitivity reactions or death.
Therefore, the diagnosis of hypersensitivity reaction should be carefully considered for patients presenting with symptoms of these diseases.
Symptoms usually appeared within the first six weeks (median time to onset 11 days) of initiation of treatment with abacavir, although these reactions may occur at any time during therapy.
Close medical supervision is necessary during the first two months, with consultations every two weeks.
It is likely that intermittent therapy may increase the risk of developing sensitisation and therefore occurrence of clinically significant hypersensitivity reactions.
Consequently, patients should be
9 advised of the importance of taking Kivexa regularly.
Restarting abacavir following a hypersensitivity reaction results in a prompt return of symptoms within hours.
This recurrence of the hypersensitivity reaction was usually more severe than on initial presentation, and may include life-threatening hypotension and death.
Patients who develop this hypersensitivity reaction must discontinue Kivexa and must never be rechallenged with Kivexa, or any other medicinal product containing abacavir (Ziagen or Trizivir).
To avoid a delay in diagnosis and minimise the risk of a life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction, abacavir must be permanently discontinued if hypersensitivity cannot be ruled out, even when other diagnoses are possible (respiratory diseases, flu-like illness, gastroenteritis or reactions to other medicinal products).
Hypersensitivity reactions with rapid onset, including life-threatening reactions have occurred after restarting abacavir in patients who had only one of the key symptoms of hypersensitivity (skin rash, fever, gastrointestinal, respiratory or constitutional symptoms such as lethargy and malaise) prior to stopping abacavir.
The most common isolated symptom of a hypersensitivity reaction was a skin rash.
Moreover, on very rare occasions hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in patients who have restarted therapy and who had no preceding symptoms of a hypersensitivity reaction.
In both cases, if a decision is made to restart abacavir this must be done in a setting where medical assistance is readily available.
Each patient must be warned about this hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir.
Many of the adverse reactions listed in the table below occur commonly (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fever, lethargy, rash) in patients with abacavir hypersensitivity.
Therefore, patients with any of these symptoms should be carefully evaluated for the presence of this hypersensitivity reaction.
If Kivexa has been discontinued in patients due to experiencing any one of these symptoms and a decision is made to restart a medicinal product containing abacavir, this must be done in a setting where medical assistance is readily available (see section 4.4).
Very rarely cases of erythema multiforme, Stevens- Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis have been reported where abacavir hypersensitivity could not be ruled out.
In such cases medicinal products containing abacavir should be permanently discontinued.
The adverse reactions considered at least possibly related to abacavir or lamivudine are listed by body system, organ class and absolute frequency.
Frequencies are defined as very common (> 1/ 10), common (> 1/ 100 ,< 1/10), uncommon (> 1/ 1000 ,< 1/100), rare (> 1/ 10,000, < 1/ 1000), very rare (< 1/ 10,000).
Body system
Abacavir
Lamivudine
Blood and
lymphatic systems
Uncommon:
Neutropenia and
disorders
anaemia (both occasionally severe), thrombocytopenia Very rare:
Pure red cell aplasia
Immune system disorders
Common: hypersensitivity
Metabolism and nutrition disorders
Common: anorexia
Nervous system disorders
Common: headache
Common:
Headache, insomnia.
Very rare:
Cases of peripheral neuropathy (or paraesthesia) have been reported
10 Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders
Common:
Cough, nasal symptoms
Gastrointestinal disorders
Common: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea Rare: pancreatitis has been reported, but a causal relationship to abacavir treatment is uncertain
Common:
Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain or cramps, diarrhoea Rare:
Rises in serum amylase.
Cases of pancreatitis have been reported
Hepatobiliary disorders
Uncommon:
Transient rises in liver enzymes (AST, ALT), Rare:
Hepatitis
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
Common: rash (without systemic symptoms) Very rare: erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis
Common:
Rash, alopecia
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders
Common:
Arthralgia, muscle disorders Rare:
Rhabdomyolysis
General disorders and administration site conditions
Common: fever, lethargy, fatigue.
Common: fatigue, malaise, fever.
Cases of lactic acidosis, sometimes fatal, usually associated with severe hepatomegaly and hepatic steatosis, have been reported with the use of nucleoside analogues (see section 4.4).
Combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with redistribution of body fat (lipodystrophy) in HIV patients including the loss of peripheral and facial subcutaneous fat, increased intra-abdominal and visceral fat, breast hypertrophy and dorsocervical fat accumulation (buffalo hump).
Combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with metabolic abnormalities such as hypertriglyceridaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, insulin resistance, hyperglycaemia and hyperlactataemia (see section 4.4).
In HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of initiation of combination antiretroviral therapy, an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic infections may arise (see section 4.4).
Cases of osteonecrosis have been reported, particularly in patients with generally acknowledged risk factors, advanced HIV disease or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
The frequency of this is unknown (see section 4.4).
4.9 Overdose
No specific symptoms or signs have been identified following acute overdose with abacavir or lamivudine, apart from those listed as undesirable effects.
If overdose occurs the patient should be monitored for evidence of toxicity (see section 4.8), and standard supportive treatment applied as necessary.
Since lamivudine is dialysable, continuous haemodialysis could be used in the treatment of overdose, although this has not been studied.
It is not known whether abacavir can be removed by peritoneal dialysis or haemodialysis.
11 5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Antivirals for treatment of HIV infections, combinations.
ATC code:
J05AR02.
Mechanism of action:
Abacavir and lamivudine are NRTIs, and are potent selective inhibitors of HIV- 1 and HIV-2.
Both abacavir and lamivudine are metabolised sequentially by intracellular kinases to the respective 5'-triphosphate (TP) which are the active moieties.
Lamivudine-TP and carbovir-TP (the active triphosphate form of abacavir) are substrates for and competitive inhibitors of HIV reverse transcriptase (RT).
However, their main antiviral activity is through incorporation of the monophosphate form into the viral DNA chain, resulting in chain termination.
Abacavir and lamivudine triphosphates show significantly less affinity for host cell DNA polymerases.
Lamivudine has been shown to be highly synergistic with zidovudine, inhibiting the replication of HIV in cell culture.
Abacavir shows synergy in vitro in combination with amprenavir, nevirapine and zidovudine.
It has been shown to be additive in combination with didanosine, stavudine and lamivudine.
In-vitro resistance:
HIV-1 resistance to lamivudine involves the development of a M184I or, more commonly, M184V amino acid change close to the active site of the viral RT.
Abacavir-resistant isolates of HIV-1 have been selected in vitro and are associated with specific genotypic changes in the RT codon region (codons M184V, K65R, L74V and Y115F).
Viral resistance to abacavir develops relatively slowly in vitro, requiring multiple mutations for a clinically relevant increase in EC50 over wild-type virus.
In vivo resistance (Therapy-naïve patients):
The M184V or M184I variants arise in HIV-1 infected patients treated with lamivudine-containing antiretroviral therapy.
Isolates from most patients experiencing virological failure with a regimen containing abacavir in pivotal clinical trials showed either no NRTI-related changes from baseline (45%) or only M184V or M184I selection (45%).
The overall selection frequency for M184V or M184I was high (54%), and less common was the selection of L74V (5%), K65R (1%) and Y115F (1%) (see Table).
The inclusion of zidovudine in the regimen has been found to reduce the frequency of L74V and K65R selection in the presence of abacavir (with zidovudine:
0/ 40, without zidovudine:
15/ 192, 8%).
Abacavir + Abacavir + lamivudine +
Therapy
Abacavir +
lamivudine +
PI (or
Total
Combivir1
NNRTI
PI/ ritonavir) Number of
Subjects
282
1094
909
2285
Number of Virological Failures Number of On-
43
90
158
306
Therapy
40 (100%)
51 (100%)2
141 (100%)
232 (100%)
Genotypes
K65R
1 (2%)
2 (1%)
3 (1%)
12
L74V Y115F
0 0
9 (18%) 2 (4%)
3 (2%) 0
12 (5%) 2 (1%)
M184V/ I TAMs3
34 (85%) 3 (8%)
22 (43%) 2 (4%)
70 (50%) 4 (3%)
126 (54%) 9 (4%)
1. Combivir is a fixed dose combination of lamivudine and zidovudine 2. Includes three non-virological failures and four unconfirmed virological failures.
3.
Number of subjects with ≥ 1 Thymidine Analogue Mutations (TAMs).
TAMs might be selected when thymidine analogs are associated with abacavir.
In a meta-analysis of six clinical trials, TAMs were not selected by regimens containing abacavir without zidovudine (0/ 127), but were selected by regimens containing abacavir and the thymidine analogue zidovudine (22/ 86, 26%).
In vivo resistance (Therapy experienced patients):
The M184V or M184I variants arise in HIV-1 infected patients treated with lamivudine-containing antiretroviral therapy and confer high-level resistance to lamivudine.
In vitro data tend to suggest that the continuation of lamivudine in anti- retroviral regimen despite the development of M184V might provide residual anti-retroviral activity (likely through impaired viral fitness).
The clinical relevance of these findings is not established.
Indeed, the available clinical data are very limited and preclude any reliable conclusion in the field.
In any case, initiation of susceptible NRTIs should always be preferred to maintenance of lamivudine therapy.
Therefore, maintaining lamivudine therapy despite emergence of M184V mutation should only be considered in cases where no other active NRTIs are available.
Clinically significant reduction of susceptibility to abacavir has been demonstrated in clinical isolates of patients with uncontrolled viral replication, who have been pre-treated with and are resistant to other nucleoside inhibitors.
In a meta-analysis of five clinical trials where ABC was added to intensify therapy, of 166 subjects, 123 (74%) had M184V/ I, 50 (30%) had T215Y/ F, 45 (27%) had M41L, 30 (18%) had K70R and 25 (15%) had D67N.
K65R was absent and L74V and Y115F were uncommon (≤ 3%).
Logistic regression modelling of the predictive value for genotype (adjusted for baseline plasma HIV-1RNA [vRNA], CD4+ cell count, number and duration of prior antiretroviral therapies) showed that the presence of 3 or more NRTI resistance-associated mutations was associated with reduced response at Week 4 (p=0.015) or 4 or more mutations at median Week 24 (p≤ 0.012).
In addition, the 69 insertion complex or the Q151M mutation, usually found in combination with A62V, V75I, F77L and F116Y, cause a high level of resistance to abacavir.
Week 4
Baseline Reverse Transcriptase
Median
(n = 166) Percent with
Mutatio
n n
Change vRNA (log10 c/ mL)
< 400 copies/ mL vRNA
None
15
-0.96
40%
M184V alone
75
-0.74
64%
Any one NRTI
mutation
82
-0.72
65%
Any two NRTI-
associated mutations Any three NRTI-
22
-0.82
32%
associated mutations Four or more NRTI-
19
-0.30
5%
associated mutations
28
-0.07
11%
Phenotypic resistance and cross-resistance:
Phenotypic resistance to abacavir requires M184V with at least one other abacavir-selected mutation, or M184V with multiple TAMs.
Phenotypic cross- resistance to other NRTIs with M184V or M184I mutation alone is limited.
Zidovudine, didanosine, stavudine and tenofovir maintain their antiretroviral activities against such HIV-1 variants.
The
13 presence of M184V with K65R does give rise to cross-resistance between abacavir, tenofovir, didanosine and lamivudine, and M184V with L74V gives rise to cross-resistance between abacavir, didanosine and lamivudine.
The presence of M184V with Y115F gives rise to cross-resistance between abacavir and lamivudine.
Appropriate use of abacavir can be guided using currently recommended resistance algorithms.
Cross-resistance between abacavir or lamivudine and antiretrovirals from other classes e. g.
PIs or NNRTIs is unlikely.
Clinical experience
Therapy-naïve patients The combination of abacavir and lamivudine as a once daily regimen is supported by a 48 weeks multi-centre, double-blind, controlled study (CNA30021) of 770 HIV-infected, therapy-naïve adults.
These were primarily asymptomatic HIV infected patients (CDC stage A).
They were randomised to receive either abacavir (ABC) 600 mg once daily or 300 mg twice daily, in combination with lamivudine 300 mg once daily and efavirenz 600 mg once daily.
The results are summarised in the table below:
Virological Response Based on Plasma HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/ ml at Week 48 ITT-Exposed Population
Treatment regimen
ABC once/ day
ABC twice/ day
(N = 384)
(N = 386)
Virological response
253/ 384 (66%)
261/ 386 (68%)
Similar clinical success (point estimate for treatment difference: -1.7, 95% CI – 8.4, 4.9) was observed for both regimens.
From these results, it can be concluded with 95% confidence that the true difference is no greater than 8.4% in favour of the twice daily regimen.
This potential difference is sufficiently small to draw an overall conclusion of non-inferiority of abacavir once daily over abacavir twice daily.
There was a low, similar overall incidence of virologic failure (viral load > 50 copies/ ml) in both the once and twice daily treatment groups (10% and 8% respectively).
In the small sample size for genotypic analysis, there was a trend toward a higher rate of NRTI-associated mutations in the once daily versus the twice daily abacavir regimens.
No firm conclusion could be drawn due to the limited data derived from this study.
Long term data with abacavir used as a once daily regimen (beyond 48 weeks) are currently limited.
Therapy-experienced patients In study CAL30001, 182 treatment-experienced patients with virologic failure were randomised and received treatment with either Kivexa once daily or abacavir 300 mg twice daily plus lamivudine 300 mg once daily, both in combination with tenofovir and a PI or an NNRTI for 48 weeks.
Results indicate that the Kivexa group was non-inferior to the abacavir twice daily group, based on similar reductions in HIV-1 RNA as measured by average area under the curve minus baseline (AAUCMB, - 1.65 log10 copies/ ml versus -1.83 log10 copies/ ml respectively, 95% CI -0.13, 0.38).
Proportions with HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/ ml (50% versus 47%) and < 400 copies/ ml (54% versus 57%) were also similar in each group (ITT population).
However, as there were only moderately experienced patients included in this study with an imbalance in baseline viral load between the arms, these results should be interpreted with caution.
In study ESS30008, 260 patients with virologic suppression on a first line therapy regimen containing abacavir 300 mg plus lamivudine 150 mg, both given twice daily and a PI or NNRTI, were randomised to continue this regimen or switch to Kivexa plus a PI or NNRTI for 48 weeks.
Results
14 indicate that the Kivexa group was associated with a similar virologic outcome (non-inferior) compared to the abacavir plus lamivudine group, based on proportions of subjects with HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/ ml (90% and 85% respectively, 95% CI -2.7, 13.5).
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
The fixed-dose combination tablet of abacavir/ lamivudine (FDC) has been shown to be bioequivalent to lamivudine and abacavir administered separately.
This was demonstrated in a single dose, 3-way crossover bioequivalence study of FDC (fasted) versus 2 x 300 mg abacavir tablets plus 2 x 150 mg lamivudine tablets (fasted) versus FDC administered with a high fat meal, in healthy volunteers (n = 30).
In the fasted state there was no significant difference in the extent of absorption, as measured by the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) and maximal peak concentration (Cmax), of each component.
There was also no clinically significant food effect observed between administration of FDC in the fasted or fed state.
These results indicate that FDC can be taken with or without food.
The pharmacokinetic properties of lamivudine and abacavir are described below.
Absorption
Abacavir and lamivudine are rapidly and well absorbed from the gastro-intestinal tract following oral administration.
The absolute bioavailability of oral abacavir and lamivudine in adults is about 83% and 80-85% respectively.
The mean time to maximal serum concentrations (tmax) is about 1.5 hours and 1.0 hour for abacavir and lamivudine, respectively.
Following a single dose of 600 mg of abacavir, the mean (CV) Cmax is 4.26 µg/ ml (28%) and the mean (CV) AUC∞ is 11.95 µg. h/ ml (21%).
Following multiple-dose oral administration of lamivudine 300 mg once daily for seven days, the mean (CV) steady-state Cmax is 2.04 µg/ ml (26%) and the mean (CV) AUC24 is 8.87 µg. h/ ml (21%).
Distribution
Intravenous studies with abacavir and lamivudine showed that the mean apparent volume of distribution is 0.8 and 1.3 l/ kg respectively.
Plasma protein binding studies in vitro indicate that abacavir binds only low to moderately (~49%) to human plasma proteins at therapeutic concentrations.
Lamivudine exhibits linear pharmacokinetics over the therapeutic dose range and displays limited plasma protein binding in vitro (< 36%).
This indicates a low likelihood for interactions with other medicinal products through plasma protein binding displacement.
Data show that abacavir and lamivudine penetrate the central nervous system (CNS) and reach the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Studies with abacavir demonstrate a CSF to plasma AUC ratio of between 30 to 44%.
The observed values of the peak concentrations are 9 fold greater than the IC50 of abacavir of 0.08 µg/ ml or 0.26 µM when abacavir is given at 600 mg twice daily.
The mean ratio of CSF/ serum lamivudine concentrations 2-4 hours after oral administration was approximately 12%.
The true extent of CNS penetration of lamivudine and its relationship with any clinical efficacy is unknown.
Metabolism
Abacavir is primarily metabolised by the liver with approximately 2% of the administered dose being renally excreted, as unchanged compound.
The primary pathways of metabolism in man are by alcohol dehydrogenase and by glucuronidation to produce the 5’ -carboxylic acid and 5’ -glucuronide which account for about 66% of the administered dose.
These metabolites are excreted in the urine.
Metabolism of lamivudine is a minor route of elimination.
Lamivudine is predominately cleared by renal excretion of unchanged lamivudine.
The likelihood of metabolic drug interactions with lamivudine is low due to the small extent of hepatic metabolism (5-10%).
Elimination
15 The mean half-life of abacavir is about 1.5 hours.
Following multiple oral doses of abacavir 300 mg twice a day there is no significant accumulation of abacavir.
Elimination of abacavir is via hepatic metabolism with subsequent excretion of metabolites primarily in the urine.
The metabolites and unchanged abacavir account for about 83% of the administered abacavir dose in the urine.
The remainder is eliminated in the faeces.
The observed lamivudine half-life of elimination is 5 to 7 hours.
The mean systemic clearance of lamivudine is approximately 0.32 l/ h/ kg, predominantly by renal clearance (> 70%) via the organic cationic transport system.
Studies in patients with renal impairment show lamivudine elimination is affected by renal dysfunction.
Dose reduction is required for patients with creatinine clearance < 50 ml/ min (see section 4.2).
Intracellular pharmacokinetics
In a study of 20 HIV-infected patients receiving abacavir 300 mg twice daily, with only one 300 mg dose taken prior to the 24 hour sampling period, the geometric mean terminal carbovir-TP intracellular half-life at steady-state was 20.6 hours, compared to the geometric mean abacavir plasma half-life in this study of 2.6 hours.
In a crossover study in 27 HIV-infected patients, intracellular carbovir-TP exposures were higher for the abacavir 600 mg once daily regimen (AUC24, ss + 32%, Cmax24, ss + 99% and Ctrough + 18%) compared to the 300 mg twice daily regimen.
For patients receiving lamivudine 300 mg once daily, the terminal intracellular half-life of lamivudine-TP was prolonged to 16-19 hours, compared to the plasma lamivudine half-life of 5-7 hours.
In a crossover study in 60 healthy volunteers, intracellular lamivudine-TP pharmacokinetic parameters were similar (AUC24, ss and Cmax24, ss) or lower (Ctrough – 24%) for the lamivudine 300 mg once daily regimen compared to the lamivudine 150 mg twice daily regimen.
Overall, these data support the use of lamivudine 300 mg and abacavir 600 mg once daily for the treatment of HIV-infected patients.
Additionally, the efficacy and safety of this combination given once daily has been demonstrated in a pivotal clinical study (CNA30021- See Clinical experience).
Special populations
Hepatically impaired:
There are no data available on the use of Kivexa in hepatically impaired patients.
Pharmacokinetic data has been obtained for abacavir and lamivudine alone.
Abacavir is metabolised primarily by the liver.
The pharmacokinetics of abacavir have been studied in patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score 5-6) receiving a single 600 mg dose.
The results showed that there was a mean increase of 1.89 fold [1.32; 2.70] in the abacavir AUC, and 1.58 [1.22; 2.04] fold in the elimination half-life.
No recommendation on dosage reduction is possible in patients with mild hepatic impairment due to substantial variability of abacavir exposure.
Data obtained in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment show that lamivudine pharmacokinetics are not significantly affected by hepatic dysfunction.
Renally impaired:
Pharmacokinetic data have been obtained for lamivudine and abacavir alone.
Abacavir is primarily metabolised by the liver with approximately 2% of abacavir excreted unchanged in the urine.
The pharmacokinetics of abacavir in patients with end-stage renal disease is similar to patients with normal renal function.
Studies with lamivudine show that plasma concentrations (AUC) are increased in patients with renal dysfunction due to decreased clearance.
Dose reduction is required for patients with creatinine clearance of < 50 ml/ min.
Elderly:
No pharmacokinetic data are available in patients over 65 years of age.
16 5.3 Preclinical safety data
With the exception of a negative in vivo rat micronucleus test, there are no data available on the effects of the combination of abacavir and lamivudine in animals.
Mutagenicity and carcinogenicity
Neither abacavir nor lamivudine were mutagenic in bacterial tests, but like many nucleoside analogues they show activity in the in vitro mammalian tests such as the mouse lymphoma assay.
This is consistent with the known activity of other nucleoside analogues.
The results of an in vivo rat micronucleus test with abacavir and lamivudine in combination were negative.
Lamivudine has not shown any genotoxic activity in the in vivo studies at doses that gave plasma concentrations up to 30-40 times higher than clinical plasma concentrations.
Abacavir has a weak potential to cause chromosomal damage both in vitro and in vivo at high tested concentrations.
The carcinogenic potential of a combination of abacavir and lamivudine has not been tested.
In long- term oral carcinogenicity studies in rats and mice, lamivudine did not show any carcinogenic potential.
Carcinogenicity studies with orally administered abacavir in mice and rats showed an increase in the incidence of malignant and non-malignant tumours.
Malignant tumours occurred in the preputial gland of males and the clitoral gland of females of both species, and in rats in the thyroid gland of males and in the liver, urinary bladder, lymph nodes and the subcutis of females.
The majority of these tumours occurred at the highest abacavir dose of 330 mg/ kg/ day in mice and 600 mg/ kg/ day in rats.
The exception was the preputial gland tumour which occurred at a dose of 110 mg/ kg in mice.
The systemic exposure at the no effect level in mice and rats was equivalent to 3 and 7 times the human systemic exposure during therapy.
While the carcinogenic potential in humans is unknown, these data suggest that a carcinogenic risk to humans is outweighed by the potential clinical benefit.
Repeat-dose toxicity
In toxicology studies abacavir was shown to increase liver weights in rats and monkeys.
The clinical relevance of this is unknown.
There is no evidence from clinical studies that abacavir is hepatotoxic.
Additionally, autoinduction of abacavir metabolism or induction of the metabolism of other medicinal products hepatically metabolised has not been observed in man.
Mild myocardial degeneration in the heart of mice and rats was observed following administration of abacavir for two years.
The systemic exposures were equivalent to 7 to 24 times the expected systemic exposure in humans.
The clinical relevance of this finding has not been determined.
Reproductive toxicology
In reproductive toxicity studies in animals, lamivudine and abacavir were shown to cross the placenta.
Lamivudine was not teratogenic in animal studies but there were indications of an increase in early embryonic deaths in rabbits at relatively low systemic exposures, comparable to those achieved in humans.
A similar effect was not seen in rats even at very high systemic exposure.
Abacavir demonstrated toxicity to the developing embryo and foetus in rats, but not in rabbits.
These findings included decreased foetal body weight, foetal oedema, and an increase in skeletal variations/ malformations, early intra-uterine deaths and still births.
No conclusion can be drawn with regard to the teratogenic potential of abacavir because of this embryo-foetal toxicity.
17 A fertility study in rats has shown that abacavir and lamivudine had no effect on male or female fertility.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Core: magnesium stearate microcrystalline cellulose sodium starch glycollate.
Coating:
Opadry Orange YS-1-13065-A containing: hypromellose titanium dioxide (E171) macrogol 400, polysorbate 80 sunset yellow aluminium lake (E110).
6.2 Incompatibilities
Not applicable.
6.3 Shelf life
3 years.
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Do not store above 30ºC.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
30 tablets in opaque white (PVC/ PVDC/ Aluminium) blister packs and white (HDPE) bottles with child-resistant closure.
90 (3x30) tablets in opaque white (PVC/ PVDC/ Aluminium) blister packs.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal and other handling
No special requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 04/ 298/ 001-002
18 EU/ 1/ 04/ 298/ 003
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
17 December 2004
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) http: / /www. emea. europa. eu
19 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
20 A MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturer(s) responsible for batch release
Glaxo Operations UK Ltd (trading as Glaxo Wellcome Operations) Priory Street Ware Hertfordshire SG12 0DJ United Kingdom
B CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (See Annex I:
Summary of Product Characteristics, 4.2)
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable.
21 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
22 A.
LABELLING
23 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
OUTER CARTON BLISTER PACK (WITH BLUE BOX) (EXCLUDING MULTIPACKS)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Kivexa 600 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains: abacavir 600 mg (as sulfate) lamivudine 300 mg
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
30 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION Read the package leaflet before use
Oral use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Contains sunset yellow (E110), see package leaflet for further information
Detach enclosed Alert Card, it contains important safety information
WARNING!
In case of any symptoms suggesting hypersensitivity reactions, contact your doctor IMMEDIATELY
“ Pull here”
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
24 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 30°C
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 04/ 298/ 002
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
25 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
MULTIPACKS ONLY OUTER LABEL (WITH BLUE BOX) 3x30 TABLETS WRAPPED IN CLEAR PLASTIC
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Kivexa 600 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains: abacavir 600 mg (as sulfate) lamivudine 300 mg
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
Multipack containing 3 packs each containing 30 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION Read the package leaflet before use
Oral use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Contains sunset yellow (E110), see package leaflet for further information
WARNING!
In case of any symptoms suggesting hypersensitivity reactions, contact your doctor IMMEDIATELY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
26 Do not store above 30°C
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 04/ 298/ 003
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
27 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
MULTIPACKS ONLY OUTER CARTON BLISTER PACK (WITHOUT BLUE BOX) 30 TABLETS
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Kivexa 600 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains: abacavir 600 mg (as sulfate) lamivudine 300 mg
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 30 film coated tablets Component of a multipack comprising 3 packs each containing 30 film-coated tablets, not to be sold separately
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION Read the package leaflet before use
Oral use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Contains sunset yellow (E110), see package leaflet for further information
Detach enclosed Alert Card, it contains important safety information
WARNING!
In case of any symptoms suggesting hypersensitivity reactions, contact your doctor IMMEDIATELY
“ Pull here”
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP 28 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 30°C
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
29 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Kivexa 600 mg/ 300 mg tablets. abacavir/ lamivudine
2.
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
5.
OTHER
30 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING AND THE IMMEDIATE PACKAGING
OUTER CARTON BOTTLE AND LABEL
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Kivexa 600 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains: abacavir 600 mg (as sulfate) lamivudine 300 mg
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
30 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
Oral use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Contains sunset yellow (E110), see package leaflet for further information
The Alert Card enclosed contains important safety information
WARNING!
In case of any symptoms suggesting hypersensitivity reactions, contact your doctor IMMEDIATELY
31 8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 30°C
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 04/ 298/ 001
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
32 KIVEXA TABLETS ALERT CARD (blister and bottle pack)
SIDE 1
IMPORTANT - ALERT CARD Kivexa (abacavir sulfate / lamivudine) Tablets Carry this card with you at all times
Since Kivexa contains abacavir some patients taking Kivexa may develop a hypersensitivity reaction (serious allergic reaction) which can be life-threatening if treatment with Kivexa is continued.
CONTACT YOUR DOCTOR IMMEDIATELY for advice on whether you should stop taking Kivexa if:
1) you get a skin rash OR 2) you get one or more symptoms from at least TWO of the following groups
- fever
- shortness of breath, sore throat or cough
- nausea or vomiting or diarrhoea or abdominal pain
- severe tiredness or achiness or generally feeling ill
If you have discontinued Kivexa due to this reaction, YOU MUST NEVER TAKE Kivexa, or any medicine containing abacavir (Ziagen or Trizivir) again as within hours you may experience a life- threatening lowering of your blood pressure or death.
(see reverse of card)
SIDE 2
You should immediately contact your doctor if you think you are having a hypersensitivity reaction to Kivexa.
Write your doctor's details below:
Doctor:...................... .……………………
Tel:.................. .…………
If your doctor is not available, you must urgently seek alternative medical advice (e. g. the emergency unit of the nearest hospital).
For general Kivexa information enquiries, contact ………
33 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
34 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
Kivexa 600 mg/ 300 mg film-coated tablets abacavir/ lamivudine
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine.
- Keep this leaflet, you may need to read it again.
- If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
- This medicine has been prescribed for you.
Do not pass it on to others.
It may harm them, even
if their symptoms are the same as yours.
- If any of the side effects get serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet,
please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTION
Since Kivexa contains abacavir some patients taking Kivexa may develop a hypersensitivity reaction (serious allergic reaction) which can be life-threatening if you continue to take Kivexa.
It is essential you read the information on this reaction under “ Take special care with Kivexa” in section 2 of this leaflet.
There is also an Alert Card included in the Kivexa pack, to remind you and medical staff about abacavir hypersensitivity.
This card should be removed and kept with you at all times.
CONTACT YOUR DOCTOR IMMEDIATELY for advice on whether you should stop taking Kivexa if:
1) you get a skin rash OR 2) you get one or more symptoms from at least TWO of the following groups
- fever
- shortness of breath, sore throat or cough
- nausea or vomiting or diarrhoea or abdominal pain
- severe tiredness or achiness or generally feeling ill
If you have discontinued Kivexa due to a hypersensitivity reaction, YOU MUST NEVER TAKE Kivexa, or any other medicine containing abacavir (Ziagen or Trizivir) again as within hours you may experience a life-threatening lowering of your blood pressure or death.
If you are hypersensitive to abacavir you should return all of your unused Kivexa tablets for disposal.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice.
In this leaflet:
1.
What Kivexa is and what it is used for 2.
Before you take Kivexa 3.
How to take Kivexa 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store Kivexa 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT KIVEXA IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
Kivexa contains abacavir and lamivudine.
These are also available as separate medicines.
They belong to a group of antiretrovirals, which are medicines used to treat Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection, called nucleoside analogue reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs).
They are used in combination with other antiretrovirals to treat HIV infection.
35 Kivexa reduces the amount of HIV in the blood (viral load), and keeps it low.
It also increases the number of CD4 blood cells.
CD4 cells are a type of white blood cell that play an important role in keeping the immune system healthy to help fight infection.
Response to treatment with Kivexa varies between patients.
Your doctor will be monitoring the effectiveness of your treatment.
2.
BEFORE YOU TAKE KIVEXA
Do not take Kivexa:
- if you are allergic (hypersensitive) to the active substance abacavir, which is also included in
medicines called Trizivir and Ziagen
- if you are allergic to the active substance lamivudine or any of the other ingredients in Kivexa
- if you have serious liver disease
If you are not sure whether you should be taking Kivexa, please discuss with your doctor before taking this medicine.
Take special care with Kivexa
Hypersensitivity reaction (serious allergic reaction):
About 5 in every 100 patients, who are treated with abacavir, develop a hypersensitivity reaction.
Research has found that people with a gene called HLA-B (type 5701) are more likely to have a hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir.
However, even if you do not have this gene type it is still possible for you to get this reaction.
If you know you have this gene type, be sure to tell your doctor before you take abacavir.
The most common symptoms of this reaction are high temperature (fever) and a skin rash.
Other frequently observed signs are nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain and severe tiredness.
Other symptoms may include joint or muscle pain, swelling of the neck, shortness of breath, sore throat, cough and headache.
Occasionally inflammation of the eye (conjunctivitis), mouth ulcers or low blood pressure may occur.
The symptoms of this allergic reaction can occur at any time during treatment with abacavir.
However they usually occur in the first six weeks of treatment.
The symptoms worsen with continued treatment and may be life-threatening if treatment is continued.
CONTACT YOUR DOCTOR IMMEDIATELY for advice on whether you should stop taking Kivexa if:
1) you get a skin rash OR 2) you get one or more symptoms from at least TWO of the following groups
- fever
- shortness of breath, sore throat or cough
- nausea or vomiting or diarrhoea or abdominal pain
- severe tiredness or achiness or generally feeling ill
If you have discontinued Kivexa due to a hypersensitivity reaction, YOU MUST NEVER TAKE Kivexa or any other medicine containing abacavir (Ziagen or Trizivir) again as within hours you may experience a life-threatening lowering of your blood pressure or death.
If you have stopped taking Kivexa for any reason, particularly because you think you are having side effects or for other illness, it is important that you contact your doctor before restarting.
Your doctor will check whether any symptoms you had may be related to this hypersensitivity reaction.
If your doctor thinks there is a possibility that they were related, you will be instructed never to take Kivexa or any other abacavir containing medicine (Ziagen or Trizivir) again.
It is important that you follow this advice.
36 Occasionally life-threatening hypersensitivity reactions have occurred when abacavir was restarted in patients who reported only one of the symptoms on the Alert Card before stopping.
On very rare occasions hypersensitivity has been reported when abacavir was restarted in patients who had no symptoms of hypersensitivity before stopping.
If you are hypersensitive to abacavir, return all of your unused Kivexa tablets for disposal.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice.
Lactic acidosis: the class of medicines to which Kivexa belongs (NRTIs) can cause a condition called lactic acidosis (excess of lactic acid in your blood), together with an enlarged liver.
Lactic acidosis, if it occurs, usually develops after a few months of treatment.
Deep, rapid breathing, drowsiness, and non-specific symptoms such as nausea, vomiting and stomach pain might indicate the development of lactic acidosis.
This rare but serious side effect occurs more often in women, particularly if very overweight.
If you have liver disease you may also be more at risk of getting this condition.
While you are being treated with Kivexa, your doctor will monitor you closely for any signs that you may be developing lactic acidosis.
Fat distribution: redistribution, accumulation or loss of body fat may occur in patients receiving combination antiretroviral therapy.
Contact your doctor if you notice changes in body fat.
Liver disease/ hepatitis: please speak with your doctor if you have a history of liver disease.
Patients with chronic hepatitis B or C and treated with antiretroviral agents are at increased risk of severe and potentially fatal liver adverse events and may require blood tests for monitoring of liver function.
If you have hepatitis B infection, you should not stop Kivexa without instructions from your doctor, as you may have a recurrence of your hepatitis.
This may occur due to you suddenly stopping lamivudine.
This recurrence may be more severe in patients with serious liver disease.
Pancreatitis: inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) has been reported in some patients treated with abacavir and lamivudine, although it was not clear whether this was due to these medicines or the HIV infection itself.
Immune Reactivation Syndrome:
In some patients with advanced HIV infection (AIDS) and a history of opportunistic infection, signs and symptoms of inflammation from previous infections may occur soon after anti-HIV treatment is started.
It is believed that these symptoms are due to an improvement in the body’ s immune response, enabling the body to fight infections that may have been present with no obvious symptoms.
If you notice any symptoms of infection, please inform your doctor immediately.
Bone problems:
Some patients taking combination antiretroviral therapy may develop a bone disease called osteonecrosis (death of bone tissue caused by loss of blood supply to the bone).
The length of combination antiretroviral therapy, corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe immunosuppression, higher body mass index, among others, may be some of the many risk factors for developing this disease.
Signs of osteonecrosis are joint stiffness, aches and pains (especially of the hip, knee and shoulder) and difficulty in movement.
If you notice any of these symptoms please inform your doctor.
General:
Kivexa helps to control your condition but is not a cure for HIV infection.
Treatment with antiretroviral medicines has not been shown to reduce the risk of passing HIV infection on to others by sexual contact or by blood transfer.
You should continue to use appropriate precautions to prevent this.
You may continue to develop other infections and other illnesses associated with HIV disease.
You should therefore keep in regular contact with your doctor while taking Kivexa.
37 Taking other medicines Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription.
Abacavir or lamivudine in Kivexa may interact with certain other medicines.
Kivexa should not be taken with zalcitabine (used to treat HIV), high doses of co-trimoxazole (for infections caused by Pneumocystis carinii), injections of ganciclovir or foscarnet (used to treat infections caused by cytomegalo virus).
Alcohol does increase the amount of abacavir in your blood.
As abacavir increases the rate at which methadone is removed from the body, patients taking methadone will be checked for any withdrawal symptoms, and may have their methadone dose changed.
Pregnancy and breast feeding Kivexa is not recommended during pregnancy.
If you become pregnant, or are planning to become pregnant, you must contact your doctor to discuss the potential adverse effects and the benefits and risks of your antiretroviral therapy to you and your child.
If you have taken Kivexa during your pregnancy, your doctor may request regular visits to monitor the development of your child.
Such visits may include blood tests and other diagnostic tests.
In children whose mother took nucleoside and nucleotide analogues during pregnancy, the benefit from the reduced chance of being infected with HIV is greater than the risk of suffering from side effects.
If you are breast-feeding you must inform your doctor.
It is recommended that HIV infected women do not breast-feed their infants under any circumstances in order to avoid transmission of HIV from mother to child.
Driving and using machines No studies on the effects of Kivexa on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
However, you should take into account the state of your health and the possible side effects of Kivexa before considering driving or using machines.
Important information about some of the other ingredients of Kivexa tablets Kivexa contains a colouring called sunset yellow (E110), this may cause allergic reactions in some people.
3.
HOW TO TAKE KIVEXA
Always take Kivexa exactly as your doctor has told you.
You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure.
Take great care not to miss any doses if at all possible.
The usual dose in adults and adolescents from 12 years of age is one tablet once a day.
Swallow the tablet whole with water.
Kivexa can be taken with or without food.
If you take more Kivexa than you should If you accidentally take too much you should tell your doctor or your pharmacist, or contact your nearest hospital emergency department for further advice.
If you forget to take Kivexa It is important to take Kivexa as prescribed to ensure you get maximum benefit.
If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember, and then continue as before.
Do not take a double dose to make up for forgotten individual doses.
It is important to take Kivexa regularly because irregular intake may increase the risk of hypersensitivity reactions.
38 If you stop taking Kivexa If you have stopped taking Kivexa for any reason, particularly if you think you are having side effects or for other illness, you must contact your doctor before restarting.
In some cases your doctor will ask you to restart Kivexa in a place where you will be able to get ready access to medical care if needed.
4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, Kivexa can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.
When treating HIV infection, it is not always possible to tell whether some of the side effects that occur are caused by Kivexa, by other medicines you are taking at the same time or by the HIV disease.
For this reason it is very important that you inform your doctor about any changes in your health.
Do not be alarmed by this list of possible side effects of Kivexa, you may not experience them.
Kivexa contains both abacavir and lamivudine, the side effects reported for each of these medicines are listed below.
A hypersensitivity reaction (serious allergic reaction) has been reported in about 5 in every 100 patients who have been treated with abacavir.
This is described in section 2 of this leaflet under “ Take special care with Kivexa”.
It is important that you read and understand the information about this serious reaction.
Common side effects (reported in 1 to 10 out of 100 patients)
- abacavir hypersensitivity, skin rash (without any other illness)
- nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, stomach pain
- headache, joint pain, muscle disorders
- cough, nasal symptoms (irritation, runny nose), high temperature
- lethargy, tiredness, difficulty in sleeping, general feeling of being unwell, loss of appetite, hair loss.
Uncommon side effects (reported in 1 to 10 out of 1,000 patients)
- increases in enzymes produced by the liver
- anaemia (low red blood cell count), neutropenia (low white blood cell count) and reduction in the
number of platelets (blood cells important for blood clotting).
If the production of red blood cells is reduced, you may have symptoms of tiredness or breathlessness.
A reduction in your white blood cell count can make you more prone to infection.
If you have a low platelet count, you may notice that you bruise more easily.
Rare side effects (reported in less than 1 in 1,000 patients)
- breakdown of muscle tissue
- increases of an enzyme called amylase
- inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis).
Very rare side effects (reported in less than 1 in 10,000 patients)
- serious skin reactions
- numbness, tingling sensation or sensation of weakness in the limbs
- severe anaemia and neutropenia.
Combination antiretroviral therapy may cause changes in body shape due to changes in fat distribution.
These may include loss of fat from legs, arms and face, increased fat in the abdomen (belly) and other internal organs, breast enlargement and fatty lumps on the back of the neck ('buffalo hump ').
The cause and long-term health effects of these conditions are not known at this time.
Combination antiretroviral therapy may also cause raised lactic acid and sugar in the blood, hyperlipaemia (increased fats in the blood) and resistance to insulin.
39 Cases of a condition called lactic acidosis, which is a build up of lactic acid in the body have been reported in some patients taking NRTIs (see “ Take special care with Kivexa” under section 2 for more information).
If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
5.
HOW TO STORE KIVEXA
Keep Kivexa out of the reach and sight of children.
Do not use Kivexa after the expiry date stated on the packaging.
The expiry date refers to the last day of that month.
Do not store above 30°C.
Medicines should not be disposed of via wastewater or household waste.
Ask your pharmacist how to dispose of medicines no longer required.
These measures will help to protect the environment.
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What Kivexa contains − The active substances are 600 mg of abacavir (as sulfate) and 300 mg of lamivudine. − The other ingredients are magnesium stearate, microcrystalline cellulose, sodium starch glycollate, Opadry Orange YS-1-13065-A containing hypromellose, titanium dioxide (E171), macrogol 400, polysorbate 80 and sunset yellow aluminium lake (E110).
What Kivexa looks like and contents of the pack
The tablets are orange, film-coated, capsule shaped, engraved with GS FC2 on one side.
They are provided in bottles or blister packs containing 30 tablets and blister packs containing 90 (3x30) tablets.
Marketing Authorisation Holder and Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Marketing authorisation holder
Glaxo Operations UK Ltd (trading as Glaxo Wellcome Operations) Priory Street Ware Hertfordshire SG12 0DJ United Kingdom
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
For any information about this medicinal product, please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder.
België/ Belgique/ Belgien GlaxoSmithKline s. a. / n. v.
Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11
Luxembourg/ Luxemburg GlaxoSmithKline s. a. / n. v.
Belgique/ Belgien Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11
40 България ГлаксоСмитКлайн ЕООД Teл.: + 359 2 953 10 34
Magyarország GlaxoSmithKline Kft.
Tel.: + 36 1 225 5300
Č eská republika GlaxoSmithKline s. r. o.
Tel: + 420 222 001 111 gsk. czmail@gsk. com
Malta GlaxoSmithKline Malta Tel: + 356 21 238131
Danmark GlaxoSmithKline Pharma A/ S Tlf: + 45 36 35 91 00 info@glaxosmithkline. dk
Nederland GlaxoSmithKline BV Tel: + 31 (0)30 6938100 nlinfo@gsk. com
Deutschland GlaxoSmithKline GmbH & Co.
KG Tel.: + 49 (0)89 36044 8701 produkt. info@gsk. com
Norge GlaxoSmithKline AS Tlf: + 47 22 70 20 00 firmapost@gsk. no
Eesti Österreich GlaxoSmithKline Eesti OÜ Tel: + 372 6676 900 estonia@gsk. com
GlaxoSmithKline Pharma GmbH Tel: + 43 (0)1 97075 0 at. info@gsk. com
Ελλάδα GlaxoSmithKline A. E. B. E.
Τηλ: + 30 210 68 82 100 España GlaxoSmithKline, S. A.
Tel: + 34 902 202 700 es-ci@gsk. com
Polska GSK Commercial Sp. z o. o.
Tel.: + 48 (0)22 576 9000 Portugal GlaxoSmithKline – Produtos Farmacêuticos, Lda.
Tel: + 351 21 412 95 00 FI. PT@gsk. com
France Laboratoire GlaxoSmithKline Tél.: + 33 (0)1 39 17 84 44 diam@gsk. com
România GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) S. R. L.
Tel: + 4021 3028 208
Ireland GlaxoSmithKline (Ireland) Limited Tel: + 353 (0)1 4955000
Slovenija GlaxoSmithKline d. o. o.
Tel: + 386 (0)1 280 25 00 medical. x. si@gsk. com
Ísland GlaxoSmithKline ehf.
Sími: + 354 530 3700
Slovenská republika GlaxoSmithKline Slovakia s. r. o.
Tel: + 421 (0)2 49 10 33 11 recepcia. sk@gsk. com
Italia GlaxoSmithKline S. p. A.
Tel: + 39 (0)45 9218 111
Suomi/ Finland GlaxoSmithKline Oy Puh/ Tel: + 358 (0)10 30 30 30 Finland. tuoteinfo@gsk. com
Κύπρος GlaxoSmithKline Cyprus Ltd Τηλ: + 357 22 89 95 01
Sverige GlaxoSmithKline AB Tel: + 46 (0)8 638 93 00 info. produkt@gsk. com
41 Latvija GlaxoSmithKline Latvia SIA Tel: + 371 7312687 lv-epasts@gsk. com
United Kingdom GlaxoSmithKline UK Tel: + 44 (0)800 221441 customercontactuk@gsk. com
Lietuva GlaxoSmithKline Lietuva UAB Tel: + 370 5 264 90 00 info. lt@gsk. com
This leaflet was approved in {MM/ YYYY}
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) web site: http: / /www. emea. europa. eu
42