# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

Empty print command.
PS_printer
PostScript file generator
Ledger
US Legal
US Letter
A4
A3
B4
B5
Enabled
Disabled
GhostScript settings
Driver
Resolution
Color depth
Additional GS options
General
Page size
Pages per sheet
Left/ right margin (1/ 72 in)
Top/ bottom margin (1/ 72 in)
Text options
Send EOF after job to eject page
Fix stair-stepping text
Fast text printing (non-PS printers only)
The %1 executable could not be found in your path. Check your installation.
Local printer (parallel, serial, USB)
Remote LPD queue
SMB shared printer (Windows)
Network printer (TCP)
File printer (print to file)
Unknown
Local printer queue (%1)

Remote LPD queue %1@%2
Unable to create spool directory %1 for printer %2.
Unable to save information for printer %1.
Unable to set correct permissions on spool directory %1 for printer %2.
Permission denied: you must be root.
Unable to execute command "%1".
Unable to write printcap file.
Could not find driver %1 in printtool database.
Could not find printer %1 in printcap file.
No driver found (raw printer)
Printer type not recognized.
The driver device %1 is not compiled in your GhostScript distribution. Check your installation or use another driver.
Unable to write driver associated files in spool directory.
APS Driver (%1)
Network printer (%1)
Unsupported backend: %1.
Unable to create directory %1.
Missing element: %1.
Invalid printer backend specification: %1
Unable to create the file %1.
The APS driver is not defined.
Unable to remove directory %1.
Unknown (unrecognized entry)
Remote queue (%1) on %2
Local printer on %1
Unrecognized entry.
The printcap file is a remote file (NIS). It cannot be written.
Unable to save printcap file. Check that you have write permissions for that file.
Internal error: no handler defined.
Could not determine spool directory. See options dialog.
Unable to create the spool directory %1. Check that you have the required permissions for that operation.
The printer has been created but the print daemon could not be restarted. %1
Unable to remove spool directory %1. Check that you have write permissions for that directory.
& Edit printcap Entry...
Editing a printcap entry manually should only be done by confirmed system administrator. This may prevent your printer from working. Do you want to continue?
Spooler type: %1
Unsupported operation.
Spooler
Spooler Settings
The executable %1 could not be found in your PATH.
Permission denied.
Printer %1 does not exist.
Unknown error: %1
Execution of lprm failed: %1
unknown
IFHP Driver (%1)
No driver defined for that printer. It might be a raw printer.
LPRngTool Common Driver (%1)
Network printer
Internal error.
Unable to find the executable foomatic-datafile in your PATH. Check that Foomatic is correctly installed.
Unable to create the Foomatic driver [%1, %2]. Either that driver does not exist, or you do n't have the required permissions to perform that operation.
You probably do not have the required permissions to perform that operation.
Unable to find executable lpdomatic. Check that Foomatic is correctly installed and that lpdomatic is installed in a standard location.
Unable to remove driver file %1.
Aliases:
String
Number
Boolean
Printcap Entry: %1
Printer Location: The Location may describe where the selected printer is located. The Location description is created by the administrator of the print system (or may be left empty).
Printer Type: The Type indicates your printer type.
Printer State: The State indicates the state of the print queue on the print server (which could be your localhost). The state may be'Idle ', 'Processing', 'Stopped ', 'Paused' or similar.
Printer Comment: The Comment may describe the selected printer. This comment is created by the administrator of the print system (or may be left empty).
Printer Selection Menu: Use this combo box to select the printer to which you want to print. Initially (if you run KDEPrint for the first time), you may only find the KDE special printers (which save jobs to disk [as PostScript- or PDF-files], or deliver jobs via email (as a PDF attachment). If you are missing a real printer, you need to...... either create a local printer with the help of the KDE Add Printer Wizard. The Wizard is available for the CUPS and RLPR printing systems (click button to the left of the'Properties' button),... or try to connect to an existing remote CUPS print server. You can connect by clicking the'System Options' button below. A new dialog opens: click on the'CUPS server 'icon: Fill in the information required to use the remote server. Note: It may happen that you successfully connected to a remote CUPS server and still do not get a printer list. If this happens: force KDEPrint to re-load its configuration files. To reload the configuration files, either start kprinter again, or switch the print system away from CUPS and back again once. The print system switch can be made through a selection in the drop-down menu at bottom of this dialog when fully expanded).
Print Job Properties: This button opens a dialog where you can make decisions regarding all supported print job options.
Selective View on List of Printers: This button reduces the list of visible printers to a shorter, more convenient, pre-defined list. This is particularly useful in enterprise environments with lots of printers. The default is to show all printers. To create a personal'selective view list ', click on the'System Options' button at the bottom of this dialog. Then, in the new dialog, select'Filter '(left column in the KDE Print Configuration dialog) and setup your selection. Warning: Clicking this button without prior creation of a personal'selective view list' will make all printers dissappear from the view. (To re-enable all printers, just click this button again.)
KDE Add Printer Wizard This button starts the KDE Add Printer Wizard. Use the Wizard (with "CUPS" or "RLPR") to add locally defined printers to your system. Note: The KDE Add Printer Wizard does not work, and this button is disabled if you use "Generic LPD", "LPRng", or "Print Through an External Program".)
External Print Command Here you can enter any command that would also print for you in a konsole window. Example: a2ps -P & lt; printernamegt; --medium=A3.
Additional Print Job Options This button shows or hides additional printing options.
System Options: This button starts a new dialog where you can adjust various settings of your printing system. Amongst them: Should KDE applications embed all fonts into the PostScript they generate for printing? Should KDE use an external PostScript viewer like gv for print page previews? Should KDEPrint use a local or a remote CUPS server?, and many more....
Help: This button takes you to the complete KDEPrint Manual.
Cancel: This button cancels your print job and quits the kprinter dialog.
Print: This button sends the job to the printing process. If you are sending non-PostScript files, you may be asked if you want KDE to convert the files into PostScript, or if you want your print subsystem (like CUPS) to do this.
Keep Printing Dialog Open If you enable this checkbox, the printing dialog stays open after you hit the Print button. This is especially useful, if you need to test various print settings (like color matching for an inkjet printer) or if you want to send your job to multiple printers (one after the other) to have it finished more quickly.
Output File Name and Path: The "Output file:" shows you where your file will be saved if you decide to "Print to File" your job, using one of the KDE Special Printers named "Print to File (PostScript)" or "Print to File (PDF)". Choose a name and location that suits your need by using the button and/ or editing the line on the right.
Output File Name and Path: Edit this line to create a path and filename that suits your needs. (Button and Lineedit field are only available if you "Print to File")
Browse Directories button: This button calls the "File Open / Browse Directories" dialog to let you choose a directory and file name where your "Print-to-File" job should be saved.
Add File to Job This button calls the "File Open / Browse Directories" dialog to allow you to select a file for printing. Note, that you can select ASCII or International Text, PDF, PostScript, JPEG, TIFF, PNG, GIF and many other graphical formats. you can select various files from different paths and send them as one "multi-file job" to the printing system.
Print Preview Enable this checkbox if you want to see a preview of your printout. A preview lets you check if, for instance, your intended "poster" or "pamphlet" layout looks like you expected, without wasting paper first. It also lets you cancel the job if something looks wrong. Note: The preview feature (and therefore this checkbox) is only visible for printjobs created from inside KDE applications. If you start kprinter from the commandline, or if you use kprinter as a print command for non-KDE applications (like Acrobat Reader, Firefox or OpenOffice), print preview is not available here.
Set as Default Printer This button sets the current printer as the user's default. Note: (Button is only visible if the checkbox for System Options -- > General -- > Miscellaneous: "Defaults to the last printer used in the application" is disabled.)
Print
Printer
& Name:
State:
Type:
Location:
Comment:
Properties
System Options
Set as & Default
Toggle selective view on printer list
Add printer...
& Print
Preview
Output file:
Print command:
Show/ hide advanced options
& Keep this dialog open after printing
An error occurred while retrieving the printer list:
The output filename is empty.
You do not have write permissions to this file.
The output directory does not exist.
You do not have write permissions in that directory.
& Options > >
Initializing printing system...
Print to File
All Files
Print Job Billing and Accounting Insert a meaningful string here to associate the current print job with a certain account. This string will appear in the CUPS "page_log" to help with the print accounting in your organization. (Leave it empty if you do not need it.) It is useful for people who print on behalf of different "customers", like print service bureaux, letter shops, press and prepress companies, or secretaries who serve different bosses, etc. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o job-billing=... # example: "Marketing_Department" or "Joe_Doe"
Scheduled Printing Scheduled printing lets you control the time of the actual printout, while you can still send away your job now and have it out of your way. Especially useful is the "Never (hold indefinitely)" option. It allows you to park your job until a time when you (or a printer administrator) decides to manually release it. This is often required in enterprise environments, where you normally are not allowed to directly and immediately access the huge production printers in your Central Repro Department. However it is okay to send jobs to the queue which is under the control of the operators (who, after all, need to make sure that the 10,000 sheets of pink paper which is required by the Marketing Department for a particular job are available and loaded into the paper trays.) Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o job-hold-until=... # example: "indefinite" or "no-hold"
Page Labels Page Labels are printed by CUPS at the top and bottom of each page. They appear on the pages surrounded by a little frame box. They contain any string you type into the line edit field. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o page-label= "..." # example: "Company Confidential"
Job Priority Usually CUPS prints all jobs per queue according to the "FIFO" principle: First In, First Out. The job priority option allows you to re-order the queue according to your needs. It works in both directions: you can increase as well as decrease priorities. (Usually you can only control your own jobs.) Since the default job priority is "50", any job sent with, for example, "49" will be printed only after all those others have finished. Conversely, a "51" or higher priority job will go right to the top of a populated queue (if no other, higher prioritized one is present.) Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o job-priority=... # example: "10" or "66" or "99"
Advanced Options
Immediately
Never (hold indefinitely)
Daytime
Evening
Night
Weekend
Second Shift (after close of business)
Third Shift (after midnight)
Specified Time
& Scheduled printing:
& Billing information:
Top/ Bottom page label:
& Job priority:
The time specified is not valid.
No Banner
Classified
Confidential
Secret
Standard
Top Secret
Unclassified
Banner Selection
& Starting banner:
& Ending banner:
Select the default banners associated with this printer. These banners will be inserted before and/ or after each print job sent to the printer. If you do n't want to use banners, select No Banner.
& Export
Export Printer Driver to Windows Clients
& Username:
& Samba server:
& Password:
Samba server Adobe Windows PostScript driver files plus the CUPS printer PPD will be exported to the [print$] special share of the Samba server (to change the source CUPS server, use the Configure Manager - > CUPS server first). The [print$] share must exist on the Samba side prior to clicking the Export button below.
Samba username User needs to have write access to the [print$] share on the Samba server. [print$] holds printer drivers prepared for download to Windows clients. This dialog does not work for Samba servers configured with security = share (but works fine with security = user).
Samba password The Samba setting encrypt passwords = yes (default) requires prior use of smbpasswd -a [username] command, to create an encrypted Samba password and have Samba recognize it.
Creating folder %1
Uploading %1
Installing driver for %1
Installing printer %1
& Close
Driver successfully exported.
Operation failed. Possible reasons are: permission denied or invalid Samba configuration (see cupsaddsmb manual page for detailed information, you need CUPS version 1.1.11 or higher). You may want to try again with another login/ password.
Operation aborted (process killed).
Operation failed. %1
You are about to prepare the %1 driver to be shared out to Windows clients through Samba. This operation requires the Adobe PostScript Driver, a recent version of Samba 2.2. x and a running SMB service on the target server. Click Export to start the operation. Read the cupsaddsmb manual page in Konqueror or type man cupsaddsmb in a console window to learn more about this functionality.
Some driver files are missing. You can get them on Adobe web site. See cupsaddsmb manual page for more details (you need CUPS version 1.1.11 or higher).
Preparing to upload driver to host %1
& Abort
The driver for printer %1 could not be found.
Preparing to install driver on host %1
Remote IPP Printer Selection
You must select a printer.
You do not have access to the requested resource.
You are not authorized to access the requested resource.
The requested operation cannot be completed.
The requested service is currently unavailable.
The target printer is not accepting print jobs.
Connection to CUPS server failed. Check that the CUPS server is correctly installed and running.
The IPP request failed for an unknown reason.
Attribute
Values
True
False
& Period:
& Size limit (KB):
& Page limit:
Quotas
Quota Settings
No quota
None
Remote IPP server
Enter the information concerning the remote IPP server owning the targeted printer. This wizard will poll the server before continuing.
Host:
Port:
Empty server name.
Incorrect port number.
Unable to connect to %1 on port %2.
Banners
Banner Settings
IPP Report
Internal error: unable to generate HTML report.
Users Access Settings
Users
Allowed Users
Denied Users
Define here a group of allowed/ denied users for this printer.
& Type:
Characters Per Inch This setting controls the horizontal size of characters when printing a text file. The default value is 10, meaning that the font is scaled in a way that 10 characters per inch will be printed. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o cpi=... # example: "8" or "12"
Lines Per Inch This setting controls the vertical size of characters when printing a text file. The default value is 6, meaning that the font is scaled in a way that 6 lines per inch will be printed. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o lpi=... # example "5" or "7"
Columns This setting controls how many columns of text will be printed on each page when printing text files. The default value is 1, meaning that only one column of text per page will be printed. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o columns=... # example: "2" or "4"
Preview icon changes when you turn on or off prettyprint.
Text Formats These settings control the appearance of text on printouts. They are only valid for printing text files or input directly through kprinter. Note: These settings have no effect whatsoever for input formats other than text, or for printing from applications such as the KDE Advanced Text Editor. (Applications in general send PostScript to the print system, and'kate 'in particular has its own knobs to control the print output.). Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o cpi=... # example: "8" or "12" -o lpi=... # example: "5" or "7" -o columns=... # example: "2" or "4"
Margins These settings control the margins of printouts on the paper. They are not valid for jobs originating from applications that define their own page layout internally and send PostScript to KDEPrint (such as KOffice or OpenOffice. org). When printing from KDE applications, such as KMail and Konqueror, or printing an ASCII text file through kprinter, you can choose your preferred margin settings here. Margins may be set individually for each edge of the paper. The combo box at the bottom lets you change the units of measurement between Pixels, Millimeters, Centimeters, and Inches. You can even use the mouse to grab one margin and drag it to the intended position (see the preview picture on the right side). Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o page-top=... # example: "72" -o page-bottom=... # example: "24" -o page-left=... # example: "36" -o page-right=... # example: "12"
Turn Text Printing with Syntax Highlighting (Prettyprint) On. ASCII text file printouts can be'prettyfied 'by enabling this option. If you do so, a header is printed at the top of each page. The header contains the page number, job title (usually the filename), and the date. In addition, C and C++ keywords are highlighted, and comment lines are italicized. This prettyprint option is handled by CUPS. If you prefer another'plaintext-to-prettyprint' converter, look for the enscript pre-filter on the Filters tab. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o prettyprint=true.
Turn Text Printing with Syntax Highlighting (Prettyprint) Off. ASCII text file printed with this option turned off appear without a page header and without syntax highlighting. (You can still set the page margins, though.) Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o prettyprint=false
Print Text with Syntax Highlighting (Prettyprint) ASCII file printouts can be'prettyfied 'by enabling this option. If you do so, a header is printed at the top of each page. The header contains the page number, job title (usually the filename), and the date. In addition, C and C++ keywords are highlighted, and comment lines are italicized. This prettyprint option is handled by CUPS. If you prefer another'plaintext-to-prettyprint' converter, look for the enscript pre-filter on the Filters tab. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o prettyprint=true. -o prettyprint=false
Text
Text Format
Syntax Highlighting
Margins
& Chars per inch:
& Lines per inch:
Columns:
& Disabled
& Enabled
Folder
CUPS Folder Settings
Installation Folder
Standard installation (/)
'Use any current or future standard CUPS job option 'is not supported by the KDEPrint GUI. Control any custom job option you may want to support using custom CUPS filters and backends plugged into the CUPS filtering chain. Send short messages to the operators of your production printers in your Central Repro Department. Standard CUPS job options: A complete list of standard CUPS job options is in the CUPS User Manual. Mappings of the kprinter user interface widgets to respective CUPS job option names are provided in the various What's This help items. Custom CUPS job options: CUPS print servers may be customized with additional print filters and backends which understand custom job options. You can specify such custom job options here. If in doubt, ask your system administrator. Operator Messages: You may send additional messages to the operator(s) of your production printers (e. g. in your Central Repro Department). Messages can be read by the operator(s) (or yourself) by viewing the "Job IPP Report" for the job. Examples: A standard CUPS job option: (Name) number-up -- (Value) 9 A job option for custom CUPS filters or backends: (Name) DANKA_watermark -- (Value) Company_Confidential A message to the operator(s): (Name) Deliver_after_completion -- (Value) to_Marketing_Departm. Note: the fields must not include spaces, tabs or quotes. You may need to double-click on a field to edit it. Warning: Do not use CUPS options that can also be controlled through the KDEPrint GUI. Results may be unpredictable if the options conflict, or if they are sent multiple times. For all options supported by the GUI, please use the GUI. (Each GUI element's'What's This' names the related CUPS option name.)
Additional Tags
Name
Value
Read-Only
The tag name must not contain any spaces, tabs or quotes: %1.
Print queue on remote CUPS server Use this for a print queue installed on a remote machine running a CUPS server. This allows to use remote printers when CUPS browsing is turned off.
Network IPP printer Use this for a network-enabled printer using the IPP protocol. Modern high-end printers can use this mode. Use this mode instead of TCP if your printer can do both.
Fax/ Modem printer Use this for a fax/ modem printer. This requires the installation of the fax4CUPS backend. Documents sent on this printer will be faxed to the given target fax number.
Other printer Use this for any printer type. To use this option, you must know the URI of the printer you want to install. Refer to the CUPS documentation for more information about the printer URI. This option is mainly useful for printer types using 3rd party backends not covered by the other possibilities.
Class of printers Use this to create a class of printers. When sending a document to a class, the document is actually sent to the first available (idle) printer in the class. Refer to the CUPS documentation for more information about class of printers.
Remote CUPS server (IPP/ HTTP)
Network printer w/ IPP (IPP/ HTTP)
Serial Fax/ Modem printer
Other & printer type
Class of printers
An error occurred while retrieving the list of available backends:
Priority
Billing Information
Fax Serial Device
Select the device which your serial Fax/ Modem is connected to.
You must select a device.
Library cupsdconf not found. Check your installation.
Symbol %1 not found in cupsdconf library.
& Export Driver...
& Printer IPP Report
IPP Report for %1
Unable to retrieve printer information. Error received:
Server
the IPP request failed for an unknown reason
Connection to CUPS server failed. Check that the CUPS server is correctly installed and running. Error: %1.
connection refused
host not found
read failed (%1)
Connection to CUPS server failed. Check that the CUPS server is correctly installed and running. Error: %2: %1
Print in Black Only (Blackplot) The'blackplot 'option specifies that all pens should plot in black-only: The default is to use the colors defined in the plot file, or the standard pen colors defined in the HP-GL/ 2 reference manual from Hewlett Packard. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o blackplot=true
Scale Print Image to Page Size The'fitplot 'option specifies that the HP-GL image should be scaled to fill exactly the page with the (elsewhere selected) media size. The default is'fitplot is disabled'. The default will therefore use the absolute distances specified in the plot file. (You should be aware that HP-GL files are very often CAD drawings intended for large format plotters. On standard office printers they will therefore lead to the drawing printout being spread across multiple pages.) Note: This feature depends upon an accurate plot size (PS) command in the HP-GL/ 2 file. If no plot size is given in the file the filter converting the HP-GL to PostScript assumes the plot is ANSI E size. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o fitplot=true
Set Pen Width for HP-GL (if not defined in file). The pen width value can be set here in case the original HP-GL file does not have it set. The pen width specifies the value in micrometers. The default value of 1000 produces lines that are 1000 micrometers == 1 millimeter in width. Specifying a pen width of 0 produces lines that are exactly 1 pixel wide. Note: The pen width option set here is ignored if the pen widths are set inside the plot file itself. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o penwidth=... # example: "2000" or "500"
HP-GL Print Options All options on this page are only applicable if you use KDEPrint to send HP-GL and HP-GL/ 2 files to one of your printers. HP-GL and HP-GL/ 2 are page description languages developed by Hewlett-Packard to drive Pen Plotting devices. KDEPrint can (with the help of CUPS) convert the HP-GL file format and print it on any installed printer. Note 1: To print HP-GL files, start'kprinter 'and simply load the file into the running kprinter. Note 2: The'fitplot' parameter provided on this dialog also works for printing PDF files (if your CUPS version is more recent than 1.1.22.) Additional hint for power users: These KDEPrint GUI elements correspond to the CUPS command line job option parameters: -o blackplot=... # examples: "true" or "false" -o fitplot=... # examples: "true" or "false" -o penwidth=... # examples: "true" or "false"
HP-GL/ 2 Options
& Use only black pen
& Fit plot to page
& Pen width:
IPP Printer Information
& Printer URI:
Either enter the printer URI directly, or use the network scanning facility.
& IPP Report
You must enter a printer URI.
No printer found at this address/ port.
< Unknown > (%1)
Name: %1
Location: %1
Description: %1
Model: %1
Idle
Stopped
Processing...
State: %1
Unable to retrieve printer info. Printer answered: %1
Unable to generate report. IPP request failed with message: %1 (0x%2).
URI Selection
Enter the URI corresponding to the printer to be installed. Examples: smb: / /[login[: passwd]@]server/ printer lpd: / /server/ queue parallel: / dev/ lp0
URI:
CUPS Server %1: %2
Server Information
Account Information
& Host:
& Port:
& User:
Password:
& Store password in configuration file
Use & anonymous access
second(s)
minute(s)
hour(s)
day(s)
week(s)
month(s)
Printer Quota Settings
Set here the quota for this printer. Using limits of 0 means that no quota will be used. This is equivalent to setting the quota period to No quota (-1). Quota limits are defined on a per-user base and applied to all users.
You must specify at least one quota limit.
CUPS Server
CUPS Server Settings
Denied users
Allowed users
All users allowed
Brightness: Slider to control the brightness value of all colors used. The brightness value can range from 0 to 200. Values greater than 100 will lighten the print. Values less than 100 will darken the print. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o brightness=... # use range from "0" to "200"
Hue (Tint): Slider to control the hue value for color rotation. The hue value is a number from -360 to 360 and represents the color hue rotation. The following table summarizes the change you will see for the base colors: Original hue=-45 hue=45 Red Purple Yellow-orange Green Yellow-green Blue-green Yellow Orange Green-yellow Blue Sky-blue Purple Magenta Indigo Crimson Cyan Blue-green Light-navy-blue Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o hue=... # use range from "-360" to "360"
Saturation: Slider to control the saturation value for all colors used. The saturation value adjusts the saturation of the colors in an image, similar to the color knob on your television. The color saturation value can range from 0 to 200. On inkjet printers, a higher saturation value uses more ink. On laserjet printers, a higher saturation uses more toner. A color saturation of 0 produces a black-and-white print, while a value of 200 will make the colors extremely intense. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o saturation=... # use range from "0" to "200"
Gamma: Slider to control the gamma value for color correction. The gamma value can range from 1 to 3000. A gamma value greater than 1000 lightens the print. A gamma value less than 1000 darkens the print. The default gamma is 1000. Note: the gamma value adjustment is not visible in the thumbnail preview. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o gamma=... # use range from "1" to "3000"
Image Printing Options All options controlled on this page only apply to printing images. Most image file formats are supported. To name a few: JPEG, TIFF, PNG, GIF, PNM (PBM/ PGM/ PNM/ PPM), Sun Raster, SGI RGB, Windows BMP. Options to influence color output of image printouts are: Brightness Hue Saturation Gamma For a more detailed explanation about Brightness, Hue, Saturation and Gamma settings, please look at the'What's This' items provided for these controls.
Coloration Preview Thumbnail The coloration preview thumbnail indicates change of image coloration by different settings. Options to influence output are: Brightness Hue (Tint) Saturation Gamma For a more detailed explanation about Brightness, Hue, Saturation and Gamma settings, please look at the'What's This' items provided for these controls.
Image Size: Drop-down menu to control the image size on the printed paper. The menu works in conjunction with slider below. The options are: Natural Image Size: Image prints in its natural image size. If it does not fit onto one sheet, the printout will be spread across multiple sheets. Note, that the slider is disabled when selecting'natural image size 'in the dropdown menu. Resolution (ppi): The resolution value slider covers a number range from 1 to 1200. It specifies the resolution of the image in Pixels Per Inch (PPI). An image that is 3000x2400 pixels will print 10x8 inches at 300 pixels per inch, for example, but 5x4 inches at 600 pixels per inch. If the specified resolution makes the image larger than the page, multiple pages will be printed. Resolution defaults to 72 ppi.% of Page Size: The percent value slider covers numbers from 1 to 800. It specifies the size in relation to the page (not the image). A scaling of 100 percent will fill the page as completely as the image aspect ratio allows (doing auto-rotation of the image as needed). A scaling of more than 100 will print the image across multiple sheets. A scaling of 200 percent will print on up to 4 pages. Scaling in% of page size defaults to 100%.% of Natural Image Size: The percent value slider moves from 1 to 800. It specifies the printout size in relation to the natural image size. A scaling of 100 percent will print the image at its natural size, while a scaling of 50 percent will print the image at half its natural size. If the specified scaling makes the image larger than the page, multiple pages will be printed. Scaling in% of natural image size defaults to 100%. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o natural-scaling=... # range in% is 1... .800 -o scaling=... # range in% is 1... .800 -o ppi=... # range in ppi is 1... 1200
Position Preview Thumbnail This position preview thumbnail indicates the position of the image on the paper sheet. Click on horizontal and vertical radio buttons to move image alignment on paper around. Options are: center top top-left left bottom-left bottom bottom-right right top-right
Reset to Default Values Reset all coloration settings to default values. Default values are: Brightness: 100 Hue (Tint). 0 Saturation: 100 Gamma: 1000
Image Positioning: Select a pair of radio buttons to move the image to the position you want on the paper printout. Default is'center '. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o position=... # examples: "top-left" or "bottom"
Image
Color Settings
Image Size
Image Position
& Brightness:
& Hue (Color rotation):
& Saturation:
& Gamma (Color correction):
& Default Settings
Natural Image Size
Resolution (ppi)
% of Page
% of Natural Image Size
& Image size type:
Job Report
Unable to retrieve job information:
& Job IPP Report
& Increase Priority
& Decrease Priority
& Edit Attributes...
Unable to change job priority:
Unable to find printer %1.
Attributes of Job %1@%2 (%3)
Unable to set job attributes:
The printer is incompletely defined. Try to reinstall it.
Remote LPD Queue Settings
Queue:
Empty host name.
Empty queue name.
Remote queue %1 on %2
No Predefined Printers
Queue
Empty printer name.
Printer not found.
Not implemented yet.
Proxy
RLPR Proxy Server Settings
Proxy Settings
& Use proxy server
File transfer failed.
Abnormal process termination (%1).
%1: execution failed with message: %2
A print error occurred. Error message received from system: %1
Some of the files to printed are not readable by the KDE print daemon. This may happen if you are trying to print as a different user to the one currently logged in. To continue printing, you need to provide root's password.
Enter the root password
Printing Status - %1
Printing system
Authentication failed (user name=%1)
Queued
Held
Error
Canceled
Aborted
Completed
helpviewer
drawdemo
EPSON InkJet Printer Utilities
& Use direct connection (might need root permissions)
Printer:
Device:
Clean print head
& Print a nozzle test pattern
& Align print head
& Ink level
Printer identification
Internal error: no device set.
Unsupported connection type: %1
An escputil process is still running. You must wait until its completion before continuing.
The executable escputil cannot be found in your PATH environment variable. Make sure gimp-print is installed and that escputil is in your PATH.
Internal error: unable to start escputil process.
Operation terminated with errors.
Output
The printer %1 already exists. Continuing will overwrite existing printer. Do you want to continue?
Initializing manager...
& View
& Icons, List, Tree
Start/ Stop Printer
& Start Printer
Stop Printer
Enable/ Disable Job Spooling
& Enable Job Spooling
& Disable Job Spooling
& Remove
& Configure...
Add & Printer/ Class...
Add & Special (pseudo) Printer...
Set as & Local Default
Set as & User Default
& Test Printer...
Configure & Manager...
Initialize Manager/ View
& Orientation
& Vertical, Horizontal
Restart Server
Configure & Server...
Show & Toolbar
Show Menu Toolbar
Show Printer Details
Toggle Printer & Filtering
%1 & Handbook
%1 & Web Site
Printer Tools
Add
Print Server
Print Manager
View
Documentation
An error occurred while retrieving the printer list.
Unable to modify the state of printer %1.
Do you really want to remove %1?
Unable to remove special printer %1.
Unable to remove printer %1.
Configure %1
Unable to modify settings of printer %1.
Unable to load a valid driver for printer %1.
Unable to create printer.
Unable to define printer %1 as default.
You are about to print a test page on %1. Do you want to continue?
Print Test Page
Test page successfully sent to printer %1.
Unable to test printer %1.
Internal error (no error message).
Error message received from manager: %1
Unable to restart print server.
Restarting server...
Unable to configure print server.
Configuring server...
Unable to start printer tool. Possible reasons are: no printer selected, the selected printer does n't have any local device defined (printer port), or the tool library could not be found.
Unable to retrieve the printer list.
Commands
Command Settings
Edit/ Create Commands
Command objects perform a conversion from input to output. They are used as the basis to build both print filters and special printers. They are described by a command string, a set of options, a set of requirements and associated mime types. Here you can create new command objects and edit existing ones. All changes will only be effective for you.
& Next >
< & Back
Add Printer Wizard
Modify Printer
Unable to find the requested page.
& Finish
Select Command
Local Port Selection
Local System
Parallel
Serial
USB
Others
Select a valid detected port, or enter directly the corresponding URI in the bottom edit field.
Empty URI.
The local URI does not correspond to a detected port. Continue?
Select a valid port.
Unable to detect local ports.
Printer type:
Interface
Interface Settings
IPP Printer
Local USB Printer
Local Parallel Printer
Local Serial Printer
Network Printer (socket)
SMB printers (Windows)
File printer
Serial Fax/ Modem printer
Description:
Model:
Members:
Implicit class
Remote class
Local class
Remote printer
Local printer
Special (pseudo) printer
Class Composition
Available printers:
Class printers:
You must select at least one printer.
Printer name:
General Settings
& Settings
Scan
Network scan:
Subnet: %1
You are about to scan a subnet (%1. *) that does not correspond to the current subnet of this computer (%2. *). Do you want to scan the specified subnet anyway?
& Scan
& Subnetwork:
& Timeout (ms):
Scan Configuration
Wrong subnetwork specification.
Wrong timeout specification.
Wrong port specification.
Configure
Some options are in conflict. You must resolve those conflicts before continuing.
File Selection
The printing will be redirected to a file. Enter here the path of the file you want to use for redirection. Use an absolute path or the browse button for graphical selection.
Print to file:
Empty file name.
Directory does not exist.
Preview
Preview Settings
Preview Program
& Use external preview program
You can use an external preview program (PS viewer) instead of the KDE built-in preview system. Note that if the KDE default PS viewer (KGhostView) cannot be found, KDE tries automatically to find another external PostScript viewer
Printer Test
Manufacturer:
Model:
Description:
& Test
Now you can test the printer before finishing installation. Use the Settings button to configure the printer driver and the Test button to test your configuration. Use the Back button to change the driver (your current configuration will be discarded).
Unable to load the requested driver: %1
Test page successfully sent to printer. Wait until printing is complete, then click the OK button.
Unable to test printer:
Unable to remove temporary printer.
Unable to create temporary printer.
Unable to change printer properties. Error received from manager: %1
Configure KDE Print
Configure print server
KAddPrinterWizard
Start the add printer wizard
No executable defined for the creation of the driver database. This operation is not implemented.
The executable %1 could not be found in your PATH. Check that this program exists and is accessible in your PATH variable.
Unable to start the creation of the driver database. The execution of %1 failed.
Please wait while KDE rebuilds a driver database.
Driver Database
Error while creating driver database: abnormal child-process termination.
User Identification
This backend may require a login/ password to work properly. Select the type of access to use and fill in the login and password entries if needed.
& Login:
& Anonymous (no login/ password)
& Guest account (login="guest ")
Normal account
Select one option
User name is empty.
Network Printer Information
& Printer address:
Port:
You must enter a printer address.
Wrong port number.
Change...
KDE Print Configuration
Printer Model Selection
Raw printer
Internal error: unable to locate the driver.
No Printer
All Printers
Print Jobs for %1
Unlimited
Max.: %1
Job ID
Owner
State
Size (KB)
Page(s)
& Hold
& Resume
Remove
Restart
& Move to Printer
& Toggle Completed Jobs
Show Only User Jobs
User Name
& Select Printer
Refresh
Keep window permanent
Unable to perform action "%1" on selected jobs. Error received from manager:
Hold
Resume
Remove
Restart
Move to %1
Operation failed.
Print Job Settings
Refresh Interval
sec
This time setting controls the refresh rate of various KDE Print components like the print manager and the job viewer.
Test Page
& Specify personal test page
Preview...
Miscellaneous
Show printing status message box
Defaults to the last printer used in the application
The selected test page is not a PostScript file. You may not be able to test your printer anymore.
Comment
Confirmation
Type
Location
Description
Members
Backend
Device
Printer IP
Port
Host
File
Account
URI
DB driver
External driver
Manufacturer
Model
Fonts
Font Settings
Fonts Embedding
Fonts Path
& Embed fonts in PostScript data when printing
& Up
& Down
& Add
Additional directory:
These options will automatically put fonts in the PostScript file which are not present on the printer. Font embedding usually produces better print results (closer to what you see on the screen), but larger print data as well.
When using font embedding you can select additional directories where KDE should search for embeddable font files. By default, the X server font path is used, so adding those directories is not needed. The default search path should be sufficient in most cases.
SMB Printer Settings
Scan
Abort
Workgroup:
Server:
< anonymous >
Login: %1
Class Members
Integer
Float
List
& Description:
& Format:
Default & value:
Command:
& Persistent option
Values
Minimum value:
Maximum value:
Add value
Delete value
Apply changes
Add group
Add option
Delete item
Move up
Move down
& Input From
Output To
File:
Pipe:
An identification string. Use only alphanumeric characters except spaces. The string __root__ is reserved for internal use.
A description string. This string is shown in the interface, and should be explicit enough about the role of the corresponding option.
The type of the option. This determines how the option is presented graphically to the user.
The format of the option. This determines how the option is formatted for inclusion in the global command line. The tag %value can be used to represent the user selection. This tag will be replaced at run-time by a string representation of the option value.
The default value of the option. For non persistent options, nothing is added to the command line if the option has that default value. If this value does not correspond to the actual default value of the underlying utility, make the option persistent to avoid unwanted effects.
Make the option persistent. A persistent option is always written to the command line, whatever its value. This is useful when the chosen default value does not match with the actual default value of the underlying utility.
The full command line to execute the associated underlying utility. This command line is based on a mechanism of tags that are replaced at run-time. The supported tags are: %filterargs: command options %filterinput: input specification %filteroutput: output specification %psu: the page size in upper case %psl: the page size in lower case
Input specification when the underlying utility reads input data from a file. Use the tag %in to represent the input filename.
Output specification when the underlying utility writes output data to a file. Use the tag %out to represent the output filename.
Input specification when the underlying utility reads input data from its standard input.
Output specification when the underlying utility writes output data to its standard output.
A comment about the underlying utility, which can be viewed by the user from the interface. This comment string supports basic HTML tags like & lt; agt;, & lt; bgt; or & lt; igt;.
Invalid identification name. Empty strings and "__root__" are not allowed.
New Group
New Option
Command Edit for %1
& Mime Type Settings
Supported & Input Formats
Requirements
& Edit Command...
Output & format:
ID name:
exec: /
LPD Queue Information
Enter the information concerning the remote LPD queue; this wizard will check it before continuing.
Some information is missing.
Cannot find queue %1 on server %2; do you want to continue anyway?
Filter
Printer Filtering Settings
Printer Filter
The printer filtering allows you to view only a specific set of printers instead of all of them. This may be useful when there are a lot of printers available but you only use a few ones. Select the printers you want to see from the list on the left or enter a Location filter (ex: Group_1*). Both are cumulative and ignored if empty.
Location filter:
Driver Selection
Several drivers have been detected for this model. Select the driver you want to use. You will have the opportunity to test it as well as to change it if necessary.
Driver Information
You must select a driver.
[recommended]
No information about the selected driver.
Introduction
Welcome, This wizard will help to install a new printer on your computer. It will guide you through the various steps of the process of installing and configuring a printer for your printing system. At each step, you can always go back using the Back button. We hope you'll enjoy this tool! The KDE printing team.
& PostScript printer
& Raw printer (no driver needed)
& Other...
& Manufacturer:
Model:
Loading...
Unable to find the PostScript driver.
Select Driver
< Unknown >
Database
Wrong driver format.
Other
New command
Edit command
Information
& Browse...
Use command:
Command Name
Enter an identification name for the new command:
A command named %1 already exists. Do you want to continue and edit the existing one?
Internal error. The XML driver for the command %1 could not be found.
output
undefined
not allowed
(Unavailable: requirements not satisfied)
Print System
Classes
Printers
Specials
Manufacturer:
Printer model:
Driver info:
Driver Settings
Jobs
Jobs Shown
Maximum number of jobs shown:
General Information
Enter the information concerning your printer or class. Name is mandatory, Location and Description are not (they may even not be used on some systems).
Name:
You must supply at least a name.
It is usually not a good idea to include spaces in printer name: it may prevent your printer from working correctly. The wizard can strip all spaces from the string you entered, resulting in %1; what do you want to do?
Strip
Keep
Backend Selection
You must select a backend.
& Local printer (parallel, serial, USB)
Locally-connected printer Use this for a printer connected to the computer via a parallel, serial or USB port.
& SMB shared printer (Windows)
Shared Windows printer Use this for a printer installed on a Windows server and shared on the network using the SMB protocol (samba).
& Remote LPD queue
Print queue on a remote LPD server Use this for a print queue existing on a remote machine running a LPD print server.
Network printer (TCP)
Network TCP printer Use this for a network-enabled printer using TCP (usually on port 9100) as communication protocol. Most network printers can use this mode.
Define/ Edit here instances for the current selected printer. An instance is a combination of a real (physical) printer and a set of predefined options. For a single InkJet printer, you could define different print formats like DraftQuality, PhotoQuality or TwoSided. Those instances appear as normal printers in the print dialog and allow you to quickly select the print format you want.
New...
Copy...
Set as Default
Settings
Test...
(Default)
Instance Name
Enter name for new instance (leave untouched for default):
Instance name must not contain any spaces or slashes.
Do you really want to remove instance %1?
You can not remove the default instance. However all settings of %1 will be discarded. Continue?
Unable to find instance %1.
Unable to retrieve printer information. Message from printing system: %1.
The instance name is empty. Please select an instance.
Internal error: printer not found.
Unable to send test page to %1.
Properties
Instances
Add Special Printer
& Location:
Command & Settings
Output File
& Enable output file
Filename extension:
The command will use an output file. If checked, make sure the command contains an output tag.
The command to execute when printing on this special printer. Either enter the command to execute directly, or associate/ create a command object with/ for this special printer. The command object is the preferred method as it provides support for advanced settings like mime type checking, configurable options and requirement list (the plain command is only provided for backward compatibility). When using a plain command, the following tags are recognized: %in: the input file (required). %out: the output file (required if using an output file). %psl: the paper size in lower case. %psu: the paper size with the first letter in upper case.
The default mimetype for the output file (e. g. application/ postscript).
The default extension for the output file (e. g. ps, pdf, ps. gz).
You must provide a non-empty name.
Invalid settings. %1.
Configuring %1
Add File button This button calls the'File Open 'dialog to let you select a file for printing. Note, that you can select ASCII or International Text, PDF, PostScript, JPEG, TIFF, PNG, GIF and many other graphic formats. you can select various files from different paths and send them as one "multi-file job" to the printing system.
Remove File button This button removes the highlighted file from the list of to-be-printed files.
Move File Up button This button moves the highlighted file up in the list of files to be printed. In effect, this changes the order of the files' printout.
Move File Down button This button moves the highlighted file down in the list of files to be printed. In effect, this changes the order of the files' printout.
File Open button This button tries to open the highlighted file, so you can view or edit it before you send it to the printing system. If you open files, KDEPrint will use the application matching the MIME type of the file.
File List view This list displays all the files you selected for printing. You can see the file name(s), file path(s) and the file (MIME) type(s) as determined by KDEPrint. You may re-arrange the initial order of the list with the help of the arrow buttons on the right. The files will be printed as a single job, in the same order as displayed in the list. Note: You can select multiple files. The files may be in multiple locations. The files may be of multiple MIME types. The buttons on the right side let you add more files, remove already selected files from the list, re-order the list (by moving files up or down), and open files. If you open files, KDEPrint will use the application matching the MIME type of the file.
Path
Add file
Remove file
Open file
Drag file(s) here or use the button to open a file dialog. Leave empty for lt; STDINgt;.
Adjustments
Print Subsystem Selection This combo box shows (and lets you select) a print subsystem to be used by KDEPrint. (This print subsystem must, of course, be installed inside your Operating System.) KDEPrint usually auto-detects the correct print subsystem by itself upon first startup. Most Linux distributions have "CUPS", the Common UNIX Printing System.
Print system currently used:
Plugin information
Current Connection This line shows which CUPS server your PC is currently connected to for printing and retrieving printer info. To switch to a different CUPS server, click "System Options", then select "Cups server" and fill in the required info.
List of Driver Options (from PPD). The upper pane of this dialog page contains all print job options as laid down in the printer's description file (PostScript Printer Description == 'PPD '.) Click on any item in the list and watch the lower pane of this dialog page display the available values. Set the values as needed, then use one of the push buttons below to proceed: 'Save' your settings if you want to re-use them in your next job(s) too. 'Save 'will store your settings permanently until you change them again.. Click'OK' (without a prior click on'Save '), if you want to use your selected settings just once, for the next print job. 'OK' will forget your current settings when kprinter is closed again, and will start next time with the previously saved defaults. 'Cancel 'will not change anything. If you proceed to print after clicking'Cancel', the job will print with the default settings of this queue. Note. The number of available job options depends strongly on the actual driver used for your print queue. 'Raw 'queues do not have a driver or a PPD. For raw queues this tab page is not loaded by KDEPrint, and thus is not present in the kprinter dialog.
List of Possible Values for given Option (from PPD). The lower pane of this dialog page contains all possible values of the print option highlighted above, as laid down in the printer's description file (PostScript Printer Description == 'PPD '.) Select the value you want and proceed. Then, use one of the push buttons below to leave this dialog: 'Save' your settings if you want to re-use them in your next job(s) too. 'Save 'will store your settings permanently until you change them again.. Click'OK' if you want to use your selected settings just once, for the next print job. 'OK 'will forget your current settings when kprinter is closed again, and will start next time with your previous defaults. 'Cancel' will not change anything. If you proceed to print after clicking'Cancel ', the job will print with the default settings of this queue. Note. The number of available job options depends strongly on the actual driver used for your print queue. 'Raw' queues do not have a driver or a PPD. For raw queues this tab page is not loaded by KDEPrint, and thus is not present in the kprinter dialog.
Initialization...
Generating print data: page %1
Previewing...
No valid print executable was found in your path. Check your installation.
This is not a Foomatic printer
Some printer information is missing
This operation is not implemented.
Unable to locate test page.
Can not overwrite regular printer with special printer settings.
Parallel Port #%1
Unable to load KDE print management library: %1
Unable to find wizard object in management library.
Unable to find options dialog in management library.
No plugin information available
Description unavailable
Remote printer queue on %1
A file share/ kdeprint/ specials. desktop was found in your local KDE directory. This file probably comes from a previous KDE release and should be removed in order to manage global pseudo printers.
Cannot copy multiple files into one file.
Cannot save print file to %1. Check that you have write access to it.
Printing document: %1
Sending print data to printer: %1
Unable to start child print process.
The KDE print server (kdeprintd) could not be contacted. Check that this server is running.
Check the command syntax: %1< files >
No valid file was found for printing. Operation aborted.
Unable to perform the requested page selection. The filter psselect cannot be inserted in the current filter chain. See Filter tab in the printer properties dialog for further information.
Could not load filter description for %1.
Error while reading filter description for %1. Empty command line received.
The MIME type %1 is not supported as input of the filter chain (this may happen with non-CUPS spoolers when performing page selection on a non-PostScript file). Do you want KDE to convert the file to a supported format?
Convert
Select MIME Type
Select the target format for the conversion:
Operation aborted.
No appropriate filter found. Select another target format.
Operation failed with message: %1 Select another target format.
Filtering print data
Error while filtering. Command was: %1.
The print file is empty and will be ignored: %1
The file format %1 is not directly supported by the current print system. You now have 3 options: KDE can attempt to convert this file automatically to a supported format. (Select Convert) You can try to send the file to the printer without any conversion. (Select Keep) You can cancel the printjob. (Select Cancel) Do you want KDE to attempt and convert this file to %2?
No appropriate filter was found to convert the file format %1 into %2. Go to System Options - > Commands to look through the list of possible filters. Each filter executes an external program. See if the required external program is available. on your system.
ISO A4
Folio
US #10 Envelope
ISO DL Envelope
Tabloid
ISO A3
ISO A2
ISO A1
ISO A0
Upper Tray
Lower Tray
Multi-Purpose Tray
Large Capacity Tray
Normal
Transparency
"General" This dialog page contains general print job settings. General settings are applicable to most printers, most jobs and most job file types. To get more specific help, enable the "What's This" cursor and click on any of the text labels or GUI elements of this dialog.
Page size: Select paper size to be printed on from the drop-down menu. The exact list of choices depends on the printer driver ("PPD") you have installed. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element correponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o PageSize=... # examples: "A4" or "Letter"
Paper type: Select paper type to be printed on from the drop-down menu. The exact list of choices depends on the printer driver ("PPD") you have installed. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o MediaType=... # example: "Transparency"
Paper source: Select paper source tray for the paper to be printed on from the drop-down menu. The exact list of choices depends on the printer driver ("PPD") you have installed. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o InputSlot=... # examples: "Lower" or "LargeCapacity"
Image Orientation: Orientation of the printed page image on your paper is controlled by the radio buttons. By default, the orientation is Portrait. You can select from 4 alternatives: Portrait. Portrait is the default setting. Landscape. Reverse Landscape. Reverse Landscape prints the images upside down. Reverse Portrait. Reverse Portrait prints the image upside down. The icon changes according to your selection. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o orientation-requested=... # examples: "landscape" or "reverse-portrait"
Duplex Printing: These controls may be grayed out if your printer does not support duplex printing (i. e. printing on both sides of the sheet.) These controls are active if your printer supports duplex printing. You can choose from 3 alternatives: None. This prints each page of the job on one side of the sheets only. Long Side. This prints the job on both sides of the paper sheets. It prints the job in a way so that the backside has the same orientation as the front side if you fold the paper over the long edge. (Some printer drivers call this mode duplex-non-tumbled.) Short Side. This prints the job on both sides of the paper sheets. It prints the job so that the backside has the reverse orientation from the front side if you turn the paper over the long edge, but the same orientation, if you turn it over the short edge. (Some printer drivers name this mode duplex-tumbled.) Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o duplex=... # examples: "tumble" or "two-sided-short-edge"
Banner Page(s): Select banner(s) to print one or two special sheets of paper just before or after your main job. Banners may contain some pieces of job information such as user name, time of printing or job title. Banner pages are useful to separate different jobs more easily, especially in a multi-user environment. Hint: You can design your own banner pages. To make use of them, just put the banner file into the standard CUPS banners directory (this is usually "/ usr/ share/ cups/ banner/". Your custom banner(s) must have one of the supported printable formats. Supported formats are ASCII text, PostScript, PDF and nearly any image format such as PNG, JPEG or GIF. Your added banner pages will appear in the drop down menu CUPS is restarted. CUPS comes with a selection of banner pages. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o job-sheets=... # examples: "standard" or "topsecret"
Pages per Sheet: You can choose to print more than one page onto each sheet of paper. This is sometimes useful to save paper. Note 1: the page images get scaled down accordingly to print 2 or 4 pages per sheet. The page image does not get scaled if you print 1 page per sheet (the default setting). Note 2: If you select multiple pages per sheet here, the scaling and re-arranging is done by your printing system. However, some printers are independently capable of printing multiple pages per sheet. In which case you find the option in the printer driver settings. Be careful: if you enable multiple pages per sheet in both places, your printout will not look as you intended. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o number-up=... # examples: "2" or "4"
Page size:
Paper type:
Paper source:
Orientation
Duplex Printing
Pages per Sheet
& Portrait
& Landscape
& Reverse landscape
Reverse portrait
& None
Long side
Short side
Start:
End:
(line %1):
Value:
String value:
No Option Selected
Configuration of %1
(rejecting jobs)
(accepting jobs)
& File
& PageMarks
Page Selection Here you can control if you print a certain selection only out of all the pages from the complete document.
All Pages: Select "All" to print the complete document. Since this is the default, it is pre-selected.
Current Page: Select "Current" if you want to print the page currently visible in your KDE application. Note: this field is disabled if you print from non-KDE applications like Mozilla or OpenOffice. org, since here KDEPrint has no means to determine which document page you are currently viewing.
Page Range: Choose a "Page Range" to select a subset of the complete document pages to be printed. The format is "n, m, o-p, q, r, s-t, u". Example: "4,6,10-13,17,20,23-25" will print the pages 4, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 20, 23, 24, 25 of your document. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o page-ranges=... # example: "4,6,10-13,17,20,23-25"
Page Set: Choose "All Pages", "Even Pages" or "Odd Pages" if you want to print a page selection matching one of these terms. The default is "All Pages". Note: If you combine a selection of a "Page Range" with a "Page Set" of "Odd" or "Even", you will only get the odd or even pages from the originally selected page range. This is useful if you want to print a page range in duplex on a simplex-only printer. In this case you can feed the paper to the printer twice; in the first pass, select "Odd" or "Even" (depending on your printer model), in second pass select the other option. You may need to "Reverse" the output in one of the passes (depending on your printer model). Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o page-set=... # example: "odd" or "even"
Output Settings: Here you can determine the number of copies, the output order and the collate mode for the pages of your print job. (Note, that the maximum number of copies allowed to print may be restricted by your print subsystem.) The'Copies' setting defaults to 1. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o copies=... # examples: "5" or "42" -o outputorder=... # example: "reverse" -o Collate=... # example: "true" or "false".
Number of Copies: Determine the number of requested copies here. You can increase or decrease the number of printed copies by clicking on the up and down arrows. You can also type the figure directly into the box. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o copies=... # examples: "5" or "42"
Collate Copies If the "Collate" checkbox is enabled (default), the output order for multiple copies of a multi-page document will be "1-2-3-..., 1-2-3-..., 1-2-3-...". If the "Collate" checkbox is disabled, the output order for multiple copies of a multi-page document will be "1-1-1-..., 2-2-2-..., 3-3-3-...". Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o Collate=... # example: "true" or "false"
Reverse Order If the "Reverse" checkbox is enabled, the output order for multiple copies of a multi-page document will be "... -3-2-1,... -3-2-1,... -3-2-1", if you also have en abled the "Collate" checkbox at the same time (the usual scenario). If the "Reverse" checkbox is enabled, the output order for multiple copies of a multi-page document will be "... -3-3-3,... -2-2-2,... -1-1-1", if you have dis abled the "Collate" checkbox at the same time. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS commandline job option parameter: -o outputorder=... # example: "reverse"
Copies
Page Selection
& All
Current
Range
Enter pages or group of pages to print separated by commas (1,2-5,8).
Output Settings
Collate
Reverse
Copies:
All Pages
Odd Pages
Even Pages
Page & set:
Pages
Do you want to continue printing anyway?
Print Preview
Cancel
The preview program %1 cannot be found. Check that the program is correctly installed and located in a directory included in your PATH environment variable.
Preview failed: neither the internal KDE PostScript viewer (KGhostView) nor any other external PostScript viewer could be found.
Preview failed: KDE could not find any application to preview files of type %1.
Preview failed: unable to start program %1.
Do you want to continue printing?
There was an error loading %1. The diagnostic is: %2
Some options selected are in conflict. You must resolve those conflicts before continuing. See the Driver Settings tab for detailed information.
Poster preview not available. Either the poster executable is not properly installed, or you do n't have the required version; available at http: / /printing. kde. org/ downloads/.
Printer Configuration
No configurable options for that printer.
No preview available
& Files
Top Margin. This spinbox/ text edit field lets you control the top margin of your printout if the printing application does not define its margins internally. The setting works for instance for ASCII text file printing, or for printing from KMail and Konqueror. Note: This margin setting is not intended for KOffice or OpenOffice. org printing, because these applications (or rather their users) are expected to do it by themselves. It also does not work for PostScript or PDF file, which in most cases have their margins hardcoded internally. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o page-top=... # use values from "0" or higher. "72" is equal to 1 inch.
Bottom Margin. This spinbox/ text edit field lets you control the bottom margin of your printout if the printing application does not define its margins internally. The setting works for instance for ASCII text file printing, or for printing from KMail and and Konqueror. Note: This margin setting is not intended for KOffice or OpenOffice. org printing, because these applications (or rather their users) are expected to do it by themselves. It also does not work for PostScript or PDF file, which in most cases have their margins hardcoded internally. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o page-bottom=... # use values from "0" or higher. "72" is equal to 1 inch.
Left Margin. This spinbox/ text edit field lets you control the left margin of your printout if the printing application does not define its margins internally. The setting works for instance for ASCII text file printing, or for printing from KMail and and Konqueror. Note: This margin setting is not intended for KOffice or OpenOffice. org printing, because these applications (or rather their users) are expected to do it by themselves. It also does not work for PostScript or PDF file, which in most cases have their margins hardcoded internally. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o page-left=... # use values from "0" or higher. "72" is equal to 1 inch.
Right Margin. This spinbox/ text edit field lets you control the right margin of your printout if the printing application does not define its margins internally. The setting works for instance for ASCII text file printing, or for printing from KMail and and Konqueror. Note: This margin setting is not intended for KOffice or OpenOffice. org printing, because these applications (or rather their users) are expected to do it by themselves. It also does not work for PostScript or PDF file, which in most cases have their margins hardcoded internally. Additional hint for power users: This KDEPrint GUI element corresponds to the CUPS command line job option parameter: -o page-right=... # use values from "0" or higher. "72" is equal to 1 inch.
Change Measurement Unit. You can change the units of measurement for the page margins here. Select from Millimeters, Centimeters, Inches or Pixels (1 pixel == 1/ 72 inch.)
Custom Margins Checkbox. Enable this checkbox if you want to modify the margins of your printouts. You can change margin settings in 4 ways: Edit the text fields. Click spinbox arrows. Move the scroll wheel of a wheel mouse. Use the mouse to drag margins in the preview frame. Note: The margin setting does not work if you load files into kprinter which have their margins hardcoded internally, such as most PDF or PostScript files. It works for all ASCII text files however. It also may not work with non-KDE applications which fail to fully utilize the KDEPrint framework, such as OpenOffice. org.
"Drag-your-Margins". Use your mouse to drag and set each margin on this little preview window.
& Use custom margins
& Top:
& Bottom:
Left:
& Right:
Pixels (1/ 72nd in)
Inches (in)
Centimeters (cm)
Millimeters (mm)
JCL
You are about to set a pseudo-printer as your personal default. This setting is specific to KDE and will not be available outside KDE applications. Note that this will only make your personal default printer as undefined for non-KDE applications and should not prevent you from printing normally. Do you really want to set %1 as your personal default?
5.
Print Poster (enabled or disabled). If you enable this option, you can print posters of different sizes The printout will happen in the form'tiles' printed on smaller paper sizes, which you can stitch together later. If you enable this option here, the'Poster Printing 'filter will be auto-loaded in the'Filters' tab of this dialog. This tab is only visible if the external'poster 'utility is discovered by KDEPrint on your system. ['poster' is a command line utility that enables you to convert PostScript files into tiled printouts, with overlap to allow the tiles to be joined together seamlessly.] Note: The standard version of'poster 'will not work. Your system must use a patched version of'poster'. Ask your operating system vendor to provide a patched version of'poster 'if they do not do so already. Additional hint for power users: A patched version of'poster' is available from the KDEPrint Website at http: / /printing. kde. org/ downloads/. The direct link to the patched source tarball is ftp: / /ftp. kde. org/ pub/ kde/ printing/ poster. tar. bz2
Tile Selection widget This GUI element is not only for viewing your selections: it also lets you interactively select the tile(s) you want to print. Hints Click any tile to select it for printing. To select multiple tiles to be printed at once, 'shift-click 'on the tiles ('shift-click' means: hold down the [SHIFT]-key on your keyboard and click with the mouse while [SHIFT]-key is held.) Be aware that the order of your clicking dictates the order in which the different tiles are printed. Note 1: The order of your selection (and the order for printout of the tiles) is indicated by the contents of the text field below, labelled as'Tile pages (to be printed): 'Note 2: By default, no tiles are selected. Before you can print (a part of) your poster, you must select at least one tile.
Poster Size Select the poster size you want from the drop-down list. Available sizes are all standard paper sizes up to'A0 '. [A0 is the same size as 16 sheets of A4, or '84cm x 118.2cm'.] Notice, how the little preview window below changes with your change of poster size. It indicates to you how many tiles need to be printed to make the poster, given the selected paper size. Hint: The little preview window below is not just a passive icon. You can click on its individual tiles to select them for printing. To select multiple tiles to be printed at once, you need to'shift-click 'on the tiles ('shift-click' means: hold down the [SHIFT]-key on your keyboard and click with the mouse while [SHIFT]-key is held.) The order in which you click dictates the order in which the tiles are printed. The order of your selection (and of the printed tiles) is indicated by the contents of the text field labelled as'Tile pages (to be printed): 'Note: By default, no tiles are selected. Before you can print (a part of) your poster, you must select at least one tile.
Paper Size This field indicates the paper size the poster tiles will be printed on. To select a different paper size for your poster tiles, go to the'General 'tab of this dialog and select one from the drop-down list. Available sizes are most standard paper sizes supported by your printer. Your printer's supported paper sizes are read from the printer driver info (as laid down in the'PPD', the printer description file.) Be aware that the'Paper Size 'selected may not be supported by'poster' (example: 'HalfLetter ') while it may well be supported by your printer. If you hit that obstacle, simply use another, supported Paper Size, such as'A4' or'Letter '. Notice, how the little preview window below changes with your change of paper size. It indicates how many tiles need to be printed to make up the poster, given the selected paper and poster size. Hint: The little preview window below is not just a passive icon. You can click on its individual tiles to select them for printing. To select multiple tiles to be printed at once, you need to'shift-click' on the tiles ('shift-click 'means: hold down the [SHIFT]-key on your keyboard and click with the mouse while [SHIFT]-key is held.) The order in which you click dictates the order in which the tiles are printed. The order of your selection (and for the printed tiles) is indicated by the contents of the text field labelled as'Tile pages (to be printed):' Note: By default, no tiles are selected. Before you can print (a part of) your poster, you must select at least one tile.
Cut Margin selection This slider and spinbox let you determine a'cut margin 'to be printed onto each tile of your poster, to help you cut the pieces as needed. Notice, how the little preview window above changes with your change of cut margins. It indicates to you how much space the cut margins will take away from each tile. Be aware, that your cut margins need to be equal to or greater than the margins your printer uses. The printer's capabilities are described in the'ImageableArea' keywords of its driver PPD file.
Order and number of tile pages to be printed. This field displays and sets the individual tiles to be printed, as well as the order for their printout. You can fill the field with 2 different methods: either use the interactive thumbnail preview above and '[SHIFT]-click 'on the tiles; or, edit this text field accordingly. When editing the field, you can denote ranges of pages with, for instance, '3-7', rather than '3,4,5,6,7 '. Examples: "2,3,7,9,3" "1-3,6,8-11"
Poster
& Print poster
Poster size:
Media size:
Print size:
Cut margin (% of media):
& Tile pages (to be printed):
Link/ unlink poster and print size
One of the command object's requirements is not met.
The command does not contain the required tag %1.
& Export...
Add Filter button This button calls a little dialog to let you select a filter here. Note 1: You can chain different filters as long as you make sure that the output of one fits as input of the next. (KDEPrint checks your filtering chain and will warn you if you fail to do so). Note 2: The filters you define here are applied to your jobfile before it is handed downstream to your spooler and print subsystem (e. g. CUPS, LPRng, LPD.)
Remove Filter button This button removes the highlighted filter from the list of filters.
Move Filter Up button This button moves the highlighted filter up in the list of filters, towards the front of the filtering chain.
Move Filter Down button This button moves the highlighted filter down in the list of filters, towards the end of the filtering chain..
Configure Filter button This button lets you configure the currently highlighted filter. It opens a separate dialog.
Filter Info Pane This field shows some general info about the selected filter. Amongst them are: the filter name (as displayed in the KDEPrint user interface); the filter requirements (that is the external program that needs to be present and executable on this system); the filter input format (in the form of one or several MIME types accepted by the filter); the filter output format (in the form of a MIME type generated by the filter); a more- or less-verbose description of the filter's operation.
Filtering Chain (if enabled, is run before actual job submission to print system.) This field shows which filters are currently selected to act as'pre-filters' for KDEPrint. Pre-filters process the print files before they are sent down-stream to your real print subsystem. The list shown in this field may be empty (default). The pre-filters act on the print job in the order they are listed (from top to bottom). This is done by acting as a filtering chain where the output of one filter acts as input to the next. By putting the filters into the wrong order, you can make the filtering chain fail. For example: if your file is ASCII text, and you want the output being processed by the'Multipage per Sheet 'filter, the first filter must be one that converts ASCII into PostScript. KDEPrint can utilize any external filtering program which you may find useful through this interface. KDEPrint ships preconfigured with support for a selection of common filters. These filters however need to be installed independently from KDEPrint. These pre-filters work for all print subsystems supported by KDEPrint (such as CUPS, LPRng and LPD), because they are not dependent upon them.. Amongst the pre-configured filters shipping with KDEPrint are: the Enscript text filter; a Multiple Pages per Sheet filter; a PostScript to PDF converter; a Page Selection/ Ordering filter; a Poster Printing filter; and some more.... To insert a filter into this list, simply click on the funnel icon (top-most on the right icon column group) and proceed. Please click on the other elements of this dialog to learn more about the KDEPrint pre-filters.
Filters
Add filter
Remove filter
Move filter up
Move filter down
Configure filter
Internal error: unable to load filter.
The filter chain is wrong. The output format of at least one filter is not supported by its follower. See Filters tab for more information.
Input
Selection of color mode: You can choose between 2 options: Color and Grayscale Note: This selection field may be grayed out and made inactive. This happens if KDEPrint can not retrieve enough information about your print file. In this case the embedded color- or grayscale information of your printfile, and the default handling of the printer take precedence.
Selection of page size: Select the paper size to be printed on from the drop-down menu. The exact list of choices depends on the printer driver ("PPD") you have installed.
Selection of pages per sheet: You can choose to print more than one page onto each sheet of paper. This is sometimes useful to save paper. Note 1: the page images get scaled down accordingly to print 2 or 4 pages per sheet. The page image does not get scaled if you print 1 page per sheet (the default setting.). Note 2: If you select multiple pages per sheet here, the scaling and re-arranging is done by your printing system. Note 3, regarding "Other": You cannot really select Other as the number of pages to print on one sheet. "Other" is listed here for information purposes only. To select 8, 9, 16 or other numbers of pages per sheet: go to the tab headlined "Filter"; enable the Multiple Pages per Sheet filter;... and configure it (bottom-most button on the right of the "Filters" tab).
Selection of image orientation: Orientation of the printed page image on your paper is controlled by these radio buttons. By default, the orientation is Portrait. You can select 2 alternatives: Portrait., the default setting; Landscape.. The icon changes according to your selection.
Print Format
Color Mode
Color
& Grayscale
Other
Evening (6 pm - 6 am)
Night (6 pm - 6 am)
Second Shift (4 pm - 12 am)
Hide & Toolbar
Hide Menu Toolbar
Hide Printer Details
Hide Only User Jobs