# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

The & korganizer; Handbook
Carlos Leonhard Woelz
carloswoelz@imap-mail. com
Milos Prudek
Paul E. Ahlquist Jr.
& Paul. E. Ahlquist. Jr. mail;
Juuml; rgen Nagel
juergen. nagel@student. fh-reutlingen. de
Michel Boyer de la Giroday
michel@klaralvdalens-datakonsult. se
Reinhold Kainhofer
reinhold@kainhofer. com
Developer
Cornelius Schumacher
& Cornelius. Schumacher. mail;
Preston Brown
& Preston. Brown. mail;
Lauri Watts
& Lauri. Watts. mail;
Reviewer
ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS
& Milos. Prudek;
& Paul. E. Ahlquist. Jr;
Juuml; rgen Nagel
Carlos Leonhard Woelz
& korganizer; is an easy to use personal information manager (PIM). You can write journal entries, schedule appointments, events, and to-dos. & korganizer; will remind you about pending tasks, and help you keep your schedule.
KDE
KOrganizer
kdepim
manager
time
schedule
alarm
appointment
event
journal
to-do
Introduction
& korganizer; is an intuitive and easy to use personal information manager (PIM). You can schedule appointments, events, create to-dos and write journal entries. & korganizer; will remind you about pending tasks, record your occurrences, experiences, and reflections and help you keep your schedule.
But & korganizer; is not only about your personal calendar, it can help you to interact with your colleagues and friends too. With & korganizer;, you can publish a calendar as a web page, invite anyone with an email address to an event and process responses, share a calendar (using a groupware server or simply a file over the network), and share events (eg; the schedule of a championship or a conference), using the get hot new stuff framework. & korganizer; is based on open standards, and works with many different group scheduling servers, giving you the control over your information and the freedom to choose the best solutions.
& korganizer; is also the calendar, journal and to-do component of & kontact;, offering you an integrated solution for your communication and information management needs: email, notes, contacts management, news reader, synchronization with portable devices, and news feeds reader. Even if you do not use it inside & kontact;, & korganizer; is integrated with the other & kde; PIM applications. For instance, you can configure it to show birthdays from & kaddressbook; in your agenda, use & kmail; to send and receive invitations, & etc;
Main features of & korganizer;:
Create To-dos, schedule events, and write journal entries.
Organize your events and to-dos by grouping the related items in categories.
Highlight categories with colors.
Open multiple calendars, and seamless view and edit them.
Reschedule your events by drag-and-drop.
Generate recurring events easily.
Organize or attend events using the group scheduling features.
Choose among the multiple supported groupware servers.
vCalendar and iCalendar (open standards) native support.
Calendar merging and import.
Synchronize your data with & PalmOS; devices.
Drag-and-drop between open calendars.
Embedding collaboration with & konqueror;.
Customizable icon sets.
Drag-and-drop tool panels.
Much more...
Now take a Five-minute fly-over course of & korganizer;, or delve into the documentation!
Five-minute Fly-over Course of & korganizer;
(for the experienced and for the impatient)
Pressed for time? Let's kick you started with a fast, hands-on overview of & korganizer;!
If you ever worked with a personal information program before, you'll be right at home with & korganizer;. You can enter new events, reschedule existing events, assign categories to your events, devise new categories, enter and modify lists of attendees and their roles, email event invitations automatically and exchange data with other & korganizer; calendars, create to-dos and write journal entries.
This course assumes that you know how to work with the & kde;, and that you prefer to explore on your own. Only the basic functions of & korganizer; are covered here.
Entering Events
Click the Day View toolbar button or choose the View Day menu item. This will bring up the Day View.
Click on the desired date in the Date Navigator.
Select the text area beside the desired hour in the main panel that reflects the time of the event. Double click this area, or just start typing the title of the event to open the New Event dialog.
Enter event details. Use tabs General, Recurrence, Attendees, Free/ Busy and Attachments to move around the dialog and access all the event's characteristics.
Press OK to save the event.
Entering To-dos
Select the Actions New To-do... menu item to open the New To-do dialog.
Enter the to-do details. Use tabs General, Attendees, Recurrence and Attachments to move around the dialog.
Press OK to save the to-do.
Adding Journal Entries
Select the View Journal menu item to open the Journal main view.
Click the Add Journal Entry link.
Enter journal entry title and text.
Rescheduling Events
Rescheduling events is a simple drag-and-drop operation:
Using the Date Navigator go to the date of the event that you want to reschedule.
You should choose an appropriate view before beginning this operation. Only the agenda view (day, work week and week views) shows individual hours and are suitable for rescheduling exactly-timed events (appointments), while the Month view only shows days. Therefore the Month view is most suitable for long-time events like holidays.
To display the week view, press the Week View toolbar button, or choose the View Week menu item.
Drag and drop the event to the new date and time location.
If you wish to reschedule more precisely, double-click the event and change the start and end time using the drop down menus that divide the day into quarter hours. If that is not precision enough, you can enter the desired time directly.
Rescheduling or Editing To-dos
You should choose an appropriate view before beginning this operation. Only the list view, to-do list view and the to-do view sidebar component show to-dos which do not have a due date.
To display the to-do list view, press the To-do List View toolbar button, or choose the View To-do List menu item.
To reschedule a to-do, right click it. This will bring up a context menu. Choose the Copy to or Move to menu items and select the new date from the calendar now appearing. The to-do is now copied or moved to the selected date. Alternatively, if the main panel holds a To-do List View, just right click the column Due Date. A calender will appear instantly, allowing you to set the new due date.
To edit a to-do, right click it and choose the Edit... menu item.
Conclusion
This five-minute course covered only the basic operation of & korganizer;. Now you should go on and read the rest of this manual to unleash the full power of & korganizer; 's capabilities. But if you do not feel like it, you should at least skip through the FAQ;.
Importing, Exporting, and Managing Calendars
& korganizer; can store (and retrieve) events, journals entries and to-dos using various methods, and to different locations. Each of these locations is called a calendar resource.
& korganizer; supports calendar files based on standards such as iCalendar and vCalendar natively (adding them as new resources), but you can import the data (merge) into an existing resource and open the file in a new window too. Importing files in the format used by the old ical application is also supported.
You can export your data as a web page, as an iCalendar or vCalendar file. These files are supported by most scheduling applications. The web page can be used to publish your calendar and to-dos list in the web or in the local network.
If you have a calendar containing events of public interest, such as a conference or championship schedule, you can upload it using the get hot new stuff framework. You can use the same framework to check if there are events worth downloading.
In this chapter, we will explain how to manage your calendar, using the resources, import and export actions and the get hot new stuff scheme.
Calendar Resources
& korganizer; uses a local file, usually $KDEHOME/ share/ apps/ korganizer/ std. ics, as its default resource. But this is not your only option: there are several other resources you can add: groupware servers, journal entries as blogs, network files, & etc;. If you use more than one resource, & korganizer; can be configured to use the default resource or ask which resource to use when saving new events, to-dos or journal entries. & korganizer; will seamlessly merge the items from two or more resources in the views.
The default resource is a good choice for many use cases, but you may want to use another resource, especially if you use a supported groupware server. Please ask the server administrator for the information required to configure the groupware resource, including free/ busy information publishing and retrieving. Access to free/ busy information allows an event organizer to take the attendee's calendar in consideration when adding him to the event's attendee list.
Besides calendar storage, groupware servers typically offer contacts, mail and free/ busy information storage. Therefore, some of the resources discussed here may be related to other resources from & kmail; and & kaddressbook; (the mail and contacts components of & kontact;), or to the free/ busy settings in the main configuration.
Please note that & korganizer; group scheduling communication is based on a peer to peer email standard. This means that you do not need a groupware server to use it!
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Resource View Sidebar
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Resource View Sidebar
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Resource View Sidebar
Adding a New & korganizer; Resource
If the resource view is not available on & korganizer; 's sidebar, choose the Settings Sidebar Show Resource View menu item to display it.
If the resource buttons are not displayed on the resource viewer, choose the Settings Sidebar Show Resource Buttons menu item to display them.
Press the Add... button to add new resources to the list of available resources.
Check or uncheck the resource box to enable or disable it.
Later, if you want to edit or delete a resource, select it on the list and press Delete to remove it or Edit... to modify it.
Alternatively, you can configure the & korganizer; resources (plus all other & kde; resources), in the & systemsettings;, using the kde; Resources configuration module.
Among the existing resources, you can find:
Birthdays from & kaddressbook;
Add this resource to view birthdays from contacts in & kaddressbook; in your calendar. The birthday appears in your calendar as a read only event and without associated time.
Journal Entries as Blogs on Server
Add this resource to be able to read your blogs as journal entries, directly from blog servers, such as blogger and drupal.
Bugzilla To-do List
Add this resource to load bugzilla open bugs as to-dos. This resource is based on the & kbugbuster; application, and uses its bug cache information. Bugzilla is an open source bug tracking system.
If you are a developer working on a project that uses bugzilla, you can use this resource to view as to-dos the open bugs of the applications or libraries you are interested in (they are called products and / or components in bugzilla). This resource is available as part of the & kde; Software Development kit.
& XML; Feature Plan
Add this resource to load a & XML; Feature Plan as to-dos. The & XML; Feature Plan is a scheme designed to document the new features of future software releases. It was designed to fit the & kde; release schedule needs, but can be helpful for any software project. The information from the & XML; file can be used to control feature freezes, to report the new features of new release or the status of the new features of a future release.
Calendar in Local File
Add this resource to be able to save (and load) your events, to-dos and journal entries to a local file. The file can be in the iCalendar or in the vCalendar standard format. & korganizer; uses this resource by default, storing your calendar information under $KDEHOME/ share/ apps/ korganizer/ std. ics.
GroupDav Server (e. g. Open Groupware)
If you have access to a server that supports the GroupDav protocol, add this resource in order to be able to save (and load) events and to-dos to the server. To add the resource, you will need to know the server & URL;, your user name and your password. The GroupDav protocol supports the storage of contacts, so you may want to add and configure the & kaddressbook; resource too.
As of June 2005, the groupware servers that implement this protocol are the OpenGroupware server and the Citadel server. An up to date list can be obtained at the GroupDav website.
Novell Groupwise Server
If you have access to a Novell GroupWise Server (version 6.5 or later), add this resource in order to be able to save (and load) events, free/ busy information and to-dos to the server. To add the resource, you will need to know the server & URL;, your user name and your password. There is support for storage of contacts, so you may want to configure & kaddressbook; resource.
The most practical way to configure the access to a GroupWise server is to use the groupwisewizard wizard. You can start it from the command line prompt: $groupwisewizard The wizard will configure not only & korganizer; to use the GroupWise resources, but & kmail;, & kaddressbook; too.
Calendar on IMAP Server via & kmail;
If you have access to a server that shares calendar data via IMAP, add this resource in order to be able to save (and load) events, to-dos, free/ busy information and journal entries to the IMAP server. To enable IMAP access, you will need to configure & kmail; first, then add the & korganizer; resource. Also, since you are using & kmail; to contact the server, & korganizer; will open & kmail; automatically, and use it to access your data. The IMAP server via & kmail; schema supports the storage of contacts, so you may want to add the & kaddressbook; resource too.
Most IMAP servers can be used to hold calendar and address book resources, allowing you to use access your data from just anywhere! If you are a user looking for a simple way to access and manage your groupware information, this is a simple and very efficient solution.
To use this resource, it is necessary to configure & kmail; first. Choose the Settings Configure & kmail;... menu item. Click the Accounts icon in the configure dialog sidebar and add the IMAP server as a disconnected IMAP incoming account. Now click the Misc icon in the sidebar and click the Groupware tab to enable and configure the IMAP resource folder options. Only then you can add the & korganizer; (and & kaddressbook;) resources. For more information on configuring & kmail;, consult the & kmail; handbook.
A more complete implementation of this schema is the Kolab Server. This groupware implementation offers additional features for system administrators, such as support of mixed client environments (Microsoft; Outlookreg;, & kde; PIM and web mail), a web administration interface, shared address book, email server, & etc; As of June 2005, the groupware servers that implement the Kolab 1 and Kolab 2 protocols are the Kolab server, version 1 and 2, and the Citadel server (Kolab 1 only). An up to date list can be obtained at the Kolab website.
The most practical way to configure the access to a Kolab server is to use the kolabwizard wizard application. You can start it from the command line prompt:
$kolabwizard
Calendar in Local Directory
Add this resource to be able to save and load your events, to-dos and journal entries from a local folder. Each calendar item will be saved in a separate file, inside the folder.
Since there is only one file per event, to-do, or journal entry, & korganizer; does not need to parse one big calendar file, sometimes with thousands of items when saving or loading, just one single calendar item. Also, in case of file corruption, you will lose only one calendar item, not the whole calendar.
Calendar in Remote File
Add this resource to be able to save and load your events, to-dos and journal entries from a remote file. There are two main advantages of keeping your calendar data in a remote server: you can access your data even if you are away from your computer, and you can let other people (for instance, a secretary) view it. & korganizer; keeps a cache of the data locally.
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Remote File Resource Configuration
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Remote File Resource Configuration
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Remote File Resource Configuration
You can configure the resource to be read only, keeping the remote file untouched. In this case, you wo n't need to supply a Upload to location, just a Download from location for the remote file. If you plan to use a writable remote resource, you will have to supply both locations. The reason to have separate locations, is that some servers may have an upload queue, a place where you need to put the upload file, different from where it will be. In most cases, if you have write access to the remote file, the Upload to and Download from file locations should be the same.
It is important to understand that the remote file resource does not add or remove individual items from the remote file, it simply saves the remote file over local cache when downloading and save the local cache over the remote file when uploading. Therefore, if the resource is read only, it makes sense to set the Automatic Reload option to a Regular interval, but if not (if the resource is writable), it is recommended to reload the file only before starting to edit it, by setting the Automatic Reload option to On startup, and to save it before exiting, by setting the Automatic Save option at least to On exit, or better yet, if you have a fast and stable connection to the remote file, set it to On every change to avoid data loss.
If you add, change or remove events, journal entries or to-dos and reload the remote file, all your local changes will be lost, and the file will revert to its previous state. This can happen in different scenarios (for instance if the system crashes, & korganizer; will reload the remote file on the next start, if you set the Automatic Save to Never, or if you set the Automatic Reload to a regular interval). If you plan to use a calendar resource in writable mode, make sure that your connection is stable, configure the resource to save the file on each change (or at frequent intervals), and do not reload the file at regular intervals.
A related, but opposite problem, is that two users cannot safely edit the same remote file at the same time, because the remote file resource does not offer a conflict resolution mechanism. For instance, if someone else changes (and saves) the remote file, after you loaded it, and a some time later you save the file, his changes will be lost.
SUSE & Linux; OpenExchange Server
If you have access to a SUSE & Linux; OpenExchange Server, version 4.1, add this resource in order to be able to save (and load) events, free/ busy information and to-dos to the server. To add the resource, you will need to know the server & URL;, your user name and your password. There is support for storage of contacts, so you may want to configure & kaddressbook; resource.
The most practical way to configure the access to an OpenExchange server is to use the sloxwizard wizard. You can start it from the command line prompt: $sloxwizard The wizard will configure not only & korganizer; to use the OpenExchange resources, but & kmail;, & kaddressbook; too.
eGroupware Server (via & XML; -RPC)
If you have access to a eGroupware Server, version 1.0, add this resource in order to be able to save (and load) events, free/ busy information and to-dos to the server. To add the resource, you will need to know the server & URL;, your user name and your password. There is support for storage of contacts, so you may want to configure & kaddressbook; resource.
The most practical way to configure the access to a eGroupware server is to use the egroupwarewizard wizard. You can start it from the command line prompt: $egroupwarewizard The wizard will configure not only & korganizer; to use the eGroupware resources, but & kmail;, & kaddressbook; too.
Importing, Exporting and Maintaining Calendars
While local files are just one among many other resources that can be used by & korganizer;, they are the most convenient way to share calendars, save copies, or import items from your old calendar program.
Importing Calendars
If you have a iCalendar or vCalendar file, and you would like to import it, choose the File Import Import Calendar.... & korganizer; will ask you if you want to Add as new calendar, which adds the calendar file as a new local file resource, Merge into existing calendar, which merges the calendar items into an existing resource or Open in separate window, which will allow you to view and edit the calendar, but will not add to its default view.
A good time to do this would be if you received a vCalendar with a few entries via email, for instance, or if you are planning to import your calendar from another application. In the latter case, the first thing to do is to use that application to export the calendar data in one of the formats above, or use a tool to convert from the application's native format. If you are migrating from & Microsoft; Outlookreg;, please check.
If you have used ical, a popular but older calendar program for & UNIX;, you may wish to import your events, journal entries, and to-dos directly to & korganizer;. To do so, choose the File Import Import From & UNIX; Ical Tool. This action will read the. calendar file from your home folder and merge any entries it contains into your current calendar. If any errors or suspicious things occur during the process, you will be notified via a message box.
Exporting Calendars
You can export your data as a web page, or as an iCalendar or vCalendar file, which are supported by most scheduling applications. The web page can be used to publish your calendar and to-dos list on the web or on the local network. Either way, & korganizer; will export all calendar items from the enabled (checked) resources which are not filtered out (let's call these items active items). In other words, if you cannot see a calendar item, it wo n't be in the exported file. To filter out the undesired items before exporting them, you can create filters. Filters even are more effective if you classify your events and to-dos in categories. To enable and disable resources, check or uncheck the resource box in the Resource View sidebar.
To export all your active events, to-dos and journal entries (independent of to what resource they belong) as a new iCalendar file, choose the File Export iCalendar... menu item. To export the same data as a new vCalendar file choose the File Export vCalendar... menu item. The Save As dialog will pop up. Enter the file name and location for the new file to complete the export action.
You can export your calendar or a part of it as a & HTML; file, suitable for publishing in the web. Anyone with access to this file, using a web browser, will be able to view it. This is an easy way to share calendar information with your colleagues and friends.
Disable all the resources you do not want to export, and filter out the items you do not want to export.
Choose the File Export Export Web Page... menu item. You will get a window with three tabs: General, Events, and To-dos.
General tab:
Specify the date range that you want published. Enter dates manually or use the Calendar Widget.
If you want to export to-dos, check the Export to-do list box.
If you want to export the items displayed in the month view, check the Export in month view box.
If you want to export events formatted as a list of events, check the Export events as list box.
Specify the web output file in the Output file field. If set another location, press the Browse Folders button to find it.
Events tab: specify if you want to include categories and attendees in the exported web page.
To-dos tab: specify if you want to list Due Dates, Categories, and Attendees.
Maintaining Your Calendars
Contemporary computers have ample storage space. However, if you synchronize your & korganizer; calendar with a limited-memory machine like the Palm device, you will find archiving useful. The performance of & korganizer; can also become worse when there are many events. To archive old items, follow the procedure below:
Choose the File Archive Old Entries....
Fill in the date in Archive now items older than field or use the Calendar Widget to choose the date. Alternatively, you can automatically archive all items older than a certain period of time.
If you have chosen archiving, you must also provide a filename for the archive in the Archive File field. If you want to re-use an older archive file, press the Browse button and find an existing archive. The entries will be added to the file, so any item already in the file will not be modified.
Archiving will keep all old items in a file, including completed to-dos. But if you do not want to keep completed to-dos at all, choose the File Purge Completed To-dos menu item to remove all the completed to-dos from your active resources. If you want to keep your completed to-dos, but do not wish to view in the to-do lists, consider filtering them out instead of purging them.
Uploading and Downloading Using Get Hot New Stuff
If you have a calendar containing events of public interest, such as a conference or championship schedule, you can upload it (or check if there is something worth downloading) using the get hot new stuff framework.
To open the Get Hot New Stuff dialog, which offers a list of calendars to download, choose the File Import Get Hot New Stuff... menu item. If you select one of the calendars, a dialog with the list of events from the calendars will appear. To merge the displayed events with your default resource, press Merge.
To open the Upload Hot New Stuff dialog, which allow you to export calendars containing events which may be useful to other people, such as a conference program, a list of holidays, special events, & etc;, choose the File Export Upload Hot New Stuff....
Before uploading the events, make sure you have filtered out all unrelated data.
Views and Filters
While calendars (resources) can hold events, to-dos and / or journal entries, these items are very different in nature. To-dos may have no date associated with them, so a schedule view is not suitable to them. Journal entries are a collection your reflections, occurrences or experiences. They require their own view mode, as they are not related with the list upcoming events or the list of to-dos, & etc;
To solve the challenge of displaying your information in an useful and intuitive fashion, & korganizer; offers different views, filters and search capabilities. You can also assign related events and to-dos to categories, which will help you to view them later, using filters or colors.
& korganizer; Views
In this section, we describe the different view modes, and present an overview of how to browse your personal data using & korganizer;.
The & korganizer; window can be divided in two main areas: the main window and the sidebar. The main window displays the main views and the sidebar displays the date navigator, the to-do view, the item viewer and the resource view. To show or hide the sidebar components, check or uncheck the menu items under the Settings Sidebar submenu.
The date navigator is provided to browse and select dates. Today's date will be outlined with a small box, dates which have events scheduled on them will be bold (daily or weekly recurring events may not be marked as bold, depending on the view configuration), and holidays will be colored red. If you want to jump to a date, simply click on it. Hold down the mouse to select multiple contiguous dates at once. The What's Next, List, Agenda and Journal views will only show events, to-dos or journals items from the dates selected in the date navigator. The Month view will show events or to-dos from the first month shown in the date navigator (the selected days in the month wo n't change the month view, only month changes).
The to-do view sidebar component lists your to-dos, just like the To-do view. It is useful if you want to see your to-dos while using the other views.
The item viewer sidebar component shows details of the currently selected events, to-dos or journal entries.
Finally, the resource viewer sidebar component allow you to enable or disable the resources on the list, by checking or unchecking the resource box, and to manage your resources. For more information, please check.
You can also browse your calendar view choosing the Go Go Backward menu item (or pressing the toolbar button), which goes to the previous day, week, month or year, choosing the Go Go Forward menu item (or pressing the toolbar button), which goes to the next day, week, month or year (depending on the view), and choosing the Go Go to Today menu item (or pressing the toolbar button), which will include the current day in the current view.
What's Next View
This view displays events and to-dos in a simple format you can quickly read. All open to-dos will be displayed, but only the events from the days selected in the Date Navigator sidebar will be shown. Events and to-dos are displayed one per line.
Switch to the What's Next view by choosing the View What's Next menu item or pressing the What's Next button in the toolbar.
List View
This view displays all your to-dos, events and journal entries for the dates selected in the date navigator as a list. Open to-dos that are not due on the selected dates are not shown. This view is good for displaying many different items in a compact fashion. It is also useful if your events are spread out over a long time period that would not be displayed completely on the screen when using one of the other views.
The items are displayed one per line. Columns show if an alarm is set (a bell icon displayed in it means the alarm is set), if it repeats multiple times (a chasing-arrows icon means a repeating event), the start and end time information. Hovering the mouse over an item will bring up a tooltip with detailed information about the item.
Switch the display to the list view by choosing the View List menu item or pressing the List button in the toolbar.
Agenda View
The agenda view presents your events or due to-dos for one or more days, sorted chronologically. You can also see the length of each event in the day timetable. The Day, Work Week and Week views are variations of the agenda view. In fact, you can set the days shown in the agenda view at any time by selecting them in the date navigator.
Time is indicated by a time bar on the left side of the view. A scrollbar on the right is provided when the whole day cannot be displayed on a single screen (which is the usual case). Each rectangle in the view represents an individual event or to-do due for that time, and displays the start and end time and summary. A bell icon is displayed if an alarm is set, and a chasing-arrows icon is displayed if it repeats multiple times. Hovering the mouse over an calendar item will bring up a tooltip with the item detailed information. To make & korganizer; show a red line marking the current-time on the current day (the Marcus Bains line), check the Show current-time (Marcus Bains) line box in the korganizer; view configuration.
Any event can be re-sized with your mouse. Simply move the mouse pointer near the top or bottom edge of the event, and drag the edge up or down. This way you can visually modify the starting and ending time of your event. This also works in the Week and Work Week views. In other words, it is possible to change start and end times with the mouse by just moving the upper or lower border of the event to the new time.
Any event can be rescheduled with your mouse. Move the mouse pointer over the event, and drag it to a new time location. This also works in the Week and Work Week views. Events can be moved to other, presently non-visible dates. Move the mouse pointer over the event, and drag it to the date navigator.
Since the agenda view cannot contain the whole day on most screens, you will have to scroll up and down to see the whole day. There is a useful hint that tells you if there are any currently invisible events above or below your current view; it is a small down-pointing at the bottom of each day view or up-pointing arrow at the top.
There are a useful shortcut for adding events:
Double-click any open region of time, and & korganizer; will automatically create an event with default duration (which is customizable in the preferences dialog). You can immediately add the title. The events snap to half-hour increments, rounding off to the closest half hour from where you clicked.
Select any open region of time, and double click it or start writing the title of the event. & korganizer; will automatically set the duration and start time as defined by the selection area in the agenda view.
To help you organize your agenda, the color of the events reflect their category, and depending on the korganizer; view configuration, it may also reflect its resource. Therefore, if you assign categories to events and different colors to categories, you will be able to quickly identify the type of event by its color.
The agenda view can display events from all your calendars merged into one view or show a view per calendar. Having both views available via tabs is also possible and can be customized in the preferences dialog.
Day View
This view presents the agenda view for a single day.
Switch the display to the day view by choosing the View Day menu item or pressing the Day button in the toolbar.
Next X Days View
This view presents the agenda view for the next days, starting from today. You can change the number of days to be displayed in the korganizer; view configuration. The default value is 3.
Switch the display to the next days view by choosing the View Next X Days menu item, (X represents the number of days, usually 3).
Week View
The week view provides a view similar to the day view. Events for seven days are shown next to each other.
Switch the display to the week view by choosing the View Week menu item or pressing the Week button in the toolbar.
Work Week View
This is the same as the week view, except that it shows only the working days of the week.
Switch the display to the work week view by choosing the View Work Week menu item or pressing the Work Week button in the toolbar.
Month View
The month view shows all the events and due to-dos for the current month in a familiar month calendar layout. Each cell in the view represents a day, and each day contains all of the events that can fit in the area provided (maximizing the window will enable you to see more appointments). Information on repeating and alarm status is indicated through bell and chasing arrows icons, just like in other views.
Navigate the month view using the date navigator arrows, or the items and toolbar buttons from the Go menu. Since the visible area of a day cell may not contain all events and to-dos, you can use the keyboard to browse the items, or, if you check the Enable scrollbars in month view cells box in the korganizer; view configuration, you can use them to see all the events and to-dos from that day.
Hover your mouse over any calendar item to display a tooltip with the item details. Double click an empty area to create an event, double click any calendar item to edit it.
To help you organize your data, the color of the events may reflect their category, and its resource, depending on the korganizer; view configuration. Therefore, if you assign categories to events and different colors to categories, you can identify the type of event (or resource) by its color.
Switch the display to the month view by choosing the View Month menu item or pressing the Month button in the toolbar.
Timeline View
The timeline view shows all events for the selected timespan in a gantt view. Every calendar is displayed in a separate line.
To-do List
The to-do list provides a place for you to jot down quick (or long-term) notes about things that need to be done. The to-do view sidebar component appears right below the Date Navigator. You can also display it in the main panel if you click the To-do List View toolbar button or if you choose the View To-do List menu item.
You can give your to-do a date due, in other words a date when the to-do should be finished.
You can also assign priorities to to-dos, and they will appear sorted in order of priority. The lower the number, the higher the priority, except that zero (0) is defined as no priority.
To make a new to-do entry, right click the to-do view sidebar component, or the to-do list view, and choose the New To-do menu item. If you right click an already existing to-do, you will get more choices: you can Show the summary, Edit... the to-do details, Delete the to-do altogether, or you can create a New Sub-To-do... You could for example make a large to-do like building a house, and make sub-to-dos like choosing the right building site, hiring an architect, hiring workers and finally arranging a party for your friends.
When you choose New To-do..., a dialog will pop up, allowing you to enter all necessary information.
Click any to-do in the list to highlight it. If you click the thick-line box on the left of the to-do description, you will change the completed status of the to-do. If you double-click the to-do description, you will be able to edit all its details.
You may also pick Purge Completed from the right mouse button menu to delete all to-do entries that you have marked completed.
To-dos can also dragged around with the mouse to rearrange the hierarchy or to exchange to-dos with other calendar windows. You can also read an overview of all available drag-and-drop operations.
Journal View
The journal view provides a place for you to record your reflections, occurrences or experiences. You can display the journal view in the main panel if you press the Journal View toolbar button or if you choose the View Journal menu item.
When you click the add journal entry link, a new journal entry will be created. If you want to edit an journal entry, just click the text box and edit it! To remove a journal entry, press the delete button next to the Title of the journal entry.
Categories
To help you organize your entries in related groups, you can assign categories to events and to-dos. If you assign categories, you can use them later when searching, filtering, and displaying events and to-dos.
To assign categories when editing or creating new events or to-dos, press the Select Categories... button in the General tab to open the Select Categories dialog. You can assign more than one category for each item.
To create, delete and edit categories, choose the Settings Manage Categories... menu item to open the Edit Categories dialog. If you assign different colors to categories, you will be able to quickly identify the type of event by its color, either in the agenda view or in the month view (depending on the korganizer; view configuration).
Filters
To help you view, find and export your data, you can create and use filters for your calendars. For instance, if you do not want to view completed to-dos, you can filter them out, instead of purging them. If you assign categories, you can use them to create filters.
To create, delete and edit filters, choose the Settings Manage View Filters... menu item to open the Edit Calendar Filters dialog. Using this dialog, you can create, delete and edit filters that will affect which items will be displayed by & korganizer;.
The View Filter submenu and the filter toolbar drop down offer access to all available filters created using the Edit Calendar Filters dialog. To toggle the display of the filters toolbar on and off, choose the Settings Toolbars Filter toolbar. If you do not want to use any filter, choose No filter.
Filters are useful when exporting your calendar. If you use a filter, only the filtered (visible) items will be exported. Also, filters are more effective when the items are already classified and organized in categories, as you can easily create filters based on categories.
Searching
Choose the Edit Find menu item, press the Find button in the toolbar, or press the Ctrl; f shortcut to find items (events, to-dos or journal entries) according to title, description, and/ or categories. The find action will only search the specified fields.
You can use wildcards if you do not remember the exact summary. If you do not know single character of the summary, put? instead of the missing character. If you do not know more characters, use *. For instance if you know that the event or to-do has meeting in the beginning and product after, you would write meeting*product in the Find dialog. & korganizer; will locate entries like To-do: arrange meeting about the new product, Meeting to discuss the old product line and similar. Letter case is ignored.
The result of the Find operation is a list of events, journal entries and/ or to-dos with the specified keyword. The search list characteristics are the same as the List View.
This resulting list is active. You can double-click a line to display or edit the event or to-do details. Get more information about these details in and.
Entering Data
Events
Events are future or past appointments, like business meetings, personal anniversaries and cinema visits. An event can also take several days, like holidays.
Entering a new event is very easy. Just choose the Actions New Event... menu item. A window with General, Recurrence, Attendees, Free/ Busy, and Attachments tabs will appear.
If you wish you can use a different way to create a new event:
Use the Date Navigator to go to the event date.
Click the desired view's icon on the View Toolbar or select the desired view from the View menu. Since your event starts at a particular time, you should choose a view that displays hours of the day. You may choose Day, Work Week view or Week view. The Month view is more suitable for to-dos, described below.
In the main panel, double click the time and date when your event starts.
A dialog with General, Recurrence, Attendees, Free/ Busy, and Attachments tabs appears. Enter your data as described below.
General Tab
This is a thorough description of the individual event window fields and widgets. Not all fields have to be filled in; some can be left empty. Read the Required fields section for detailed information. And if you prefer to learn by example, there's one in the Entering event section.
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - General tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - General tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - General tab
Title:
Enter short description of the event into the Title field. This description is the text shown on the & korganizer; main panel.
Location:
Enter short description of the location where the event will take place.
Date & Time
The & korganizer; suggested Start and End dates of your event. Events are expected to start and end on the same date. Change these dates as desired. Enter the dates directly or use the Calendar Widget. Select the time from quarter hour intervals, or enter the desired time directly into the time fields. These fields are only available when the Time associated box is checked.
Time associated
Uncheck the Time associated box if your event is not scheduled on an exact time.
Most events are scheduled to an exact time. If your event does not need specific time, perhaps it should be created as a to-do
Reminder
Check the Reminder box if & korganizer; should remind you about an event.
Choose how many minutes, hours or days before the event you want to be reminded, or click the Advanced button to open the Edit Reminders dialog. Using this dialog, you can set repeating intervals for your reminders, and create special reminders that play sounds or run programs.
Show Time As:
The duration of the event may be shown as Busy or Free in your schedule. Choose it from the Show Time As drop down box.
Details:
Enter a long description of the event in the large, untitled rectangle. You can write as many details as you wish here. For example, If the event is, say, planned general repair of your car, you can list all items that need repairing. Later on you can print this list and hand it over to the serviceman. If the event is shopping, you should list the goods that you need to buy. Print the event and take it to the shop with you.
Select Categories
You can assign several categories to a calendar item. Click the Select button to open the Select Categories dialog. Check the category boxes to assign suitable categories to the event. You can also add a new category, modify a category or delete a category by pressing the button Edit Category.
Your language lesson at work may belong to both Business and Education categories, while the anniversary of your marriage belongs to either Personal or Special Occasion - it is your choice.
Access:
Choose Private or Confidential to keep the event private or confidential. Currently, this choice correctly sets the CLASS attribute of the events to PUBLIC, PRIVATE or CONFIDENTIAL. However, if these settings are really used to restrict the access of the information depends on the client and / or groupware server implementation.
Currently, & korganizer; will display items owned by other people and marked as confidential. Other clients may treat them differently, but be careful when publishing private or confidential events: vCalendar and iCalendar are text files, and can be read with any text editor (if someone has read access to them). So if you want to keep items really confidential, make sure you use a resource that only you can access.
When you want to confirm, apply or call off the entered data, choose among the Action Buttons, OK, Apply and Cancel.
Recurrence Tab
Some events take place regularly. You can specify their exact scheduling here.
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Recurrence tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Recurrence tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Recurrence tab
To activate the settings, start by checking the Enable recurrence check box. If it is not checked, you are not able to make any changes on this tab.
The Recurrence tab window is divided into four groups: Appointment Time, Recurrence Rule, Recurrence Range, and Exceptions.
Appointment Time
The appointment time is set in the General tab window. It is displayed here to guide you while you set the recurrence options.
Recurrence Rule
Choose if you want to repeat this event daily, weekly, monthly or yearly. More detailed options are as follows:
Daily
Specify whether the event occurs every day (1), every other day (2) and so on.
Weekly
Specify whether the event occurs every week (1), every other week (2) and so on. Also specify the days (Sunday... Monday) on which the event occurs.
Monthly
You can either have the event occur on the same day of the month, or in a specific week on a specific day of the week. You need to choose between these two possibilities. By default, & korganizer; assumes you want to repeat on the same calendar day of the month (for instance the 15th). You can also adjust the period, so you can repeat monthly, tri-monthly and so on.
Yearly
This is similar to Monthly. You need to choose whether or not you are indicating a calendar day of the year (eg;, the 250th day of the year) - Recur on day # of the year, in a specific week on a specific day of the week of a month (eg;, the 2nd Tuesday of March), or the day of the month in a particular month of the year - Recur on day # of the month. By default, & korganizer; assumes you mean the day of the month. You can adjust the period to reflect events that occur bi-annually, every four years, and so on.
Recurrence Range
By default, events which repeat will do so forever; there is no end to the repetition. This may or may not be desirable, so you are provided with two ways of terminating the repetition: either by giving an ending date, or by specifying a total number of recurrences. In this area, you can choose the method that is suitable for this event.
Exceptions
You may have a very nice recurrence rule set up, but realize that there are a few exceptions. If you set up your college class schedule for instance, you may want to make exceptions for holidays and the like. In this area, you can add, change, and delete dates from the list of exceptions (ie; times when even if the recurrence rule matches, the event will not be scheduled). Pick a date with the date selector, and press Add to include it. For removing dates, highlight them in the box on the right side, and then click Delete.
When you want to confirm, call off or revert the entered data, choose among the Action Buttons, OK, Apply and Cancel.
Attendees Tab
Chose in this tab the people you want to invite to your event.
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Attendees tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Attendees tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Attendees tab
Identity as organizer:
Sets the identity corresponding to the organizer of this to-do or event. If & korganizer; is configured to send invitation mails, the identity selected on this combo box will be used when sending these mails. The default identity can be set in the Personal section of the & korganizer; configuration, other identities in the About Me -gt; Password & User Account section of the & kcontrolcenter;. In addition, identities are gathered from your & kmail; settings and from your address book. If you choose to set it globally for & kde; in the & kcontrolcenter;, be sure to check the Use email settings from System Settings box in the Personal section of the & korganizer; configuration.
Attendee list
The list in the center of the tab displays the attendees selected for this event, and lets you select attendees to edit or remove. Please note that you can change the order of attendees. Click any of the column headings (Name, Email, Role, Status, RSVP) to sort the list according to that column. The RSVP column indicates whether or not a response is requested from the attendee.
Select Addressee
If the attendee(s) are in your Address Book, you do not have to remember or type his email address to add it to the attendee list. Just click the Select Addressee... button and choose the attendee(s) from the list. Please note that this is the standard & kde; address book, which is also used by & kmail; and can also be called as a separate application (kaddressbook;).
New
Press the New button to add a new manually added attendee to the list. If you want to add contacts from your address book, press Select Addressee instead.
Name field
Fill in the Attendee Name and Email address fields, or select one of the attendees in the list above to edit it.
Role
Choose the role of the attendee (Participant, Optional participant, Observer, Chair) from the drop down menu. The role is a simple reminder of what part the attendee plays in this event. It can be used for sorting (see above).
Status
Choose the status of the attendee (Needs Action, Accepted, Declined, Tentative, Delegated, Completed, In progress). The status, which is displayed in the details list window gives you quick overview of what should be done to make the event successful. It can be used for sorting (see above). If you use groupware schedule and request responses from your attendees, as you receive the responses the status of the attendee will be updated. If you do not request responses, you will have to update the status manually.
Request Response
Check the Request Response check box if this attendee should respond to your schedule plan. Consequently the attendee will be emailed with the event schedule information. A small envelope will appear in the details list to indicate this. This feature is specially useful when groupware scheduling is enabled, as the attendees status are updated automatically.
Free/ Busy Tab
When adding attendees to your event, you need to know if they are busy or free in that particular time. If the attendees make their free / busy information available, you can view here their schedule before sending the invitations.
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Free/ Busy tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Free/ Busy tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Free/ Busy tab
This tab shows the free/ busy schedule chart on the right, where each line represents one of the attendees, listed on the left. The marked areas on the chart represent the time already taken by other events, unmarked areas represent time free from other events. You can move the event to a different point in time by dragging it with the mouse, or resize it by moving the edges of the highlighted area with the mouse.
The free/ busy information is only available if the attendee publishes his free/ busy schedule, and if & korganizer; is correctly configured to retrieve it. For more information about configuring & korganizer; to publish and retrieve free/ busy information, please check the. Double-clicking on an attendee entry in the list will allow you to enter the location of their free/ busy information.
Scale
Sets the zoom level on the schedule chart. Hour shows a range of several hours, Day shows a range of a few days, Week shows a range of a few months, and Month shows a range of a few months, while Automatic selects the range most appropriate for the current event or to-do.
Center on Start
Press this button to center the free/ busy schedule chart on the start time and day of this event.
Zoom to Fit
Press this button to zoom the free/ busy schedule chart so that you can see the entire duration of the event on it.
Pick Date
Press this button to automatically move the event to a date and time when all the attendees are free.
Reload
Press this button to reload Free/ Busy data for all attendees from the corresponding servers.
Attachments Tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Attachments tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Attachments tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit Event dialog - Attachments tab
Events and to-dos can contain attachments. Attachments can either be stored as links or inline. The following actions are provided to work with attachments:
Add URI...
Adds a link attachment.
Add File...
Adds an inline attachment.
Edit...
Allows to change an existing attachment.
Remove
Deletes the selected attachment.
Show
Display the selected attachment.
Load/ Save as Template
The Save as Template button enables you to save the current event as a template, so that you can reuse the data entered for future events. As an example you can save a template for a meeting that takes place at the same location and with the same people.
With the Load Template button you can use an existing template for your event. Continuing the example in the preceding paragraph you can specify the agenda of the meeting.
To-dos
The To-do List is a place for you to write down notes to yourself about things that you need to do. To-dos are tasks, that may or may not be scheduled. There are short-term and long-term to-dos. For instance you should go to a hairdresser within a week, and you should sell your old car within a year. You likely do not want an alarm go off at a particular time, you just want to have a list of things that you must do, and dates when they must be finished at the latest (date due).
To enter a new to-do, choose Actions New To-do.... A window with General, Recurrence, Attendees, and Attachments tabs appears.
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit To-do dialog - General tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit To-do dialog - General tab
A screenshot of & korganizer; 's Edit To-do dialog - General tab
Title
Enter short description of the to-do into the Title field. This description is the text shown on the & korganizer; To-do list.
Enter short description of the location where the to-do will take place.
The Due and Start boxes are not initially checked, as to-dos usually do not have a start and due date. Check one or both boxes and change these dates as desired. Enter the dates directly or use the Calendar Widget. Choose time from quarter hour intervals, or enter the desired time directly into the time fields. These fields are only available when Time associated is checked.
The date and time are initially unchecked, because to-dos do not have the character of a fixed event. Some of them do not need a due date at all. Most of them certainly do not need the exact time of fulfillment. If your to-do requires exact time, maybe it actually belongs to events.
Completed
This is a percent completed pull down menu initially set at 0% complete. Later on, you can indicate your progress by adjusting the percent completed in steps of 10%.
Priority
Assign a priority to your to-do. This drop down menu offers priorities from one to nine, one being the highest. Initially to-dos are set to priority five (medium).
Check the Reminder box if & korganizer; should remind you about the to-do.
Choose how many minutes, hours or days before the to-do you want to be reminded, or click the Advanced button to open the Edit Reminders dialog. Using this dialog, you can set repeating intervals for your reminders, and create special reminders that play sounds or run programs.
Details
Enter a long description of the to-do in the large rectangle.
For example, If the to-do is, say, planned general repair of your car, you can list all items that need repairing. Later on you can print this list and hand it over to the serviceman. If the to-do is shopping, you should list the goods that you need to buy. Print the to-do and take it to the shop with you.
You can assign several categories to a calendar item. Click the Select Categories button to open the Select Categories dialog. Check the category boxes to assign suitable categories to the to-do. You can also add a new category, modify a category or delete a category by pressing the button Edit Category.
Access
Choose Private or Confidential to keep the to-do private or confidential. Currently, this choice correctly sets the CLASS attribute of the events or to-dos to PUBLIC, PRIVATE or CONFIDENTIAL. However, if these settings are really used to restrict the access of the information depends on the client and / or groupware server implementation.
Currently, & korganizer; will display items owned by other people and marked as confidential. Other clients may treat them differently, but be careful when publishing private or confidential to-dos: vCalendar and iCalendar are text files, and can be read with any text editor (if someone has read access to them). So if you want to keep items really confidential, make sure you use a resource that only you can access.
Some to-dos take place regularly. You can specify exact scheduling here.
If the to-do does not have a due date, this tab is completely disabled. To activate the settings, start by checking the Enable recurrence check box. If it is not checked, you are not able to make any changes on this tab.
This tab is configure in the same way as the Edit Event dialog's Recurrence tab. Please check for more information about setting the recurrence options.
Some to-dos may require more people. You can list those people here. Please check for more information.
Some to-dos require attachments. You can Add..., Edit..., Remove, and Show attachments. You can refer to the attachment by entering the path to the attachment or Internet address.
Required Fields
This is an overview of what fields are required and what fields can be empty when entering events and to-dos:
In the General Tab, you should at least fill the Title field and the description (the large rectangle), even though neither is mandatory. If you check the Reminder check box, you should also specify the time, and either the sound to be played or the program to be run.
The Attendees tab may be left completely empty.
The Recurrence tab must only be filled if you checked the Enable Recurrence check box.
The Attachments tab may be left completely empty.
Group Scheduling
The group schedule functionality of & korganizer; allows you to organize appointments, meetings and shared to-do items, request responses from attendees and publish items. If you are being invited to an event or to-do, you can reply to it, stating if you will be able to attend, or send a counter proposal, with different arrangements, like a different time or location. You can also publish your free/ busy schedule, to let people know when you are available, and request the same information from others.
Currently, & korganizer; schedules events and to-dos using email to transport the data, in a standards based scheme, the IMIP-protocol for group scheduling. Being a standard, IMIP is a used by many other clients too. For example & Microsoft; Outlook, Lotus Notes and Novell Evolution. This means that you can share events with other users using one of these clients. & korganizer; is integrated with & kmail; for receiving, processing, and sending events, event responses, updates, cancellations, & etc; For instance, when you get an invitation in & kmail;, and decide to accept it, by clicking the accept link in the mail body, the event is added to your calendar, and a response to the event's organizer is sent automatically.
If you check the Use Groupware Communication box in the korganizer; group scheduling configuration, & korganizer; will handle the group scheduling communication for you. In other words, you will seldom need to use the Schedule menu directly to perform the scheduling actions. For instance, if you create an event or to-do with attendees, & korganizer; will ask you if you want to send the invitations to the attendees, so you will not need to use the Schedule Send Invitation to Attendees menu item later. Also, if you change your status as an attendee for an event you were invited to, it will ask you if you want to send your updated status to the event's organizer, so you will not need to use the Schedule Send Status Update menu item later.
Publishing an Event, To-do or Journal Entry
If you simply want to send an event, to-do or journal entry, choose the Schedule Publish Item Information... menu item, when the item is selected. Then a dialog appears, asking you the email addresses which will receive the event or to-do. The item will be sent by email, in the iCalendar format.
Please note that you can use this action to email any item to anyone, not just to the item's attendees. In fact, you can publish an item with no attendees at all, as publishing does not request an answer from the attendees.
An example: you are playing in a band and, from time to time, you give live concerts. To notify your fans about the concerts, you maintain a mailing list. If you use & korganizer; to organize your concert dates, you can just choose the Schedule Publish Item Information... menu item, put in the address of the mailing list and the event gets sent. Mailing list subscribers who use & korganizer; get the concert date automatically inserted in their calendar.
Publishing an event as described above will only inform the receiver about the event, but not give her the option to ask for attendance. Use Schedule Send as iCalendar... if you want to provide that option instead.
Acting as Organizer in Group Scheduling
When you create an event or a to-do, and add attendees to it, you are acting as the event organizer. To add attendees, use the attendee tab, in the Edit Event, or Edit To-do dialog. In the agenda view, a little icon Organizer Icon is placed in the event, if you are the organizer of a group scheduling event.
The organizer is responsible for sending the invitations, collecting the attendees responses, and for keeping the data of the event or to-do up to date for all people involved.
Sending Invitations and Processing Responses
To organize an event or to-do, create it in & korganizer; and add all people that should attend using the attendees tab. & korganizer; can send invitations to the attendees, either automatically (depending on korganizer; group scheduling configuration), or by selecting the event or to-do and choosing the Schedule Send Invitation to Attendees menu item. The attendees get an email containing all the relevant information for the event or to-do. They can respond to the meeting proposal by accepting or rejecting it or by making a counter proposal. They can also delegate or forward the invitation. All this information is sent to you by email again and, if you have configured & kmail; appropriately, the attendees responses are automatically inserted in your calendar. If there are additional attendees willing to participate (e. g. by accepting a forwarded invitation) you will be asked to accept the new attendees.
Cancelling an Event or To-do
To cancel an event or to-do you have to be the organizer. If you checked the Use Groupware Communication box in the korganizer; group scheduling configuration, just delete the item, and & korganizer; will ask you to send the cancellation. If not, simply select the item, and choose the Schedule Send Cancellation to Attendees menu item.
This action will send a cancel-message to all attendees, so they can remove the item from their calendars too.
Acting as the Attendee
When you get an email with an invitation and accept it, the event or to-do is added to your calendar. If it is an event, a little icon Attendee Icon is placed in the event in the agenda view.
Answering an Invitation
If you have an invitation in your & kmail; inbox you can either press Reject to ignore the request, or press Accept or Accept Cond.. The last two actions will insert the item to your calendar. In any case, & kmail; will send your response to the organizer automatically.
You can also Delegate or Forward the invitation. When delegating, you can suggest another person as your proxy. Using Forward you can forward the invitation to one or more people not yet invited. When the receiver of the delegation or forward accepts the invitation, the organizer will be asked to approve the new attendee.
If for any reason you changed your mind, edit your status in the item's attendee tab. If you checked the Use Groupware Communication box in the korganizer; group scheduling configuration, & korganizer; will ask you to send an email updating your attendee status. If not, choose the Schedule Send Status Update menu item to send your status update.
Sending an Alternative Proposal
If you are not satisfied with some of the characteristics of the event or to-do you got invited to, and want to send a counter proposal to the organizer (for instance an alternative location or time), just edit the item and send it back as your proposal, by selecting the item and choosing the Schedule Request Change menu item.
The organizer of the event will get your proposal by email, and will be able to accept it or decline.
Requesting the Latest Version of an Event or To-do
To request the latest version of an event or to-do, select the item, and choose the Schedule Request Update menu item. The organizer should then send you back the latest version of the item.
Free Busy information
The free/ busy information represents an availability schedule. By presenting the intervals when one already has previous commitments, others can avoid arranging appointments for these periods. Note that only the times are published, not the events, reasons or attendees.
& korganizer; supports publishing and retrieving free/ busy information, either manually or automatically.
To email your free/ busy information, choose the Schedule Mail Free Busy Information... menu item. Enter the email addresses you want to send the information to in the dialog and press OK.
Groupware servers usually have a standard location for uploading your free busy information, so that other users can access your data, and you can access other user's free busy schedule. You can configure & korganizer; to upload and download free busy information automatically, using the Free Busy preferences, in the & korganizer; Configure dialog.
To upload your free/ busy information to the server set in & korganizer; preferences, choose the Schedule Upload Free Busy Information menu item.
Examples
Entering a New Group Event
In this example, you'll enter an event. You need to arrange a meeting on the next Monday regarding launch of your new Product. Your boss Joan Holden will be the event chairwoman owner, and you, Jack Smith, will be the event organizer. There will be two more attendees (participants): Peter Krzinski and Kirsten Friese. Joan gave you the program of the meeting. The appointment will start at 12 noon and end at 1 pm. The same appointment should be scheduled (recurred) each Monday.
Using the Date Navigator, go to the next Monday.
Choose the Actions New Event..., or select the area between 12 noon and end at 1 pm, and start typing the event title.
Enter a suitable title. It's important to choose the right brief description, because this is the only field that can be searched. We suggest that you enter Product launch event.
Enter the detailed event program into the largest rectangle area. For the sake of this simple example, enter Introduction, The Plan, Conclusion on three separate lines.
Check the Reminder check box. Set the reminder time to 15 minutes, just long enough to brew a cup of tea prior to the meeting start.
Click the Select Categories button.
Check Appointment in the Available Categories. Then click the OK button.
Click the Recurrence tab and check the Enable recurrence box.
Most work has been done for you automatically. & korganizer; defaults to recurring weekly. Also note that No ending date is chosen. This means that this event will be repeated each Monday (starting, of course, on Monday February 12, 2004) until the end of time (that is, until you delete it).
Since everything is all right here, click the Attendees tab.
In the Attendees tab you should do the following:
You will see that you are the organizer of the event. Click the New button to add the other attendees.
In the Name field, enter the email in the Name & #060; email#062; format. In our example, enter Joan Holden & #060; jholden@thiscompany. com#062;.
If the attendees are already in your & kde; address book, instead of typing the names and emails, you can press the Select Addressee... button to add them.
Choose Chair as the role.
Click New.
In the Name field, enter Peter Krzinski & #060; pkrzinski@thiscompany. com#062;.
In the Name field, enter Kirsten Friese & #060; kfriese@thiscompany. com#062;.
Click Apply.
If you have configured & korganizer; use groupware communication, you will be asked if you want to send an email to the attendees, with details of the event and asking for a response if the Request response box from the attendees tab is checked. Else, you can send the invitations choosing the Schedule Send Invitation to Attendees menu item.
Review the event setup by clicking on the General, Attendees, and Recurrence tabs. If you are satisfied, click OK.
Congratulations, you've scheduled your first event!
& korganizer; Configuration
To change & korganizer; 's look and behavior, choose the Settings Configure & korganizer;... menu item, or if you are running & korganizer; as the calendar component of & kontact;, choose the Settings Configure Calendar... menu item. You can get more information about all the configure options and possibilities in.
To customize the set of tools available on the bar, choose the Settings Configure Toolbars... menu item and read the configure toolbars detailed description.
To move toolbars around the screen, point your mouse over the toolbar handle and drag the toolbar to a new position on your the & korganizer; window.
Localization information like date and time formats can be configured from & kcontrolcenter; within the Regional & Language module. This control module can be accessed from within & korganizer;: just choose the Settings Configure Date & Time... menu item. & korganizer; has to be restarted for changes done in & kcontrolcenter; to take effect.
To configure where & korganizer; stores and retrieves calendar events, journal entries and to-dos, (in local files, groupware servers, journal entries as blogs, network files, & etc;), please check.
& korganizer; Main Configuration
The options dialog lets you configure a number of different areas of & korganizer;.
Personal
The personal options relate to your personal identity, and other miscellaneous things that do not fall under any of the other general categories.
Use email settings from System Settings
Check this box to use your name and email address as set in & kcontrolcenter; (About Me Password & User Account).
Full name
Full name is initially set to Anonymous with an email address of nobody@nowhere. You can change your name by directly entering it here or you can use your Email Settings from & kcontrolcenter; (see above). This name will be displayed by default as Organizer in to-dos and Events.
Email address
Email address will be used to identify the owner of the calendar. When another person opens your calendar or events, he/ she will not be able to modify it because it will be read-only.
Export to & HTML; with every save
By checking this option, you can order & korganizer; to export your calendar and to-do list to an html file in your home folder every time you save your changes.
Enable automatic saving of manually opened calendar files
When this box is checked, manually opened calendar files are saved automatically when you exit & korganizer;, without asking. Furthermore, the calendar file is saved periodically as you work to prevent the loss of valuable data. You can also specify the save interval in minutes.
This option does not affect your resource settings. To change the resource saving options, you have to configure each resource individually. For more information about resources, please check.
Confirm deletes
When you check Confirm deletes box, & korganizer; will ask you to confirm each deletion. If this is not checked, & korganizer; will not ask before deleting events.
New Events, To-dos and Journal Entries Should
This option lets you choose between adding new items to the standard resource or making & korganizer; ask you which resource should be used to save each new item.
Kolab2 server specificity: It is recommended to choose Be asked which resource to use, if you intend to use the shared folder functionality of the Kolab server. This will allow you to keep control of which information is available only to you, and which information is published in the shared folders.
Default email attachment method
This option allows you to select the way an email is attached to an event. You can attach an email the complete email including attachments, the email excluding attachments or only a link to the email.
Note that attaching an email without attachments might invalidate its signature.
Time & Date
Timezone
Select your location from the list on the drop down. If your city is not listed, select one that shares the same time zone. & korganizer; will automatically adjust for daylight savings.
Use holiday region
Select your country from the list on the drop down, or if it is not listed, select (None). If your country is selected, & korganizer; will recognize and display its important dates and holidays in the calendar view.
Day begins at
Select the time you start your day from the list on the drop down. It could be the time when you usually get up, or the time when you start working. This setting does not prevent you to set or view items before this time, it just sets the time that will be displayed by default on the top of the calendar view. Use the scrollbar to display earlier or later events in the agenda view.
Default appointment time
Select the default start time for events from the list on the drop down. When you choose New Event from the Action Menu, or create an event in some other manner such that & korganizer; cannot guess when you would like your event to start, & korganizer; will put this hour in the start time editor as the default value.
Default duration of new appointment (HH: MM):
Select the default duration for events using the spin box. When you choose New Event from the Action Menu, or create an event in some other manner such that & korganizer; cannot guess its duration, & korganizer; will use this as the default value.
Default alarm time
Select how long before the actual event's scheduled time will the alarm activate.
Working Hours
The options Daily start hour and Daily ending hour let you specify when your working day starts and when it ends. & korganizer; set the working hours apart by marking them with a different color from the non working hours, holidays and non working days.
Additionally, you have check boxes labeled after the days of the week. Check the week days that are working days for you, in order to mark the working hours in these days. Check Exclude holidays prevent & korganizer; from marking the working hours for the holiday region defined in the Use holiday region drop down above.
Views
These options let you configure & korganizer; views:
Enable tooltips for displaying summaries
If your summary for an event is longer than would fit in the current View, the remaining characters are not displayed. Check Enable tooltips for displaying summaries if you want the full summary displayed when the hovering the mouse pointer over the appointment for a few seconds.
Show to-dos in day, week and month views
This check box toggles the display of to-dos in the day, week and month views in the agenda (day and week) and month views. If you have too many to-dos which have due date associated, you may want to turn them off to avoid clutter.
Date Navigator options:
Show events that recur daily in date navigator
If the Show events that recur daily in date navigator box is checked, the days containing daily recurring events are shown in bold typeface in the date navigator.
Show events that recur weekly in the date navigator
If the Show events that recur weekly in date navigator box is checked, the days containing weekly recurring events are shown in bold typeface in the date navigator.
Agenda view options:
Hour size:
By using this slider you can control the height of the rows in the agenda view.
Next x days:
This option allows you to change the amount of days of the Next x Days menu item in the View menu.
Show current-time (Marcus Bains) line
This check box toggles a red line in the day or week view indicating the current time (Marcus Bains line) on and off. This line gives you an indication how much time is left & eg; until a meeting takes place.
Show seconds on current-time line
This check box toggles the seconds on the current-time line (Marcus Bains line) on and off.
Time range selection in agenda view starts event editor
Check this box to start the event editor automatically when you select a time range in the daily and weekly view. To select a time range, drag the mouse from the start time to the end time of the event you are about to plan.
Agenda view uses resource colors
With & korganizer;, you can assign a different color to each resource. This check box toggles the use the resource color when displaying the to-do or event in the agenda view on and off. Note that if you do not assign different colors, there is little sense in using this feature, as & korganizer; default configuration is to use the same color for all resources.
Agenda view calendar display
Select if all calendars should be merged into one agenda view, each calendar should be displayed in its own aganda view or if both view should be available via tabs.
Month view options:
Enable scrollbars in month view cells
This check box toggles the cell scrollbars in the month view on and off. Even if you check this box, the scrollbars will only appear when needed.
Month view uses full window
If you check this box, the month view will be displayed in the whole & korganizer; window instead of sharing the window with the sidebar (the date navigator, the to-dos and the calendar resources).
Month view uses category colors
With & korganizer;, you can assign a different color to each category. If you check this box, the event or to-do color in the month view will reflect the category color, instead of using no color, or only the resource color. Note that if you do not assign different category colors, there is little sense in using this feature, as & korganizer; default configuration is to use the same color for all categories.
Month view uses resource colors
With & korganizer;, you can assign a different color to each resource. If you check this box, the event or to-do color in the month view will reflect the resource color, instead of using no color, or only the category color. Note that if you do not assign different resource colors, there is little sense in using this feature, as & korganizer; default configuration is to use the same color for all resources.
To-do view options:
To-do list view uses full window
If you enable this option, the to-do list view will be displayed in the whole & korganizer; window instead of sharing the window with the sidebar (the date navigator, the to-dos and the calendar resources).
Record completed to-dos in journal entries
If you check this box, & korganizer; will automatically add a journal entry for every completed to-dos.
Fonts
Time bar
Press this button to pick the font, font style and size for the time bar.
Month view
Press this button to pick the font, font style and size for the month view.
Agenda view
Press this button to pick the font, font style and size for the agenda view (day, week and work week views).
Current-time line
Press this button to pick the font, font style and size for the Marcus Bains line (a red line in the agenda view indicating the current time).
Colors
Choose the color used for holidays, for highlighting, and for specific event categories. You can choose a different color for each category. Of course too many colors may be confusing, so use common sense. The use of color depend also on the view preferences.
Holiday color
This button opens the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the holiday color. The holiday color will be used for the holiday name in the month view and the holiday number in the date navigator.
Highlight color
This button opens the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the highlight color. The highlight color will be used for marking the currently selected area in your agenda and in the date navigator.
Default event color
This button opens the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the default event color. The default event color will be used for events categories in your agenda and (depending on the settings) in the month view. Note that you can specify a separate color for each event category below.
Agenda view background color
This button opens the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the agenda view background color.
Working hours color
This button opens the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the color of the working hours background in the agenda view.
To-do due today color
This button opens the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the to-do due today color.
To-do overdue color
This button opens the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the to-do overdue color.
Categories
This group allows you to assign a color to each category. Select a category in the drop down list, and press the button to open the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the color for that category. Depending on the view preferences, this color will be used to mark events and to-dos which belong to this category in your agenda and in the month view.
Resources
This group allows you to assign a color to each resource. Select a resource in the drop down list, and press the button to open the Select Color dialog, allowing you to select the color for that resource. Depending on the view preferences, this color will be used to mark events and to-dos which are stored using this resource in your agenda and in the month view.
Use Groupware Communication
Check this box to automatically send mails when creating, updating or deleting events or to-dos which involve others. This mail can be an invitation to attendees of an event you created, a cancellation of an event you created, an answer or an update on your invitation status, an event change request, & etc; Check this option if you you want to use the groupware functionality (eg; Configuring & kontact; as a & kde; Kolab client).
Send copy to owner when mailing events
When you check the Send copy to owner when mailing events box, you will get a copy of all email messages that & korganizer; sends at your request to the event attendees.
Mail Client
Here you can choose which type of mail transport you would like to use. You can either use & kmail; or the & Sendmail; command (which must be installed on your system in order to work).
Additional email addresses
This tells & korganizer; what further email addresses you have. You can add, edit or remove additional emails addresses. These email addresses are the ones you have in addition to the one set in personal preferences. If you get an invitation to an event, but use another email address there, you need to list this address here so & korganizer; can recognize it as yours, and add the item to your calendar.
Free/ Busy
Publish Tab: by publishing your free/ busy information, you allow others to take your busy time schedule into account when inviting you to an event.
Publish free/ busy information automatically
Enable this option if you wish your Free/ Busy information to be uploaded automatically. Note that you may skip this option and choose to mail or upload your Free/ Busy information via the Schedule menu of & korganizer;.
If your application is setup to work as a kde; Kolab client, this is not required. The Kolab2 server can take care of publishing your Free/ Busy information and manage the access to it from other users.
Minimum time between uploads (in minutes)
In case you choose to publish your information automatically, you may configure the interval of time in minutes between each upload.
Publish (default 60) days of free/ busy
Configure the number of calendar days you wish to be published and available to others
Server & URL;
Enter the & URL; for the server on which your Free/ Busy information shall be published. Ask the server administrator for this information.
Kolab2 server example: webdavs: / /kolab2. com/ freebusy/ joe@kolab2. com. ifb
Username
Enter the login information relative to your account on the server
Kolab2 server specificity: Registered your UID (Unique IDentifier), by default your UID would be similar to your email address on the Kolab2 server but it may also be different. In the last case enter your UID. Ask about your UID to the server administrator if you do not know it.
Password
Enter here your password (server login password).
Remember password
Check this option if you want & korganizer; to remember your password and skip asking you each time it upload your Free/ Busy information.
It is not recommended to store your password in the configuration file for security reasons.
Retrieve Tab: by retrieving other peoples' free/ busy information, you can take their busy time schedule into account when inviting them to an event.
Retrieve other peoples' free/ busy information automatically
Automate the process for retrieving other users free/ busy time. Fill in the server information section below to enable this option.
Use full email address for retrieval
This setting lets you change the name of the file which will be fetched from the server. If you check this option, it will download a free/ busy file called user@domain. ifb, else it will fetch user. ifb. Ask the server Administrator if you are not sure about how to configure this option.
Kolab2 server specificity: If you are configuring & korganizer; as a component to a kde; Kolab client (kontact; /Kolab) you have to check this option.
Enter the & URL; for the server on which your Free/ Busy information shall be fetched. Ask the server administrator for this information.
Kolab2 server example: webdavs: / /kolab2. com/ freebusy/
Enter the login information relative to your account on the server.
Kolab2 server specificity: Registered your UID (Unique IDentifier), by default your UID would be similar to your email address on the Kolab2 server but it may also be different. In the last case enter your UID. Ask about your UID to the server administrator if you do not know it.
Check this option if you want & korganizer; to remember your password and skip asking you each time it fetches the free/ busy files.
Plugins
For more information about configuring plugins, please refer to
Toolbars Configuration
& korganizer; has three toolbars: a Main toolbar (with New Event, New To-do, Print, Undo, Redo, Cut, Copy, Paste, Find, Go Backward, Go Forward and Goto Today buttons), a Views toolbar (for selecting between Whats Next view, List view, Day view, Work Week view, Week view, Next X Day view, Month view, To-do List view and Journal view buttons), a Schedule toolbar (with Publish Item Information, Send Invitations to Attendees, Send Status Update and Open Address Book buttons) and a Filters toolbar, which allows you to choose a filter for the & korganizer; views. You can customize these toolbars in various ways: you can add new icons, change the icon size, change toolbar position and add text description to the icons.
There are two ways to change the position of the toolbars:
You can right click the toolbar to bring up the Toolbar Menu. The icon size and text position can also be adjusted from this menu.
You can simply drag the toolbar by the handle on the left border of each toolbar, and drop it whenever you wish. Also look at other easy drag-and-drop operations.
The toolbars are configured in two places:
The tool set is configured in the Settings Configure Toolbars... menu item.
The graphic style (icon size, text position, & etc;) is adjusted through the Toolbar Context Menu. Right click the toolbar to access this menu.
Configure Toolbars Dialog
This dialog allows you to customize the selection of tools on the toolbar. Open it choosing the Settings Configure Toolbars... menu item.
Choosing the toolbar
First you need to choose the toolbar that you want to modify. All actions apply to the toolbar that is selected from the drop down menu at the top of the window.
Available Actions
There are two rectangles below the toolbar title: Available actions and Current actions. Using the left and right arrows (located between the rectangles) you can move icons from the Available actions group to the Current actions group. The toolbar will have every icon that is in the Current actions box. The up and down arrows allow you reposition an icon.
Remember that less icons may be better, because the screen is less busy and therefore it is easier to find the toolbar buttons you actually use. For instance if you always cut and paste with the keyboard hotkeys, you do not need the Cut, Copy and Paste icons.
Toolbar Context Menu
This menu allows you to change the look of the toolbars. Right click the toolbar to access this menu.
Text Position
Initially, icons do not have any text assigned. You may prefer having text under each icon, or text alongside each icon. You can also have plain texts without any icons.
Orientation
You can have the toolbar at the top, bottom, left or right side. If you choose Floating position, the toolbar will be displayed outside the main & korganizer; panel and you can move it around. If you choose Flat, the toolbar will collapse into a tiny rectangle. You can later click that rectangle and the toolbar will appear again.
Icon Size
You can change the size of the icons. Make your choice between small, medium and large icons.
Reference
Menus
When & korganizer; starts, the main & korganizer; window appears. The window has several components: a menubar, a toolbar, a month calendar, a main panel with the current view of events, and a to-do list.
The menus provide access to all the common operations that can be performed with the calendar, including saving, loading, adding and deleting events, to-dos and journal entries, printing and more.
Please note that when using & korganizer; as the calendar component of & kontact;, the menus differ from the stand alone application.
File
The File menu provides access to functions involving the entire calendar.
Ctrl; N File New
Opens another main window. This window initially contains unnamed calendar. You can use the new window to:
open the same calendar twice (select the File Open menu item and choose the same calendar as in the original window)
have two different calendars open at the same time (select the File Open menu item and choose a different calendar).
create a new calendar (select the File Save menu item to give your new calendar a filename and to save it).
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Ctrl; O File Open
Opens a file dialog allowing you to select a new vCalendar or iCalendar file to load. If you have made changes to the current calendar, you will be given the option of saving them before loading a new one.
For more information about this, please refer to.
File Open Recent
Open Recent provides a list of recently opened calendar files for quick access, allowing you to bypass the file dialog entirely.
Ctrl; S File Save
When you choose Save or click the Save icon, & korganizer; saves the calendar to disk, and makes sure all changes that you made will be remembered. If the calendar has no name, Save will behave like Save As.
File Save As...
Save As displays a file dialog in which you may choose a different name for your calendar than the one currently assigned to it. This is useful if you have made changes to a calendar that you want to save, but also want to keep separate from your regular calendar.
File Revert
When you choose Revert, & korganizer; loads the last saved version of the calendar, discarding all the changes made after the last save.
Ctrl; P File Print
Choose Print or click the Print icon to print the current calendar. You can specify the range of dates to be printed (either manually or with Calendar Widget) and the Print Style (Day, Week, Month or To-dos and Journal).
File Import Import Calendar
If you have a different iCalendar or vCalendar file somewhere, and you would like to merge its contents into your own calendar, add as a new resource or open it as a new window, choose this menu item. A good time to do this would be if you received a vCalendar with a few entries via email, for instance.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
File Import Import From & UNIX; Ical Tool
If you have used ical, a popular but older calendar program for & UNIX;, you may wish to import your events and to-do directly to & korganizer;. This action will read the. calendar file from your home folder and merge any entries it contains into your current calendar. If any errors or suspicious things occur during the process, you will be notified via a message box.
File Import Get Hot New Stuff...
This action will open the Get Hot New Stuff dialog, which offers a list of calendars to download. These events can be added to your calendar.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
File Export Export Web Page...
You can export your calendar or a part of it as a & HTML; file, suitable for publishing on the World Wide Web.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
File Export iCalendar
This action will export all your active events, to-dos and journal entries (independent of to what resource they belong) as a new iCalendar file.
File Export vCalendar
This action will export all your active events, to-dos and journal entries (independent of to what resource they belong) as a new vCalendar file.
File Export Upload Hot New Stuff...
This action will open the Upload Hot New Stuff dialog, which allow you to export calendars containing events which may be useful to other people, such as a conference program, a list of holidays, special events, & etc;
File Archive Old Entries...
From time to time you should delete your old events.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
File Purge Completed To-dos
This action will remove all the completed to-dos from your active calendar.
Ctrl; Q File Quit
When you choose Quit or click the Quit icon, the current calendar window will quit, prompting you to save if the current calendar has been modified but not yet saved.
This has no effect on other calendar windows which may be opened. You have to quit each calendar window individually.
Edit
With the Edit menu you can edit and search events and to-dos.
Cut, Copy, and Paste menu items behave in the same fashion as in other & kde; applications. With the Find menu item you can find event and to-dos across the current calendar.
Ctrl; Z Edit Undo
Undo the latest action, or in other words, return the calendar to the state it was immediately before the latest action.
Ctrl; Shift; Z Edit Redo
Redo the latest action, or in other words, return the calendar to the state it was immediately before the latest undo.
Ctrl; X Edit Cut
Cuts the currently selected event(s) to the clipboard, removing them from your calendar.
Ctrl; C Edit Copy
Copies the currently selected item(s) to the clipboard, but leaving them untouched.
Ctrl; V Edit Paste
Paste inserts the contents of the clipboard into your calendar. The clipboard must contain a valid vCalendar or iCalendar, provided either by a previous Cut/ Copy operation or from a selection made outside of & korganizer;. You will be warned if the contents of the clipboard cannot be understood.
However, you can safely use Ctrl; C and Ctrl; V hotkeys to copy text data from any outside application to a & korganizer; Edit Event window and vice versa.
Edit Delete
Delete the currently selected item(s), removing them from your calendar.
Ctrl; f Edit Find
Choose Find from the Edit or click the Find icon to find events, to-dos and journal entries according to their title, description, and/ or categories.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
View
There are several different views available for displaying your events, to-dos and journal entries. & korganizer; is smart enough to remember in between sessions what the last active view was, and the next time it is started, it will display that view.
In general, each view will provide a way of displaying your journal entries, to-dos and events, constrained to a particular time period or style of display. Click any item to select it for further action. Right click an item to bring up a menu with options such as edit, delete, and so on. You can also use the Action menu to perform similar operations.
View What's Next
Switch the display to the what's next view.
This view displays your next events and to-dos. Events and to-dos are displayed one per line.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
View Day
Switch the display to the day view.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
View Next x Days
Switch the display to the next x day view, where x is defined in & korganizer; main configurations.
View Work Week
Switch the display to the work week view.
This is the same as the week view, except only the working days of the week are shown.
View Week
Switch the display to the week view.
The week view provides a view similar to the day view. Events for seven days are shown next to each other. All of the functions available for the day view are available in the week view, too.
View Month
Switch the display to the Month view.
View List
Switch the display to the list view.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
View To-do List
Switch the display to the to-do list view.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
View Journal
Switch the display to the journal view.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
View Refresh
Updates or refreshes the currently displayed view.
View Zoom
Use this submenu to adjust the current view to show more or less data.
In the agenda view (day(s) or week view), you can use the zoom actions to show more or less days (Zoom In Horizontally and Zoom Out Horizontally), or more or less hours in the day (Zoom In Vertically and Zoom Out Vertically).
View Filter
This submenu offers access to the filters already created using the Edit Filters dialog. Select on this submenu the filter that will be used in & korganizer; view. If you do not want to use a filter, choose No filter.
Go
For more information about browsing & korganizer; views, please refer to.
Go Go Backward
Go to the previous day, week or month, depending on the view.
Go Go Forward
Go to the next day, week, or month, depending on the view.
Go Go to Today
Go to the period of time that includes the current day.
Actions
Actions New Event...
Choose New Event... to create a new event.
You can get a detailed description of the event window in the Entering Events section.
Actions New To-do...
Choose New To-do... to create a new to-do. Initially the to-do has no due date, but you can specify one.
You can get a detailed description of the to-do window in the Entering To-dos section.
Actions New Sub-to-do...
Choose New Sub-to-do... to start writing a new sub-to-do. The currently selected to-do will be the sub-to-do parent. Initially the to-do has no due date, but you can specify one.
You can get a detailed description of the to-do window in Entering To-dos section.
Actions New Journal...
Choose New Journal... to start writing a new journal entry.
Actions Show
Choose Show to open a dialog showing the details of the currently selected journal entry, event or to-do.
Actions Edit...
Choose Edit... to edit the currently selected journal entry, event or to-do.
Actions Delete
Choose Delete to remove the currently selected journal entry, event or to-do.
Actions Make Sub-to-do Independent
Choose Make Sub-to-do Independent to detach the currently selected sub-to-do item from its parent and make it an independent to-do item.
Schedule
Schedule Publish Item Information...
Email the selected event, to-do or journal entry in the iCalendar format.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Schedule Send Invitation to Attendees
Send the selected to-do or event to the attendees, and, if necessary, request a response from them.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Schedule Send Status Update
If you changed your status as an attendee, choose this menu item to send your updated status (accepted, tentative, & etc;) to the item's organizer.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Schedule Send Cancellation to Attendees
If you plan to cancel an event or to-do, select it, and choose this menu item to notify the attendees about the cancellation.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Schedule Request Update
Request the latest version of the selected event or to-do from the organizer.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Schedule Request Change
Send an alternative proposal to the organizer of the selected event or to-do.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Schedule Mail Free Busy Information...
Email your Free Busy information to one or more email addresses.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Schedule Upload Free Busy Information
Upload your Free Busy information to the groupware server. Other users will then be able to retrieve the information.
Settings
Settings Toolbars
Click the menu items of this submenu to show or hide & korganizer; toolbars.
Settings Show Status bar or Settings Hide Status bar
Choose this menu item to toggle the display of the status bar on and off.
Settings Sidebar
Click the menu items of this submenu to show or hide & korganizer; sidebar components. Note that the sidebar is visible only when the current view does not use the full window.
Settings Sidebar Show Resource Buttons
Click this menu item toggle the display of the resource view sidebar buttons on and off.
Settings Configure Date & Time...
Click this menu item to set the desktop date and time formats. Note that this setting is shared between other desktop applications.
Settings Manage View Filters...
Choose this menu item to open the Edit Filters dialog. Using this dialog, you can create, delete and edit filters that will affect which items will be displayed by & korganizer;.
Settings Manage Categories...
Choose this menu item to open the Edit Categories dialog. Using this dialog, you can create, delete and edit calendar item categories. Categories are used to organize your events and to-dos in related groups.
Settings Configure Shortcuts...
Choose this menu item to open the Configure Shortcuts dialog. This dialog allows you to assign shortcuts to & korganizer; actions, and configure the shortcuts already assigned.
Settings Configure Toolbars...
Choose this menu item to open the Configure Toolbars dialog. This dialog allows you to add, remove and change the order of the actions in & korganizer; toolbars.
Settings Configure & korganizer;...
Choose the Settings Configure & korganizer;... menu item to display & korganizer; Configure dialog.
For more information about this action, please refer to.
Help
& help. menu. documentation;
HotKeys
This is a reference to all hotkeys and their corresponding description in the handbook.
Hotkeys Sorted Alphabetically
Hotkey
Description
& Ctrl; C
Edit Copy equivalent; copy the selection to clipboard.
& Ctrl; F
Edit Find equivalent; Find data in current calendar.
F1
Help Contents equivalent; help for & korganizer;.
& Ctrl; N
File New equivalent; create and open new calendar.
& Ctrl; O
File Open equivalent; open a calendar file in the current window.
& Ctrl; P
File Print equivalent; print current calendar.
& Ctrl; Q
File Quit equivalent; quit current calendar.
& Ctrl; S
File Save equivalent; save current calendar.
& Ctrl; V
Edit Paste equivalent; paste data from clipboard.
& Ctrl; X
Edit Cut equivalent; cut the selection to the clipboard.
Hotkeys Sorted by Function
Copy: Edit Copy equivalent; copy the selection to clipboard.
Cut: Edit Cut equivalent; cut the selection to the clipboard.
& Ctrl; X
Find: Edit Find equivalent; Find data in current calendar.
& Ctrl; F
Help: Help Contents equivalent; help for & korganizer;.
New: File New equivalent; create and open new calendar.
& Ctrl; N
Open: File Open equivalent; open a calendar file in the current window.
& Ctrl; O
Paste: Edit Paste equivalent; paste data from clipboard.
& Ctrl; V
Print: File Print equivalent; print current calendar.
& Ctrl; P
Quit: File Quit equivalent; quit current calendar.
& Ctrl; Q
Save: File Save equivalent; save current calendar.
& Ctrl; S
Action Buttons
Many windows contain buttons Default, Delete, OK, Apply, and Cancel. With these buttons you will decide whether the data that you entered into the window will be saved or forgotten.
Default
If you click the Default button, changes you have made will be forgotten, and all choices will be returned to their default values.
Delete
Click Delete to completely remove the event or event that you are editing from the calendar.
OK
When you click the OK button, your changes will be remembered and & korganizer; will close the window.
Apply
When you click the Apply button, your changes will be remembered, and the window will remain on screen for further editing.
Cancel
If you click the Cancel button, your editing will be forgotten, and & korganizer; will close the window.
Other Features
In this chapter, you'll learn other useful features of & korganizer;: what tricks you can do with a click of your mouse and what interaction between & korganizer; and & konqueror; is possible.
You'll also learn about synchronizing with your & PalmPilot; or compatible handheld computer.
Command Line
A nice program to access a & kde; calendar from the command line is konsolekalendar, which is included in the kdepim package together with & korganizer;.
Drag and Drop Operations
& korganizer; can be easily controlled with your mouse. The supported drag-and-drop operations are detailed below.
Any event can be re-sized with your mouse. Simply move the mouse pointer near the top or bottom edge of the event, and drag the edge up or down. This way you can visually modify the starting and ending time of your appointment. This works in the Day, Week and Work Week views.
Any event can be rescheduled with your mouse. Move the mouse pointer over the event, and drag it to a new time location. This works in the Day, Week and Work Week views.
Events can be copied to other, presently non-visible dates. Move the mouse pointer over the event, and drag it to the Date Navigator on the left side of the current calendar, or to the Date Navigator of a different calendar.
However, you cannot drag from agenda view in one calendar to agenda view in other calendar.
Toolbars can be dragged on the screen. Move the mouse pointer over the toolbar's handle, and drag it to a new location on your screen.
& konqueror; Interaction
& konqueror; recognizes the vCalendar format used by & korganizer;. If you use & konqueror; to navigate to your calendar, it will be displayed inside & konqueror; as a live object. You will be able to perform most operations with your calendar inside & konqueror;; you will not need to start & korganizer;. In technical jargon, this is described as embedding vCalendar as KPart inside & konqueror;.
Palm Synchronization
Palm Synchronization can be done via & kpilot;. Choose Settings Configure & kpilot; and check the Calendar (korganizer;) and To-do's (korganizer;) boxes. After synchronization the Calendar and To-do's should be visible in & korganizer;.
See the FAQ; for one of the most common & PalmPilot; syncing problems.
Questions and Answers
Can I import my old Ical data?
Sure! Follow the instructions in Import From & UNIX; Ical section.
Can I import data from & Microsoft; Outlook?
Yes you can, but you must first tell Outlook to export its data to vCalendar format. Then you must copy this data to your home folder, click File Open, navigate to the file and double-click it. For more information on importing data from & Microsoft; Outlook, please check.
I'm trying to sync & korganizer; with my & PalmPilot;, but nothing happens. What else do I need to do?
Make sure no form of & korganizer; is running: neither & korganizer; itself nor the alarm daemon in the system tray.
Make sure the versions of the & kpilot; datebook conduit and & korganizer; are compatible.
Can I use freebusy-time with & korganizer;?
yes, follow the instructions in Free/ Busy.
Credits and License
& korganizer;
Program copyright 2000-2004, The & kde; Developers
& korganizer; homepage is at http: / /korganizer. kde. org
If you discover bugs or see room for improvement in & korganizer; please visit http: / /korganizer. kde. org/ contact/ bugswishes. html.
Contributors:
Reinhold Kainhofer reinhold@kainhofer. com
& Cornelius. Schumacher; & Cornelius. Schumacher. mail;
& Preston. Brown; & Preston. Brown. mail;
Documentation copyright 2000 & Milos. Prudek;
Documentation copyright 2001 Paul E. Ahlquist, Jr Paul. E. Ahlquist. Jr. mail;
Documentation copyright 2004 Juuml; rgen Nagel juergen. nagel@student. fh-reutlingen. de
Documentation copyright 2005 Carlos Leonhard Woelz carloswoelz@imap-mail. com
CREDIT_FOR_TRANSLATORS
& underFDL; & underGPL;
Installation
How to Obtain & korganizer;
& install. intro. documentation;
Click the Applications menu of the main menu to see if & korganizer; is already installed on your system. If & korganizer; is not there, either it is not installed, or perhaps the administrator of your system has moved it to some other place.
Requirements
& korganizer; requires & kde; 3.4. It requires roughly 2MB of space in your & kde; system folder. Your calendars will require additional space in your home folder. Very large calendars slow down & korganizer; operation, therefore periodic cleanup is advisable.
& korganizer; needs about 5 Megabytes of memory to run, but this may vary depending on your platform and the size of your calendar(s).
All required libraries are part of standard & kde; libraries (kdelibs). & kde; base package (kdebase) must also be installed to change localization preferences like date and time formats. & korganizer; itself is in the kdepim package. All packages can be found on kde; home page.
The & korganizer; homepage is at http: / /korganizer. kde. org
Glossary
Calendar Widget
A tool for choosing the date inside certain entry windows, like event editing window. It is displayed as a small button to the right of the date field. When you click the button, you will see a month calendar. Use the arrows to go to a desired date, or click the month name or year number to go directly to the desired month or year.
Date Navigator
The calendar that is in the upper-left corner of the & korganizer; window. It is the main way provided to navigate among dates, and to select from them. The single-arrow icons move forwards and backwards in time by increments of a month, while the double-arrows allow moving by years at a time. Today's date will be outlined with a small box. Dates which have events scheduled on them will be bold. If you want to select a date, simply click it. Hold down the & Ctrl; key and click the dates if you wish to select multiple neighbor dates at once. The dates will be displayed in the main panel.
Recurring events are not always displayed. You can forbid the display of recurring appointments in the Date Navigator. Get more information in the Views chapter.
Due Date
A due date is simply the date when your to-do must be finished. For instance, if your to-do is that you must return your books to the library by 16th November, that date is called the to-do due date
Main panel
Normally the largest part of the screen, to the right of the Date Navigator. It displays the View of the day, workdays, week or month, the List View or the to-do list view.
The right mouse button can be used in the List view and to-do list view only. It displays a local menu. The left mouse button can be used in any view.
Free/ busy
The free/ busy information is a set of busy time intervals. By presenting the intervals when one already has previous commitments, others can avoid arranging appointments for these periods. Note that only the times are published, not the event titles, descriptions or attendees. In other words, the free/ busy information is the availability schedule.
When adding attendees to your event, you need to know if they are busy or free in that particular time before sending the invitations. If the attendees make their free/ busy information available, & korganizer; can retrieve this information and display it in the Free/ Busy tab of the Edit Event dialog.
Some to-dos require attachments. You can Add..., Edit..., Remove, and Show attachments. You can refer to the attachment by entering the & URI; (path or Internet address) to the attachment.