# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

Name
Size
Encoding
Type
Compress
Encrypt
Sign
contains
does not contain
equals
does not equal
matches regular expr.
does not match reg. expr.
is in address book
is not in address book
is in category
is not in category
has an attachment
has no attachment
is
is not
is equal to
is not equal to
is greater than
is less than or equal to
is less than
is greater than or equal to
bytes
days
Error while creating file %1: %2
Failed to create folder
One or more of your configured OpenPGP encryption keys or S/ MIME certificates is not fully trusted for encryption.
One or more of the OpenPGP encryption keys or S/ MIME certificates for recipient "%1" is not fully trusted for encryption.
The following keys are only marginally trusted:
The following keys or certificates have unknown trust level:
The following keys or certificates are revoked:
Not Fully Trusted Encryption Keys
OpenPGP Key Expired
S/ MIME Certificate Expired
OpenPGP Key Expires Soon
S/ MIME Certificate Expires Soon
One or more of your configured OpenPGP encryption keys or S/ MIME certificates is not usable for encryption. Please reconfigure your encryption keys and certificates for this identity in the identity configuration dialog. If you choose to continue, and the keys are needed later on, you will be prompted to specify the keys to use.
Unusable Encryption Keys
One or more of your configured OpenPGP signing keys or S/ MIME signing certificates is not usable for signing. Please reconfigure your signing keys and certificates for this identity in the identity configuration dialog. If you choose to continue, and the keys are needed later on, you will be prompted to specify the keys to use.
Unusable Signing Keys
Examination of recipient's encryption preferences yielded that the message should be encrypted using OpenPGP, at least for some recipients; however, you have not configured valid trusted OpenPGP encryption keys for this identity. You may continue without encrypting to yourself, but be aware that you will not be able to read your own messages if you do so.
Examination of recipient's encryption preferences yielded that the message should be encrypted using S/ MIME, at least for some recipients; however, you have not configured valid S/ MIME encryption certificates for this identity. You may continue without encrypting to yourself, but be aware that you will not be able to read your own messages if you do so.
Examination of recipient's signing preferences yielded that the message should be signed using OpenPGP, at least for some recipients; however, you have not configured valid OpenPGP signing certificates for this identity.
Do Not OpenPGP-Sign
Examination of recipient's signing preferences yielded that the message should be signed using S/ MIME, at least for some recipients; however, you have not configured valid S/ MIME signing certificates for this identity.
Do Not S/ MIME-Sign
Examination of recipient's signing preferences showed no common type of signature matching your available signing keys. Send message without signing?
No signing possible
You did not select an encryption key for yourself (encrypt to self). You will not be able to decrypt your own message if you encrypt it.
Missing Key Warning
& Encrypt
You did not select an encryption key for the recipient of this message; therefore, the message will not be encrypted.
You did not select an encryption key for any of the recipients of this message; therefore, the message will not be encrypted.
Send & Unencrypted
You did not select an encryption key for one of the recipients: this person will not be able to decrypt the message if you encrypt it.
You did not select encryption keys for some of the recipients: these persons will not be able to decrypt the message if you encrypt it.
Encryption Key Selection
There is a problem with the encryption key(s) for "%1". Please re-select the key(s) which should be used for this recipient.
No valid and trusted encryption key was found for "%1". Select the key(s) which should be used for this recipient. If there is no suitable key in the list you can also search for external keys.
More than one key matches "%1". Select the key(s) which should be used for this recipient.
Name Selection
Which name shall the contact '%1 'have in your address book?
Select the address book folder to store the new contact in:
Filter Log Viewer
& Log filter activities
You can turn logging of filter activities on and off here. Of course, log data is collected and shown only when logging is turned on.
Logging Details
Log pattern description
Log filter & rule evaluation
You can control the feedback in the log concerning the evaluation of the filter rules of applied filters: having this option checked will give detailed feedback for each single filter rule; alternatively, only feedback about the result of the evaluation of all rules of a single filter will be given.
Log filter pattern evaluation
Log filter actions
Log size limit:
unlimited
Collecting log data uses memory to temporarily store the log data; here you can limit the maximum amount of memory to be used: if the size of the collected log data exceeds this limit then the oldest data will be discarded until the limit is no longer exceeded.
Could not write the file %1: "%2" is the detailed error description.
KMail Error
Friend
Business
Later
Wrong Crypto Plug-In.
Different results for signatures
The crypto engine returned no cleartext data.
Status:
(unknown)
Crypto plug-in "%1" is not initialized.
Crypto plug-in "%1" cannot verify signatures.
No appropriate crypto plug-in was found.
No %1 plug-in was found.
The message is signed, but the validity of the signature cannot be verified. Reason: %1
Encrypted data not shown
This message is encrypted.
Decrypt Message
Could not decrypt the data.
Crypto plug-in "%1" could not decrypt the data.
Error: %1
Crypto plug-in "%1" cannot decrypt messages.
Note: This HTML message may contain external references to images etc. For security/ privacy reasons external references are not loaded. If you trust the sender of this message then you can load the external references for this message by clicking here.
Note: This is an HTML message. For security reasons, only the raw HTML code is shown. If you trust the sender of this message then you can activate formatted HTML display for this message by clicking here.
Sorry, certificate could not be imported. Reason: %1
Sorry, no certificates were found in this message.
Certificate import status:
Sorry, no details on certificate import available.
Certificate import details:
Failed: %1 (%2)
New or changed: %1 (secret key available)
New or changed: %1
Chiasmus backend does not offer the "x-obtain-keys" function. Please report this bug.
Chiasmus Backend Error
Unexpected return value from Chiasmus backend: The "x-obtain-keys" function did not return a string list. Please report this bug.
No keys have been found. Please check that a valid key path has been set in the Chiasmus configuration.
Chiasmus Decryption Key Selection
Chiasmus backend does not offer the "x-decrypt" function. Please report this bug.
The "x-decrypt" function does not accept the expected parameters. Please report this bug.
Chiasmus Decryption Error
Unexpected return value from Chiasmus backend: The "x-decrypt" function did not return a byte array. Please report this bug.
Unnamed
Error: Signature not verified
Good signature
Bad signature
No public key to verify the signature
No signature found
Error verifying the signature
No status information available.
Good signature.
One key has expired.
The signature has expired.
Unable to verify: key missing.
CRL not available.
Available CRL is too old.
A policy was not met.
A system error occurred.
One key has been revoked.
Bad signature.
Invalid signature.
Not enough information to check signature validity.
Signature is valid.
Signed by %2.
Unknown signature state
Show Details
No Audit Log available
Error Retrieving Audit Log: %1
Show Audit Log
Hide Details
Encapsulated message
Please wait while the message is being decrypted...
Encrypted message
Encrypted message (decryption not possible)
Reason: %1
Please wait while the signature is being verified...
certificate
Warning:
Sender's mail address is not stored in the %1 used for signing.
sender:
stored:
No mail address is stored in the %1 used for signing, so we cannot compare it to the sender's address %2.
Not enough information to check signature. %1
Message was signed with unknown key.
Message was signed by %1.
Message was signed with key %1.
Message was signed on %1 with key %2.
Message was signed by %3 on %1 with key %2
Message was signed by %2 with key %1.
Message was signed on %1 with unknown key %2.
Message was signed with unknown key %1.
The validity of the signature cannot be verified.
Message was signed by %2 (Key ID: %1).
The signature is valid, but the key's validity is unknown.
The signature is valid and the key is marginally trusted.
The signature is valid and the key is fully trusted.
The signature is valid and the key is ultimately trusted.
The signature is valid, but the key is untrusted.
Warning: The signature is bad.
End of signed message
End of encrypted message
End of encapsulated message
The message could not be decrypted.
KWallet is not available. It is strongly recommended to use KWallet for managing your passwords. However, KMail can store the password in its configuration file instead. The password is stored in an obfuscated format, but should not be considered secure from decryption efforts if access to the configuration file is obtained. Do you want to store the password for account '%1 'in the configuration file?
KWallet Not Available
Store Password
Do Not Store Password
Create an Account Later
Location:
Incoming server:
Welcome to KMail's account wizard
It seems you have started KMail for the first time. You can use this wizard to setup your mail accounts. Just enter the connection data that you received from your email provider into the following pages.
You can use this wizard to setup your mail accounts. Just enter the connection data that you received from your email provider into the following pages.
Create a new identity
An identity is your email address, name, organization and so on. Do not uncheck this if you do not know what you are doing, as some servers refuse to send mail if the sending identity does not match the one belonging to that account.
Account Wizard
Select what kind of account you would like to create
Account Type
Real name:
E-mail address:
Organization:
Account Information
Login name:
Password:
Login Information
Choose...
Outgoing server:
Use local delivery
If your local host acts as a sending mail server (SMTP), you may activate this.
Server Information
Sendmail
Local Account
Checking for supported security capabilities of %1...
Edit with:
KMail is unable to detect when the chosen editor is closed. To avoid data loss, editing the attachment will be aborted.
Unable to edit attachment
Sieve Diagnostics
Collecting diagnostic information about Sieve support...
Collecting data for account '%1 '...
------------------------------------------------------------
(Account does not support Sieve)
(Account is not an IMAP account)
Contents of script '%1 ':
(This script is empty.)
------------------------------------------------------------ %1 ------------------------------------------------------------
Sieve capabilities:
(No special capabilities available)
Available Sieve scripts:
(No Sieve scripts available on this server)
Active script: %1
Sieve script installed successfully on the server. Out of Office reply is now active.
Sieve script installed successfully on the server. Out of Office reply has been deactivated.
New Folder
New Subfolder of %1
& Name:
Enter a name for the new folder.
Mailbox & format:
Select whether you want to store the messages in this folder as one file per message (maildir) or as one big file (mbox). KMail uses maildir by default and this only needs to be changed in rare circumstances. If you are unsure, leave this option as-is.
Folder & contains:
Select whether you want the new folder to be used for mail storage of for storage of groupware items such as tasks or notes. The default is mail. If you are unsure, leave this option as-is.
Mail
Calendar
Contacts
Notes
Tasks
Journal
Namespace for & folder:
Select the personal namespace the folder should be created in.
Please specify a name for the new folder.
No Name Specified
Folder names cannot contain the / (slash) character; please choose another folder name.
Folder names cannot start with a. (dot) character; please choose another folder name.
Your IMAP server does not allow the character '%1 '; please choose another folder name.
Failed to create folder %1, folder already exists.
Failed to create folder %1.
None
Read
Append
Write
All
& User identifier:
The User Identifier is the login of the user on the IMAP server. This can be a simple user name or the full email address of the user; the login for your own account on the server will tell you which one it is.
Permissions
Custom Permissions
Custom Permissions (%1)
User Id
Add Entry...
Modify Entry...
Remove Entry
Error retrieving user permissions.
Information not retrieved from server, you need to use "Check Mail" and have administrative privileges on the folder.
Error: no IMAP account defined for this folder
Connecting to server %1, please wait...
Error connecting to server %1
This IMAP server does not have support for access control lists (ACL)
Error retrieving access control list (ACL) from server %1
Modify Permissions
Add Permissions
Do you really want to remove your own permissions for this folder? You will not be able to access it afterwards.
Remove
& New Subfolder...
& New Folder...
& Copy Folders To
& Copy Folder To
& Move Folders To
& Move Folder To
Add to Favorite Folders
Move to This Folder
Copy to This Folder
New Messages In
KMail - There are no unread messages
Find Messages
& Search
Search in & all local folders
Search & only in:
Include sub-folders
Subject
Sender/ Receiver
Date
Folder
Search folder & name:
Last Search
Open Search Folder
Open & Message
AMiddleLengthText...
Ready.
& Reply...
Reply to & All...
Reply to Mailing-List...
& Forward
& Inline...
As & Attachment...
Save Attachments...
Clear Selection
Done
Search canceled
Searching in %1 (message %2)
& Copy To
& Move To
Path
There is nothing to undo.
Structuring information returned by the Crypto plug-in could not be processed correctly; the plug-in might be damaged. Please contact your system administrator.
No active Crypto Plug-In was found and the built-in OpenPGP code did not run successfully. You can do two things to change this: either activate a Plug-In using the Settings- > Configure KMail- > Plug-In dialog. or specify traditional OpenPGP settings on the same dialog's Identity- > Advanced tab.
Chiasmus backend does not offer the "x-encrypt" function. Please report this bug.
The "x-encrypt" function does not accept the expected parameters. Please report this bug.
Chiasmus Encryption Error
Unexpected return value from Chiasmus backend: The "x-encrypt" function did not return a byte array. Please report this bug.
The inline OpenPGP crypto message format does not support encryption or signing of attachments. Really use deprecated inline OpenPGP?
Insecure Message Format
Use Inline OpenPGP
Use OpenPGP/ MIME
Examination of the recipient's signing preferences yielded that you be asked whether or not to sign this message. Sign this message?
Sign Message?
& Sign
Do & Not Sign
There are conflicting signing preferences for these recipients. Sign this message?
You have requested to sign this message, but no valid signing keys have been configured for this identity.
Send Unsigned?
Send & Unsigned
Some parts of this message will not be signed. Sending only partially signed messages might violate site policy. Sign all parts instead?
This message will not be signed. Sending unsigned message might violate site policy. Sign message instead?
& Sign All Parts
Unsigned-Message Warning
Send & As Is
Valid trusted encryption keys were found for all recipients. Encrypt this message?
Examination of the recipient's encryption preferences yielded that you be asked whether or not to encrypt this message. Encrypt this message?
Encrypt Message?
Sign & & & Encrypt
& Sign Only
& Send As-Is
There are conflicting encryption preferences for these recipients. Encrypt this message?
Do & Not Encrypt
You have requested to encrypt this message, and to encrypt a copy to yourself, but no valid trusted encryption keys have been configured for this identity.
Send Unencrypted?
Some parts of this message will not be encrypted. Sending only partially encrypted messages might violate site policy and/ or leak sensitive information. Encrypt all parts instead?
This message will not be encrypted. Sending unencrypted messages might violate site policy and/ or leak sensitive information. Encrypt messages instead?
& Encrypt All Parts
Unencrypted Message Warning
Error: The backend did not return any encoded data. Please report this bug: %1
No suitable encoding could be found for your message. Please set an encoding using the'Options' menu.
Not all characters fit into the chosen encoding '%1 '. Send the message anyway and lose some characters or let Kmail try to automatically find a suitable encoding?
Some Characters Will Be Lost
Send Anyway
Auto-Detect Encoding
This message could not be signed, since no valid signing keys have been found; this should actually never happen, please report this bug.
This message could not be signed, since the chosen backend does not seem to support signing; this should actually never happen, please report this bug.
GnuPG Audit Log for Signing Operation
The signing operation failed. Please make sure that the gpg-agent program is running.
This message could not be encrypted, since the chosen backend does not seem to support encryption; this should actually never happen, please report this bug.
GnuPG Audit Log for Encryption Operation
This message could not be signed and encrypted, since the chosen backend does not seem to support combined signing and encryption; this should actually never happen, please report this bug.
No Subject
[vCard]
CC:
BCC:
Date:
From:
To:
Reply to:
%1% probability of being spam with confidence %3%. Full report: Probability=%2 Confidence=%4
%1% probability of being spam. Full report: Probability=%2
No Spam agent
Spam filter score not a number
Threshold not a valid number
Spam filter score could not be extracted from header
Threshold could not be extracted from header
Error evaluating spam score
%1. Full report: %2
(resent from %1)
User-Agent:
X-Mailer:
Spam Status:
Description
Save & As...
Open
Open With...
View
Save All Attachments...
Copy
Delete Attachment
Edit Attachment
Properties
Unspecified Binary Data
Error while renaming a folder.
This account does not have support for quota information.
Error retrieving quota information from server %1
No quota is set for this folder.
Open attachment '%1 '? Note that opening an attachment may compromise your system's security.
Open Attachment?
& Open with '%1 '
& Open With...
Do not ask again
Test for KMail D-Bus interface
Test Recipient Editor
Error while deleting messages on the server:
Error while retrieving message on the server:
Error while uploading folder
Could not make the folder %1 on the server.
This could be because you do not have permission to do this, or because the folder is already present on the server; the error message from the server communication is here:
Error while deleting folder %1 on the server:
Error while reading folder %1 on the server:
Error while trying to rename folder %1
Set Focus to Quick Search
Extend Selection to Previous Message
Extend Selection to Next Message
Old Folders
Search
Folders
Favorite Folders
Remove Duplicate Messages
Move Message to Folder
Copy Message to Folder
Jump to Folder...
Abort Current Operation
Focus on Next Folder
Focus on Previous Folder
Select Folder with Focus
Focus on Next Message
Focus on Previous Message
Select Message with Focus
New mail arrived %1
New mail arrived
(no templates)
Properties of Folder %1
This folder does not have any expiry options set
Are you sure you want to expire the folder %1?
Expire Folder
& Expire
Empty Trash
Move to Trash
Are you sure you want to empty the trash folder?
Are you sure you want to move all messages from folder %1 to the trash?
Moved all messages to the trash
Delete Search
Are you sure you want to delete the search %1? Any messages it shows will still be available in their original folder.
& Delete
Delete Folder
Are you sure you want to delete the empty folder %1?
Are you sure you want to delete the empty folder %1 and all its subfolders? Those subfolders might not be empty and their contents will be discarded as well. Beware that discarded messages are not saved into your Trash folder and are permanently deleted.
Are you sure you want to delete the folder %1, discarding its contents? Beware that discarded messages are not saved into your Trash folder and are permanently deleted.
Are you sure you want to delete the folder %1 and all its subfolders, discarding their contents? Beware that discarded messages are not saved into your Trash folder and are permanently deleted.
You are about to recreate the index for folder %1. This will destroy all message status information. Are you sure you want to continue?
Really recreate index?
Recreate Index
The index of folder %1 has been recreated.
Index recreated
Are you sure you want to refresh the IMAP cache? This will remove all changes that you have done locally to your IMAP folders.
Refresh IMAP Cache
& Refresh
Are you sure you want to expire all old messages?
Expire Old Messages?
Expire
Use of HTML in mail will make you more vulnerable to "spam" and may increase the likelihood that your system will be compromised by other present and anticipated security exploits.
Security Warning
Use HTML
Loading external references in html mail will make you more vulnerable to "spam" and may increase the likelihood that your system will be compromised by other present and anticipated security exploits.
Load External References
Delete Messages
Delete Message
Moving messages...
Deleting messages...
Messages deleted successfully.
Messages moved successfully.
Deleting messages failed.
Deleting messages canceled.
Moving messages failed.
Moving messages canceled.
Move Messages to Folder
Copying messages...
Messages copied successfully.
Copying messages failed.
Copying messages canceled.
Copy Messages to Folder
Moving messages to trash...
Messages moved to trash successfully.
Moving messages to trash failed.
Moving messages to trash canceled.
Filter on Mailing-List...
Filter on Mailing-List %1...
Jump to Folder
Filtering messages
Filtering message %1 of %2
Unable to process messages:
KMail's Out of Office Reply functionality relies on server-side filtering. You have not yet configured an IMAP server for this. You can do this on the "Filtering" tab of the IMAP account configuration.
No Server-Side Filtering Configured
Could not start certificate manager; please check your installation.
Could not start GnuPG LogViewer (kwatchgnupg); please check your installation.
Work Offline
Work Online
Loading...
& Compact All Folders
& Expire All Folders
& Refresh Local IMAP Cache
Empty All & Trash Folders
Check & Mail
Check Mail in Favorite Folders
Check Mail In
Check Mail
& Send Queued Messages
Online status (unknown)
Send Queued Messages Via
& Address Book
Certificate Manager
GnuPG Log Viewer
& Import Messages
& Debug Sieve...
Filter & Log Viewer...
& Anti-Spam Wizard...
& Anti-Virus Wizard...
& Account Wizard...
Edit "Out of Office" Replies...
& Move to Trash
Trash
Move message to trashcan
Move Thread to Trash
Move thread to trashcan
Delete Thread
& Find Messages...
& Find in Message...
Select & All Messages
& Properties
& Mailing List Management...
& Assign Shortcut...
Mark All Messages as & Read
& Expiration Settings
& Compact Folder
Check Mail & in This Folder
Rebuild Index...
& Archive Folder...
Prefer & HTML to Plain Text
Load External References
Copy Folder
Cut Folder
Paste Folder
Copy Messages
Cut Messages
Paste Messages
& New Message...
New
Message From & Template
New Message to Mailing-List...
Send Again...
& Create Filter
Filter on & Subject...
Filter on & From...
Filter on & To...
Filter on Mailing-List...
New Message From & Template
Mark & Thread
Mark Thread as & Read
Mark all messages in the selected thread as read
Mark Thread as & New
Mark all messages in the selected thread as new
Mark Thread as & Unread
Mark all messages in the selected thread as unread
Mark Thread as & Important
Remove & Important Thread Mark
Mark Thread as & Action Item
Remove & Action Item Thread Mark
& Watch Thread
& Ignore Thread
Save Attachments...
Apply All Filters
Apply Filter
& Expand Thread
Expand the current thread
& Collapse Thread
Collapse the current thread
Expand All Threads
Expand all threads in the current folder
Collapse All Threads
Collapse all threads in the current folder
& View Source
& Display Message
& Next Message
Go to the next message
Next & Unread Message
Next
Go to the next unread message
& Previous Message
Go to the previous message
Previous Unread & Message
Previous
Go to the previous unread message
Next Unread & Folder
Go to the next folder with unread messages
Previous Unread Folder
Go to the previous folder with unread messages
Next Unread & Text
Go to the next unread text
Scroll down current message. If at end of current message, go to next unread message.
Configure & Filters...
Configure & POP Filters...
Manage & Sieve Scripts...
KMail & Introduction
Display KMail's Welcome Page
Configure & Notifications...
& Configure KMail...
Empty Trash
& Move All Messages to Trash
& Delete Search
& Delete Folder
Toggle Message Tag %1
Message Tag %1
No duplicate messages found.
Filter %1
& Troubleshoot IMAP Cache...
Folder Shortcut %1
Subscription
Local Subscription
Out of office reply active
This setting has been fixed by your administrator. If you think this is an error, please contact him.
Do you really want to remove the identity named %1?
Remove Identity
& Remove
Add...
Modify...
Set as Default
Receiving
Sending
Outgoing accounts (add at least one):
Common Options
Confirm & before send
Never Automatically
On Manual Mail Checks
On All Mail Checks
Send Now
Send Later
Allow 8-bit
MIME Compliant (Quoted Printable)
Send & messages in outbox folder:
Default send method:
Message & property:
Default domain:
The default domain is used to complete email addresses that only consist of the user's name.
Unable to create account
Add Account
Unable to locate account
Modify Account
Unable to locate account %1.
Fonts
Colors
Layout
Message List
Message Window
System Tray
Message Tags
Message Body
Message List - New Messages
Message List - Unread Messages
Message List - Important Messages
Message List - Action Item Messages
Folder List
Quoted Text - First Level
Quoted Text - Second Level
Quoted Text - Third Level
Fixed Width Font
Composer
Printing Output
& Use custom fonts
Apply & to:
Link
Followed Link
Misspelled Words
New Message
Unread Message
Important Message
Action Item Message
OpenPGP Message - Encrypted
OpenPGP Message - Valid Signature with Trusted Key
OpenPGP Message - Valid Signature with Untrusted Key
OpenPGP Message - Unchecked Signature
OpenPGP Message - Bad Signature
Border Around Warning Prepending HTML Messages
Folder Name and Size When Close to Quota
HTML Status Bar Background - No HTML Message
HTML Status Bar Foreground - No HTML Message
HTML Status Bar Background - HTML Message
HTML Status Bar Foreground - HTML Message
& Use custom colors
Recycle colors on deep & quoting
Close to quota threshold:
%
Show favorite folder view
Show folder quick search field
Folder Tooltips
Always
When Text Obscured
Never
Standard format (%1)
Localized format (%1)
Fancy format (%1)
Custom format:
General
Default Aggregation:
Default Theme:
Date Display
Custom format information...
These expressions may be used for the date: d - the day as a number without a leading zero (1-31) dd - the day as a number with a leading zero (01-31) ddd - the abbreviated day name (Mon - Sun) dddd - the long day name (Monday - Sunday) M - the month as a number without a leading zero (1-12) MM - the month as a number with a leading zero (01-12) MMM - the abbreviated month name (Jan - Dec) MMMM - the long month name (January - December) yy - the year as a two digit number (00-99) yyyy - the year as a four digit number (0000-9999) These expressions may be used for the time: h - the hour without a leading zero (0-23 or 1-12 if AM/ PM display) hh - the hour with a leading zero (00-23 or 01-12 if AM/ PM display) m - the minutes without a leading zero (0-59) mm - the minutes with a leading zero (00-59) s - the seconds without a leading zero (0-59) ss - the seconds with a leading zero (00-59) z - the milliseconds without leading zeroes (0-999) zzz - the milliseconds with leading zeroes (000-999) AP - switch to AM/ PM display. AP will be replaced by either "AM" or "PM". ap - switch to AM/ PM display. ap will be replaced by either "am" or "pm". Z - time zone in numeric form (-0500) All other input characters will be ignored.
Fallback character encoding:
Auto
& Override character encoding:
Enable system tray icon
System Tray Mode
Always show KMail in system tray
Only show KMail in system tray if there are unread messages
Available Tags
Add new tag
Remove selected tag
Increase tag priority
Decrease tag priority
Tag Settings
Name:
Change text color:
Change & background color:
Change font:
Message tag & icon:
Shortcut:
Enable & toolbar button
Standard Templates
Custom Templates
Charset
Headers
Attachments
Warn if too many recipients are specified
Warn if more than this many recipients are specified
No autosave
min
Default Forwarding Type:
Inline
As Attachment
Configure Completion Order...
Edit Recent Addresses...
External Editor
%f will be replaced with the filename to edit.
Reply Subject Prefixes
Recognize any sequence of the following prefixes (entries are case-insensitive regular expressions):
Add...
Remove
Modify...
Enter new reply prefix:
Forward Subject Prefixes
Remove
Enter new forward prefix:
This list is checked for every outgoing message from the top to the bottom for a charset that contains all required characters.
& Modify...
Enter charset:
& Keep original charset when replying or forwarding (if possible)
This charset is not supported.
& Use custom message-id suffix
Custom message-id suffix:
Define custom mime header fields:
Value
New
& Value:
Outlook-compatible attachment naming
Turn this option on to make Outlook(tm) understand attachment names containing non-English characters
Enable detection of missing attachments
Recognize any of the following key words as intention to attach a file:
Enter new key word:
You have chosen to encode attachment names containing non-English characters in a way that is understood by Outlook(tm) and other mail clients that do not support standard-compliant encoded attachment names. Note that KMail may create non-standard compliant messages, and consequently it is possible that your messages will not be understood by standard-compliant mail clients; so, unless you have no other choice, you should not enable this option.
Reading
Composing
Warnings
S/ MIME Validation
Crypto Backends
Changing the global HTML setting will override all folder specific values.
This option requires dirmngr > = 0.9.0
no proxy
(Current system setting: %1)
Groupware
Invitations
Set the parent of the resource folders

& Resource folders are subfolders of:
& Resource folders are in account:
Invitations are normally sent as attachments to a mail. This switch changes the invitation mails to be sent in the text of the mail instead; this is necessary to send invitations and replies to Microsoft Outlook. But, when you do this, you no longer get descriptive text that mail programs can read; so, to people who have email programs that do not understand the invitations, the resulting messages look very odd. People that have email programs that do understand invitations will still be able to work with this.
Edit Identity
& Your name:
Your name This field should contain your name as you would like it to appear in the email header that is sent out; if you leave this blank your real name will not appear, only the email address.
Organization:
Organization This field should have the name of your organization if you would like it to be shown in the email header that is sent out. It is safe (and normal) to leave this blank.
& Email address:
Email address This field should have your full email address. If you leave this blank, or get it wrong, people will have trouble replying to you.
Cryptography
Change...
Your OpenPGP Signature Key
Select the OpenPGP key which should be used to digitally sign your messages.
The OpenPGP key you choose here will be used to digitally sign messages. You can also use GnuPG keys. You can leave this blank, but KMail will not be able to digitally sign emails using OpenPGP; normal mail functions will not be affected. You can find out more about keys at http: / /www. gnupg. org
OpenPGP signing key:
Your OpenPGP Encryption Key
Select the OpenPGP key which should be used when encrypting to yourself and for the "Attach My Public Key" feature in the composer.
The OpenPGP key you choose here will be used to encrypt messages to yourself and for the "Attach My Public Key" feature in the composer. You can also use GnuPG keys. You can leave this blank, but KMail will not be able to encrypt copies of outgoing messages to you using OpenPGP; normal mail functions will not be affected. You can find out more about keys at http: / /www. gnupg. org
OpenPGP encryption key:
Your S/ MIME Signature Certificate
Select the S/ MIME certificate which should be used to digitally sign your messages.
The S/ MIME (X.509) certificate you choose here will be used to digitally sign messages. You can leave this blank, but KMail will not be able to digitally sign emails using S/ MIME; normal mail functions will not be affected.
S/ MIME signing certificate:
Your S/ MIME Encryption Certificate
Select the S/ MIME certificate which should be used when encrypting to yourself and for the "Attach My Certificate" feature in the composer.
The S/ MIME certificate you choose here will be used to encrypt messages to yourself and for the "Attach My Certificate" feature in the composer. You can leave this blank, but KMail will not be able to encrypt copies of outgoing messages to you using S/ MIME; normal mail functions will not be affected.
S/ MIME encryption certificate:
Preferred crypto message format:
Advanced
& Reply-To address:
Reply-To addresses This sets the Reply-to: header to contain a different email address to the normal From: address. This can be useful when you have a group of people working together in similar roles. For example, you might want any emails sent to have your email in the From: field, but any responses to go to a group address. If in doubt, leave this field blank.
& BCC addresses:
BCC (Blind Carbon Copy) addresses The addresses that you enter here will be added to each outgoing mail that is sent with this identity. They will not be visible to other recipients. This is commonly used to send a copy of each sent message to another account of yours. To specify more than one address, use commas to separate the list of BCC recipients. If in doubt, leave this field blank.
Dictionary:
Sent-mail & folder:
& Drafts folder:
& Templates folder:
Special & transport:
Templates
& Use custom message templates for this identity
& Copy Global Templates
Signature
Picture
Invalid Email Address
One of the configured OpenPGP signing keys does not contain any user ID with the configured email address for this identity (%1). This might result in warning messages on the receiving side when trying to verify signatures made with this configuration.
One of the configured OpenPGP encryption keys does not contain any user ID with the configured email address for this identity (%1).
One of the configured S/ MIME signing certificates does not contain the configured email address for this identity (%1). This might result in warning messages on the receiving side when trying to verify signatures made with this configuration.
One of the configured S/ MIME encryption certificates does not contain the configured email address for this identity (%1).
Email Address Not Found in Key/ Certificates
The signature file is not valid
Edit Identity "%1"
The custom sent-mail folder for identity "%1" does not exist (anymore); therefore, the default sent-mail folder will be used.
The custom drafts folder for identity "%1" does not exist (anymore); therefore, the default drafts folder will be used.
The custom templates folder for identity "%1" does not exist (anymore); therefore, the default templates folder will be used.
You need to supply a username and a password to access this mailbox.
Authorization Dialog
Account:
Could not start process for %1.
Error while trying to subscribe to %1:
Retrieving Namespaces
KMail has detected a prefix entry in the configuration of the account "%1" which is obsolete with the support of IMAP namespaces.
The configuration was automatically migrated but you should check your account configuration.
It was not possible to migrate your configuration automatically so please check your account configuration.
unknown
Error while uploading message
Could not upload the message dated %1 from %2 with subject %3 to the server.
The destination folder was: %1.
The server reported:
No detailed quota information available.
The folder is too close to its quota limit. (%1)
Since you do not have write privileges on this folder, please ask the owner of the folder to free up some space in it.
Error
The connection to the server %1 was unexpectedly closed or timed out. It will be re-established automatically if possible.
The connection to account %1 was broken.
The connection to account %1 timed out.
Error while checking account %1 for new mail: %2
Error while uploading status of messages to server:
retrieving folders
Confirm Delivery
Set Transport To
Set Reply-To To
Set Identity To
Mark As
Important
Unread
Replied
Forwarded
Old
Watched
Ignored
Spam
Ham
Action Item
Add Tag
Send Fake MDN
Ignore
Displayed
Deleted
Dispatched
Processed
Denied
Failed
Remove Header
Add Header
With value:
Rewrite Header
Replace:
With:
Move Into Folder
Copy Into Folder
Forward To
The addressee to whom the message will be forwarded.
The filter will forward the message to the addressee entered here.
Default Template
The template used when forwarding
Set the forwarding template that will be used with this filter.
Forward to %1 with default template
Forward to %1 with template %2
Redirect To
Execute Command
Pipe Through
Play Sound
Add to Address Book
Default
From
To
CC
BCC
KMail Filter
Cannot save new addresses to address book.
Cannot save to address book: address book is locked.
with category
in address book
This defines the preferred address book. If it is not accessible, the filter will fallback to the default address book.
To execute your search all messages of the folder %1 have to be downloaded from the server. This may take some time. Do you want to continue your search?
Continue Search
Downloading emails from IMAP server
URL: %1
Error while searching.
Executing precommand %1
Could not execute precommand '%1 '.
The precommand exited with code %1: %2
Critical error: Unable to collect mail:
Failed to add message:
Local Folders
Add Favorite Folder...
Remove From Favorites
Rename Favorite...
Add Folders to Favorites
Insert Folders Above %1
Insert Folders Below %1
Add Favorite Folder
Rename Favorite
This message contains a request to return a notification about your reception of the message. You can either ignore the request or let KMail send a "denied" or normal response.
This message contains a request to send a notification about your reception of the message. It contains a processing instruction that is marked as "required", but which is unknown to KMail. You can either ignore the request or let KMail send a "failed" response.
This message contains a request to send a notification about your reception of the message, but it is requested to send the notification to more than one address. You can either ignore the request or let KMail send a "denied" or normal response.
This message contains a request to send a notification about your reception of the message, but there is no return-path set. You can either ignore the request or let KMail send a "denied" or normal response.
This message contains a request to send a notification about your reception of the message, but the return-path address differs from the address the notification was requested to be sent to. You can either ignore the request or let KMail send a "denied" or normal response.
Header "Disposition-Notification-Options" contained required, but unknown parameter
Receipt:
Attachment: %1
This attachment has been deleted.
The attachment '%1 'has been deleted.
Queued
Sent
Has Attachment
Turn on HTML rendering for this message.
Load external references from the Internet for this message.
Work online.
Decrypt message.
Show signature details.
Hide signature details.
Show attachment list.
Hide attachment list.
Show full "To" list
Hide full "To" list
Show full "Cc" list
Hide full "Cc" list
Expand all quoted text.
Collapse quoted text.
Could not start certificate manager. Please check your installation.
Show certificate 0x%1
Attachment #%1 (unnamed)
Show GnuPG Audit Log for this operation
Here you can create and manage templates to use when composing new messages, replies or forwarded messages. The message templates support substitution commands, either simply type them or select them from the Insert command menu.
Templates specified here are folder-specific. They override both global templates and per-identity templates.
Templates specified here are identity-specific. They override global templates, but can be overridden by per-folder templates if they are specified.
These are global (default) templates. They can be overridden by per-identity templates or per-folder templates if they are specified.
How does this work?
Default new message template
Default reply template
On %1 %2 you wrote: %3 %4
Default reply all template
On %1 %2 %3 wrote: %4 %5
Default forward template
---------- Forwarded Message ---------- Subject: %1 Date: %2, %3 From: %4 %OADDRESSEESADDR %5 -----------------------------------------
Total
Searches
Total Messages
Unread Messages
Quota
Storage Size
Subfolder Storage Size
Icon Size
Display Tooltips
Sort Items
Automatically, by Current Column
Manually, by Drag And Drop
Serverside Subscription...
Local Subscription...
Refresh Folder List
Expire...
Multiple Folders
Cannot move or copy folder %1 here because a folder with the same name already exists.
Cannot move or copy folder %1 because it is not completely copied itself.
Cannot move or copy folder %1 into a subfolder below itself.
Moving the selected folders is not possible
Cannot create folder %1 because of insufficient permissions on the server. If you think you should be able to create subfolders here, ask your administrator to grant you rights to do so.
Go to the next unread message in folder %1?
Go to Next Unread Message
Go To
Do Not Go To
& Move Here
& Copy Here
Cancel
Copy or Move Messages to %1
Error opening %1; this folder is missing.
Error opening %1; either this is not a valid maildir folder, or you do not have sufficient access permissions.
Could not sync maildir folder.
Message could not be added to the folder, possibly disk space is low.
KMFolderMaildir: :addMsg: abnormally terminating to prevent data loss.
Writing index file
Your outbox contains messages which were most-likely not created by KMail; please remove them from there if you do not want KMail to send them.
Distribution List %1
Select Recipient
Address book:
Email
- >
Search & Directory Service
Search:
Add as & To
Add as CC
Add as & BCC
& Cancel
Distribution Lists
Selected Recipients
Address Books
Categories
Recent Addresses
Cannot enter folder %1.
Folder %1 is unreadable.
%1 of %2 %3 used
KB
MB
GB
& Send picture with every message
Check this box if you want KMail to add a so-called X-Face header to messages written with this identity. An X-Face is a small (48x48 pixels) black and white image that some mail clients are able to display.
This is a preview of the picture selected/ entered below.
Click on the widgets below to obtain help on the input methods.
External Source
Input Field Below
Obtain picture from:
Select File...
Use this to select an image file to create the picture from. The image should be of high contrast and nearly quadratic shape. A light background helps improve the result.
Set From Address Book
You can use a scaled-down version of the picture you have set in your address book entry.
KMail can send a small (48x48 pixels), low-quality, monochrome picture with every message. For example, this could be a picture of you or a glyph. It is shown in the recipient's mail client (if supported).
Use this field to enter an arbitrary X-Face string.
Examples are available at http: / /www. xs4all. nl/ ~ace/ X-Faces/.
You do not have your own contact defined in the address book.
No Picture
No picture set for your address book entry.
The folder you deleted was associated with the account %1 which delivered mail into it. The folder the account delivers new mail into was reset to the main Inbox folder.
KMail
%1 already seems to be running on another display on this machine. Running %2 more than once can cause the loss of mail. You should not start %1 unless you are sure that it is not already running.
%1 seems to be running on another display on this machine. Running %1 and %2 at the same time can cause the loss of mail. You should not start %2 unless you are sure that %1 is not running.
%1 already seems to be running on %2. Running %1 more than once can cause the loss of mail. You should not start %1 on this computer unless you are sure that it is not already running on %2.
%1 seems to be running on %3. Running %1 and %2 at the same time can cause the loss of mail. You should not start %2 on this computer unless you are sure that %1 is not running on %3.
Start %1
Exit
inbox
Enable Subscriptions?
Enable
Do Not Enable
Currently subscriptions are not used for server %1. Do you want to enable subscriptions?
Save Distribution List
Save List
There are no recipients in your list. First select some recipients, then try again.
New Distribution List
Please enter name:
Distribution list with the given name %1 already exists. Please select a different name.
Select the address book folder to store the contact group in:
New Identity
& New identity:
& With empty fields
& Use Control Center settings
& Duplicate existing identity
& Existing identities:
New entry:
& Add...
New Value
Change Value
Mailinglist Folder Properties
Associated Mailing List
& Folder holds a mailing list
Detect Automatically
Mailing list description:
Preferred handler:
Browser
& Address type:
Invoke Handler
Post to List
Subscribe to List
Unsubscribe From List
List Archives
List Help
Not available
KMail was unable to detect a mailing list in this folder. Please fill the addresses by hand.
Not available.
Permissions (ACL)
Access Control
Maintenance
Unknown
Mailbox
Maildir
Disconnected IMAP
IMAP
unnamed
Act on new/ unread mail in this folder
If this option is enabled then you will be notified about new/ unread mail in this folder. Moreover, going to the next/ previous folder with unread messages will stop at this folder. Uncheck this option if you do not want to be notified about new/ unread mail in this folder and if you want this folder to be skipped when going to the next/ previous folder with unread messages. This is useful for ignoring any new/ unread mail in your trash and spam folder.
Include this folder in mail checks
If this option is enabled this folder will be included while checking new emails. Uncheck this option if you want to skip this folder while checking new emails.
Keep replies in this folder
Check this option if you want replies you write to mails in this folder to be put in this same folder after sending, instead of in the configured sent-mail folder.
Hide this folder in the folder selection dialog
Check this option if you do not want this folder to be shown in folder selection dialogs, such as the Jump to Folder dialog.
Use & default identity
& Sender identity:
Select the sender identity to be used when writing new mail or replying to mail in this folder. This means that if you are in one of your work folders, you can make KMail use the corresponding sender email address, signature and signing or encryption keys automatically. Identities can be set up in the main configuration dialog. (Settings - > Configure KMail)
& Folder contents:
Generate free/ busy and activate alarms for:
Nobody
Admins of This Folder
All Readers of This Folder
This setting defines which users sharing this folder should get "busy" periods in their freebusy lists and should see the alarms for the events or tasks in this folder. The setting applies to Calendar and Task folders only (for tasks, this setting is only used for alarms). Example use cases: if the boss shares a folder with his secretary, only the boss should be marked as busy for his meetings, so he should select "Admins", since the secretary has no admin rights on the folder. On the other hand if a working group shares a Calendar for group meetings, all readers of the folders should be marked as busy for meetings. A company-wide folder with optional events in it would use "Nobody" since it is not known who will go to those events.
This setting allows you to disable alarms for folders shared by others.
Block free/ busy and alarms locally
Share unread state with all users
If enabled, the unread state of messages in this folder will be the same for all users having access to this folder. If disabled (the default), every user with access to this folder has their own unread state.
You have configured this folder to contain groupware information and the general configuration option to hide groupware folders is set. That means that this folder will disappear once the configuration dialog is closed. If you want to remove the folder again, you will need to temporarily disable hiding of groupware folders to be able to see it.
Use custom & icons
& Normal:
& Unread:
Show Sender/ Receiver Column in List of Messages
Show column:
Default
Sender
Receiver
Use default aggregation
Aggregation
Use default theme
Theme
& Use custom message templates in this folder
Files
Contents:
Folder type:
Size:
Index:
Rebuild Local IMAP Cache
Messages
Total messages:
Unread messages:
Compaction:
Compact Now
%1 B
%1 (%2)
Possible
Possible, but unsafe
Not required
Compacting folder %1 may not be safe. This may result in index or mailbox corruption. Ensure that you have a recent backup of the mailbox and messages.
Really compact folder?
Compact Folder
Error while listing folder %1:
& Server supports Sieve
& Reuse host and login configuration
Managesieve & port:
& Alternate URL:
H T M L M e s s a g e
N o H T M L M e s s a g e
P l a i n M e s s a g e
Click to toggle between HTML and plain text.
Create a new subfolder under the currently selected folder
You can start typing to filter the list of folders.
The index of folder '%2 'seems to be out of date. To prevent message corruption the index will be regenerated. As a result deleted messages might reappear and status flags might be lost. Please read the corresponding entry in the FAQ section of the manual of KMail for information about how to prevent this problem from happening again.
Index Out of Date
Folder ` %1 'changed; recreating index.
The operation was canceled by the user.
Failed to archive the folder '%1 '.
Archiving failed.
Unable to finalize the archive file.
Archiving finished
Archiving folder '%1 'successfully completed. The archive was written to the file '%2'.
The archive file has a size of %1.
Archiving finished.
Unable to retrieve a message for folder '%1 '.
Internal error while trying to retrieve a message from folder '%1 '.
Failed to write a message into the archive folder '%1 '.
Downloading a message in folder '%1 'failed.
Downloading a message in the current folder failed.
Archiving folder %1
Unable to open folder '%1 '.
Unable to create folder structure for folder '%1 'within archive file.
Unable to backup messages in folder '%1 ', the index file is corrupted.
Unable to open archive for writing.
Archiving
Download all messages now
Download all messages later
Delete all messages
Download Now
Download Later
Delete
POP Filter
Messages to filter found on POP Account: %1 The messages shown exceed the maximum size limit you defined for this account. You can select what you want to do with them by checking the appropriate button.
Messages Exceeding Size
Ruleset Filtered Messages: none
Show messages matched by a ruleset and tagged'Download 'or'Delete'
Show messages matched by a filter ruleset
Ruleset Filtered Messages: %1
Configure vacation notifications to be sent:
& Activate vacation notifications
& Resend notification only after:
& Send responses for these addresses:
Do not send vacation replies to spam messages
Only react to mail coming from domain
Uploading message data
Server operation
Source folder: %1 - Destination folder: %2
Downloading message data
Message with subject:
Error while retrieving messages from the server.
Error while retrieving information on the structure of a message.
Uploading message data failed.
Uploading message data completed.
Error while copying messages.
Evaluating filter rules:
Filter rules have matched.
Applying filter action: %1
Transmission failed.
Preparing transmission from "%1"...
Cannot open folder %1.
Transmission aborted.
Moving message %1 of %2 from %3.
With Custom Template
Reply With Custom Template
Reply to All With Custom Template
(no custom templates)
Please select the Chiasmus key file to use:
Additional arguments for chiasmus:
Universal
Reply
Reply to All
Forward
Additional recipients of the message
Additional recipients who get a copy of the message
When using this template, the default recipients are those you enter here. This is a comma-separated list of mail addresses.
When using this template, the recipients you enter here will by default get a copy of this message. This is a comma-separated list of mail addresses.
Here you can add, edit, and delete custom message templates to use when you compose a reply or forwarding message. Create the custom template by selecting it using the right mouse button menu or toolbar menu. Also, you can bind a keyboard combination to the template for faster operations. Message templates support substitution commands, by simply typing them or selecting them from the Insert command menu. There are four types of custom templates: used to Reply, Reply to All, Forward, and Universal which can be used for all kinds of operations. You cannot bind a keyboard shortcut to Universal templates.
Expand All Groups
Collapse All Groups
Open a new tab
Close the current tab
Show Quick Search
Open in New Tab
Expand Group Header
Collapse Group Header
Activate Next Tab
Activate Previous Tab
Hide Column Name in Header
Default Theme
Default Aggregation
Default Sort Order
Empty
Close Tab
Close All Other Tabs
Locally unsubscribing from folders will remove all information that is present locally about those folders. The folders will not be changed on the server. Press cancel now if you want to make sure all local changes have been written to the server by checking mail first.
Local changes will be lost when unsubscribing
Currently local subscriptions are not used for account %1. Do you want to enable local subscriptions?
For safety reasons, compaction has been disabled for %1
Folder "%1" successfully compacted
Error occurred while compacting "%1". Compaction aborted.
Redirect Message
Select the recipient & addresses to redirect to:
Use the Address-Selection Dialog
This button opens a separate dialog where you can select recipients out of all available addresses.
& Send Now
Send & Later
You cannot redirect the message without an address.
Empty Redirection Address
Snippet %1
Add Group
Do you really want to remove this group and all its snippets?
& Apply
Edit Snippet
Edit Group
Edit & group...
& Paste
& Edit...
Text Snippets
& Add Snippet...
Add Group...
Please enter the value for %1:
Enter Values for Variables
Enter the replacement values for %1:
Make value & default
Enable this to save the value entered to the right as the default value for this variable
If you enable this option, the value entered to the right will be saved. If you use the same variable later, even in another snippet, the value entered to the right will be the default value for that variable.
The receiver of this invitation does not match any of your identities. Please select the transport which should be used to send your reply.
The identity matching the receiver of this invitation does not have an associated transport configured. Please select the transport which should be used to send your reply.
Select Transport
Answer:
Declined: %1
Tentative: %1
Accepted: %1
None of your identities match the receiver of this message, please choose which of the following addresses is yours, if any, or select one of your identities to use in the reply:
Several of your identities match the receiver of this message, please choose which of the following addresses is yours:
Select Address
Are you sure you want to expire old messages?
'%1 'does not appear to be a folder. Please move the file out of the way.
The permissions of the folder '%1 'are incorrect; please make sure that you can view and modify the content of this folder.
KMail could not create folder '%1 '; please make sure that you can view and modify the content of the folder '%2'.
A folder with the same name has been deleted since the last mail check. You need to check mails first before creating another folder with the same name.
Could Not Create Folder
Cannot create file ` %1 'in %2. KMail cannot start without it.
New & Window
Starting...
None (7-bit text)
None (8-bit text)
Quoted Printable
Base 64
Message Part Properties
The MIME type of the file: normally, you do not need to touch this setting, since the type of the file is automatically checked; but, sometimes, %1 may not detect the type correctly -- here is where you can fix that.
The size of the part: sometimes, %1 will only give an estimated size here, because calculating the exact size would take too much time; when this is the case, it will be made visible by adding "(est.)" to the size displayed.
The file name of the part: although this defaults to the name of the attached file, it does not specify the file to be attached; rather, it suggests a file name to be used by the recipient's mail agent when saving the part to disk.
& Description:
A description of the part: this is just an informational description of the part, much like the Subject is for the whole message; most mail agents will show this information in their message previews alongside the attachment's icon.
& Encoding:
The transport encoding of this part: normally, you do not need to change this, since %1 will use a decent default encoding, depending on the MIME type; yet, sometimes, you can significantly reduce the size of the resulting message, e. g. if a PostScript file does not contain binary data, but consists of pure text -- in this case, choosing "quoted-printable" over the default "base64" will save up to 25% in resulting message size.
Suggest & automatic display
Check this option if you want to suggest to the recipient the automatic (inline) display of this part in the message preview, instead of the default icon view; technically, this is carried out by setting this part's Content-Disposition header field to "inline" instead of the default "attachment".
& Sign this part
Check this option if you want this message part to be signed; the signature will be made with the key that you associated with the currently-selected identity.
Encrypt this part
Check this option if you want this message part to be encrypted; the part will be encrypted for the recipients of this message
%1 (est.)
Root:
Usage:
Select Font
Select Size
unknown
(match any of the following)
(match all of the following)
internal part
body part
Template content
Template shortcut
Template type
& File
& Edit
& View
& Go
Folder
& Message
Reply Special
& Tools
& Settings
& Help
Main Toolbar
& Options
& Attach
HTML Toolbar
Your names
Your emails
Signing
& Automatically sign messages
When this option is enabled, all messages you send will be signed by default; of course, it is still possible to disable signing for each message individually.
Encrypting
When encrypting emails, always also encrypt to the certificate of my own identity
When this option is enabled, the message/ file will not only be encrypted with the receiver's public key, but also with your key. This will enable you to decrypt the message/ file at a later time. This is generally a good idea.
Show signed/ encrypted text after composing
When this option is enabled, the signed/ encrypted text will be shown in a separate window, enabling you to know how it will look before it is sent. This is a good idea when you are verifying that your encryption system works.
Store sent messages encrypted
Check to store messages encrypted
Store Messages Encrypted When this box is checked, sent messages are stored encrypted like they were sent. This is not recommended, as you will not be able to read the messages any longer if a necessary certificate expires. However, there may be local rules that require you to turn this option on. When in doubt, check with your local administrator.
Always show the encryption keys & for approval
When this option is enabled, the application will always show you a list of public keys from which you can choose the one it will use for encryption. If it is off, the application will only show the dialog if it cannot find the right key or if there are several which could be used.
Automatically encrypt & messages whenever possible
When this option is enabled, every message you send will be encrypted whenever encryption is possible and desired; of course, it is still possible to disable the automatic encryption for each message individually.
Never sign/ encrypt when saving as draft
Account & name:
Name displayed in the list of accounts
Account name: This defines the name displayed in KMail's account list.
Incoming mail & server:
Address of the mail server
The address of the mail server, e. g. mail. yourprovider. org. You should get this address from your mail provider.
& Port:
Communication port with the mail server
Port: Defines the communication port with the mail server. You do not need to change this unless your mail provider uses some non-standard port.
Your Internet Service Provider gave you a user name which is used to authenticate you with their servers. It usually is the first part of your email address (the part before @).
& Login:
The username that identifies you against the mail server
Password:
Password for access to the mail server
The password given to you by your mail provider.
Whether to store the password or ask for it when checking for new mail
Check this option to have KMail store the password. If KWallet is available the password will be stored there which is considered safe. However, if KWallet is not available, the password will be stored in KMail's configuration file. The password is stored in an obfuscated format, but should not be considered secure from decryption efforts if access to the configuration file is obtained.
Store IMAP Password
Include this account when clicking on the toolbar button
Include in manual mail check
If active, KMail checks for new mail every x minutes
Enable & interval mail checking
Check interval:
IMAP Settings
Automatically compact folders (expunges deleted messages)
Show hidden folders
Show only server-side subscribed folders
Show only & locally subscribed folders
Activate this to load attachments not automatically when you select the email but only when you click on the attachment. This way also big emails are shown instantly.
Load attachments on demand
Only folders that are open (expanded) in the folder tree are checked for subfolders. Use this if there are many folders on the server.
List only open folders
Trash folder:
Use the default identity for this account
Select the KMail identity used for this account
Identity:
Here you see the different namespaces that your IMAP server supports. Each namespace represents a prefix that separates groups of folders. Namespaces allow KMail for example to display your personal folders and shared folders in one account.
Namespaces:
Reload the namespaces from the server. This overwrites any changes.
...
Personal namespaces include your personal folders.
Personal:
These namespaces include the folders of other users.
Other users:
These namespaces include the shared folders.
Shared:
Security
Encryption
& None
Use & SSL for secure mail download
Use & TLS for secure mail download
Authentication Method
Clear text
& LOGIN
& PLAIN
CRAM-MD5
& DIGEST-MD5
& NTLM
& GSSAPI
& Anonymous
Check & What the Server Supports
Check to be warned when sending unsigned messages.
Warn When Trying To Send Unsigned Messages If this box is checked, you will be warned when you try to send parts of or the whole message unsigned. It is recommended to leave this option turned on for maximum integrity.
Warn when trying to send & unsigned messages
Check to be warned when sending unencrypted messages.
Warn When Trying To Send Unencrypted Messages If this box is checked, you will be warned when you try to send parts of or the whole message unencrypted. It is recommended to leave this option turned on for maximum integrity.
& Warn when trying to send unencrypted messages
Check to be warned if the address is not in the certificate
Warn if receiver's email address is not in certificate If this option is checked, a warning is issued if the email address of the receiver is not contained in the certificate used for encrypting. It is recommended to leave this option turned on for maximum security.
Warn if & Receiver's Email Address is Not in Certificate
Warn if certificates/ keys expire soon (configure thresholds below)
For Signing
For Encryption
Select the number of days here
Warn If Signature Certificate Expires Select the minimum number of days the signature certificate should be valid without issuing a warning. The recommended SPHINX setting is 14 days.
Warn If Encryption Certificate Expires Select the minimum number of days the encryption certificate should be valid without issuing a warning. The recommended SPHINX setting is 14 days.
Warn If A Certificate In The Chain Expires Select the minimum number of days all certificates in the chain should be valid without issuing a warning. The recommended SPHINX setting is 14 days.
Warn If CA Certificate Expires Select the minimum number of days the CA certificate should be valid without issuing a warning. The recommended SPHINX setting is 14 days.
Warn If Root Certificate Expires Select the minimum number of days the root certificate should be valid without issuing a warning. The recommended SPHINX setting is 14 days.
For root certificates:
For intermediate CA certificates:
For end-user certificates/ keys:
Re-enable All "Do not Ask Again" Warnings
Account Type: POP Account
Address of the mail POP3 server
The address of the POP3 server, e. g. pop3. yourprovider. org. You should get this address from your mail provider.
Password: The password given to you by your mail provider.
Check this option to have KMail store the password. If KWallet is available the password will be stored there which is considered safe. However, if KWallet is not available, the password will be stored in KMail's configuration file. The password is stored in an obfuscated format, but should not be considered secure from decryption efforts if access to the configuration file is obtained.
Store POP password
Include in manual mail check
Check interval:
POP Settings
If checked the message is not deleted from the mail server
KMail can fetch a copy of mails and leave the original message on the server.
Leave fetched messages on the server
The original message is deleted from the server after x days
Leave messages on the server for
Only the x most recent messages are kept on the server
KMail keeps only the x most recent messages on the server and deletes all older.
Keep only the last
messages
Keep most recent messages within the quota and delete oldest
If active, most recent messages are kept until the quota is reached and oldest messages are deleted.
Keep only the last
MB
If you select this option, POP Filters will be used to decide what to do with messages. You can then select to download, delete or keep them on the server.
& Filter messages if they are greater than
Destination folder:
Pre-command:
Set the folder where new messages from this account are put
& Use pipelining for faster mail download
NTLM
& APOP
Add a new identity
Modify the selected identity
Rename the selected identity
& Rename
Remove the selected identity
Use the selected identity by default
Set as & Default
HTML Messages
WARNING: Allowing HTML in email may increase the risk that your system will be compromised by present and anticipated security exploits. More about HTML mails... More about external references...
Messages sometimes come in both formats. This option controls whether you want the HTML part or the plain text part to be displayed. Displaying the HTML part makes the message look better, but at the same time increases the risk of security holes being exploited. Displaying the plain text part loses much of the message's formatting, but makes it almost impossible to exploit security holes in the HTML renderer (Konqueror). The option below guards against one common misuse of HTML messages, but it cannot guard against security issues that were not known at the time this version of KMail was written. It is therefore advisable to not prefer HTML to plain text. Note: You can set this option on a per-folder basis from the Folder menu of KMail's main window.
Prefer HTML to plain text
Some mail advertisements are in HTML and contain references to, for example, images that the advertisers employ to find out that you have read their message ("web bugs"). There is no valid reason to load images off the Internet like this, since the sender can always attach the required images directly to the message. To guard from such a misuse of the HTML displaying feature of KMail, this option is disabled by default. However, if you wish to, for example, view images in HTML messages that were not attached to it, you can enable this option, but you should be aware of the possible problem.
Allow messages to load external references from the Internet
Encrypted Messages
Attempt decryption of encrypted messages when viewing
Message Disposition Notifications
Send policy:
Message Disposition Notification Policy MDNs are a generalization of what is commonly called read receipt. The message author requests a disposition notification to be sent and the receiver's mail program generates a reply from which the author can learn what happened to his message. Common disposition types include displayed (i. e. read), deleted and dispatched (e. g. forwarded). The following options are available to control KMail's sending of MDNs: Ignore: Ignores any request for disposition notifications. No MDN will ever be sent automatically (recommended). Ask: Answers requests only after asking the user for permission. This way, you can send MDNs for selected messages while denying or ignoring them for others. Deny: Always sends a denied notification. This is only slightly better than always sending MDNs. The author will still know that the messages has been acted upon, he just cannot tell whether it was deleted or read etc. Always send: Always sends the requested disposition notification. That means that the author of the message gets to know when the message was acted upon and, in addition, what happened to it (displayed, deleted, etc.). This option is strongly discouraged, but since it makes much sense e. g. for customer relationship management, it has been made available.
Ask
Deny
Always send
Quote original message:
Nothing
Full message
Only headers
Do not send MDNs in response to encrypted messages
WARNING: Unconditionally returning confirmations undermines your privacy. More about MDNs...
Certificate & & Key Bundle Attachments
Automatically import keys and certificate
To:
CC:
& Template type:
Add Snippet
Group:
& Snippet:
Shortcut:
& Add
Template Configuration
Reply to Sender
Reply to All / Reply to List
Forward Message
& Quote indicator:
The following placeholders are supported in the quote indicator: %f: sender's initials%%: percent sign %_: space
If this option is selected, S/ MIME certificates are validated using Certificate Revocation Lists (CRLs).
Validate certificates using CRLs
If this option is selected, S/ MIME certificates are validated online using the Online Certificates Status Protocol (OCSP). Fill in the URL of the OCSP responder below.
Validate certificates online (OCSP)
Online Certificate Validation
OCSP responder URL:
OCSP responder signature:
Enter here the address of the server for online validation of certificates (OCSP responder). The URL is usually starting with http: / /.
Ignore service URL of certificates
By default GnuPG uses the file ~/. gnupg/ policies. txt to check if a certificate policy is allowed. If this option is selected, policies are not checked.
Do not check certificate policies
If this option is checked, Certificate Revocation Lists are never used to validate S/ MIME certificates.
Never consult a CRL
If this option is checked, missing issuer certificates are fetched when necessary (this applies to both validation methods, CRLs and OCSP)
Fetch missing issuer certificates
HTTP Requests
Entirely disables the use of HTTP for S/ MIME.
Do not perform any HTTP requests
When looking for the location of a CRL, the to-be-tested certificate usually contains what are known as "CRL Distribution Point" (DP) entries, which are URLs describing the way to access the URL. The first found DP entry is used. With this option all entries using the HTTP scheme are ignored when looking for a suitable DP.
Ignore HTTP CRL distribution point of certificates
If this option is selected, the value of the HTTP proxy shown on the right (which comes from the environment variable http_proxy) will be used for any HTTP request.
Use system HTTP proxy:
Use this proxy for HTTP requests:
Enter here the location of your HTTP Proxy, which will be used for all HTTP requests relating to S/ MIME. The syntax is host: port, for instance myproxy. nowhere. com:3128.
LDAP Requests
Entirely disables the use of LDAP for S/ MIME.
Do not perform any LDAP requests
When looking for the location of a CRL, the to-be-tested certificate usually contains what are known as "CRL Distribution Point" (DP) entries, which are URLs describing the way to access the URL. The first found DP entry is used. With this option all entries using the LDAP scheme are ignored when looking for a suitable DP.
Ignore LDAP CRL distribution point of certificates
Primary host for LDAP requests:
Entering a LDAP server here will make all LDAP requests go to that server first. More precisely, this setting overrides any specified host and port part in a LDAP URL and will also be used if host and port have been omitted from the URL. Other LDAP servers will be used only if the connection to the "proxy" failed. The syntax is "HOST" or "HOST: PORT". If PORT is omitted, port 389 (standard LDAP port) is used.
Account Type: Local Account
File location:
Choose...
Locking Method
Procmail lockfile:
& Mutt dotlock
Mutt dotlock privileged
& FCNTL
None (use with care)
Include in manual mail check
Destination folder:
& Pre-command
IMAP Resource Folder Options
This enables the IMAP storage for the Kontact applications
& Enable IMAP resource functionality
Choose the format to use to store the contents of the groupware folders.
& Format used for the groupware folders:
Deprecated Kolab1 (iCal/ vCard)
Kolab2 (XML)
Set the language of the folder names
& Language of the groupware folders:
English
German
French
Dutch
When this is checked, you will not see the IMAP resource folders in the folder tree.
& Hide groupware folders
When this is checked, you will not see normal mail folders in the folder tree for the account configured for groupware.
& Only show groupware folders for this account
Synchronize groupware changes in disconnected IMAP folders immediately when being online.
& Synchronize groupware changes immediately
Incoming accounts (add at least one):
Remove
Check mail on startup
New Mail Notification
& Beep
& Use message indicator
Show for each folder the number of newly arrived messages
Detailed new mail notification
Other Actions...
Account Type: Maildir Account
Folder location:
Include in & manual mail check
& Pre-command:
Groupware Compatibility & & Legacy Options
Turn this option on in order to make Outlook(tm) understand your answers to invitation replies
& Mangle From: / To: headers in replies to invitations
Turn this option on in order to make Outlook(tm) understand your answers to invitations
Send & invitations in the mail body
Microsoft Outlook, when used in combination with a Microsoft Exchange server, has a problem understanding standards-compliant groupware email. Turn this option on to send groupware invitations in a way that Microsoft Exchange understands.
Exchange-compatible invitation & naming
Send invitation reply comments in a way that Microsoft Outlook(tm) understands.
Outlook compatible invitation reply comments
When this is on, the user will not see the mail composer window. Invitation mails are sent automatically.
& Automatic invitation sending
Options
Delete invitation emails after the reply to them has been sent
Ask for confirmation before moving all messages to trash
Exclude important messages from expiry
& When trying to find unread messages:
Do not Loop
Loop in Current Folder
Loop in All Folders
Loop in All Marked Folders
When entering a folder:
Jump to First New Message
Jump to First Unread or New Message
Jump to Last Selected Message
Mark selected message as read after
sec
& Ask for action after dragging messages to another folder
By default, & message folders on disk are:
This selects which mailbox format will be the default for local folders: mbox: KMail's mail folders are represented by a single file each. Individual messages are separated from each other by a line starting with "From". This saves space on disk, but may be less robust, e. g. when moving messages between folders. maildir: KMail's mail folders are represented by real folders on disk. Individual messages are separate files. This may waste a bit of space on disk, but should be more robust, e. g. when moving messages between folders.
Flat Files ("mbox" format)
Directories ("maildir" format)
Open this folder on & startup:
Empty local & trash folder on program exit
& Quota units:
This prevents the automatic expiry of old messages in a folder from deleting (or moving to an archive folder) the messages that are marked'Important 'or'Action Item'
Send queued mail on mail check
Select whether you want KMail to send all messages in the outbox on manual or all mail checks, or whether you do not want messages to be sent automatically at all.
Automatically move non-synced mails from folders with insufficient access rights
If there are new messages in a folder, which have not been uploaded to the server yet, but you do not have sufficient access rights on the folder now to upload them, these messages will automatically be moved into a lost and found folder.
Allow local flags in read-only folders
This setting allows administrators to set a minimum delay between two mail checks. The user will not be able to choose a value smaller than the value set here.
The most recently selected folder in the folder selection dialog.
Disregard the users umask setting and use "read-write for the user only" instead
Policy for showing the system tray icon
Close the application when the main window is closed, even if there is a system tray icon active.
Verbose new mail notification
If this option is enabled then for each folder the number of newly arrived messages is shown in the new mail notification; otherwise, you will only get a simple'New mail arrived 'message.
Use message indicator
If this option is enabled and a message indicator is installed on the desktop, then indicators will be displayed for folders containing unread messages.
Specify editor:
Use external editor instead of composer
The threshold for when to warn the user that a folder is nearing its quota limit.
The filename separator for maildir files "uniq: info" - see the original maildir specification at http: / /cr. yp. to/ proto/ maildir. html The default depends on the current operating system. WIN= '!', all others': '.
Enable groupware functionality
Mangle From: / To: headers in replies to replies
Microsoft Outlook has a number of shortcomings in its implementation of the iCalendar standard; this option works around one of them. If you have problems with Outlook users not being able to get your replies, try setting this option.
Send groupware invitations in the mail body
Microsoft Outlook has a number of shortcomings in its implementation of the iCalendar standard; this option works around one of them. If you have problems with Outlook users not being able to get your invitations, try setting this option.
Exchange-compatible invitation naming
Microsoft Outlook, when used in combination with a Microsoft Exchange server, has a problem understanding standards-compliant groupware email. Turn this option on to send groupware invitations in a way that Microsoft Exchange understands.
When replying to invitations, send the reply comment in way that Microsoft Outlook understands.
Automatic invitation sending
When this is checked, you will not see the mail composer window. Instead, all invitation mails are sent automatically. If you want to see the mail before sending it, you can uncheck this option. However, be aware that the text in the composer window is in iCalendar syntax, and you should not try modifying it by hand.
When this is checked, received invitation emails that have been replied to will be moved to the Trash folder, once the reply has been successfully sent.
Enabling this makes it possible to store the entries from the Kontact applications (KOrganizer, KAddressBook, and KNotes.) If you want to set this option you must also set the applications to use the IMAP resource; this is done in the KDE System Settings.
Usually you will not have any reason to see the folders that hold the IMAP resources. But if you need to see them, you can set that here.
If the account used for storing groupware information is not used to manage normal mail, set this option to make KMail only show groupware folders in it. This is useful if you are handling regular mail via an additional online IMAP account.
Choose the storage format of the groupware folders. The default format is to use the ical (for calendar folders) and vcard (for address book folders) standards. This format makes all Kontact features available. The Kolab XML format uses a custom model that matches more closely the one used in Outlook. This format gives better Outlook compatibility, when using a Kolab server or a compatible solution.
This chooses the parent of the IMAP resource folders. By default, the Kolab server sets the IMAP inbox to be the parent.
This is the ID of the account holding the IMAP resource folders.
If you want to set the folder names of the IMAP storage to your local language, you can choose between these available languages. Please note, that the only reason to do so is for compatibility with Microsoft Outlook. It is considered a bad idea to set this, since it makes changing languages impossible. So do not set this unless you have to.
Only filter mails received in disconnected IMAP inbox.
Also filter new mails received in groupware folders.
Synchronize groupware changes in DIMAP folders immediately when being online.
This value is used to decide whether the KMail Introduction should be displayed.
Maximal number of connections per host
This can be used to restrict the number of connections per host while checking for new mail. By default the number of connections is unlimited (0).
Show folder quick search line edit
Hide local inbox if unused
Forward Inline As Default.
Allow the semicolon character (';') to be used as separator in the message composer.
Keep original charset when replying or forwarding if possible
Automatically insert signature
Remember this identity, so that it will be used in future composer windows as well.
Remember this folder for sent items, so that it will be used in future composer windows as well.
Remember this mail transport, so that it will be used in future composer windows as well.
Word & wrap at column:
Use Fixed Font
Warn if the number of recipients is larger than
If the number of recipients is larger than this value, KMail will warn and ask for a confirmation before sending the mail. The warning can be turned off.
Turn this option on to make Outlook & #8482; understand attachment names containing non-English characters
Automatically request & message disposition notifications
Enable this option if you want KMail to request Message Disposition Notifications (MDNs) for each of your outgoing messages. This option only affects the default; you can still enable or disable MDN requesting on a per-message basis in the composer, menu item Options - > Request Disposition Notification.
Use recent addresses for autocompletion
Disable this option if you do not want recently used addresses to appear in the autocompletion list in the composer's address fields.
Autosave interval:
A backup copy of the text in the composer window can be created regularly. The interval used to create the backups is set here. You can disable autosaving by setting it to the value 0.
Insert signature above quoted text
Prepend separator to signature
Replace recognized prefix with "Re:"
Replace recognized prefix with "Fwd:"
Use smart & quoting
Maximum number of recipient editor lines.
List of message part types to strip off mails that are being forwarded inline.
Show the Text Snippet Management and Insertion Panel in the composer.
The maximum size in MB that email attachments are allowed to have (-1 for no limit).
Show the GnuPG Audit Log even after crypto operations that completed successfully.
Message Preview Pane
Do not show a message preview pane
Show the message preview pane below the message list
Show the message preview pane next to the message list
Long folder list
Short folder list
What style of headers should be displayed
How much of headers should be displayed
Some emails, especially those generated automatically, do not specify the character encoding which needs to be used to properly display them. In such cases a fallback character encoding will be used, which you can configure here. Set it to the character encoding most commonly used in your part of the world. As a default the encoding configured for the whole system is used.
Changing this from its default'Auto 'will force the use of the specified encoding for all emails, regardless of what they specify themselves.
Replace smileys by emoticons
Enable this if you want smileys like: -) appearing in the message text to be replaced by emoticons (small pictures).
Show expand/ collapse quote marks
Enable this option to show different levels of quoted text. Disable to hide the levels of quoted text.
Automatic collapse level:
Reduce font size for quoted text
Enable this option to show quoted text with a smaller font.
Show user agent in fancy headers
Enable this option to get the User-Agent and X-Mailer header lines displayed when using fancy headers.
Allow to delete attachments of existing mails.
Allow to edit attachments of existing mails.
Always decrypt messages when viewing or ask before decrypting
Message Structure Viewer Placement
Above the message pane
Below the message pane
Message Structure Viewer
Show never
Show always
Show HTML status bar
Show spam status in fancy headers
Number of addresses to show before collapsing
How attachments are shown
Send Message Disposition Notifications with an empty sender.
Send Message Disposition Notifications with an empty sender string. Some servers might be configure to reject such messages, so if you are experiencing problems sending MDNs, uncheck this option.
Message template for new message
Message template for reply
Message template for reply to all
Message template for forward
Quote characters
Allow out-of-office settings to be changeable by the user.
Allow users to upload out-of-office sieve scripts, but prevent them from changing any settings, such as the domain to react to or the spam reaction switch.
Send out-of-office replies to mails coming from this domain only.
Allow out-of-office replies to be sent to messages marked as SPAM.
Check if there is still an active out-of-office reply configured when starting KMail.
Display tooltips for messages and group headers
Enable this option to display tooltips when hovering over an item in the message list.
Hide tab bar when only one tab is open
With this option enabled the tab bar will be displayed only when there are two or more tabs. With this option disabled the tab bar will be always shown. When the tab bar is hidden you can always open a folder in a new tab by middle-clicking it.
Quoted Message Text
Message Text as Is
Message Id
Date in Short Format
Date in C Locale
Day of Week
Time
Time in Long Format
Time in C Locale
To Field Address
To Field Name
To Field First Name
To Field Last Name
CC Field Address
CC Field Name
CC Field First Name
CC Field Last Name
From Field Address
From Field Name
From Field First Name
From Field Last Name
Addresses of all recipients
Quoted Headers
Headers as Is
Header Content
From field Name
Pipe Original Message Body and Insert Result as Quoted Text
Pipe Original Message Body and Insert Result as Is
Pipe Original Message with Headers and Insert Result as Is
Pipe Current Message Body and Insert Result as Is
Pipe Current Message Body and Replace with Result
Insert File Content
Discard to Next Line
Template Comment
No Operation
Clear Generated Message
Turn Debug On
Turn Debug Off
& Insert Command
Insert Command
Original Message
Current Message
Process with External Programs
Miscellaneous
The mail index for '%1 'is from an unknown version of KMail (%2). This index can be regenerated from your mail folder, but some information, including status flags, may be lost. Do you wish to downgrade your index file?
Downgrade
Do Not Downgrade
The mail index for '%1 'is corrupted and will be regenerated now, but some information, including status flags, will be lost.
Troubleshooting IMAP Cache
Troubleshooting the IMAP Cache If you have problems with synchronizing an IMAP folder, you should first try rebuilding the index file. This will take some time to rebuild, but will not cause any problems. If that is not enough, you can try refreshing the IMAP cache. If you do this, you will lose all your local changes for this folder and all its subfolders.
Rebuild & index
Scope:
Only Current Folder
Current Folder & All Subfolders
All Folders of This Account
Refresh & Cache
The UID cache file for folder %1 could not be read. There could be a problem with file system permission, or it is corrupted.
The UID cache file for folder %1 could not be written. There could be a problem with file system permission.
You must synchronize with the server before renaming IMAP folders.
No account setup for this folder. Please try running a sync before this.
Are you sure you want to refresh the IMAP cache of the folder %1 and all its subfolders? This will remove all changes you have done locally to your folders.
The index of this folder has been recreated.
Folder %1 is not in initial sync state (state was %2). Do you want to reset it to initial sync state and sync anyway?
Reset & & Sync
Synchronizing
Connecting to %1
Checking permissions
Renaming folder
Retrieving folderlist
Error while retrieving the folderlist
Retrieving subfolders
Deleting folders from server
Retrieving message list
No messages to delete...
Expunging deleted messages
Retrieving new messages
No new messages from server
Checking annotation support
Retrieving annotations
Setting annotations
Setting permissions
Retrieving permissions
Getting quota information
Updating cache file
Synchronization done
Uploading messages to server
Your access rights to folder %1 have been restricted, it will no longer be possible to add messages to this folder.
Access rights revoked
No messages to upload to server
Uploading status of messages to server
Creating subfolders on server
Mails on the server in folder %1 were deleted. Do you want to delete them locally? UIDs: %2
Deleting removed messages from server
Checking folder validity
Folder listing failed in interesting ways.
Retrieving folders for namespace %1
It seems that the folder %1 was deleted. Do you want to delete it from the server?
Canceled
The IMAP server %1 does not have support for IMAP annotations. The XML storage cannot be used on this server; please re-configure KMail differently.
The IMAP server %1 does not support annotations. The XML storage cannot be used on this server, please re-configure KMail differently
Error while setting annotation:
lost+found
There are new messages in folder %1, which have not been uploaded to the server yet, but the folder has been deleted on the server or you do not have sufficient access rights on the folder to upload them. All affected messages will therefore be moved to %2 to avoid data loss.
Insufficient access rights
There are new messages in this folder (%1), which have not been uploaded to the server yet, but the folder has been deleted on the server or you do not have sufficient access rights on the folder now to upload them. Please contact your administrator to allow upload of new messages to you, or move them out of this folder. Do you want to move these messages to another folder now?
Move
Do Not Move
Source URL is malformed
Kioslave Error Message
Your POP3 server (Account: %1) does not support the UIDL command: this command is required to determine, in a reliable way, which of the mails on the server KMail has already seen before; the feature to leave the mails on the server will therefore not work properly.
Fetching message %1 of %2 (%3 of %4 KB) for %5@%6 (%7 KB remain on the server).
Fetching message %1 of %2 (%3 of %4 KB) for %5@%6.
Unable to complete LIST operation.
Error while checking account %1 for new mail: %2
Your POP3 server (Account: %1) does not support the TOP command. Therefore it is not possible to fetch the headers of large emails first, before downloading them.
%1 (Default)
Identity Name
Email Address
Paste as Quotation
Add & Quote Characters
Remove Quote Characters
Add as & Inline Image
Add as & Attachment
Name of the attachment:
Add as & Text
Undefined Recipient Type
Select type of recipient
Save List...
Save recipients as distribution list
Select...
Select recipients from address book
No recipients
To: %1
CC: %1
BCC: %1
Truncating recipients list to %1 of %2 entries.
Maintainer
Original author
Former maintainer
Former co-maintainer
Core developer
Former core developer
Documentation
system tray notification
PGP 6 support and further enhancements of the encryption support
Original encryption support PGP 2 and PGP 5 support
GnuPG support
New message list and new folder tree
Anti-virus support
POP filters
Usability tests and improvements
gypten and Kroupware project management
Improved HTML support
beta testing of PGP 6 support
timestamp for'Transmission completed 'status messages
multiple encryption keys per address
KDE Email Client
(c) 1997-2009, The KMail developers
Certificate Signature Request
Please create a certificate from attachment and return to sender.
KMail is set to be offline; all network jobs are suspended
KMail is set to be online; all network jobs resumed
KMail is currently in offline mode. How do you want to proceed?
Online/ Offline
You do not have read/ write permission to your inbox folder.
outbox
You do not have read/ write permission to your outbox folder.
sent-mail
You do not have read/ write permission to your sent-mail folder.
trash
You do not have read/ write permission to your trash folder.
drafts
You do not have read/ write permission to your drafts folder.
templates
You do not have read/ write permission to your templates folder.
The %4 folder exists. %1 now uses the %5 folder for its messages. %2 can move the contents of %6 into this folder for you, though this may replace any existing files with the same name in %7. Would you like %3 to move the mail files now?
The %4 folder exists. %1 now uses the %5 folder for its messages. %2 can move the contents of %6 into this folder for you. Would you like %3 to move the mail files now?
Migrate Mail Files?
File %1 exists. Do you want to replace it?
Save to File
& Replace
KMail encountered a fatal error and will terminate now
KMail encountered a fatal error and will terminate now. The error was: %1
Are you sure you want to empty the trash folders of all accounts?
Message Disposition Notification Request
Send "denied"
& Ignore
& Send
& Headers
Choose display style of message headers
& Enterprise Headers
Show the list of headers in Enterprise style
& Fancy Headers
Show the list of headers in a fancy format
& Brief Headers
Show brief list of message headers
& Standard Headers
Show standard list of message headers
& Long Headers
Show long list of message headers
& All Headers
Show all message headers
& Attachments
Choose display style of attachments
& As Icons
Show all attachments as icons. Click to see them.
& Smart
Show attachments as suggested by sender.
& Inline
Show all attachments inline (if possible)
& Hide
Do not show attachments in the message viewer
& Set Encoding
New Message To...
Reply To...
Forward To...
Open in Address Book
Select All Text
Copy Link Address
Open URL
Bookmark This Link
Save Link As...
Show Message Structure
Scroll Message Up
Scroll Message Down
Scroll Message Up (More)
Scroll Message Down (More)
Toggle HTML Display Mode
Toggle display mode between HTML and plain text
The email client for the K Desktop Environment.
Retrieving Folder Contents Please wait... nbsp;
Offline KMail is currently in offline mode. Click here to go online... nbsp;
Welcome to KMail %1KMail is the email client for the K Desktop Environment. It is designed to be fully compatible with Internet mailing standards including MIME, SMTP, POP3 and IMAP. KMail has many powerful features which are described in the documentation The KMail homepage offers information about new versions of KMail %6 %4 %5 We hope that you will enjoy KMail. Thank you, nbsp; & nbsp; The KMail Team
Some of the new features in this release of KMail include (compared to KMail %1, which is part of KDE %2):
Please take a moment to fill in the KMail configuration panel at Settings-gt; Configure KMail. You need to create at least a default identity and an incoming as well as outgoing mail account.
Important changes (compared to KMail %1):
%1
(body part)
Could not send MDN.
Scroll To
Save As...
Decrypt With Chiasmus...
View Attachment: %1
Deleting an attachment might invalidate any digital signature on this message.
Modifying an attachment might invalidate any digital signature on this message.
Edit
Attachments:
Please wait
Address copied to clipboard.
URL copied to clipboard.
File %1 exists. Do you want to replace it?
Message as Plain Text
The message was removed while saving it. It has not been saved.
Open Message
The file does not contain a message.
The file contains multiple messages. Only the first message is shown.
Do you want to forward the selected messages as attachments in one message (as a MIME digest) or as individual messages?
Send As Digest
Send Individually
This is a MIME digest forward. The content of the message is contained in the attachment(s).
Not enough free disk space?
Corrupt IMAP cache detected in folder %1. Copying of messages aborted.
Moving messages
Deleting messages
Opening URL...
Do you really want to execute %1?
Execute
Found no attachments to save.
Save Attachments To
attachment.1
Save Attachment
attachment. %1
A file named %1 already exists. Do you want to overwrite it?
File Already Exists
& Overwrite
Overwrite & All
The part %1 of the message is encrypted. Do you want to keep the encryption when saving?
KMail Question
Keep Encryption
Do Not Keep
The part %1 of the message is signed. Do you want to keep the signature when saving?
Keep Signature
Could not write to the file%1%2
Error saving attachment
From: %1 To: %2 Subject: %3
Mail: %1
& Identity:
& Dictionary:
& Sent-Mail folder:
& Mail transport:
& From:
& Reply to:
Subject:
Sticky
Autosaving the message as %1 failed. Reason: %2
Autosaving Failed
& Send Mail
& Send Mail Via
Send
Send & Later Via
Queue
Save as & Draft
Save as & Template
& Insert File...
& Insert File Recent
& New Composer
New Main & Window
Select & Recipients...
Save & Distribution List...
Paste as Attachment
Clean Spaces
& Urgent
& Request Disposition Notification
Set Encoding
& Wordwrap
& Snippets
& Automatic Spellchecking
Auto-Detect
Formatting (HTML)
HTML
& All Fields
& Identity
& Dictionary
& Sent-Mail Folder
& Mail Transport
& From
& Reply To
Subject
Append Signature
Prepend Signature
Insert Signature At Cursor Position
Attach & Public Key...
Attach & My Public Key
& Attach File...
Attach
& Remove Attachment
& Save Attachment As...
Attachment Properties
& Spellchecker...
Spellchecker
Encrypt Message with Chiasmus...
& Encrypt Message
& Sign Message
& Cryptographic Message Format
Reset Font Settings
Reset Font
Configure KMail...
Spellcheck: %1
Column: %1
Line: %1
Resave as Template
& Save as Draft
Resave this message in the Templates folder. It can then be used at a later time.
Save this message in the Drafts folder. It can then be edited and sent at a later time.
Do you want to save the message for later or discard it?
Close Composer
The message you have composed seems to refer to an attached file but you have not attached anything. Do you want to attach a file to your message?
File Attachment Reminder
& Send as Is
KMail could not recognize the location of the attachment (%1); you have to specify the full path if you wish to attach a file.
Your administrator has disallowed attaching files bigger than %1 MB.
Attach File
An error occurred while trying to export the key from the backend: %1
Key Export Failed
Exporting key...
OpenPGP key 0x%1
Attach Public OpenPGP Key
Select the public key which should be attached.
Edit With...
Add Attachment...
KMail could not compress the file.
The compressed file is larger than the original. Do you want to keep the original one?
Keep
KMail could not uncompress the file.
KMail was unable to create the temporary file %1. Because of this, editing this attachment is not possible.
Save Attachment As
Insert clipboard text as attachment
You have requested that messages be encrypted to yourself, but the currently selected identity does not define an (OpenPGP or S/ MIME) encryption key to use for this. Please select the key(s) to use in the identity configuration.
Undefined Encryption Key
In order to be able to sign this message you first have to define the (OpenPGP or S/ MIME) signing key to use. Please select the key to use in the identity configuration.
Undefined Signing Key
KMail is currently in offline mode. Your messages will be kept in the outbox until you go online.
You must enter your email address in the From: field. You should also set your email address for all identities, so that you do not have to enter it for each message.
You must specify at least one receiver, either in the To: field or as CC or as BCC.
To: field is empty. Send message anyway?
No To: specified
You did not specify a subject. Send message anyway?
No Subject Specified
Send as Is
& Specify the Subject
& Keep markup, do not sign/ encrypt
& Keep markup, do not encrypt
& Keep markup, do not sign
Sign/ Encrypt (delete markup)
Encrypt (delete markup)
Sign (delete markup)
Inline signing/ encrypting of HTML messages is not possible; do you want to delete your markup?
Sign/ Encrypt Message?
The custom drafts or templates folder for identify "%1" does not exist (anymore); therefore, the default drafts or templates folder will be used.
About to send email...
Send Confirmation
You are trying to send the mail to more than %1 recipients. Send message anyway?
Too many recipients
& Edit Recipients
Turning HTML mode off will cause the text to lose the formatting. Are you sure?
Lose the formatting?
Lose Formatting
Spellcheck: on
Spellcheck: off
Please configure a Crypto Backend to use for Chiasmus encryption first. You can do this in the Crypto Backends tab of the configure dialog's Security page.
It looks as though libkleopatra was compiled without Chiasmus support. You might want to recompile libkleopatra with --enable-chiasmus.
No Chiasmus Backend Configured
No Chiasmus Keys Found
Chiasmus Encryption Key Selection
Message will be signed
Message will not be signed
Message will be encrypted
Message will not be encrypted
This is the list of defined filters. They are processed top-to-bottom. Click on any filter to edit it using the controls in the right-hand half of the dialog.
Click this button to create a new filter. The filter will be inserted just before the currently-selected one, but you can always change that later on. If you have clicked this button accidentally, you can undo this by clicking on the Delete button.
Click this button to copy a filter. If you have clicked this button accidentally, you can undo this by clicking on the Delete button.
Click this button to delete the currently-selected filter from the list above. There is no way to get the filter back once it is deleted, but you can always leave the dialog by clicking Cancel to discard the changes made.
Click this button to move the currently-selected filter up one in the list above. This is useful since the order of the filters in the list determines the order in which they are tried on messages: The topmost filter gets tried first. If you have clicked this button accidentally, you can undo this by clicking on the Down button.
Click this button to move the currently-selected filter down one in the list above. This is useful since the order of the filters in the list determines the order in which they are tried on messages: The topmost filter gets tried first. If you have clicked this button accidentally, you can undo this by clicking on the Up button.
Click this button to rename the currently-selected filter. Filters are named automatically, as long as they start with "lt;". If you have renamed a filter accidentally and want automatic naming back, click this button and select Clear followed by OK in the appearing dialog.
Check this button to force the confirmation dialog to be displayed. This is useful if you have defined a ruleset that tags messages to be downloaded later. Without the possibility to force the dialog popup, these messages could never be downloaded if no other large messages were waiting on the server, or if you wanted to change the ruleset to tag the messages differently.
POP3 Filter Rules
Filter Rules
Import...
Export...
Available Filters
Filter Criteria
Filter Action
Global Options
Always & show matched'Download Later 'messages in confirmation dialog
Filter Actions
Advanced Options
Apply this filter to incoming messages:
from all accounts
from all but online IMAP accounts
from checked accounts only
Account Name
Apply this filter & before sending messages
The filter will be triggered before the message is sent and it will affect both the local copy and the sent copy of the message. This is required if the recipient's copy also needs to be modified.
Apply this filter to & sent messages
The filter will be triggered after the message is sent and it will only affect the local copy of the message. If the recipient's copy also needs to be modified, please use "Apply this filter before sending messages".
Apply this filter on manual & filtering
If this filter & matches, stop processing here
Add this filter to the Apply Filter menu
Shortcut:
Additionally add this filter to the toolbar
Icon for this filter:
Up
Down
Rename...
At least one filter targets a folder on an online IMAP account. Such filters will only be applied when manually filtering and when filtering incoming online IMAP mail.
The following filters are invalid (e. g. containing no actions or no search rules). Discard or edit invalid filters?
Discard
The following filters have not been saved because they were invalid (e. g. containing no actions or no search rules).
Rename Filter
Rename filter "%1" to: (leave the field empty for automatic naming)
Please select an action.
& Download mail
Download mail later
Delete mail from server
Importing the archive file '%1 'into the folder '%2' succeeded.
Import finished.
Failed to import the archive into folder '%1 '.
Importing archive failed.
Unable to create subfolder for folder '%1 '.
Importing folder %1
Failed to add a message to the folder '%1 '.
Unexpected subdirectory named '%1 '.
The file '%1 'does not appear to be a valid archive.
Unable to open archive file '%1 '
Importing Archive
Edit...
VCard Viewer
& Import
& Next Card
& Previous Card
Failed to parse vCard.
Select Folder
Unknown folder '%1 '
Please select a folder
Mail Expiry Properties
Expire read messages after
Expire unread messages after
Move expired messages to:
Delete expired messages permanently
Note: Expiry action will be applied immediately after confirming settings.
Please select a folder to expire messages into.
No Folder Selected
Account type is not supported.
Configure Account
Account Type: Disconnected IMAP Account
Account Type: IMAP Account
Filtering
none
The server does not seem to support unique message numbers, but this is a requirement for leaving messages on the server. Since some servers do not correctly announce their capabilities you still have the possibility to turn leaving fetched messages on the server on.
The server does not seem to support fetching message headers, but this is a requirement for filtering messages on the server. Since some servers do not correctly announce their capabilities you still have the possibility to turn filtering messages on the server on.
Please note that this feature can cause some POP3 servers that do not support pipelining to send corrupted mail; this is configurable, though, because some servers support pipelining but do not announce their capabilities. To check whether your POP3 server announces pipelining support use the "Check What the Server Supports" button at the bottom of the Security tab in this dialog; if your server does not announce it, but you want more speed, then you should do some testing first by sending yourself a batch of mail and downloading it.
Please specify a server and port on the General tab first.
The server does not seem to support pipelining; therefore, this option has been disabled. Since some servers do not correctly announce their capabilities you still have the possibility to turn pipelining on. But please note that this feature can cause some POP servers that do not support pipelining to send corrupt messages. So before using this feature with important mail you should first test it by sending yourself a larger number of test messages which you all download in one go from the POP server.
The server does not seem to support unique message numbers, but this is a requirement for leaving messages on the server; therefore, this option has been disabled. Since some servers do not correctly announce their capabilities you still have the possibility to turn leaving fetched messages on the server on.
The server does not seem to support fetching message headers, but this is a requirement for filtering messages on the server; therefore, this option has been disabled. Since some servers do not correctly announce their capabilities you still have the possibility to turn filtering messages on the server on.
Choose Location
Only local files are currently supported.
Fetching Namespaces...
Personal
Other Users
Shared
Edit Namespace '%1 '
Anti-Spam Wizard
Anti-Virus Wizard
Welcome to the KMail Anti-Spam Wizard
Welcome to the KMail Anti-Virus Wizard
Options to fine-tune the handling of spam messages
Options to fine-tune the handling of virus messages
Summary of changes to be made by this wizard
Virus handling
Spam Handling
Semi spam (unsure) handling
Classify as Spam
Classify as NOT Spam
Scanning for %1...
Scanning for anti-spam tools finished.
Scanning for anti-virus tools finished.
Sorry, no spam detection tools have been found. Install your spam detection software and re-run this wizard.
Scanning complete. No anti-virus tools found.
Messages classified as spam are marked as read. Spam messages are moved into the folder named %1.
Messages classified as spam are marked as read. Spam messages are not moved into a certain folder.
Messages classified as spam are not marked as read. Spam messages are moved into the folder named %1.
Messages classified as spam are not marked as read. Spam messages are not moved into a certain folder.
The folder for messages classified as unsure (probably spam) is %1.
The wizard will create the following filters: %1
The wizard will replace the following filters: %1
The wizard will search for any tools to do spam detection and setup KMail to work with them.
Here you can get some assistance in setting up KMail's filter rules to use some commonly-known anti-virus tools. The wizard can detect those tools on your computer as well as create filter rules to classify messages using these tools and to separate messages containing viruses. The wizard will not take any existing filter rules into consideration: it will always append the new rules. Warning: As KMail appears to be frozen during the scan of the messages for viruses, you may encounter problems with the responsiveness of KMail because anti-virus tool operations are usually time consuming; please consider deleting the filter rules created by the wizard to get back to the former behavior.
Please select the tools to be used for the detection and go to the next page.
& Mark detected spam messages as read
Mark messages which have been classified as spam as read.
Move & known spam to:
The default folder for spam messages is the trash folder, but you may change that in the folder view below.
Move & probable spam to:
The default folder is the inbox folder, but you may change that in the folder view below. Not all tools support a classification as unsure. If you have not selected a capable tool, you cannot select a folder as well.
Check messages using the anti-virus tools
Let the anti-virus tools check your messages. The wizard will create appropriate filters. The messages are usually marked by the tools so that following filters can react on this and, for example, move virus messages to a special folder.
Move detected viral messages to the selected folder
A filter to detect messages classified as virus-infected and to move those messages into a predefined folder is created. The default folder is the trash folder, but you may change that in the folder view.
Additionally, mark detected viral messages as read
Mark messages which have been classified as virus-infected as read, as well as moving them to the selected folder.
Import Archive
& Folder:
& Archive File:
Please select an archive file that should be imported.
No archive file selected
Please select the folder where the archive should be imported to.
No target folder selected
Checking account: %1
completed
Account %1
Account %1 has no mailbox defined: mail checking aborted; check your account settings.
Checking account %1 for new mail
POP Account
IMAP Account
You need to add an account in the network section of the settings in order to receive mail.
%1 #%2
& Reply
Reply to Author...
Reply Without & Quote...
Create To-do/ Reminder...
Create To-do
Allows you to create a calendar to-do or reminder from this message
This option starts the KOrganizer to-do editor with initial values taken from the currently selected message. Then you can edit the to-do to your liking before saving it to your calendar.
Mark Message
Mark Message as & Read
Mark selected messages as read
Mark Message as & New
Mark selected messages as new
Mark Message as & Unread
Mark selected messages as unread
Mark Message as & Important
Remove & Important Message Mark
Mark Message as & Action Item
Remove & Action Item Message Mark
& Edit Message
& Redirect...
Mailing-List
Open Message in List Archive
Post New Message
Go to Archive
Request Help
Contact Owner
Unsubscribe from List
email
web
Cannot add message to outbox folder
Critical error: Unable to process sent mail (out of space? )Moving failing message to "sent-mail" folder.
Moving the sent message "%1" from the "outbox" to the "sent-mail" folder failed. Possible reasons are lack of disk space or write permission. Please try to fix the problem and move the message manually.
It is not possible to send messages without specifying a sender address. Please set the email address of identity '%1 'in the Identities section of the configuration dialog and then try again.
%1 of %2 queued messages successfully sent.
Critical error: Unable to execute filters before sending message (out of space?)
Sending messages
Initiating sender process...
Transport '%1 'is invalid.
Sending failed
You have chosen to send all queued email using an unencrypted transport, do you want to continue?
Send Unencrypted
Sending message %1 of %2: %3
Failed to send (some) queued messages.
Sending aborted: %1 The message will stay in the'outbox 'folder until you either fix the problem (e. g. a broken address) or remove the message from the'outbox' folder. The following transport was used: %2
Sending aborted.
Sending failed: %1 The message will stay in the'outbox 'folder until you either fix the problem (e. g. a broken address) or remove the message from the'outbox' folder. The following transport was used: %2 Continue sending the remaining messages?
Continue Sending
& Continue Sending
& Abort Sending
Sending failed: %1 The message will stay in the'outbox 'folder until you either fix the problem (e. g. a broken address) or remove the message from the'outbox' folder. The following transport was used: %2
Archive
Archive Folder
Format:
Compressed Zip Archive (. zip)
Uncompressed Archive (. tar)
BZ2-Compressed Tar Archive (. tar. bz2)
GZ-Compressed Tar Archive (. tar. gz)
& Delete folders after completion
Please select the folder that should be archived.
No folder selected
Select Filters
Import Filters
The selected file is not readable. Your file access permissions might be insufficient.
Export Filters
%1's %2
My %1
KMail will now create the required groupware folders as subfolders of %1; if you do not want this, cancel and the IMAP resource will be disabled
%1: no folder found, will create it
%1: found folder %2, will set it as main groupware folder
KMail found the following groupware folders in %1 and needs to perform the following operations: %2 If you do not want this, cancel and the IMAP resource will be disabled
Standard Groupware Folders
Default folder
There are multiple %1 default folders, please choose one:
You do not have read/ write permission to your %1 folder.
Complete Message
Body of Message
Anywhere in Headers
All Recipients
Size in Bytes
Age in Days
Message Status
Message Tag
Search Criteria
Match all of the following
Match any of the following
Cannot expire messages from folder %1: destination folder %2 not found
Removing old messages from folder %1 failed.
Moving old messages from folder %1 to folder %2 failed.
Removing old messages from folder %1 was canceled.
Moving old messages from folder %1 to folder %2 was canceled.
Cannot open file "%1": %2
Internal error. Please copy down the details and report a bug.
Could not sync index file %1: %2
Could not add message to folder:
Could not add message to folder (No space left on device?)
I am out of office till %1. In urgent cases, please contact Mrs. vacation replacement email: email address of vacation replacement phone: +49 711 1111 11 fax.: +49 711 1111 12 Yours sincerely, -- enter your name and email address here
Your server did not list "vacation" in its list of supported Sieve extensions; without it, KMail cannot install out-of-office replies for you. Please contact you system administrator.
Configure "Out of Office" Replies
Someone (probably you) changed the vacation script on the server. KMail is no longer able to determine the parameters for the autoreplies. Default values will be used.
There is still an active out-of-office reply configured. Do you want to edit it?
Out-of-office reply still active
Set subject of message
Send CC: to'address'
Send BCC: to'address'
Add'header 'to message
Read message body from'file '
Set body of message
Add an attachment to the mail. This can be repeated
Only check for new mail
Only open composer window
View the given message file
Send message to'address' resp. attach the file the'URL 'points to
Removing folder
Error while removing a folder.
Destination folder: %1
checking
Error while querying the server status.
Retrieving message status
Retrieving messages
Error while listing the contents of the folder %1.
Error while retrieving messages.
Error while creating a folder.
updating message counts
Error while getting folder information.
... that you can go to the next and previous message by using the right and left arrow keys respectively?
... that you can rapidly create filters on sender, recipient, subject and mailing lists with Message-gt; Createnbsp; Filter?
... that you can get rid of the & quot; [mailing list name]quot; added to the subject of some mailing lists by using the rewrite header filter action? Just use rewrite header & quot; Subjectquot; replace & quot; \\s*\\[mailing list name\\]\\s*quot; with & quot; quot;
... that you can associate mailing lists with folders in the Folder-gt; Mailing List Management dialog? You can then use Message-gt; Newnbsp; Messagenbsp; tonbsp; Mailingnbsp; List... to open the composer with the mailing list address preset. Alternatively, you can click with the middle mouse button on the folder.
... that you can assign custom icons to each folder individually? See Folder-gt; Properties
... that KMail can show a color bar indicating the type of message (Plain text/ HTML/ OpenPGP) currently displayed? This thwarts attempts to fake successful signature verification by sending HTML mails mimicking KMail's signature status frames.
... that you can filter on any header by simply entering its name in the first edit field of a search rule?
... that you can filter out HTML only messages with the rule quot; Content-typequot; contains & quot; text/ htmlquot;?
... that when replying, only the selected part of the message is quoted? If nothing is selected, the full message is quoted. This even works with text of attachments when View-gt; Attachments-gt; Inline is selected. This feature is available with all reply commands except Message-gt; Reply Without Quote. contributed by David F. Newman
Shortcut for Folder %1
Select Shortcut for Folder
To choose a key or a combination of keys which select the current folder, click the button below and then press the key(s) you wish to associate with this folder.
A critical error occurred. Processing stops here.
A problem was found while applying this action.
Too many filter actions in filter rule %1.
Unknown filter action %1 in filter rule %2. Ignoring it.
vCard Import Failed
Unable to access %1.
Running precommand failed.
Cannot open file:
Transmission failed: Could not lock %1.
Cannot remove mail from mailbox %1: %2
Cannot insert content from file %1: %2
Pipe command %1 failed.
Manage Sieve Scripts
Available Scripts
No Sieve URL configured
Failed to fetch the list of scripts
Delete Script
Edit Script...
Deactivate Script
New Script...
Really delete script "%1" from the server?
Delete Sieve Script Confirmation
New Sieve Script
Please enter a name for the new Sieve script:
Edit Sieve Script
The Sieve script was successfully uploaded.
Sieve Script Upload
A file named "%1" already exists. Are you sure you want to overwrite it?
Overwrite File?
Distribution list "%1" is empty, it cannot be used.
Open Address Book
Select Sound File
File already exists
Overwrite
Cancel
By Sender
By Receiver
By Smart Sender/ Receiver
By Subject
By Size
By Action Item Status
By New/ Unread Status
Ascending
Descending
by Sender/ Receiver
by Sender
by Receiver
Senders/ Receivers, Flat
Attachment
New/ Unread
Spam/ Ham
Watched/ Ignored
Tag List
Message
Status
Delete Aggregation
Customize Themes
New Theme
Delete Theme
Unnamed Theme
New Column
Today
Ready
Attachment Icon
Action Item Icon
Important Icon
Signature State Icon
Max Date
Never Show
Open Full Search
Any Status
Configure...
Message Sort Order
Message Sort Direction
Expand Recent Groups
Topmost Message
Most Recent Message
Never Expand Threads
Expand Threads With New Messages
Expand Threads With Unread Messages
Expand Threads With Unread or Important Messages
Always Expand Threads
Groups & & Threading
Threading:
Thread leader:
Header click sorts messages:
Unnamed Column
Message Group
Sample Tag 1
Soften
Font
Hide
Group Header
Automatic
Column Properties
Add Column...
Delete Column
Add New Column
Header:
Icon size:
Description:
Show Default Columns
Sorting
Threads with messages dated %1
Messages sent on %1
Messages sent %1
Messages received %1
Messages sent to %1
Messages sent by %1
Messages received by %1
Date (Order of Arrival)
0 unsent
0 unread
0 messages
Form
Check Mail
Filter by Status
Show Columns
Insert Result of Command
My %1 (%2)
Column Properties...
Subscription...
Choose..
Export to HTML...
Export the selected messages to a HTML file
Message Sorting:
Message Sort Direction:
To Do
To Do Icon
by To Do Status
ToDo
%1 on %2
Status:
Size Column
(Status)
Thread Messages also by & Subject
& Unread Count
Choose how to display the count of unread messages
View in & Separate Column
View After & Folder Name
& Total Column
Toggle display of column showing the total number of messages in folders.
& Size Column
Toggle display of column showing the total size of messages in folders.
< none >
Message List
& Subject
& Templates
attachment, attached
Message List - Todo Messages
Remove & To-do Thread Mark
Adopter and co-maintainer
& Address Book...
Center
Manage Link...
Shortcut
Remove & To-do Message Mark
Snippet Settings
Mark Message as & To-do
Mark Thread as & To-do
no subject
< message >
< body >

Primary Recipients
& Copy to (CC):
& Blind copy to (BCC):
Hidden Recipients
& To
& CC
& BCC
& To-do
Shortcut conflict
& Insert
Replace
Replace & All
Replace with:
Chat & With...
Encrypt all message parts
Sign all message & parts
Initializing...
Move to:
Classify Message as & Spam
Remove & Spam Classification
Classify Message as & Ham
Remove & Ham Classification
Remove recipient line
Attaching Image Failed
Search:
As Digest...