# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Telzir 700 mg film-coated tablets.
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each film-coated tablet contains 700 mg of fosamprenavir as fosamprenavir calcium (equivalent to approximately 600 mg of amprenavir).
Excipients:
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Film-coated tablets.
Pink film coated, capsule shaped, biconvex tablets, marked with GXLL7 on one side.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Telzir in combination with low dose ritonavir is indicated for the treatment of Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 (HIV-1) infected adults, adolescents and children of 6 years and above in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products.
In moderately antiretroviral experienced adults, Telzir in combination with low dose ritonavir has not been shown to be as effective as lopinavir / ritonavir.
No comparative studies have been undertaken in children or adolescents.
In heavily pretreated patients the use of Telzir in combination with low dose ritonavir has not been sufficiently studied.
In protease inhibitor (PI) experienced patients the choice of Telzir should be based on individual viral resistance testing and treatment history (see section 5.1).
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Telzir must only be given with low dose ritonavir as a pharmacokinetic enhancer of amprenavir and in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products.
The Summary of Product Characteristics of ritonavir must therefore be consulted prior to initiation of therapy with Telzir.
Therapy should be initiated by a physician experienced in the management of HIV infection.
Telzir (fosamprenavir) is a pro-drug of amprenavir and must not be administered concomitantly with other medicinal products containing amprenavir.
The importance of complying with the full recommended dosing regimen should be stressed to all patients.
2 Caution is advised if the recommended doses of Telzir with ritonavir detailed below are exceeded (see section 4.4).
Telzir tablet is administered orally.
Telzir tablet can be taken with or without food.
Telzir is also available as an oral suspension for use in patients unable to swallow tablets, and in paediatric patients less than 39 kg (please refer to the Summary of Product Characteristics for Telzir oral suspension).
Adults
The recommended dose is 700 mg fosamprenavir twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir twice daily.
Paediatric patients from 6 years of age
The adult dose of Telzir tablet 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily may be used in children weighing at least 39 kg and able to swallow tablets.
For children weighing less than 39 kg, Telzir oral suspension is the recommended option for the most accurate dosing in children based on body weight (please refer to the Summary of Product Characteristics for Telzir oral suspension).
Children less than 6 years of age:
Telzir with ritonavir is not recommended in children below 6 years due to insufficient data on pharmacokinetics, safety and antiviral response (see section 5.2).
Elderly (over 65 years of age)
The pharmacokinetics of fosamprenavir have not been studied in this patient population (see section 5.2).
Renal impairment
No initial dose adjustment is considered necessary in patients with renal impairment (see section 5.2).
Hepatic impairment
For adults with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score:
5-6) the recommended dose is 700 mg fosamprenavir twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir once daily.
For adults with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score:
7-9) the recommended dose is 450 mg fosamprenavir twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir once daily.
As it is not possible to achieve this fosamprenavir dose using the tablet formulation, these patients should be treated with fosamprenavir oral suspension.
For adults with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score:
10-15): fosamprenavir should be used with caution and at a reduced dose of 300 mg fosamprenavir twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir once daily.
As it is not possible to achieve this fosamprenavir dose using the tablet formulation, these patients should be treated with fosamprenavir oral suspension.
Even with these dose adjustments for adults, some patients with hepatic impairment may have higher or lower than anticipated amprenavir and/ or ritonavir plasma concentrations as compared to patients with normal hepatic function, due to increased inter-patient variability (see section 5.2), therefore a close monitoring of safety and virologic response is warranted.
3 No dose recommendation can be made for children and adolescents with hepatic impairment as no studies have been conducted in these age groups.
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to fosamprenavir, amprenavir or to any of the excipients of Telzir, or to ritonavir.
Telzir must not be administered concurrently with medicinal products with narrow therapeutic windows that are substrates of cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), e. g. amiodarone, astemizole, bepridil, cisapride, dihydroergotamine, ergotamine, pimozide, quinidine, terfenadine, oral midazolam (for caution on parenterally administered midazolam, see section 4.5), oral triazolam.
Telzir with ritonavir must not be co-administered with medicinal products with narrow therapeutic windows that are highly dependent on CYP2D6 metabolism, e. g. flecainide and propafenone (see section 4.5).
Combination of rifampicin with Telzir with concomitant low-dose ritonavir is contraindicated.
(see section 4.5).
Herbal preparations containing St John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum) must not be used while taking Telzir due to the risk of decreased plasma concentrations and reduced clinical effects of amprenavir (see section 4.5).
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Patients should be advised that treatment with Telzir, or any other current antiretroviral therapy, does not cure HIV and that they may still develop opportunistic infections and other complications of HIV infection.
Current antiretroviral therapies, including Telzir, have not been proven to prevent the risk of transmission of HIV to others through sexual contact or blood contamination.
Appropriate precautions should continue to be taken.
Fosamprenavir contains a sulphonamide moiety.
The potential for cross-sensitivity between medicinal products in the sulphonamide class and fosamprenavir is unknown.
In the pivotal studies of Telzir, in patients receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir there was no evidence of an increased risk of rashes in patients with a history of sulphonamide allergy versus those who did not have a sulphonamide allergy.
Yet, Telzir should be used with caution in patients with a known sulphonamide allergy.
Co-administration of Telzir 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir in doses greater than 100 mg twice daily has not been clinically evaluated.
The use of higher ritonavir doses might alter the safety profile of the combination and therefore is not recommended.
Liver disease
Telzir with ritonavir should be used with caution and at reduced doses in adults with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment (see section 4.2. Patients with chronic hepatitis B or C and treated with combination antiretroviral therapy are at an increased risk of severe and potentially fatal hepatic adverse events.
In case of concomitant antiviral therapy for hepatitis B or C, please refer also to the relevant Summary of Product Characteristics for these medicinal products.
Patients with pre-existing liver dysfunction, including chronic active hepatitis, have an increased frequency of liver function abnormalities during combination antiretroviral therapy and should be
4 monitored according to standard practice.
If there is evidence of worsening liver disease in such patients, interruption or discontinuation of treatment must be considered.
Medicinal products – interactions
The use of Telzir concomitantly with halofantrine or lidocaine (systemic) is not recommended (see section 4.5).
The use of Telzir concomitantly with PDE5 inhibitors (e. g. sildenafil and vardenafil) is not recommended (see section 4.5).
Concomitant use of Telzir with simvastatin or lovastatin is not recommended due to an increased risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis (see section 4.5).
A reduction in the rifabutin dosage by at least 75% is recommended when administered with Telzir with ritonavir.
Further dose reduction may be necessary (see section 4.5).
Because there may be an increased risk of hepatic transaminase elevations and hormonal levels may be altered with co-administration of fosamprenavir, ritonavir and oral contraceptives, alternative non- hormonal methods of contraception are recommended for women of childbearing potential (see section 4.5).
No data are available on the co-administration of fosamprenavir and ritonavir with oestrogens and/ or progestogens when used as hormonal replacement therapies.
The efficacy and safety of these therapies with fosamprenavir and ritonavir has not been established.
Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, phenobarbital) should be used with caution.
Telzir may be less effective due to decreased amprenavir plasma concentrations in patients taking these medicinal products concomitantly (see section 4.5).
Therapeutic concentration monitoring is recommended for immunosuppressant medicinal products (cyclosporine, tacrolimus, rapamycin) when co-administered with Telzir (see section 4.5).
Therapeutic concentration monitoring is recommended for tricyclic antidepressants (e. g. desipramine and nortriptyline) when coadministered with Telzir (see section 4.5).
When warfarin or other oral anticoagulants are coadministered with Telzir a reinforced monitoring of INR (International Normalised Ratio) is recommended (see section 4.5).
Concomitant use of Telzir with ritonavir and fluticasone or other glucocorticoids that are metabolised by CYP3A4 is not recommended unless the potential benefit of treatment outweighs the risk of systemic corticosteroid effects, including Cushing’ s syndrome and adrenal suppression (see section 4.5).
Rash / cutaneous reactions
Most patients with mild or moderate rash can continue Telzir.
Appropriate antihistamines (e. g. cetirizine dihydrochloride) may reduce pruritus and hasten the resolution of rash.
Severe and life-threatening skin reactions, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome, were reported in less than 1% of patients included in the clinical development programme.
Telzir should be permanently discontinued in case of severe rash, or in case of rash of moderate intensity with systemic or mucosal symptoms (see section 4.8).
Haemophiliac patients
There have been reports of increased bleeding including spontaneous skin haematomas and haemarthroses in haemophiliac patients type A and B treated with protease inhibitors (PIs).
In some
5 patients administration of factor VIII was necessary.
In more than half of the reported cases, treatment with protease inhibitors was continued, or reintroduced if treatment had been discontinued.
A causal relationship has been evoked, although the mechanism of action has not been elucidated.
Haemophiliac patients should therefore be informed of the possibility of increased bleeding.
Hyperglycaemia
New onset of diabetes mellitus, hyperglycaemia or exacerbations of existing diabetes mellitus have been reported in patients receiving antiretroviral therapy, including protease inhibitors.
In some of these, the hyperglycaemia was severe and in some cases also associated with ketoacidosis.
Many of the patients had confounding medical conditions, some of which required therapy with medicinal products that have been associated with the development of diabetes mellitus or hyperglycaemia.
Lipodystrophy
Combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with the redistribution of body fat (lipodystrophy) in HIV patients.
The long-term consequences of these events are currently unknown.
Knowledge about the mechanism is incomplete.
A connection between visceral lipomatosis and protease inhibitors and lipoatrophy and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors has been hypothesised.
A higher risk of lipodystrophy has been associated with individual factors such as older age, and with drug related factors such as longer duration of antiretroviral treatment and associated metabolic disturbances.
Clinical examination should include evaluation for physical signs of fat redistribution.
Consideration should be given to the measurement of fasting serum lipids and blood glucose.
Lipid disorders should be managed as clinically appropriate (see section 4.8).
Immune Reactivation Syndrome
In HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of institution of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic pathogens may arise and cause serious clinical conditions, or aggravation of symptoms.
Typically, such reactions have been observed within the first few weeks or months of initiation of CART.
Relevant examples are cytomegalovirus retinitis, generalised and/ or focal mycobacterium infections, and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Any inflammatory symptoms should be evaluated and treatment instituted when necessary.
Osteonecrosis:
Although the etiology is considered to be multifactorial (including corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe immunosuppression, higher body mass index), cases of osteonecrosis have been reported particularly in patients with advanced HIV-disease and/ or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
Patients should be advised to seek medical advice if they experience joint aches and pain, joint stiffness or difficulty in movement.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
When fosamprenavir and ritonavir are co-administered, the ritonavir metabolic drug interaction profile may predominate because ritonavir is a more potent CYP3A4 inhibitor.
The full prescribing information for ritonavir must therefore be consulted prior to initiation of therapy with Telzir with ritonavir.
Ritonavir also inhibits CYP2D6 but to a lesser extent than CYP3A4.
Ritonavir induces CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and glucuronosyl transferase.
Additionally, both amprenavir, the active metabolite of fosamprenavir, and ritonavir are primarily metabolised in the liver by CYP3A4.
Therefore, any medicinal products that either share this
6 metabolic pathway or modify CYP3A4 activity may modify the pharmacokinetics of amprenavir and ritonavir.
Similarly administration of fosamprenavir with ritonavir may modify the pharmacokinetics of other active substances that share this metabolic pathway.
Interaction studies have only been performed in adults.
• Associations contraindicated (see section 4.3)
CYP3A4 substrates with narrow therapeutic index Telzir must not be administered concurrently with medicinal products with narrow therapeutic windows containing active substances that are substrates of cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4).
Co-administration may result in competitive inhibition of the metabolism of these active substances thus increasing their plasma level and leading to serious and / or life-threatening adverse reactions such as cardiac arrhythmia (e. g. amiodarone, astemizole, bepridil, cisapride, pimozide, quinidine, terfenadine) or peripheral vasospasm or ischaemia (e. g. ergotamine, dihydroergotamine).
CYP2D6 substrates with narrow therapeutic index Telzir with ritonavir must not be co-administered with medicinal products containing active substances that are highly dependent on CYP2D6 metabolism and for which elevated plasma concentrations are associated with serious and / or life-threatening adverse reactions.
These active substances include flecainide and propafenone.
Rifampicin Rifampicin is a strong CYP3A4 inducer and has been shown to cause an 82% decrease in amprenavir AUC, which can result in virological failure and resistance development.
During attempts to overcome the decreased exposure by increasing the dose of other protease inhibitors with ritonavir, a high frequency of liver reactions was seen.
The combination of rifampicin and Telzir with concomitant low-dose ritonavir is contraindicated (see section 4.3).
St John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum) Serum levels of amprenavir and ritonavir can be reduced by concomitant use of the herbal preparation St John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum).
This is due to induction of drug metabolising enzymes by St John’ s wort.
Herbal preparations containing St John’ s wort should therefore not be combined with Telzir with ritonavir.
If a patient is already taking St John’ s wort, check amprenavir, ritonavir and if possible viral levels and stop St John’ s wort.
Amprenavir and ritonavir levels may increase on stopping St John’ s wort.
The inducing effect may persist for at least 2 weeks after cessation of treatment with St John’ s wort.
• Other combinations
Antiretroviral medicinal products
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Efavirenz: there was no clinically relevant interaction when fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily was used concurrently with efavirenz (600 mg once daily).
Nevirapine: there was no clinically relevant interaction when fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily was used concurrently with nevirapine (200 mg twice daily).
Nucleoside / Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Interaction studies with abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine have been performed with amprenavir without ritonavir.
Based on data derived from these studies and because ritonavir is not expected to 7 have a significant impact on the pharmacokinetics of NRTIs, the co-administration of fosamprenavir and ritonavir with these medicinal products is not expected to significantly alter the exposure of the co-administered active substances.
Didanosine chewable tablet: no pharmacokinetic study has been performed with fosamprenavir in combination with didanosine.
Clinically significant interaction resulting from an increase in the stomach pH due to the didanosine antacid component is unlikely and no dose separation or adjustment is considered necessary when fosamprenavir and didanosine are administered concomitantly (see chapter, Antacids).
No significant interaction is expected with didanosine gastro-resistant capsule.
Tenofovir: no recommendations can be drawn at this stage on the co-administration of fosamprenavir with ritonavir with tenofovir.
Protease Inhibitors
Lopinavir / ritonavir:
Co-administration of standard doses of lopinavir/ ritonavir with fosamprenavir results in a significant reduction in amprenavir concentrations.
Co-administration of increased doses of fosamprenavir 1400mg twice daily with lopinavir/ ritonavir 533/ 133mg twice daily to PI-experienced patients resulted in a higher incidence of gastrointestinal adverse events and elevations in triglycerides with the combination regimen without increases in virological efficacy, when compared with standard doses of fosamprenavir/ ritonavir.
Therefore, concomitant administration of these medicinal products is not recommended.
No interaction studies have been undertaken between fosamprenavir with ritonavir and the protease inhibitors: indinavir, saquinavir, nelfinavir and atazanavir.
Antibiotics / Antifungals
Clarithromycin: a reduction in the clarithromycin dose should be considered when co-administered with Telzir with ritonavir in patients with renal impairment as moderate increases in clarithromycin concentrations are expected when co-administered with Telzir with ritonavir.
Erythromycin: no pharmacokinetic study has been performed with fosamprenavir with ritonavir in combination with erythromycin, however, plasma levels of erythromycin may be increased when co-administered.
Ketoconazole / Itraconazole: co-administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily and ketoconazole 200 mg once daily increased plasma ketoconazole Cmax by 25% and increased AUC(0-τ) to values 2.69-fold those observed on administration of ketoconazole 200 mg once daily without concurrent fosamprenavir with ritonavir.
The Cmax, AUC and Cmin of amprenavir were unchanged.
When used with Telzir with ritonavir, high doses (> 200 mg/ day) of ketoconazole or itraconazole are not recommended.
Rifabutin: compared to rifabutin administered alone (300 mg once daily), plasma rifabutin AUC (0- 48) was unchanged and Cmax was decreased 14% following co-administration of reduced doses of rifabutin (150 mg every other day) with fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily.
However, 25-O-desacetylrifabutin AUC (0-48) and Cmax were increased 11-fold and 6- fold respectively, which could potentially lead to an increase of rifabutin related adverse events, notably uveitis.
Based on historical comparison, rifabutin did not appear to reduce amprenavir exposure.
On the basis of these data, a 75% reduction of the standard rifabutin dose (i. e. to 150 mg every other day) is recommended when administered with Telzir with ritonavir.
Further dose reduction may be necessary.
8 Other medicinal products
Medicinal products that may reduce plasma amprenavir concentrations when co-administered with Telzir
Antacids, Histamine H2 receptor antagonist and Proton-Pump inhibitors: no dose adjustment for any of the respective medicinal products is considered necessary when antacids, proton-pump inhibitors or histamine H2 receptor antagonists are administered concomitantly with fosamprenavir.
The AUC and Cmax of amprenavir were decreased by 18% and 35% respectively, whilst the Cmin (C12h) was comparable, when a single 1400 mg dose of fosamprenavir was co-administered with a single 30 ml dose of antacid suspension (equivalent to 3.6 grams aluminium hydroxide and 1.8 grams magnesium hydroxide).
Serum levels of amprenavir can be reduced by concomitant use of histamine H2 receptor antagonists (for example ranitidine and cimetidine).
Concurrent administration of ranitidine (300 mg single dose) with fosamprenavir (1400 mg single dose) decreased plasma amprenavir AUC by 30% and Cmax by 51%.
There was, however, no change observed in the amprenavir Cmin (C12h).
Anticonvulsant active substances:
The AUC and Cmin of amprenavir were increased by 20% and 19% respectively, with Cmax unchanged when fosamprenavir (700 mg twice daily) plus ritonavir (100 mg twice daily) was given concomitantly with phenytoin (300 mg once daily).
The AUC, Cmax and Cmin of phenytoin were decreased by 22%, 20% and 29% respectively.
Therefore, if fosamprenavir plus ritonavir is given in combination with phenytoin, no change to the fosamprenavir plus ritonavir dosage regimen is required.
However, it is recommended that phenytoin plasma concentrations be monitored and phenytoin dose increased as appropriate.
Concomitant administration of other anticonvulsant agents known to be enzymatic inducers (e. g. phenobarbital, carbamazepine) has not been studied but may lead to a decrease in the plasma concentrations of amprenavir.
These combinations should be used with caution.
Medicinal products whose plasma levels may be increased when co-administered with Telzir
Other medicinal products with a narrow therapeutic window: some substances (e. g. lidocaine (by systemic route) and halofantrine) given with Telzir may cause serious adverse reactions.
Concomitant use is not recommended.
Erectile dysfunction medicinal products: concomitant use is not recommended.
Based on data for ritonavir and other protease inhibitors, plasma concentrations of PDE5 inhibitors (e. g. sildenafil and vardenafil) are expected to substantially increase when co-administered with Telzir with ritonavir and may result in an increase in PDE5 inhibitor associated adverse reactions, including hypotension, visual changes and priapism.
Fluticasone propionate (interaction with ritonavir): in a clinical study where ritonavir 100 mg capsules bid were co-administered with 50 µg intranasal fluticasone propionate (4 times daily) for 7 days in healthy subjects, the fluticasone propionate plasma levels increased significantly, whereas the intrinsic cortisol levels decreased by approximately 86% (90% confidence interval 82-89%).
Greater effects may be expected when fluticasone propionate is inhaled.
Systemic corticosteroid effects including Cushing’ s syndrome and adrenal suppression have been reported in patients receiving ritonavir and inhaled or intranasally administered fluticasone propionate; this could also occur with other corticosteroids metabolised via the P450 3A pathway e. g. budesonide.
Consequently, concomitant administration of Telzir with ritonavir and these glucocorticoids is not recommended unless the potential benefit of treatment outweighs the risk of systemic corticosteroid effects (see section 4.4).
A dose reduction of the glucocorticoid should be considered with close monitoring of local and systemic effects or a switch to a glucocorticoid, which is not a substrate for CYP3A4 (e. g. beclomethasone).
Moreover, in case of withdrawal of glucocorticoids progressive dose reduction may have to be
9 performed over a longer period.
The effects of high fluticasone systemic exposure on ritonavir plasma levels is yet unknown.
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors: if treatment with a HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor is indicated, pravastatin or fluvastatin is recommended because their metabolism is not dependent on CYP 3A4 and interactions are not expected with protease inhibitors.
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors which are highly dependent on CYP3A4 for metabolism, such as lovastatin and simvastatin, are expected to have markedly increased plasma concentrations when co-administered with Telzir with ritonavir.
Since increased concentrations of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors may cause myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, the combination of lovastatin or simvastatin with Telzir with ritonavir is not recommended.
No adjustment of the fosamprenavir or ritonavir dose is required when co-administered with atovarstatin.
The Cmax, AUC and Cmin of atorvastatin were increased by 184%, 153% and 73% respectively when atorvastatin (10 mg once daily for 4 days) was given with fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily for two weeks.
The Cmax, AUC and Cmin of amprenavir were unchanged.
When used with Telzir with ritonavir, doses of atorvastatin no greater than 20 mg / day should be administered, with careful monitoring for atorvastatin toxicity.
Immunosuppressants: frequent therapeutic concentration monitoring of immunosuppresant levels is recommended until levels have stabilised as plasma concentrations of cyclosporin, rapamycin and tacrolimus may be increased when co-administered with fosamprenavir with ritonavir.
Midazolam: midazolam is extensively metabolized by CYP3A4.
Coadministration with Telzir/ ritonavir may cause a large increase in the concentration of this benzodiazepine.
No drug interaction study has been performed for the co-administration of Telzir/ ritonavir with benzodiazepines.
Based on data for other CYP3A4 inhibitors, plasma concentrations of midazolam are expected to be significantly higher when midazolam is given orally.
Therefore Telzir/ ritonavir should not be co-administered with orally administered midazolam (see section 4.3), whereas caution should be used with co-administration of Telzir/ ritonavir and parenteral midazolam.
Data from concomitant use of parenteral midazolam with other protease inhibitors suggest a possible 3-4 fold increase in midazolam plasma levels.
If Telzir/ ritonavir is co-administered with parenteral midazolam, it should be done in an intensive care unit (ICU) or similar setting which ensures close clinical monitoring and appropriate medical management in case of respiratory depression and/ or prolonged sedation.
Dosage adjustment for midazolam should be considered, especially if more than a single dose of midazolam is administered.
Tricyclic antidepressants: careful monitoring of the therapeutic and adverse reactions of tricyclic antidepressants is recommended when they (for example desipramine and nortriptyline) are concomitantly administered with Telzir.
Medicinal products whose plasma levels may be decreased when co-administered with Telzir
Methadone: co-administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily with methadone once daily (≤ 200 mg) for 14 days decreased the active (R-) methadone enantiomer AUC(0- τ) and Cmax by 18% and 21% respectively.
This limited impact is not expected to be clinically significant.
However, as a precaution, patients should be monitored for withdrawal syndrome.
Based on historical comparisons, methadone did not appear to alter plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetic parameters.
Oral anticoagulants: a reinforced monitoring of the International Normalised Ratio is recommended in case of administration of Telzir with ritonavir with warfarin or other oral anticoagulants, due to a possible decrease or increase of their antithrombotic effect.
Steroids:
Co-administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily + ritonavir 100 mg twice daily with an oral contraceptive containing ethinyl estradiol (EE) 0.035 mg/ norethisterone (NE) 0.5 mg once
10 daily decreased plasma EE AUC(0- τ) and Cmax by 37% and 28%, respectively, and decreased plasma NE AUC(0-τ), Cmax, and Cτ by 34%, 38%, and 26%, respectively.
Steady state plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters were not significantly affected by co-administration with this oral contraceptive; however, ritonavir AUC(0- τ) and Cmax were 45% and 63% higher, respectively, compared to historical data in female subjects dosed with fosamprenavir / ritonavir alone.
In addition to the decreased hormonal contraceptive exposures, co-administration of fosamprenavir with ritonavir and this oral contraceptive resulted in clinically significant hepatic transaminase elevations in some healthy subjects.
Therefore alternative non-hormonal methods of contraception are recommended for women of childbearing potential (see section 4.4).
Paroxetine:
The Cmax and AUC of paroxetine were decreased by 51% and 55% respectively when paroxetine 20 mg once daily was given with fosamprenavir 700 mg and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily for 10 days in healthy volunteers.
The mechanism of this interaction remains unknown.
Based on historical comparison, amprenavir pharmacokinetic parameters were not altered by paroxetine.
Therefore, if paroxetine is co-administered with Telzir and ritonavir, the recommended approach is a dose titration of paroxetine based on a clinical assessment of antidepressant response.
In addition, patients on stable dose of paroxetine who start treatment with Telzir and ritonavir should be monitored for antidepressant response.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Pregnancy
There is no clinical experience with fosamprenavir in pregnant women.
In animal studies at systemic plasma exposures (AUC) to amprenavir lower than therapeutic exposure in patients treated with Telzir, some developmental toxicity was observed (see section 5.3).
In view of the low exposure in reproductive toxicity studies, the potential developmental toxicity of Telzir has not been fully determined.
Telzir should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
Lactation
Amprenavir-related material was found in rat milk, but it is not known whether amprenavir is excreted in human milk.
Rat pups exposed pre and post-natally to amprenavir and fosamprenavir showed developmental toxicity (see section 5.3).
It is therefore recommended that mothers treated with Telzir do not breast-feed their infants.
As a general rule, it is recommended that HIV-infected women must not breast-feed under any circumstances to avoid transmission of HIV.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects of Telzir in combination with ritonavir on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
The adverse reaction profile of Telzir should be borne in mind when considering the patient’ s ability to drive or operate machinery (see section 4.8).
4.8 Undesirable effects
The safety of fosamprenavir has been studied in 755 adult patients in Phase II and III controlled clinical trials.
The safety of the co-administration of fosamprenavir with low dose ritonavir was established in two pivotal Phase III trials:
APV30002 (n = 322) in antiretroviral naïve patients, fosamprenavir (1400 mg) given once daily in combination with ritonavir (200 mg) as part of a triple regimen including abacavir and lamivudine.
APV30003 in protease inhibitor experienced patients, fosamprenavir given in combination with low dose ritonavir either once daily (1400 mg / 200 mg) (n =
11 106) or twice daily (700 mg / 100 mg) (n = 106) in combination with two active reverse transcriptase inhibitors (RTIs).
The adverse reaction profile was similar across all the respective adult studies: antiretroviral naïve (APV30002) and protease inhibitor experienced (twice daily dosing, APV30003) patient populations.
Adverse reactions are listed by MedDRA system organ class and absolute frequency.
Frequencies are defined as:
Very common (≥ 1/ 10), Common (≥ 1/ 100, < 1/ 10), Uncommon (≥ 1/ 1,000, < 1/ 100), Rare (≥ 1/ 10,000, < 1/ 1,000) or Very rare (< 1/ 10,000), including isolated reports.
Frequency categories for the events below have been based on clinical trials and postmarketing data.
Most of the adverse events below were reported from two large clinical studies in adults, where the adverse events were of at least moderate intensity (Grade 2 or more) occurring in at least 1% of patients and reported by investigators as being attributable to the medicinal products used in the studies.
Body System
Adverse reaction
Frequency
Nervous system disorders
Headache, dizziness, oral paraesthesia
Common
Gastrointestinal disorders
Diarrhoea
Very common
Loose stools, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain
Common
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
Rash (see text below “ rash/ cutaneous reactions”)
Common
Angioedema
Uncommon
Stevens Johnson syndrome
Rare
General disorders and administration site conditions
Fatigue
Common
Children and adolescents:
The adverse event profile in children and adolescents is based on integrated safety data from two studies (APV29005 and APV20003) in which 126 HIV-1 infected subjects 2 to 18 years of age received fosamprenavir with ritonavir with background nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor therapy (see section 5.1 for information on dosing regimens applied for each age group).
70% of subjects received greater than 48 weeks of exposure.
Overall the safety profile in these 126 children and adolescents was similar to that observed in the adult population.
Drug-related adverse events were more common in APV20003 (55%) where subjects received once daily fosamprenavir / ritonavir when compared to APV29005 (39%) where subjects received twice daily fosamprenavir / ritonavir.
Rash / cutaneous reactions: erythematous or maculopapular cutaneous eruptions, with or without pruritus, may occur during therapy.
The rash generally will resolve spontaneously without the necessity of discontinuing treatment with the fosamprenavir with ritonavir.
12 Severe or life-threatening cases of rash, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome are rare.
Fosamprenavir with ritonavir therapy should be definitively stopped in case of severe rash or in case of rash of mild or moderate intensity associated with systemic or mucosal signs (see section 4.4).
Clinical chemistry abnormalities: clinical chemistry abnormalities (Grade 3 or 4) potentially related to treatment with fosamprenavir with ritonavir and reported in greater than or equal to 1% of adult patients, included: increased ALT (common), AST (common), serum lipase (common) and triglycerides (very common).
Grade 3 or 4 elevations in total cholesterol values were observed in less than 1% of adult patients (< 1% APV30002; 0% APV 30003).
Lipodystrophy: combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with redistribution of body fat (lipodystrophy) in HIV patients including the loss of peripheral and facial subcutaneous fat, increased intra-abdominal and visceral fat, breast hypertrophy and dorsocervical fat accumulation (buffalo hump) (see section 4.4).
Metabolic abnormalities: combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with metabolic abnormalities such as hypertriglyceridaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, insulin resistance, hyperglycaemia and hyperlactataemia (see section 4.4).
Hyperglycaemia: new onset of diabetes mellitus, hyperglycaemia or exacerbations of existing diabetes mellitus have been reported in patients receiving antiretroviral protease inhibitors (see section 4.4).
Rhabdomyolysis: an increase in CPK, myalgia, myositis, and rarely, rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with protease inhibitors, more specifically in association with nucleoside analogues.
Haemophiliac patients: there have been reports of increased spontaneous bleeding in haemophiliac patients receiving antiretroviral protease inhibitors (see section 4.4).
Immune Reactivation Syndrome: in HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of initiation of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic infections may arise (see section 4.4).
Osteonecrosis: cases of osteonecrosis have been reported, particularly in patients with generally acknowledged risk factors, advanced HIV disease or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
The frequency of this is unknown (see section 4.4).
4.9 Overdose
There is no known antidote for Telzir.
It is not known whether amprenavir can be removed by peritoneal dialysis or haemodialysis.
If overdosage occurs, the patient should be monitored for evidence of toxicity (see section 4.8) and standard supportive treatment applied as necessary.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Antivirals for systemic use, protease inhibitor, ATC Code:
J05A E07
Mechanism of action
The in vitro antiviral activity observed with fosamprenavir is due to the presence of trace amounts of amprenavir.
Amprenavir is a competitive inhibitor of the HIV-1 protease.
Amprenavir binds to the active site of HIV-1 protease and thereby prevents the processing of viral gag and gag-pol polyprotein precursors, resulting in the formation of immature non-infectious viral particles.
13 Co-administration of ritonavir with fosamprenavir increase plasma amprenavir AUC by approximately 2-fold and plasma C τ, ss by 4- to 6-fold, compared to values obtained when fosamprenavir is administered alone.
Administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily results in plasma amprenavir concentrations (data from study APV30003 in antiretroviral experienced patients) which results in protein adjusted median ratios of Cmin/ IC50 and Cmin/ IC95 of 21.7 (range 1.19-240) and 3.21 (range 0.26-30.0), respectively.
Antiviral activity in vitro
The in vitro antiviral activity of amprenavir was evaluated against HIV-1 IIIB in both acutely and chronically infected lymphoblastic cell lines (MT-4, CEM-CCRF, H9) and in peripheral blood lymphocytes.
The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of amprenavir ranged from 0.012 to 0.08 µM in acutely infected cells and was 0.41 µM in chronically infected cells (1 µM = 0.50 µg/ ml).
The relationship between in vitro anti-HIV-1 activity of amprenavir and the inhibition of HIV-1 replication in humans has not been defined.
Resistance
In vitro
HIV-1 isolates with decreased susceptibility to amprenavir have been selected during in vitro serial passage experiments.
Reduced susceptibility to amprenavir was associated with virus that had developed I50V or I84V or V32I+I47V or I54M mutations.
In vivo
a) ART-naïve or PI-naïve patients Various regimens have been assessed in the amprenavir/ fosamprenavir development programs with and without co-administration of ritonavir.
Analysis of the virological failure samples across these regimens defined four main resistance pathways:
V32I+I47V, I50V, I54L/ M and I84V.
Additional mutations observed which may contribute to resistance were:
L10V/ F/ R, I13V, K20R/ T, L33F/ V, M36I, M46I/ L, I47V/ L Q58E, I62V, L63P, V77I, I85V, and I93L.
When ART naïve patients were treated with the currently approved doses of fosamprenavir/ ritonavir, as for other ritonavir boosted PI regimens, the mutations described were infrequently observed.
Sixteen of 434 ART-naïve patients who received fosamprenavir 700mg/ ritonavir 100mg twice daily in ESS100732 experienced virological failure by Week 48 with 14 isolates genotyped.
Three of 14 isolates had protease resistance mutations.
One resistance mutation was observed in each of 3 isolates:
K20K/ R, I54I/ L and I93I/ L respectively
Genotypic analysis of isolates from 13 of 14 paediatric patients exhibiting virological failure among the 59 PI-naïve patients enrolled, demonstrated resistance patterns similar to those observed in adults.
b) PI-experienced patients
Amprenavir
In the studies of PI-experienced patients, PRO30017 (amprenavir 600 mg / ritonavir 100 mg twice daily in sub-study A and B with 80 and 37 patients respectively), the following mutations emerged in patients with virological failure:
L10F/ I/ V, V11I, I13V, K20R, V32I, L33F, E34Q, M36I, M46I/ L, I47V, G48V, I50V, I54L/ M/ T/ V, Q58E, D60E, I62V, A71V, V77I, V82A/ I, I84V, I85V, L90M and I93L/ M.
14 Fosamprenavir
In the studies of PI-experienced patients, APV30003 and its extension, APV30005 (fosamprenavir 700 mg / ritonavir 100 mg twice daily: n=107), the following mutations emerged in patients experiencing virological failure through 96 weeks:
L10F/ I, L24I, V32I, L33F, M36I, M46I/ L, I47V, I50V, I54L/ M/ S, A71I/ T/ V, G73S, V82A, I84V, and L90M.
In the paediatric studies APV20003 and APV29005, 67 PI-experienced patients were treated with fosamprenavir / ritonavir and of 22 virological failure isolates genotyped, nine patients were found with treatment-emergent protease mutations.
The mutational profiles were similar to those described for PI-experienced adults treated with fosamprenavir / ritonavir.
Analyses based on genotypic resistance testing.
Genotypic interpretation systems may be used to estimate the activity of amprenavir / ritonavir or fosamprenavir / ritonavir in subjects with PI-resistant isolates.
The current (July 2006) ANRS AC-11 algorithm for fosamprenavir / ritonavir defines resistance as the presence of the mutations V32I+I47A/ V, or I50V, or at least four mutations among:
L10F/ I/ V, L33F, M36I, I54A/ L/ M/ S/ T/ V, I62V, V82A/ C/ F/ G, I84V and L90M and is associated with increased phenotypic resistance to fosamprenavir with ritonavir as well as reduced likelihood of virological response (resistance).
Conclusions regarding the relevance of particular mutations or mutational patterns are subject to change with additional data, and it is recommended to always consult current interpretation systems for analysing resistance test results.
Analyses based on phenotypic resistance testing.
Clinically validated phenotypic interpretation systems may be used in association with the genotypic data to estimate the activity of amprenavir / ritonavir or fosamprenavir / ritonavir in patients with PI- resistant isolates.
Resistance testing diagnostic companies have developed clinical phenotypic cut-offs for FPV/ RTV that can be used to interpret resistance test results.
Cross-Resistance
HIV-1 isolates with a decreased susceptibility to amprenavir have been selected during in vitro serial passage experiments.
Reduced susceptibility to amprenavir was associated with virus that had developed I50V or I84V or V32I+I47Vor I54M mutations.
Each of these four genetic patterns associated with reduced susceptibility to amprenavir produces some cross-resistance to ritonavir but susceptibility to indinavir, nelfinavir and saquinavir is generally retained.
There are currently data on cross-resistance between amprenavir and other protease inhibitors for all 4 fosamprenavir resistance pathways, either alone or in combination with other mutations.
Based on data from twenty-five antiretroviral naïve patients failing a fosamprenavir containing regimen (one of whom showed Baseline resistance to lopinavir and saquinavir and another to tipranavir the resistance pathways associated with amprenavir produce limited cross-resistance to atazanavir/ ritonavir (three of 25 isolates), darunavir/ ritonavir (four of 25 isolates), indinavir/ ritonavir (one of 25 isolates), lopinavir/ ritonavir (three of 24 isolates, saquinavir (three of 24 isolates) and tipranavir/ ritonavir (four of 24 isolates).
Conversely amprenavir retains activity against some isolates with resistance to other PIs and this retained activity would depend on the number and type of protease resistance mutations present in the isolates.
The number of key PI-resistance mutations increases markedly the longer a failing PI-containing regimen is continued.
Early discontinuation of failing therapies is recommended in order to limit the accumulation of multiple mutations, which may be detrimental to a subsequent rescue regimen.
Cross-resistance between amprenavir and reverse transcriptase inhibitors is unlikely to occur because the enzyme targets are different.
Telzir is not recommended for use as monotherapy, due to the rapid emergence of resistant virus.
15 Clinical experience
Clinical experience with fosamprenavir boosted with ritonavir is mainly based on three open label studies.
Two studies performed in antiretroviral naïve patients, one in comparison to nelfinavir (study APV30002) and one in comparison to lopinavir / ritonavir (study ESS100732), and one study in antiretroviral experienced patients, in comparison to lopinavir / ritonavir (study APV30003).
Antiretroviral Naïve Adult Patients
In antiretroviral naïve patients in APV30002, fosamprenavir (1400 mg) given once daily in combination with low dose ritonavir (200 mg) as part of a triple regimen including abacavir (300 mg twice daily) and lamivudine (150 mg twice daily) showed similar efficacy over 48 weeks compared to nelfinavir (1250 mg) given twice daily in combination with abacavir with lamivudine (300 and 150 mg twice daily).
Non-inferiority was demonstrated between fosamprenavir with ritonavir and nelfinavir based on the proportions of patients achieving plasma HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ ml at 48 weeks (primary endpoint).
In the ITT (Rebound or Discontinuation = Failure) analysis, 69% (221 / 322) of patients receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir achieved < 400 copies/ ml compared to 68% (221 / 327) of patients receiving nelfinavir.
The median plasma HIV-1 RNA had decreased by 3.1 log10 copies/ ml and 3.0 log10 copies/ ml at Week 48 in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir and nelfinavir arms respectively.
The median baseline CD4 cell count was low (170 cells/ mm3 overall) in both groups.
CD4 + cell counts increased in both the fosamprenavir with ritonavir and nelfinavir groups, with median increases above baseline being similar in magnitude at Week 48 (+ 203 and + 207 cells/ mm3, respectively).
The data presented above demonstrates that the once daily regimen of fosamprenavir with ritonavir (1400 / 200 mg OD) in antiretroviral naïve patients showed similar efficacy compared to nelfinavir given twice daily.
This study in view of its design (open label versus nelfinavir) did not provide a sufficiently robust efficacy demonstration in antiretroviral naïve patients to support the once daily regimen of fosamprenavir with ritonavir.
As a conservative approach, based on enhanced amprenavir Ctrough levels, the twice daily dosing regimen of fosamprenavir with ritonavir was recommended for optimal therapeutic management of this population (see section 4.2).
In a subsequent randomised open-label study (ESS100732) in antiretroviral naïve patients, fosamprenavir (700 mg) co-administered with low dose ritonavir (100 mg) in a twice daily regimen including abacavir / lamivudine (600 mg / 300 mg) fixed dose combination tablet once daily showed comparable efficacy over 48 weeks to lopinavir / ritonavir (400 mg / 100 mg) given twice daily in combination with abacavir / lamivudine (600 mg / 300 mg once daily).
Non-inferiority was demonstrated between fosamprenavir co-administered with ritonavir and lopinavir / ritonavir based on the proportions of patients achieving plasma HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ ml at 48 weeks (primary endpoint).
In the Time to loss of virological response (TLOVR) analysis for the ITT(E) population, the proportion of patients achieving < 400 copies/ ml was 73% (315 / 434) in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir group compared to 71% (317 / 444) of patients receiving lopinavir / ritonavir, with a 95% confidence interval of the difference of [-4,84%; 7; 05%].
The median plasma HIV-1 RNA had decreased by 3.34 log10 copies/ ml and 3.33 log10 copies/ ml at Week 48 in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir and lopinavir / ritonavir arms respectively.
16 Median increase in CD4 cell count was 176 cells/ mm3 in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir arm and 191 cells/ mm3 in the lopinavir / ritonavir arm respectively by Week 48.
Antiretroviral Experienced Adult Patients
In a randomised open-label study (APV30003) in protease inhibitor experienced patients with virological failure (less than or equal to two PIs) the fosamprenavir with ritonavir combination (700 / 100 mg twice daily or 1400 / 200 mg once daily) did not demonstrate non-inferiority to lopinavir / ritonavir with regard to viral suppression as measured by the average area under the curve minus baseline (AAUCMB) for plasma HIV-1 RNA over 48 weeks (the primary end point).
Results were in favour of the lopinavir / ritonavir arm as detailed below.
All patients in this study had failed treatment with a previous protease inhibitor regimen (defined as plasma HIV-1 RNA that never went below 1,000 copies/ ml after at least 12 consecutive weeks of therapy, or initial suppression of HIV-1 RNA which subsequently rebounded to ≥ 1,000 copies/ ml).
However, only 65% of patients were receiving a PI based regimen at study entry.
The population enrolled mainly consisted of moderately antiretroviral experienced patients.
The median durations of prior exposure to NRTIs were 257 weeks for patients receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily (79% had ≥ 3 prior NRTIs) and 210 weeks for patients receiving lopinavir/ ritonavir (64% had ≥ 3 prior NRTIs).
The median durations of prior exposure to protease inhibitors were 149 weeks for patients receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily (49% received ≥ 2 prior PIs) and 130 weeks for patients receiving lopinavir/ ritonavir (40% received ≥ 2 prior PIs).
The mean AAUCMBs (log10 c/ ml) in the ITT (E) population (Observed analysis) at 48 weeks are described in the table below:
Plasma HIV-1 RNA Average Area Under the Curve Minus Baseline (AAUCMB) Values (log10 copies/ ml) at week 48 by Randomisation Strata in APV30003 ITT (E) Population (Observed Analysis)
Observed analysis Observed analysis FPV/ RTV BID LPV/ RTV BID
Observed analysis Mean Diff.
Plasma HIV-1 RNA stratum 1000 – 10,000
N=107 N=103 Mean (n) Mean (n)
(97.5% CI) FPV/ RTV BID vs LPV/ RTV BID
copies/ ml > 10,000 – 100,000
-1.53 (41) -1.43 (43)
-0.104 (-0.550, 0.342)
copies/ ml
-1.59 (45) -1.81 (46)
0.216 (-0.213, 0.664)
> 100,000 copies/ ml
-1.38 (19) -2.61 (14)
1.232 (0.512, 1.952)
Total population
-1.53 (105) -1.76 (103)
0.244 (-0.047, 0.536)
Key:
FPV/ RTV BID – Fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily, LPV/ RTV BID – Lopinavir / ritonavir twice daily
When considering the proportion of patients with undetectable viral load in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily dosing regimens and lopinavir / ritonavir arms respectively, results showed a trend in favour of the lopinavir / ritonavir arms:
58% versus 61% (plasma HIV-1 RNA < 400 copies/ ml) or 46% versus 50% (plasma HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/ ml) at Week 48 (secondary efficacy endpoint) in the intent to treat (RD=F) analysis.
17 In patients with high viral load at baseline (> 100,000 copies/ ml) 7/ 14 (50%) patients in the lopinavir / ritonavir group and 6/ 19 (32%) patients in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir group had plasma HIV-1 RNA < 400 copies/ ml.
The fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily regimen and the lopinavir / ritonavir twice daily regimen showed similar immunological improvements through 48 weeks of treatment as measured by median change from baseline in CD4 + cell count (fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily:
81 cells/ mm3: lopinavir / ritonavir twice daily:
91 cells/ mm3).
There are insufficient data to recommend the use of fosamprenavir with ritonavir in heavily pre-treated patients.
Children and adolescent patients above the age of six
Fosamprenavir tablets and oral suspension with ritonavir in combination with NRTIs have been evaluated in protease inhibitor naïve and experienced children and adolescent patients.
The benefit in this age group has mainly been derived from the ongoing study, APV29005, an open label 48 week study evaluating the pharmacokinetic profiles, safety, and antiviral activity of fosamprenavir with ritonavir administered twice daily to HIV 1 protease inhibitor experienced and naive patients 2 to 18 years of age.
Results through 24 weeks of treatment are provided below.
APV29005 enrolled 25 patients aged 6 to 11 (the majority of whom were treated with fosamprenavir / ritonavir 18/ 3 mg/ kg twice daily or the adult tablet regimen), and 29 patients aged 12 to 18 (the majority of whom were treated with the adult tablet regimen).
Overall, 27 (50%) were PI-naïve, 9 of whom were ART naïve, and 27 (50%) were PI-experienced.
Prior NRTI exposure was extensive, with median durations of 421 and 389 weeks for the PI naïve and experienced patients respectively.
The median duration of prior PI exposure was 239 weeks.
Overall, patients enrolled with a median 4.6 HIV-1 RNA log10 copies/ ml (33% of whom had > 100,000 copies/ ml at baseline) and a median% CD4+ cell of 18% (37% of whom had% CD4+ of < 15% at baseline).
Through 24 weeks of therapy, 70% (19/ 27) of protease inhibitor naive and 56% (15/ 27) of protease inhibitor experienced patients achieved and maintained a plasma HIV 1 RNA < 400 copies/ ml (ITT(E), TLOVR).
In the ITT(E) population (Observed analysis) at Week 24 the median% CD4+ cell counts increased by 8% in the PI-naïve subjects and 4% in the PI-experienced subjects.
These data were further substantiated by the supportive study APV20003; however, a different dosage regimen than that of study APV29005 was used.
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
After oral administration, fosamprenavir is rapidly and almost completely hydrolysed to amprenavir and inorganic phosphate prior to reaching the systemic circulation.
The conversion of fosamprenavir to amprenavir appears to primarily occur in the gut epithelium.
The pharmacokinetic properties of amprenavir following co-administration of Telzir with ritonavir have been evaluated in healthy adult subjects and HIV-infected patients and no substantial differences were observed between these two groups.
Telzir tablet and oral suspension formulations, both given fasted, delivered equivalent plasma amprenavir AUC∞ values and the Telzir oral suspension formulation delivered a 14% higher plasma amprenavir Cmax as compared to the oral tablet formulation.
Absorption
18 After single dose administration of fosamprenavir, amprenavir peak plasma concentrations are observed approximately 2 hours after administration.
Fosamprenavir AUC values are, in general, less than 1% of those observed for amprenavir.
The absolute bioavailability of fosamprenavir in humans has not been established.
After multiple dose oral administration of equivalent fosamprenavir and amprenavir doses, comparable amprenavir AUC values were observed; however, Cmax values were approximately 30% lower and Cmin values were approximately 28% higher with fosamprenavir.
After multiple dose oral administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily, amprenavir was rapidly absorbed with a geometric mean (95% CI) steady state peak plasma amprenavir concentration (Cmax) of 6.08 (5.38-6.86) µg/ ml occurring approximately 1.5 (0.75-5.0) hours after dosing (tmax).
The mean steady state plasma amprenavir trough concentration (Cmin) was 2.12 (1.77-2.54) µg/ ml and AUC0-tau was 39.6 (34.5– 45.3) h*µg/ ml.
Administration of the fosamprenavir tablet formulation in the fed state (standardised high fat meal:
967 kcal, 67 grams fat, 33 grams protein, 58 grams carbohydrate) did not alter plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetics (Cmax, tmax or AUC0- ∞) compared to the administration of this formulation in the fasted state.
Telzir tablets may be taken without regard to food intake.
Co-administration of amprenavir with grapefruit juice was not associated with clinically significant changes in plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetics.
Distribution
The apparent volume of distribution of amprenavir following administration of Telzir is approximately 430 l (6 l/ kg assuming a 70 kg body weight), suggesting a large volume of distribution, with penetration of amprenavir freely into tissues beyond the systemic circulation.
This value is decreased by approximately 40% when Telzir is co-administered with ritonavir, most likely due to an increase in amprenavir bioavailability.
In in vitro studies, the protein binding of amprenavir is approximately 90%.
It is bound to the alpha-1- acid glycoprotein (AAG) and albumin, but has a higher affinity for AAG.
Concentrations of AAG have been shown to decrease during the course of antiretroviral therapy.
This change will decrease the total active substance concentration in the plasma, however the amount of unbound amprenavir, which is the active moiety, is likely to be unchanged.
CSF penetration of amprenavir is negligible in humans.
Amprenavir appears to penetrate into semen, though semen concentrations are lower than plasma concentrations.
Metabolism
Fosamprenavir is rapidly and almost completely hydrolysed to amprenavir and inorganic phosphate as it is absorbed through the gut epithelium, following oral administration.
Amprenavir is primarily metabolised by the liver with less than 1% excreted unchanged in the urine.
The primary route of metabolism is via the cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme.
Amprenavir metabolism is inhibited by ritonavir, via inhibition of CYP3A4, resulting in increased plasma concentrations of amprenavir.
Amprenavir in addition is also an inhibitor of the CYP3A4 enzyme, although to a lesser extent than ritonavir.
Therefore medicinal products that are inducers, inhibitors or substrates of CYP3A4 must be used with caution when administered concurrently with Telzir with ritonavir (see sections 4.3 and 4.5).
Elimination
Following administration of Telzir, the half-life of amprenavir is 7.7 hours.
When Telzir is co-administered with ritonavir, the half-life of amprenavir is increased to 15 – 23 hours.
19 The primary route of elimination of amprenavir is via hepatic metabolism with less than 1% excreted unchanged in the urine and no detectable amprenavir in faeces.
Metabolites account for approximately 14% of the administered amprenavir dose in the urine, and approximately 75% in the faeces.
Special populations
Paediatrics
In a clinical study on pharmacokinetics of fosamprenavir in paediatric patients, eight subjects 12 to 18 years of age received the standard fosamprenavir adult tablet dose of 700 mg twice daily (with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily).
Compared to the historical adult population receiving fosamprenavir / ritonavir 700 / 100 mg twice daily, 12 to 18 year old subjects had 20% lower plasma APV AUC(0- 24), 23% lower Cmax, and 20% lower Cmin values.
Children 6 to 11 years of age (n=9) receiving fosamprenavir / ritonavir 18 / 3 mg/ kg twice daily had 26% higher AUC(0-24) and similar Cmax and Cmin values when compared to the historical adult population receiving fosamprenavir / ritonavir 700 / 100 mg twice daily.
APV20002 is a 48 week, Phase II, open label study designed to evaluate the pharmacokinetics, safety, tolerability and antiviral activity of fosamprenavir with and without ritonavir in paediatric subjects 4 weeks to < 2 years of age.
Compared to the historical adult population receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily, a subset of five pediatric subjects ages 6 to < 24-months receiving fosamprenavir / ritonavir 45/ 7 mg/ kg twice daily demonstrated that despite an approximate 5-fold increase in fosamprenavir and ritonavir doses on a mg/ kg basis, plasma amprenavir AUC(0-τ) was approximately 48% lower, Cmax 26% lower, and Cτ 29% lower in the paediatric subjects.
No dosing recommendations can be made for the very young (children < 2 years of age) and Telzir with ritonavir is not recommended for this patient population (see section 4.2).
Elderly
The pharmacokinetics of fosamprenavir in combination with ritonavir has not been studied in patients over 65 years of age.
Renal impairment
Patients with renal impairment have not been specifically studied.
Less than 1% of the therapeutic dose of amprenavir is excreted unchanged in the urine.
Renal clearance of ritonavir is also negligible, therefore the impact of renal impairment on amprenavir and ritonavir elimination should be minimal
Hepatic impairment
Fosamprenavir is converted in man to amprenavir.
The principal route of amprenavir and ritonavir elimination is hepatic metabolism.
The plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetics were evaluated in a 14 day repeat-dose study in HIV-1 infected adult subjects with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir compared to matched control subjects with normal hepatic function.
In subjects with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 5-6), the dosage regimen of fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily with a reduced dosing frequency of ritonavir 100 mg once daily provided slightly higher plasma amprenavir Cmax (17%), slightly higher plasma amprenavir AUC(0-12) (22%), similar plasma total amprenavir C12 values and approximately 117% higher plasma unbound amprenavir C12 values compared to subjects with normal hepatic function receiving the standard fosamprenavir / ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily regimen.
In subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 7-9), a reduced dose of fosamprenavir 450 mg twice daily with a reduced dosing frequency of ritonavir 100 mg once daily is 20 predicted to deliver similar plasma amprenavir Cmax and AUC(0-12), but approximately 35% lower plasma total amprenavir C12 values and approximately 88% higher plasma unbound amprenavir C12 values than achieved in subjects with normal hepatic function receiving the standard fosamprenavir with ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily regimen.
In subjects with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 10-13), a reduced dose of fosamprenavir 300 mg twice daily with a reduced dosing frequency of ritonavir 100 mg once daily delivered 19% lower plasma amprenavir Cmax, 23% lower AUC(0-12), and 38% lower C12 values, but similar unbound plasma amprenavir C12 values than achieved in subjects with normal hepatic function receiving the standard fosamprenavir with ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily regimen.
Despite reducing the dosing frequency of ritonavir, subjects with severe hepatic impairment had 64% higher ritonavir Cmax, 40% higher ritonavir AUC(0-24), and 38% higher ritonavir C12 than achieved in subjects with normal hepatic function receiving the standard fosamprenavir with ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily regimen.
Fosamprenavir with ritonavir was generally well-tolerated in subjects with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment, and these regimens had similar adverse event and clinical laboratory profiles as previous studies of HIV-1 infected subjects with normal hepatic function.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
Toxicity was similar to that of amprenavir and occurred at amprenavir plasma exposure levels below human exposure after treatment with fosamprenavir in combination with ritonavir at the recommended dose.
In repeated dose toxicity studies in adult rats and dogs, fosamprenavir produced evidence of gastrointestinal disturbances (salivation, vomiting and soft to liquid faeces), and hepatic changes (increased liver weights, raised serum liver enzyme activities and microscopic changes, including hepatocyte necrosis).
Toxicity was not aggravated when juvenile animals were treated as compared with adult animals, but the data did indicate a steeper dose response.
In reproductive toxicity studies with fosamprenavir in rats, male fertility was not affected, but in females gravid uterine weights, numbers of ovarian corpora lutea and uterine implantation sites were reduced.
In pregnant rats and rabbits there were no major effects on embryo-foetal development.
However, the number of abortions increased.
In rabbits, systemic exposure at the high dose level was only 0.3 times human exposure at the maximum clinical dose and thus the developmental toxicity of fosamprenavir has not been fully determined.
In rats exposed pre- and post-natally to fosamprenavir, pups showed impaired physical and functional development and reduced growth.
Pup survival was decreased.
In addition, decreased number of implantation sites per litter and a prolongation of gestation were seen when pups were mated after reaching maturity.
Fosamprenavir was not mutagenic or genotoxic in a standard battery of in vitro and in vivo assays.
In long-term carcinogenicity studies with fosamprenavir in mice and rats, there were increases in hepatocellular adenomas and hepatocellular carcinomas in mice at exposure levels equivalent to 0.1 to 0.3-fold those in humans given 700 mg of fosamprenavir plus 100mg ritonavir twice daily, and increases in hepatocellular adenomas and thyroid follicular cell adenomas in rats at exposure levels equivalent to 0.3 to 0.6-fold those in humans given 700 mg of fosamprenavir plus 100mg ritonavir twice daily.
The relevance of the hepatocellular findings in the rodents for humans is uncertain; however, there is no evidence from clinical trials or marketed use to suggest that these findings are of clinical significance.
Repeat dose studies with fosamprenavir in rats produced effects consistent with hepatic enzyme induction, which predisposes rats to thyroid neoplasms.
The thyroid tumorigenic potential is regarded to be species-specific.
The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
In rats 21 only there was an increase in interstitial cell hyperplasia in males at exposure levels equivalent to 0.5- fold those in humans, and an increase in uterine endometrial adenocarcinoma in females at an exposure level equivalent to 1.1-fold those in humans.
The incidence of endometrial findings was slightly increased over concurrent controls, but within background range for female rats.
The relevance of the uterine endometrial adenocarcinomas for humans is uncertain; however there is no evidence from clinical trials or marketed use to suggest that these findings are of clinical significance.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Tablet core:
Microcrystalline cellulose Croscarmellose sodium Povidone K30 Magnesium stearate Colloidal anhydrous silica
Tablet film-coat:
Hypromellose Titanium dioxide (E171) Glycerol triacetate Iron oxide red (E172)
6.2 Incompatibilities
Not applicable.
6.3 Shelf life
3 years.
6.4 Special precautions for storage
This medicinal product does not require any special storage conditions.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
HDPE bottles with a child resistant polypropylene closure containing 60 tablets.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
Any unused product should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements..
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Road Greenford
22 Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER
EU/ 1/ 04/ 282/ 001
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
Date of first authorisation:
12 July 2004
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) http: / /www. emea. europa. eu
23 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Telzir 50 mg/ ml oral suspension.
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each ml of oral suspension contains 50 mg fosamprenavir as fosamprenavir calcium (equivalent to approximately 43 mg amprenavir).
Excipients:
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Oral suspension.
The suspension is white to off-white in colour.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Telzir in combination with low dose ritonavir is indicated for the treatment of Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 (HIV-1) infected adults, adolescents and children of 6 years and above in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products.
In moderately antiretroviral experienced adults, Telzir in combination with low dose ritonavir has not been shown to be as effective as lopinavir / ritonavir.
No comparative studies have been undertaken in children or adolescents.
In heavily pretreated patients the use of Telzir in combination with low dose ritonavir has not been sufficiently studied.
In protease inhibitor (PI) experienced patients, the choice of Telzir should be based on individual viral resistance testing and treatment history (see section 5.1).
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Telzir must only be given with low dose ritonavir as a pharmacokinetic enhancer of amprenavir and in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products.
The Summary of Product Characteristics of ritonavir must therefore be consulted prior to initiation of therapy with Telzir.
Therapy should be initiated by a physician experienced in the management of HIV infection.
Telzir (fosamprenavir) is a pro-drug of amprenavir and must not be administered concomitantly with other medicinal products containing amprenavir.
The importance of complying with the full recommended dosing regimen should be stressed to all patients.
24 Caution is advised if the recommended dose of fosamprenavir with ritonavir detailed below are exceeded (see section 4.4).
Telzir suspension is administered orally.
Shake the bottle vigorously for 20 seconds before first dose is removed and 5 seconds before each subsequent dose.
Telzir is also available as 700 mg film-coated tablets.
Adults
In adults, the oral suspension should be taken without food and on an empty stomach.
Please refer to the table below for the dosing recommendations in adults.
Paediatric patients (from 6 years of age)
In paediatric patients, the oral suspension should be taken with food in order to aid palatability and assist compliance (see section 5.2).
Telzir oral suspension is the recommended option for the most accurate dosing in children based on body weight.
Please refer to the table below for the dosing recommendations in paediatric patients.
No dosing recommendations can be made for children weighing less than 25 kg.
Children less than 6 years of age:
Telzir with ritonavir is not recommended in children below 6 years due to insufficient data on pharmacokinetics, safety and antiviral response (see section 5.2).
Dosing recommendations for Telzir with ritonavir
Age
Body weight
Telzir dose (TWICE DAILY)
Ritonavir dose (TWICE DAILY)
Adult (> 18
Tablet or Oral suspension
Capsule or Solution
years)
700 mg (1 tablet or 14 ml suspension)
100 mg
Oral suspension should be taken without food 6-17 years
> 39 kg
Tablet or Oral suspension
Capsule or Solution
700 mg (1 tablet or 14 ml suspension)
100 mg
Oral suspension should be taken with food
25
33-38 kg
Oral suspension
Capsule or Solution
18 mg/ kg (0.36 ml/ kg); maximum 700 mg or 14 ml
100 mg
Oral suspension should be taken with food
25-32 kg
Oral suspension
Solution
18 mg/ kg (0.36 ml/ kg)
3 mg/ kg
Oral suspension should be taken with food
< 25 kg
No dosing recommendations
< 6 years
Not recommended
Elderly (over 65 years of age)
The pharmacokinetics of fosamprenavir have not been studied in this patient population (see section 5.2).
Renal impairment
No initial dose adjustment is considered necessary in patients with renal impairment (see section 5.2).
Hepatic impairment
For adults with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score:
5-6) the recommended dose is 700 mg fosamprenavir twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir once daily.
For adults with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score:
7-9) the recommended dose is 450 mg fosamprenavir (i. e.
9 ml Telzir oral suspension) twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir once daily.
For adults with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score:
10-15): fosamprenavir should be used with caution and at a reduced dose of 300 mg fosamprenavir twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir once daily.
Even with these dose adjustments for adults with, some patients with hepatic impairment may have higher or lower than anticipated amprenavir and/ or ritonavir plasma concentrations as compared to patients with normal hepatic function, due to increased inter-patient variability (see section 5.2), therefore a close monitoring of safety and virologic response is warranted.
In this patient population, the oral suspension should be taken without food and on an empty stomach.
No dose recommendation can be made for children and adolescents with hepatic impairment as no studies have been conducted in these age groups.
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to fosamprenavir, amprenavir or to any of the excipients of Telzir, or to ritonavir.
26 Telzir must not be administered concurrently with medicinal products with narrow therapeutic windows that are substrates of cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4), e. g. amiodarone, astemizole, bepridil, cisapride, dihydroergotamine, ergotamine, pimozide, quinidine, terfenadine, oral midazolam (for caution on parenterally administered midazolam, see section 4.5), oral triazolam.
Telzir with ritonavir must not be co-administered with medicinal products with narrow therapeutic windows that are highly dependent on CYP2D6 metabolism e. g. flecainide and propafenone (see section 4.5).
Combination of rifampicin with Telzir with concomitant low-dose ritonavir is contraindicated.
(see section 4.5).
Herbal preparations containing St John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum) must not be used while taking Telzir due to the risk of decreased plasma concentrations and reduced clinical effects of amprenavir (see section 4.5).
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Patients should be advised that treatment with the Telzir, or any other current antiretroviral therapy, does not cure HIV and that they may still develop opportunistic infections and other complications of HIV infection.
Current antiretroviral therapies, including Telzir, have not been proven to prevent the risk of transmission of HIV to others through sexual contact or blood contamination.
Appropriate precautions should continue to be taken.
Fosamprenavir contains a sulphonamide moiety.
The potential for cross-sensitivity between medicinal products in the sulphonamide class and fosamprenavir is unknown.
In the pivotal studies of Telzir, in patients receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir there was no evidence of an increased risk of rashes in patients with a history of sulphonamide allergy versus those who did not have a sulphonamide allergy.
Yet, Telzir should be used with caution in patients with a known sulphonamide allergy.
The Telzir oral suspension contains propyl and methyl parahydroxybenzoate.
These products may cause an allergic reaction in some individuals.
This reaction may be delayed.
Co-administration of Telzir 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir in doses greater than 100 mg twice daily has not been clinically evaluated.
The use of higher ritonavir doses might alter the safety profile of the combination and therefore is not recommended.
Liver disease
Telzir with ritonavir should be used with caution and at reduced doses in adults with mild, moderate or severe hepatic impairment (see section 4.2). Patients with chronic hepatitis B or C and treated with combination antiretroviral therapy are at an increased risk of severe and potentially fatal hepatic adverse events.
In case of concomitant antiviral therapy for hepatitis B or C, please refer also to the relevant Summary of Product Characteristics for these medicinal products.
Patients with pre-existing liver dysfunction, including chronic active hepatitis, have an increased frequency of liver function abnormalities during combination antiretroviral therapy and should be monitored according to standard practice.
If there is evidence of worsening liver disease in such patients, interruption or discontinuation of treatment must be considered.
Medicinal products – interactions
The use of Telzir concomitantly with halofantrine or lidocaine (systemic) is not recommended.
27 The use of Telzir concomitantly with PDE5 inhibitors (e. g. sildenafil and vardenafil) is not recommended (see section 4.5).
Concomitant use of Telzir with simvastatin or lovastatin is not recommended due to an increased risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis (see section 4.5).
A reduction in the rifabutin dosage by at least 75% is recommended when administered with Telzir with ritonavir.
Further dose reduction may be necessary (see section 4.5).
Because there may be an increased risk of hepatic transaminase elevations and hormonal levels may be altered with co-administration of fosamprenavir, ritonavir and oral contraceptives, alternative non- hormonal methods of contraception are recommended for women of childbearing potential (see section 4.5).
No data are available on the co-administration of fosamprenavir and ritonavir with oestrogens and/ or progestogens when used as hormonal replacement therapies.
The efficacy and safety of these therapies with fosamprenavir and ritonavir has not been established.
Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, phenobarbital) should be used with caution.
Telzir may be less effective due to decreased amprenavir plasma concentrations in patients taking these medicinal products concomitantly (see section 4.5).
Therapeutic concentration monitoring is recommended for immunosuppressant medicinal products (cyclosporine, tacrolimus, rapamycin) when co-administered with Telzir (see section 4.5).
Therapeutic concentration monitoring is recommended for tricyclic antidepressants (e. g. desipramine and nortriptyline) when co-administered with Telzir (see section 4.5).
When warfarin or other oral anticoagulants are co-administered with Telzir a reinforced monitoring of INR (International normalised ratio) is recommended (see section 4.5).
Concomitant use of Telzir with ritonavir and fluticasone or other glucocorticoids that are metabolised by CYP3A4 is not recommended unless the potential benefit of treatment outweighs the risk of systemic corticosteroid effects, including Cushing’ s syndrome and adrenal suppression (see section 4.5).
Rash / cutaneous reactions
Most patients with mild or moderate rash can continue Telzir.
Appropriate antihistamines (e. g. cetirizine dihydrochloride) may reduce pruritus and hasten the resolution of rash.
Severe and life-threatening skin reactions, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome, were reported in less than 1% of patients included in the clinical development programme.
Telzir should be permanently discontinued in case of severe rash, or in case of rash of moderate intensity with systemic or mucosal symptoms (see section 4.8).
Haemophiliac patients
There have been reports of increased bleeding including spontaneous skin haematomas and haemarthroses in haemophiliac patients type A and B treated with protease inhibitors (PIs).
In some patients administration of factor VIII was necessary.
In more than half of the reported cases, treatment with protease inhibitors was continued, or reintroduced if treatment had been discontinued.
A causal relationship has been evoked, although the mechanism of action has not been elucidated.
Haemophiliac patients should therefore be informed of the possibility of increased bleeding.
Hyperglycaemia
28 New onset of diabetes mellitus, hyperglycaemia or exacerbations of existing diabetes mellitus have been reported in patients receiving antiretroviral therapy, including protease inhibitors.
In some of these, the hyperglycaemia was severe and in some cases also associated with ketoacidosis.
Many of the patients had confounding medical conditions, some of which required therapy with medicinal products that have been associated with the development of diabetes mellitus or hyperglycaemia.
Lipodystrophy
Combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with the redistribution of body fat (lipodystrophy) in HIV patients.
The long-term consequences of these events are currently unknown.
Knowledge about the mechanism is incomplete.
A connection between visceral lipomatosis and protease inhibitors and lipoatrophy and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors has been hypothesised.
A higher risk of lipodystrophy has been associated with individual factors such as older age, and with drug related factors such as longer duration of antiretroviral treatment and associated metabolic disturbances.
Clinical examination should include evaluation for physical signs of fat redistribution.
Consideration should be given to the measurement of fasting serum lipids and blood glucose.
Lipid disorders should be managed as clinically appropriate (see section 4.8).
Immune Reactivation Syndrome
In HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of institution of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic pathogens may arise and cause serious clinical conditions, or aggravation of symptoms.
Typically, such reactions have been observed within the first few weeks or months of initiation of CART.
Relevant examples are cytomegalovirus retinitis, generalised and/ or focal mycobacterium infections, and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Any inflammatory symptoms should be evaluated and treatment instituted when necessary.
Osteonecrosis:
Although the etiology is considered to be multifactorial (including corticosteroid use, alcohol consumption, severe immunosuppression, higher body mass index), cases of osteonecrosis have been reported particularly in patients with advanced HIV-disease and/ or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
Patients should be advised to seek medical advice if they experience joint aches and pain, joint stiffness or difficulty in movement.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
When fosamprenavir and ritonavir are co-administered, the ritonavir metabolic drug interaction profile may predominate because ritonavir is a more potent CYP3A4 inhibitor.
The full prescribing information for ritonavir must therefore be consulted prior to initiation of therapy with Telzir with ritonavir.
Ritonavir also inhibits CYP2D6 but to a lesser extent than CYP3A4.
Ritonavir induces CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and glucuronosyl transferase.
Additionally, both amprenavir, the active metabolite of fosamprenavir, and ritonavir are primarily metabolised in the liver by CYP3A4.
Therefore, any medicinal products that either share this metabolic pathway or modify CYP3A4 activity may modify the pharmacokinetics of amprenavir and ritonavir.
Similarily, administration of fosamprenavir with ritonavir may modify the pharmacokinetics of other active substances that share this metabolic pathway.
Interaction studies have only been performed in adults.
• Associations contraindicated (see section 4.3)
CYP3A4 substrates with narrow therapeutic index
29 Telzir must not be administered concurrently with medicinal products with narrow therapeutic windows containing active substances that are substrates of cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4).
Co-administration may result in competitive inhibition of the metabolism of these active substances thus increasing their plasma levels and leading to serious and / or life-threatening adverse reactions such as cardiac arrhythmia (e. g. amiodarone, astemizole, bepridil, cisapride, pimozide, quinidine, terfenadine) or peripheral vasospasm or ischaemia (e. g. ergotamine, dihydroergotamine).
CYP2D6 substrates with narrow therapeutic index Telzir with ritonavir must not be co-administered with medicinal products containing active substances that are highly dependent on CYP2D6 metabolism and for which elevated plasma concentrations are associated with serious and / or life-threatening adverse reactions.
These active substances include flecainide and propafenone.
Rifampicin Rifampicin is a strong CYP3A4 inducer and has been shown to cause an 82% decrease in amprenavir AUC, which can result in virological failure and resistance development.
During attempts to overcome the decreased exposure by increasing the dose of other protease inhibitors with ritonavir, a high frequency of liver reactions was seen.
The combination of rifampicin and Telzir with concomitant low-dose ritonavir is contraindicated (see section 4.3).
St John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum) Serum levels of amprenavir and ritonavir can be reduced by concomitant use of the herbal preparation St John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum).
This is due to induction of drug metabolising enzymes by St John’ s wort.
Herbal preparations containing St John’ s wort should therefore not be combined with Telzir with ritonavir.
If a patient is already taking St John’ s wort, check amprenavir, ritonavir and if possible viral levels and stop St John’ s wort.
Amprenavir and ritonavir levels may increase on stopping St John’ s wort.
The inducing effect may persist for at least 2 weeks after cessation of treatment with St John’ s wort.
• Other combinations
Antiretroviral medicinal products
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Efavirenz: there was no clinically relevant interaction when fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily was used concurrently with efavirenz (600 mg once daily).
Nevirapine: there was no clinically relevant interaction when fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily was used concurrently with nevirapine (200 mg twice daily).
Nucleoside / Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Interaction studies with abacavir, lamivudine and zidovudine have been performed with amprenavir without ritonavir.
Based on data derived from these studies and because ritonavir is not expected to have a significant impact on the pharmacokinetics of NRTIs, the co-administration of fosamprenavir and ritonavir with these medicinal products is not expected to significantly alter the exposure of the co-administered active substances.
Didanosine chewable tablet: no pharmacokinetic study has been performed with fosamprenavir in combination with didanosine.
Clinically significant interaction resulting from an increase in the stomach pH due to the didanosine antacid component is unlikely and no dose separation or adjustment is considered necessary when fosamprenavir and didanosine are administered concomitantly (see chapter, Antacids).
No significant interaction is expected with didanosine gastro-resistent capsule
30 Tenofovir: no recommendations can be drawn at this stage on the co-administration of fosamprenavir with ritonavir with tenofovir.
Protease Inhibitors
Lopinavir / ritonavir:
Co-administration of standard doses of lopinavir/ ritonavir with fosamprenavir results in a significant reduction in amprenavir concentrations.
Co-administration of increased doses of fosamprenavir 1400mg twice daily with lopinavir/ ritonavir 533/ 133mg twice daily to PI-experienced patients resulted in a higher incidence of gastrointestinal adverse events and elevations in triglycerides with the combination regimen without increases in virological efficacy, when compared with standard doses of fosamprenavir/ ritonavir.
Therefore, concomitant administration of these medicinal products is not recommended.
No interaction studies have been undertaken between fosamprenavir with ritonavir and the following protease inhibitors: indinavir, saquinavir, nelfinavir and atazanavir.
Antibiotics / Antifungals
Clarithromycin: a reduction in the clarithromycin dose should be considered when co-administered with Telzir with ritonavir in patients with renal impairment as moderate increases in clarithromycin concentrations are expected when coadministered with Telzir with ritonavir.
Erythromycin: no pharmacokinetic study has been performed with fosamprenavir with ritonavir in combination with erythromycin, however, plasma levels of erythromycin may be increased when co-administered.
Ketoconazole / Itraconazole: co-administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily and ketoconazole 200 mg once daily increased plasma ketoconazole Cmax by 25% and increased AUC(0-τ) to values 2.69-fold those observed on administration of ketoconazole 200 mg once daily without concurrent fosamprenavir with ritonavir.
The Cmax, AUC and Cmin of amprenavir were unchanged.
When used with Telzir with ritonavir, high doses (> 200 mg/ day) of ketoconazole or itraconazole are not recommended.
Rifabutin: compared to rifabutin administered alone (300 mg once daily), plasma rifabutin AUC (0- 48) was unchanged and Cmax was decreased 14% following co-administration of reduced doses of rifabutin (150 mg every other day) with fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily.
However, 25-O-desacetylrifabutin AUC (0-48) and Cmax were increased 11-fold and 6- fold respectively, which could potentially lead to an increase of rifabutin related adverse events, notably uveitis.
Based on historical comparison, rifabutin did not appear to reduce amprenavir exposure.
On the basis of these data, a 75% reduction of the standard rifabutin dose (i. e. to 150 mg every other day) is recommended when administered with Telzir with ritonavir.
Further dose reduction may be necessary.
Other medicinal products
Medicinal products that may reduce plasma amprenavir concentrations when co-administered with Telzir
Antacids, Histamine H2 receptor antagonist and Proton-Pump inhibitors: no dose adjustment for any of the respective medicinal products is considered necessary when antacids, proton-pump inhibitors or histamine H2 receptor antagonists are administered concomitantly with fosamprenavir.
The AUC and Cmax of amprenavir were decreased by 18% and 35% respectively, whilst the Cmin (C12h) was comparable, when a single 1400 mg dose of fosamprenavir was co-administered with a single 30 ml
31 dose of antacid suspension (equivalent to 3.6 grams aluminium hydroxide and 1.8 grams magnesium hydroxide).
Serum levels of amprenavir can be reduced by concomitant use of histamine H2 receptor antagonists (for example ranitidine and cimetidine).
Concurrent administration of ranitidine (300 mg single dose) with fosamprenavir (1400 mg single dose) decreased plasma amprenavir AUC by 30% and Cmax by 51%.
There was, however, no change observed in the amprenavir Cmin (C12h).
Anticonvulsant active substances:
The AUC and Cmin of amprenavir were increased by 20% and 19% respectively, with Cmax unchanged when fosamprenavir (700 mg twice daily) plus ritonavir (100 mg twice daily) was given concomitantly with phenytoin (300 mg once daily).
The AUC, Cmax and Cmin of phenytoin were decreased by 22%, 20% and 29% respectively.
Therefore, if fosamprenavir plus ritonavir is given in combination with phenytoin, no change to the fosamprenavir plus ritonavir dosage regimen is required.
However, it is recommended that phenytoin plasma concentrations be monitored and phenytoin dose increased as appropriate.
Concomitant administration of other anticonvulsant agents known to be enzymatic inducers (e. g. phenobarbital, carbamazepine) has not been studied but may lead to a decrease in the plasma concentrations of amprenavir.
These combinations should be used with caution.
Medicinal products whose plasma levels may be increased when co-administered with Telzir
Other medicinal products with a narrow therapeutic window: some substances (e. g. lidocaine (by systemic route) and halofantrine) given with Telzir may cause serious adverse reactions.
Concomitant use is not recommended.
Erectile dysfunction medicinal products: concomitant use is not recommended.
Based on data for ritonavir and other protease inhibitors, plasma concentrations of PDE5 inhibitors (e. g. sildenafil and vardenafil) are expected to substantially increase when co-administered with Telzir with ritonavir and may result in an increase in PDE5 inhibitor associated adverse reactions, including hypotension, visual changes and priapism.
Fluticasone propionate (interaction with ritonavir): in a clinical study where ritonavir 100 mg capsules bid were co-administered with 50 µg intranasal fluticasone propionate (4 times daily) for 7 days in healthy subjects, the fluticasone propionate plasma levels increased significantly, whereas the intrinsic cortisol levels decreased by approximately 86% (90% confidence interval 82-89%).
Greater effects may be expected when fluticasone propionate is inhaled.
Systemic corticosteroid effects including Cushing’ s syndrome and adrenal suppression have been reported in patients receiving ritonavir and inhaled or intranasally administered fluticasone propionate; this could also occur with other corticosteroids metabolised via the P450 3A pathway e. g. budesonide.
Consequently, concomitant administration of Telzir with ritonavir and these glucocorticoids is not recommended unless the potential benefit of treatment outweighs the risk of systemic corticosteroid effects (see section 4.4).
A dose reduction of the glucocorticoid should be considered with close monitoring of local and systemic effects or a switch to a glucocorticoid, which is not a substrate for CYP3A4 (e. g. beclomethasone).
Moreover, in case of withdrawal of glucocorticoids progressive dose reduction may have to be performed over a longer period.
The effects of high fluticasone systemic exposure on ritonavir plasma levels is yet unknown.
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors: if treatment with a HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor is indicated, pravastatin or fluvastatin is recommended because their metabolism is not dependent on CYP3A4 and interactions are not expected with protease inhibitors.
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors which are highly dependent on CYP3A4 for metabolism, such as lovastatin and simvastatin, are expected to have markedly increased plasma concentrations when co-administered with Telzir with ritonavir.
Since increased concentrations of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors may cause myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, the combination of lovastatin or simvastatin with Telzir with ritonavir is not
32 recommended.
No adjustment of the fosamprenavir or ritonavir dose is required when co-administered with atovarstatin.
The Cmax, AUC and Cmin of atorvastatin were increased by 184%, 153% and 73% respectively when atorvastatin (10 mg once daily for 4 days) was given with fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily for two weeks.
The Cmax, AUC and Cmin of amprenavir were unchanged.
When used with Telzir with ritonavir, doses of atorvastatin no greater than 20 mg/ day should be administered, with careful monitoring for atorvastatin toxicity.
Immunosuppressants: frequent therapeutic concentration monitoring of immunosuppresant levels is recommended until levels have stabilised as plasma concentrations of cyclosporin, rapamycin and tacrolimus may be increased when co-administered with fosamprenavir with ritonavir.
Midazolam: midazolam is extensively metabolized by CYP3A4.
Coadministration with Telzir/ ritonavir may cause a large increase in the concentration of this benzodiazepine.
No drug interaction study has been performed for the co-administration of Telzir/ ritonavir with benzodiazepines.
Based on data for other CYP3A4 inhibitors, plasma concentrations of midazolam are expected to be significantly higher when midazolam is given orally.
Therefore Telzir/ ritonavir should not be co-administered with orally administered midazolam (see section 4.3), whereas caution should be used with co-administration of Telzir/ ritonavir and parenteral midazolam.
Data from concomitant use of parenteral midazolam with other protease inhibitors suggest a possible 3-4 fold increase in midazolam plasma levels.
If Telzir/ ritonavir is co-administered with parenteral midazolam, it should be done in an intensive care unit (ICU) or similar setting which ensures close clinical monitoring and appropriate medical management in case of respiratory depression and/ or prolonged sedation.
Dosage adjustment for midazolam should be considered, especially if more than a single dose of midazolam is administered.
Tricyclic antidepressants: careful monitoring of the therapeutic and adverse reactions of tricyclic antidepressants is recommended when they (for example desipramine and nortriptyline) are concomitantly administered with Telzir.
Medicinal products whose plasma levels may be decreased when co-administered with Telzir
Methadone: co-administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily with methadone once daily (≤ 200 mg) for 14 days decreased the active (R-) methadone enantiomer AUC(0- τ) and Cmax by 18% and 21% respectively.
This limited impact is not expected to be clinically significant.
However, as a precaution, patients should be monitored for withdrawal syndrome.
Based on historical comparisons, methadone did not appear to alter plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetic parameters.
Oral anticoagulants: a reinforced monitoring of the International Normalised Ratio is recommended in case of administration of Telzir with ritonavir with warfarin or other oral anticoagulants, due to a possible decrease or increase of their antithrombotic effect.
Steroids:
Co-administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily + ritonavir 100 mg twice daily with an oral contraceptive containing ethinyl estradiol (EE) 0.035 mg/ norethisterone (NE) 0.5 mg once daily decreased plasma EE AUC(0- τ) and Cmax by 37% and 28%, respectively, and decreased plasma NE AUC(0-τ), Cmax, and Cτ by 34%, 38%, and 26%, respectively.
Steady state plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters were not significantly affected by co-administration with this oral contraceptive; however, ritonavir AUC(0- τ) and Cmax were 45% and 63% higher, respectively, compared to historical data in female subjects dosed with fosamprenavir / ritonavir alone.
In addition to the decreased hormonal contraceptive exposures, co-administration of fosamprenavir with ritonavir and this oral contraceptive resulted in clinically significant hepatic transaminase elevations in some healthy subjects.
Therefore alternative non-hormonal methods of contraception are recommended for women of childbearing potential (see section 4.4).
33 Paroxetine:
The Cmax and AUC of paroxetine were decreased by 51% and 55% respectively when paroxetine 20 mg once daily was given with fosamprenavir 700 mg and ritonavir 100 mg twice daily for 10 days in healthy volunteers.
The mechanism of this interaction remains unknown.
Based on historical comparison, amprenavir pharmacokinetic parameters were not altered by paroxetine.
Therefore, if paroxetine is co-administered with Telzir and ritonavir, the recommended approach is a dose titration of paroxetine based on a clinical assessment of antidepressant response.
In addition, patients on stable dose of paroxetine who start treatment with Telzir and ritonavir should be monitored for antidepressant response.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Pregnancy
There is no clinical experience with fosamprenavir in pregnant women.
In animal studies at systemic plasma exposures (AUC) to amprenavir lower than therapeutic exposure in patients treated with Telzir, some developmental toxicity was observed (see section 5.3).
In view of the low exposure in reproductive toxicity studies, the potential developmental toxicity of Telzir has not been fully determined.
Telzir should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus.
Lactation Amprenavir-related material was found in rat milk, but it is not known whether amprenavir is excreted in human milk.
Rat pups exposed pre and post-natally to amprenavir and fosamprenavir showed developmental toxicity (see section 5.3).
It is therefore recommended that mothers treated with Telzir do not breast-feed their infants.
As a general rule, it is recommended that HIV-infected women must not breast-feed under any circumstances to avoid transmission of HIV.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects of Telzir in combination with ritonavir on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
The adverse reaction profile of Telzir should be borne in mind when considering the patient’ s ability to drive or operate machinery (see section 4.8).
4.8 Undesirable effects
It should be noted that the Telzir oral suspension has not been evaluated clinically in adults and that the adverse reaction profile detailed in this section is based on the experience in adults with the Telzir film coated tablets.
The safety of fosamprenavir has been studied in 755 adult patients in Phase II and III controlled clinical trials.
The safety of the co-administration of fosamprenavir with low dose ritonavir was established in two pivotal Phase III trials:
APV30002 (n = 322) in antiretroviral naïve patients, fosamprenavir (1400 mg) given once daily in combination with ritonavir (200 mg) as part of a triple regimen including abacavir and lamivudine.
APV30003 in protease inhibitor experienced patients, fosamprenavir given in combination with low dose ritonavir either once daily (1400 mg / 200 mg) (n = 106) or twice daily (700 mg / 100 mg) (n = 106) in combination with two active reverse transcriptase inhibitors (RTIs).
The adverse reaction profile was similar across all the respective adult studies: antiretroviral naïve (APV30002) and protease inhibitor experienced (twice daily dosing, APV30003) patient populations.
34 Adverse reactions are listed by MedDRA system organ class and absolute frequency.
Frequencies. are defined as:
Very common (≥ 1/ 10), Common (≥ 1/ 100, < 1/ 10), Uncommon (≥ 1/ 1,000, < 1/ 100), Rare (≥ 1/ 10,000, < 1/ 1,000) or Very rare (< 1/ 10,000), including isolated reports.
Frequency categories for the events below have been based on clinical trials and postmarketing data.
Most of the adverse events below were reported from two large clinical studies in adults, where the adverse events were of at least moderate intensity (Grade 2 or more) occurring in at least 1% of patients and reported by investigators as being attributable to the medicinal products used in the studies.
Body System
Adverse reaction
Frequency
Nervous system disorders
Headache, dizziness, oral paraesthesia
Common
Gastrointestinal disorders
Diarrhoea
Very common
Loose stools, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain
Common
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
Rash (see text below “ rash/ cutaneous reactions”)
Common
Angioedema
Uncommon
Stevens Johnson syndrome
Rare
General disorders and administration site conditions
Fatigue
Common
Children and adolescents:
The adverse event profile in children and adolescents is based on integrated safety data from two studies (APV29005 and APV20003) in which 126 HIV-1 infected subjects 2 to 18 years of age received fosamprenavir with ritonavir with background nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor therapy (see section 5.1 for information on dosing regimens applied for each age group).
70% of subjects received greater than 48 weeks of exposure.
Overall the safety profile in these 126 children and adolescents was similar to that observed in the adult population.
Drug-related adverse events were more common in APV20003 (55%) where subjects received once daily fosamprenavir / ritonavir when compared to APV29005 (39%) where subjects received twice daily fosamprenavir / ritonavir.
Rash / cutaneous reactions: erythematous or maculopapular cutaneous eruptions, with or without pruritus, may occur during therapy.
The rash generally will resolve spontaneously without the necessity of discontinuing treatment with the fosamprenavir with ritonavir.
Severe or life-threatening cases of rash, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome are rare.
Fosamprenavir with ritonavir therapy should be definitively stopped in case of severe rash or in case of rash of mild or moderate intensity associated with systemic or mucosal signs (see section 4.4).
35 Clinical chemistry abnormalities: clinical chemistry abnormalities (Grade 3 or 4) potentially related to treatment with fosamprenavir with ritonavir and reported in greater than or equal to 1% of adult patients, included: increased ALT (common), AST (common), serum lipase (common) and triglycerides (very common).
Grade 3 or 4 elevations in total cholesterol values were observed in less than 1% of adult patients (< 1% APV30002; 0% APV 30003).
Lipodystrophy: combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with redistribution of body fat (lipodystrophy) in HIV patients including the loss of peripheral and facial subcutaneous fat, increased intra-abdominal and visceral fat, breast hypertrophy and dorsocervical fat accumulation (buffalo hump) (see section 4.4).
Metabolic abnormalities: combination antiretroviral therapy has been associated with metabolic abnormalities such as hypertriglyceridaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, insulin resistance, hyperglycaemia and hyperlactataemia (see section 4.4).
Hyperglycaemia: new onset of diabetes mellitus, hyperglycaemia or exacerbations of existing diabetes mellitus have been reported in patients receiving antiretroviral protease inhibitors (see section 4.4).
Rhabdomyolysis: an increase in CPK, myalgia, myositis, and rarely, rhabdomyolysis, have been reported with protease inhibitors, more specifically in association with nucleoside analogues.
Haemophiliac patients: there have been reports of increased spontaneous bleeding in haemophiliac patients receiving antiretroviral protease inhibitors (see section 4.4).
Immune Reactivation Syndrome: in HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of initiation of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic infections may arise (see section 4.4).
Osteonecrosis: cases of osteonecrosis have been reported, particularly in patients with generally acknowledged risk factors, advanced HIV disease or long-term exposure to combination antiretroviral therapy (CART).
The frequency of this is unknown (see section 4.4).
4.9 Overdose
There is no known antidote for Telzir.
It is not known whether amprenavir can be removed by peritoneal dialysis or haemodialysis.
If overdosage occurs, the patient should be monitored for evidence of toxicity (see section 4.8) and standard supportive treatment applied as necessary.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Antivirals for systemic use, protease inhibitor, ATC Code:
J05A E07
Mechanism of action
The in vitro antiviral activity observed with fosamprenavir is due to the presence of trace amounts of amprenavir.
Amprenavir is a competitive inhibitor of the HIV-1 protease.
Amprenavir binds to the active site of HIV-1 protease and thereby prevents the processing of viral gag and gag-pol polyprotein precursors, resulting in the formation of immature non-infectious viral particles.
Co-administration of ritonavir with fosamprenavir increase plasma amprenavir AUC by approximately 2-fold and plasma C τ, ss by 4- to 6-fold, compared to values obtained when fosamprenavir is administered alone.
Administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily with ritonavir 100 mg twice
36 daily results in plasma amprenavir concentrations (data from study APV30003 in antiretroviral experienced patients) which results in protein adjusted median ratios of Cmin/ IC50 and Cmin/ IC95 of 21.7 (range 1.19-240) and 3.21 (range 0.26-30.0), respectively.
Antiviral activity in vitro
The in vitro antiviral activity of amprenavir was evaluated against HIV-1 IIIB in both acutely and chronically infected lymphoblastic cell lines (MT-4, CEM-CCRF, H9) and in peripheral blood lymphocytes.
The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of amprenavir ranged from 0.012 to 0.08 µM in acutely infected cells and was 0.41 µM in chronically infected cells (1 µM = 0.50 µg/ ml).
The relationship between in vitro anti-HIV-1 activity of amprenavir and the inhibition of HIV-1 replication in humans has not been defined.
Resistance
In vitro
HIV-1 isolates with decreased susceptibility to amprenavir have been selected during in vitro serial passage experiments.
Reduced susceptibility to amprenavir was associated with virus that had developed I50V or I84V or V32I+I47V or I54M mutations.
In vivo
b) ART-naïve or PI-naïve patients
Various regimens have been assessed in the amprenavir/ fosamprenavir development programs with and without co-administration of ritonavir.
Analysis of the virological failure samples across these regimens defined four main resistance pathways:
V32I+I47V, I50V, I54L/ M and I84V.
Additional mutations observed which may contribute to resistance were:
L10V/ F/ R, I13V, K20R/ T, L33F/ V, M36I, M46I/ L, I47V/ L Q58E, I62V, L63P, V77I, I85V, and I93L.
When ART naïve patients were treated with the currently approved doses of fosamprenavir/ ritonavir, as for other ritonavir boosted PI regimens, the mutations described were infrequently observed.
Sixteen of 434 ART-naïve patients who received fosamprenavir 700mg/ ritonavir 100mg twice daily in ESS100732 experienced virological failure by Week 48 with 14 isolates genotyped.
Three of 14 isolates had protease resistance mutations.
One resistance mutation was observed in each of 3 isolates:
K20K/ R, I54I/ L and I93I/ L respectively
Genotypic analysis of isolates from 13 of 14 paediatric patients exhibiting virological failure among the 59 PI-naïve patients enrolled, demonstrated resistance patterns similar to those observed in adults.
b) PI-experienced patients
Amprenavir
In the studies of PI-experienced patients, PRO30017 (amprenavir 600 mg / ritonavir 100 mg twice daily in sub-study A and B with 80 and 37 patients respectively), the following mutations emerged in patients with virological failure:
L10F/ I/ V, V11I, I13V, K20R, V32I, L33F, E34Q, M36I, M46I/ L, I47V, G48V, I50V, I54L/ M/ T/ V, Q58E, D60E, I62V, A71V, V77I, V82A/ I, I84V, I85V, L90M and I93L/ M.
Fosamprenavir
37 In the studies of PI-experienced patients, APV30003 and its extension, APV30005 (fosamprenavir 700 mg / ritonavir 100 mg twice daily: n=107), the following mutations emerged in patients experiencing virological failure through 96 weeks:
L10F/ I, L24I, V32I, L33F, M36I, M46I/ L, I47V, I50V, I54L/ M/ S, A71I/ T/ V, G73S, V82A, I84V, and L90M.
In the paediatric studies APV20003 and APV29005, 67 PI-experienced patients were treated with fosamprenavir / ritonavir and of 22 virological failure isolates genotyped, nine patients were found with treatment-emergent protease mutations.
The mutational profiles were similar to those described for PI-experienced adults treated with fosamprenavir / ritonavir.
Analyses based on genotypic resistance testing.
Genotypic interpretation systems may be used to estimate the activity of amprenavir / ritonavir or fosamprenavir / ritonavir in subjects with PI-resistant isolates.
The current (July 2006) ANRS AC-11 algorithm for fosamprenavir / ritonavir defines resistance as the presence of the mutations V32I+I47A/ V, or I50V, or at least four mutations among:
L10F/ I/ V, L33F, M36I, I54A/ L/ M/ S/ T/ V, I62V, V82A/ C/ F/ G, I84V and L90M and is associated with increased phenotypic resistance to fosamprenavir with ritonavir as well as reduced likelihood of virological response (resistance).
Conclusions regarding the relevance of particular mutations or mutational patterns are subject to change with additional data, and it is recommended to always consult current interpretation systems for analysing resistance test results.
Analyses based on phenotypic resistance testing.
Clinically validated phenotypic interpretation systems may be used in association with the genotypic data to estimate the activity of amprenavir / ritonavir or fosamprenavir / ritonavir in patients with PI- resistant isolates.
Resistance testing diagnostic companies have developed clinical phenotypic cut-offs for FPV/ RTV that can be used to interpret resistance test results.
Cross-Resistance
HIV-1 isolates with a decreased susceptibility to amprenavir have been selected during in vitro serial passage experiments.
Reduced susceptibility to amprenavir was associated with virus that had developed I50V or I84V or V32I+I47Vor I54M mutations.
Each of these four genetic patterns associated with reduced susceptibility to amprenavir produces some cross-resistance to ritonavir but susceptibility to indinavir, nelfinavir and saquinavir is generally retained.
There are currently data on cross-resistance between amprenavir and other protease inhibitors for all 4 fosamprenavir resistance pathways, either alone or in combination with other mutations.
Based on data from twenty-five antiretroviral naïve patients failing a fosamprenavir containing regimen (one of whom showed Baseline resistance to lopinavir and saquinavir and another to tipranavir) the resistance pathways associated with amprenavir produce limited cross-resistance to atazanavir/ ritonavir (three of 25 isolates), darunavir/ ritonavir (four of 25 isolates), indinavir/ ritonavir (one of 25 isolates), lopinavir/ ritonavir (three of 24 isolates, saquinavir (three of 24 isolates) and tipranavir/ ritonavir (four of 24 isolates).
Conversely amprenavir retains activity against some isolates with resistance to other PIs and this retained activity would depend on the number and type of protease resistance mutations present in the isolates.
The number of key PI-resistance mutations increases markedly the longer a failing PI-containing regimen is continued.
Early discontinuation of failing therapies is recommended in order to limit the accumulation of multiple mutations, which may be detrimental to a subsequent rescue regimen.
Cross-resistance between amprenavir and reverse transcriptase inhibitors is unlikely to occur because the enzyme targets are different.
Telzir is not recommended for use as monotherapy, due to the rapid emergence of resistant virus.
Clinical experience
38 Clinical experience with fosamprenavir boosted with ritonavir is mainly based on three open label studies.
Two studies performed in antiretroviral naïve patients, one in comparison to nelfinavir (study APV30002) and one in comparison to lopinavir / ritonavir (study ESS100732), and one study in antiretroviral experienced patients, in comparison to lopinavir / ritonavir (study APV30003).
Antiretroviral Naïve Adult Patients
In antiretroviral naïve patients in APV30002, fosamprenavir (1400 mg) given once daily in combination with low dose ritonavir (200 mg) as part of a triple regimen including abacavir (300 mg twice daily) and lamivudine (150 mg twice daily) showed similar efficacy over 48 weeks compared to nelfinavir (1250 mg) given twice daily in combination with abacavir plus lamivudine (300 and 150 mg twice daily).
Non-inferiority was demonstrated between fosamprenavir with ritonavir and nelfinavir based on the proportions of patients achieving plasma HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ ml at 48 weeks (primary endpoint).
In the ITT (Rebound or Discontinuation = Failure) analysis, 69% (221 / 322) of patients receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir achieved < 400 copies/ ml compared to 68% (221 / 327) of patients receiving nelfinavir.
The median plasma HIV-1 RNA had decreased by 3.1 log10 copies/ ml and 3.0 log10 copies/ ml at Week 48 in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir and nelfinavir arms respectively.
The median baseline CD4 cell count was low (170 cells/ mm3 overall) in both groups.
CD4+ cell counts increased in both the fosamprenavir with ritonavir and nelfinavir groups, with median increases above baseline being similar in magnitude at Week 48 (+203 and +207 cells/ mm3, respectively).
The data presented above demonstrates that the once daily regimen of fosamprenavir with ritonavir (1400/ 200 mg OD) in antiretroviral naïve patients showed similar efficacy compared to nelfinavir given twice daily.
This study in view of its design (open label versus nelfinavir) did not provide a sufficiently robust efficacy demonstration in antiretroviral naïve patients to support the once daily regimen of fosamprenavir with ritonavir.
As a conservative approach, based on enhanced amprenavir Ctrough levels, the twice daily dosing regimen of fosamprenavir with ritonavir was recommended for optimal therapeutic management of this population (see section 4.2).
In a subsequent randomised open-label study (ESS100732) in antiretroviral naïve patients, fosamprenavir (700 mg) co-administered with low dose ritonavir (100 mg) in a twice daily regimen including abacavir / lamivudine (600 mg / 300 mg) fixed dose combination tablet once daily showed comparable efficacy over 48 weeks to lopinavir / ritonavir (400 mg / 100 mg) given twice daily in combination with abacavir / lamivudine (600 mg / 300 mg once daily).
Non-inferiority was demonstrated between fosamprenavir co-administered with ritonavir and lopinavir / ritonavir based on the proportions of patients achieving plasma HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ ml at 48 weeks (primary endpoint).
In the Time to loss of virological response (TLOVR) analysis for the ITT(E) population, the proportion of patients achieving < 400 copies/ ml was 73% (315 / 434) in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir group compared to 71% (317 / 444) of patients receiving lopinavir / ritonavir, with a 95% confidence interval of the difference of [-4,84%; 7; 05%].
The median plasma HIV-1 RNA had decreased by 3.34 log10 copies/ ml and 3.33 log10 copies/ ml at Week 48 in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir and lopinavir / ritonavir arms respectively.
Median increase in CD4 cell count was 176 cells/ mm3 in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir arm and 191 cells/ mm3 in the lopinavir / ritonavir arm respectively by Week 48.
Antiretroviral Experienced Adult Patients
39 In a randomised open-label study (APV30003) in protease inhibitor experienced patients with virological failure (less than or equal to two PIs) the fosamprenavir with ritonavir (700 / 100 mg twice daily or 1400 / 200 mg once daily) did not demonstrate non-inferiority to lopinavir / ritonavir with regard to viral suppression as measured by the average area under the curve minus baseline (AAUCMB) for plasma HIV-1 RNA over 48 weeks (the primary end point).
Results were in favour of the lopinavir / ritonavir arm as detailed below.
All patients in this study had failed treatment with a previous protease inhibitor regimen (defined as plasma HIV-1 RNA that never went below 1,000 copies/ ml after at least 12 consecutive weeks of therapy, or initial suppression of HIV-1 RNA which subsequently rebounded to ≥ 1,000 copies/ ml).
However, only 65% of patients were receiving a PI based regimen at study entry.
The population enrolled mainly consisted of moderately antiretroviral experienced patients.
The median durations of prior exposure to NRTIs were 257 weeks for patients receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily (79% had ≥ 3 prior NRTIs) and 210 weeks for patients receiving lopinavir/ ritonavir (64% had ≥ 3 prior NRTIs).
The median durations of prior exposure to protease inhibitors were 149 weeks for patients receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily (49% received ≥ 2 prior PIs) and 130 weeks for patients receiving lopinavir/ ritonavir (40% received ≥ 2 prior PIs).
The mean AAUCMBs (log10 c/ ml) in the ITT (E) population (Observed analysis) at 48 weeks are described in the table below:
Plasma HIV-1 RNA Average Area Under the Curve Minus Baseline (AAUCMB) Values (log10 copies/ ml) at week 48 by Randomisation Strata in APV30003 ITT (E) Population (Observed Analysis)
Observed analysis Observed analysis FPV/ RTV BID LPV/ RTV BID
Observed analysis Mean Diff.
Plasma HIV-1 RNA stratum 1000 – 10,000
N=107 N=103 Mean (n) Mean (n)
(97.5% CI) FPV/ RTV BID vs LPV/ RTV BID
copies/ ml > 10.000 – 100,000
-1.53 (41) -1.43 (43)
-0.104 (-0.550, 0.342)
copies/ ml
-1.59 (45) -1.81 (46)
0.216 (-0.213, 0.664)
> 100,000 copies/ ml
-1.38 (19) -2.61 (14)
1.232 (0.512, 1.952)
Total population
-1.53 (105)
-1.76 (103)
0.244
(-0.047, 0.536)
Key:
FPV/ RTV BID – Fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily, LPV/ RTV BID – Lopinavir / ritonavir twice daily
When considering the proportion of patients with undetectable viral load in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily dosing regimens and lopinavir / ritonavir arms respectively, results showed a trend in favour of the lopinavir / ritonavir arms:
58% versus 61% (plasma HIV-1 RNA < 400 copies/ ml) or 46% versus 50% (plasma HIV-1 RNA < 50 copies/ ml) at Week 48 (secondary efficacy endpoint) in the intent to treat (RD=F) analysis.
40 In patients with high viral load at baseline (> 100,000 copies/ ml) 7/ 14 (50%) patients in the lopinavir / ritonavir group and 6/ 19 (32%) patients in the fosamprenavir with ritonavir group had plasma HIV-1 RNA < 400 copies/ ml.
The fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily regimen and the lopinavir / ritonavir twice daily regimen showed similar immunological improvements through 48 weeks of treatment as measured by median change from baseline in CD4+ cell count (fosamprenavir with ritonavir twice daily:
81 cells/ mm3: lopinavir / ritonavir twice daily:
91 cells/ mm3).
There are insufficient data to recommend the use of fosamprenavir with ritonavir in heavily pre-treated patients.
Children and adolescent patients above the age of six
Fosamprenavir tablets and oral suspension with ritonavir in combination with NRTIs have been evaluated in protease inhibitor naïve and experienced children and adolescent patients.
The benefit in this age group has mainly been derived from the ongoing study, APV29005, an open label 48 week study evaluating the pharmacokinetic profiles, safety, and antiviral activity of fosamprenavir with ritonavir administered twice daily to HIV 1 protease inhibitor experienced and naive patients 2 to 18 years of age.
Results through 24 weeks of treatment are provided below.
APV29005 enrolled 25 patients aged 6 to 11 (the majority of whom were treated with fosamprenavir / ritonavir 18/ 3 mg/ kg twice daily or the adult tablet regimen) and 29 patients aged 12 to 18 (the majority of whom were treated with the adult tablet regimen).
Overall, 27 (50%) were PI-naïve, 9 of whom were ART naïve, and 27 (50%) were PI-experienced.
Prior NRTI exposure was extensive, with median durations of 421 and 389 weeks for the PI naïve and experienced patients respectively.
The median duration of prior PI exposure was 239 weeks.
Overall, patients enrolled with a median 4.6 HIV-1 RNA log10 copies/ ml (33% of whom had > 100,000 copies/ ml at baseline) and a median% CD4+ cell of 18% (39% of whom had% CD4+ of < 15% at baseline).
Through 24 weeks of therapy, 70% (19/ 27) of protease inhibitor naive and 56% (15/ 27) of protease inhibitor experienced patients achieved and maintained a plasma HIV 1 RNA < 400 copies/ ml (ITT(E), TLOVR).
In the ITT(E) population (Observed analysis) at Week 24 the median% CD4+ cell counts increased by 8% in the PI-naïve subjects and 4% in the PI-experienced subjects.
These data were further substantiated by the supportive study APV20003; however, a different dosage regimen than that of study APV29005 was used.
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
After oral administration, fosamprenavir is rapidly and almost completely hydrolysed to amprenavir and inorganic phosphate prior to reaching the systemic circulation.
The conversion of fosamprenavir to amprenavir appears to primarily occur in the gut epithelium.
The pharmacokinetic properties of amprenavir following co-administration of Telzir with ritonavir have been evaluated in healthy adult subjects and HIV-infected patients and no substantial differences were observed between these two groups.
Telzir tablet and oral suspension formulations, both given fasted, delivered equivalent plasma amprenavir AUC∞ values and the Telzir oral suspension formulation delivered a 14% higher plasma amprenavir Cmax as compared to the oral tablet formulation.
However, the bioequivalence could not be demonstrated when the oral suspension was given with food.
Therefore for adult patients the Telzir oral suspension should be taken without food and on an empty stomach (see section 4.2).
Absorption
41 After single dose administration of fosamprenavir, amprenavir peak plasma concentrations are observed approximately 2 hours after administration.
Fosamprenavir AUC values are, in general, less than 1% of those observed for amprenavir.
The absolute bioavailability of fosamprenavir in humans has not been established.
After multiple dose oral administration of equivalent fosamprenavir and amprenavir doses, comparable amprenavir AUC values were observed; however, Cmax values were approximately 30% lower and Cmin values were approximately 28% higher with fosamprenavir.
After multiple dose oral administration of fosamprenavir 700 mg with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily, amprenavir was rapidly absorbed with a geometric mean (95% CI) steady state peak plasma amprenavir concentration (Cmax) of 6.08 (5.38-6.86) µg/ ml occurring approximately 1.5 (0.75-5.0) hours after dosing (tmax).
The mean steady state plasma amprenavir trough concentration (Cmin) was 2.12 (1.77-2.54) µg/ ml and AUC0-tau was 39.6 (34.5– 45.3) h*µg/ ml.
Administration of the fosamprenavir oral suspension formulation with a high fat meal (967 kcal, 67 grams fat, 33 grams protein, 58 grams carbohydrate) reduced plasma amprenavir AUC(0- ∞) by 28% and Cmax by 46% and delayed Tmax by 0.72 hours.
For adult patients the fosamprenavir oral suspension should be taken without food and on an empty stomach.
In children and adolescents the fosamprenavir oral suspension should be taken with food.
The dose recommendations for this population therefore take into account the observed food effect (see section 4.2).
Co-administration of amprenavir with grapefruit juice was not associated with clinically significant changes in plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetics.
Distribution
The apparent volume of distribution of amprenavir following administration of Telzir is approximately 430 l (6 l/ kg assuming a 70 kg body weight), suggesting a large volume of distribution, with penetration of amprenavir freely into tissues beyond the systemic circulation.
This value is decreased by approximately 40% when Telzir is co-administered with ritonavir, most likely due to an increase in amprenavir bioavailability.
In in vitro studies, the protein binding of amprenavir is approximately 90%.
It is bound to the alpha-1- acid glycoprotein (AAG) and albumin, but has a higher affinity for AAG.
Concentrations of AAG have been shown to decrease during the course of antiretroviral therapy.
This change will decrease the total active substance concentration in the plasma, however the amount of unbound amprenavir, which is the active moiety, is likely to be unchanged.
CSF penetration of amprenavir is negligible in humans.
Amprenavir appears to penetrate into semen, though semen concentrations are lower than plasma concentrations.
Metabolism
Fosamprenavir is rapidly and almost completely hydrolysed to amprenavir and inorganic phosphate as it is absorbed through the gut epithelium, following oral administration.
Amprenavir is primarily metabolised by the liver with less than 1% excreted unchanged in the urine.
The primary route of metabolism is via the cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme.
Amprenavir metabolism is inhibited by ritonavir, via inhibition of CYP3A4, resulting in increased plasma concentrations of amprenavir.
Amprenavir in addition is also an inhibitor of the CYP3A4 enzyme, although to a lesser extent than ritonavir.
Therefore medicinal products that are inducers, inhibitors or substrates of CYP3A4 must be used with caution when administered concurrently with Telzir with ritonavir (see sections 4.3 and 4.5).
42 Elimination
Following administration of Telzir, the half-life of amprenavir is 7.7 hours.
When Telzir is co-administered with ritonavir, the half-life of amprenavir is increased to 15 – 23 hours.
The primary route of elimination of amprenavir is via hepatic metabolism with less than 1% excreted unchanged in the urine and no detectable amprenavir in faeces.
Metabolites account for approximately 14% of the administered amprenavir dose in the urine, and approximately 75% in the faeces.
Special populations
Paediatrics
In a clinical study on pharmacokinetics of fosamprenavir in paediatric patients, eight subjects 12 to 18 years of age received the standard fosamprenavir adult tablet dose of 700 mg twice daily (with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily).
Compared to the historical adult population receiving fosamprenavir / ritonavir 700 / 100 mg twice daily, 12 to 18 year old subjects had 20% lower plasma APV AUC(0- 24), 23% lower Cmax, and 20% lower Cmin values.
Children 6 to 11 years of age (n=9) receiving fosamprenavir / ritonavir 18 / 3 mg/ kg twice daily had 26% higher AUC(0-24) and similar Cmax and Cmin values when compared to the historical adult population receiving fosamprenavir / ritonavir 700 / 100 mg twice daily.
APV20002 is a 48 week, Phase II, open label study designed to evaluate the pharmacokinetics, safety, tolerability and antiviral activity of fosamprenavir with and without ritonavir in paediatric subjects 4 weeks to < 2 years of age.
Compared to the historical adult population receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily, a subset of five pediatric subjects ages 6 to < 24-months receiving fosamprenavir / ritonavir 45/ 7 mg/ kg twice daily demonstrated that despite an approximate 5-fold increase in fosamprenavir and ritonavir doses on a mg/ kg basis, plasma amprenavir AUC(0-τ) was approximately 48% lower, Cmax 26% lower, and Cτ 29% lower in the paediatric subjects.
No dosing recommendations can be made for the very young (children < 2 years of age) and Telzir with ritonavir is not recommended for this patient population (see section 4.2).
Elderly
The pharmacokinetics of fosamprenavir in combination with ritonavir has not been studied in patients over 65 years of age.
Renal impairment
Patients with renal impairment have not been specifically studied.
Less than 1% of the therapeutic dose of amprenavir is excreted unchanged in the urine.
Renal clearance of ritonavir is also negligible, therefore the impact of renal impairment on amprenavir and ritonavir elimination should be minimal
Hepatic impairment
Fosamprenavir is converted in man to amprenavir.
The principal route of amprenavir and ritonavir elimination is hepatic metabolism.
The plasma amprenavir pharmacokinetics were evaluated in a 14 day repeat-dose study in HIV-1 infected adult subjects with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment receiving fosamprenavir with ritonavir compared to matched control subjects with normal hepatic function.
In subjects with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 5-6), the dosage regimen of fosamprenavir 700 mg twice daily with a reduced dosing frequency of ritonavir 100 mg once daily
43 provided slightly higher plasma amprenavir Cmax (17%), slightly higher plasma amprenavir AUC(0-12) (22%), similar plasma total amprenavir C12 values and approximately 117% higher plasma unbound amprenavir C12 values compared to subjects with normal hepatic function receiving the standard fosamprenavir / ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily regimen.
In subjects with moderate hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 7-9), a reduced dose of fosamprenavir 450 mg twice daily with a reduced dosing frequency of ritonavir 100 mg once daily is predicted to deliver similar plasma amprenavir Cmax and AUC(0-12), but approximately 35% lower plasma total amprenavir C12 values and approximately 88% higher plasma unbound amprenavir C12 values than achieved in subjects with normal hepatic function receiving the standard fosamprenavir with ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily regimen.
In subjects with severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh score of 10-13), a reduced dose of fosamprenavir 300 mg twice daily with a reduced dosing frequency of ritonavir 100 mg once daily delivered 19% lower plasma amprenavir Cmax, 23% lower AUC(0-12), and 38% lower C12 values, but similar unbound plasma amprenavir C12 values than achieved in subjects with normal hepatic function receiving the standard fosamprenavir with ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily regimen.
Despite reducing the dosing frequency of ritonavir, subjects with severe hepatic impairment had 64% higher ritonavir Cmax, 40% higher ritonavir AUC(0-24), and 38% higher ritonavir C12 than achieved in subjects with normal hepatic function receiving the standard fosamprenavir with ritonavir 700 mg / 100 mg twice daily regimen.
Fosamprenavir with ritonavir was generally well-tolerated in subjects with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment, and these regimens had similar adverse event and clinical laboratory profiles as previous studies of HIV-1 infected subjects with normal hepatic function.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
Toxicity was similar to that of amprenavir and occurred at amprenavir plasma exposure levels below human exposure after treatment with fosamprenavir in combination with ritonavir at the recommended dose.
In repeated dose toxicity studies in adult rats and dogs, fosamprenavir produced evidence of gastrointestinal disturbances (salivation, vomiting and soft to liquid faeces), and hepatic changes (increased liver weights, raised serum liver enzyme activities and microscopic changes, including hepatocyte necrosis).
Toxicity was not aggravated when juvenile animals were treated as compared with adult animals, but the data did indicate a steeper dose response.
In reproductive toxicity studies with fosamprenavir in rats, male fertility was not affected, but in females gravid uterine weights, numbers of ovarian corpora lutea and uterine implantation sites were reduced.
In pregnant rats and rabbits there were no major effects on embryo-foetal development.
However, the number of abortions increased.
In rabbits, systemic exposure at the high dose level was only 0.3 times human exposure at the maximum clinical dose and thus the development toxicity of fosamprenavir has not been fully determined.
In rats exposed pre- and post-natally to fosamprenavir, pups showed impaired physical and functional development and reduced growth.
Pup survival was decreased.
In addition, decreased number of implantation sites per litter and a prolongation of gestation were seen when pups were mated after reaching maturity.
Fosamprenavir was not mutagenic or genotoxic in a standard battery of in vitro and in vivo assays.
In long-term carcinogenicity studies with fosamprenavir in mice and rats, there were increases in hepatocellular adenomas and hepatocellular carcinomas in mice at exposure levels equivalent to 0.1 to 0.3-fold those in humans given 700 mg of fosamprenavir plus 100mg ritonavir twice daily, and increases in hepatocellular adenomas and thyroid follicular cell adenomas in rats at exposure levels equivalent to 0.3 to 0.6-fold those in humans given 700 mg of fosamprenavir plus 100mg ritonavir twice daily.
The relevance of the hepatocellular findings in the rodents for humans is uncertain;
44 however, there is no evidence from clinical trials or marketed use to suggest that these findings are of clinical significance.
Repeat dose studies with fosamprenavir in rats produced effects consistent with hepatic enzyme induction, which predisposes rats to thyroid neoplasms.
The thyroid tumorigenic potential is regarded to be species-specific.
The clinical relevance of these findings is unknown.
In rats only there was an increase in interstitial cell hyperplasia in males at exposure levels equivalent to 0.5-fold those in humans, and an increase in uterine endometrial adenocarcinoma in females at an exposure level equivalent to 1.1-fold those in humans.
The incidence of endometrial findings was slightly increased over concurrent controls, but within background range for female rats.
The relevance of the uterine endometrial adenocarcinomas for humans is uncertain; however there is no evidence from clinical trials or marketed use to suggest that these findings are of clinical significance.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Hypromellose Sucralose Propylene glycol Methyl parahydroxybenzoate (E218) Propyl parahydroxybenzoate (E216) Polysorbate 80 Calcium chloride dihydrate Artificial grape bubblegum flavour Natural peppermint flavour Purified water
6.2 Incompatibilities
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal products.
6.3 Shelf life
2 years.
Discard 28 days after first opening.
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Do not freeze.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
HDPE bottle with a child resistant polypropylene closure containing 225 millilitres oral suspension.
A 10 ml graduated polypropylene dosing syringe and polyethylene adapter are provided in the pack.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
Any unused product should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Road
45 Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER
EU/ 1/ 04/ 282/ 002
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
Date of first authorisation:
12 July 2004
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) http: / /www. emea. europa. eu
46 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
47 A MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDERS RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturers responsible for batch release
Film-coated tablets Glaxo Wellcome Operations, Priory Street, Ware, Hertfordshire SG12 0DJ, United Kingdom
Oral suspension Glaxo Wellcome GmbH & Co KG, Industriestrasse 32-36, D-23843, Bad Oldesloe, Germany
The printed package leaflet of the medicinal product must state the name and address of the manufacturer responsible for the release of the concerned batch.
B CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (See Annex I:
Summary of Product Characteristics, section 4.2).
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable.
• OTHER CONDITIONS
Pharmacovigilance system
The MAH must ensure that the system of pharmacovigilance, as described in version 1 presented in Module 1.8.1 of the Marketing Authorisation Application, is in place and functioning before and whilst the product is on the market.
Risk Management Plan
The MAH commits to performing the pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan as agreed in version 6.2 of the Risk Management Plan (RMP) presented in Module 1.8.2. of the Marketing Authorisation Application and any subsequent updates of the RMP agreed by the CHMP.
As per the CHMP Guideline on Risk Management Systems for medicinal products for human use, the updated RMP should be submitted at the same time as the next Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR).
In addition, an updated RMP should be submitted • When new information is received that may impact on the current Safety Specification, Pharmacovigilance Plan or risk minimisation activities • Within 60 days of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached • At the request of the EMEA
48 Periodic Safety Updates
Following submission of an annual PSUR in December 2007 (covering 20 October 2006 to 21 October 2007), thereafter the MAH will submit 6-monthly PSURs until otherwise instructed by the CHMP.
49 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
50 A.
LABELLING
51 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
OUTER CARTON FOR TABLETS
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Telzir 700 mg film-coated tablets Fosamprenavir
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 700 mg fosamprenavir as fosamprenavir calcium (equivalent to approximately 600 mg of amprenavir)
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
60 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use
Read the package leaflet before use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
52 11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 04/ 282/ 001
13.
BATCH NUMBER
LOT
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
53 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE IMMEDIATE PACKAGING
BOTTLE LABEL FOR TABLETS
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Telzir 700 mg film-coated tablets Fosamprenavir
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each film-coated tablet contains 700 mg fosamprenavir as fosamprenavir calcium (equivalent to approximately 600 mg of amprenavir)
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
60 film-coated tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use
Read the package leaflet before use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
54 11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 04/ 282/ 001
13.
BATCH NUMBER
LOT
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
55 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
OUTER CARTON FOR ORAL SUSPENSION
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Telzir 50 mg/ ml oral suspension Fosamprenavir
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each ml of oral suspension contains 50 mg fosamprenavir as fosamprenavir calcium (equivalent to approximately 43 mg of amprenavir)
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
This product also contains preservatives: methyl parahydroxybenzoate (E218) and propyl parahydroxybenzoate (E216), see leaflet for further information
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
Bottle with 225 ml oral suspension A 10 ml graduated dosing syringe and adapter are also provided in the pack
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use
Read the package leaflet before use
Shake bottle vigorously before use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
Discard 28 days after first opening
56 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not freeze
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 04/ 282/ 002
13.
BATCH NUMBER
LOT
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
57 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE IMMEDIATE PACKAGING
BOTTLE LABEL FOR ORAL SUSPENSION
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Telzir 50 mg/ ml oral suspension Fosamprenavir
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each ml of oral suspension contains 50 mg fosamprenavir as fosamprenavir calcium (equivalent to approximately 43 mg of amprenavir)
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
This product also contains preservatives: methyl parahydroxybenzoate (E218) and propyl parahydroxybenzoate (E216), see leaflet for further information
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
225 ml oral suspension A 10 ml graduated dosing syringe and adapter are also provided in the pack
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use
Read the package leaflet before use
Shake bottle vigorously before use
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
Discard 28 days after first opening
58 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not freeze
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 04/ 282/ 002
13.
BATCH NUMBER
LOT
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
59 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
60 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
Telzir 700 mg film-coated tablets Fosamprenavir
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine. • Keep this leaflet.
You may need to read it again. • If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist (chemist). • This medicine has been prescribed for you personally.
Do not pass it on to other people - it may harm them even if their symptoms seem to be the same as yours. • If you have serious side effects, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
In this leaflet:
1.
What Telzir is and what it is used for 2.
Before you take Telzir 3.
How to take Telzir 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store Telzir 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT TELZIR IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
Telzir is used to treat HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) infection.
The active ingredient in Telzir is fosamprenavir.
Fosamprenavir is a ‘ pro-drug ’ of the medicine amprenavir.
This means that it is converted into active amprenavir once it is inside the body.
Telzir is a type of medicine known as an anti-retroviral.
It is taken with low doses of another drug, ritonavir, which boosts the level of Telzir in the blood.
Telzir belongs to a group of anti-retroviral medicines called protease inhibitors.
Protease is an enzyme produced by HIV which enables the virus to multiply in white blood cells (CD4 cells) in your blood.
By stopping protease from working, Telzir stops HIV multiplying and infecting more CD4 cells.
Telzir with low doses of ritonavir is used in combination with other anti-retroviral medicines (‘ combination therapy ’) to treat adults, adolescents and children aged over 6 years infected with HIV-1.
HIV can become resistant to anti-HIV medicines.
To avoid this happening, and to stop your illness getting worse, it is very important that you keep taking all your medicines exactly as prescribed.
Telzir will not stop you passing on HIV.
HIV infection is spread by sexual contact with someone who ’ s got the infection, or by transfer of infected blood (for example by sharing needles).
61 2.
BEFORE YOU TAKE TELZIR
Telzir is to be taken in combination with low doses of ritonavir and other antiretroviral medicines.
It is therefore important that you carefully read the package leaflet provided with these medicines.
If you have any further questions about ritonavir or the other medicines prescribed, please ask your doctor or pharmacist.
Don ’ t take Telzir: • if you are allergic (hypersensitive) to fosamprenavir, amprenavir or any of the other ingredients in Telzir (listed in section 6), or to ritonavir. • if you are taking any of the medicines listed in the section ‘ Don’ t take these medicines with Telzir’.
You will find this section under ‘ Other medicines and Telzir’. → Tell your doctor if any of these applies to you.
Take special care with Telzir Before you take Telzir your doctor needs to know: • If you have a known allergy to medicines containing sulphonamide.
You may also be allergic to Telzir. • If you have liver disease.
Your doctor may lower your dose of Telzir and ritonavir depending on the amount of liver damage.
You will be monitored while you are taking Telzir.
If your liver disease gets worse, you may need to stop taking Telzir for a while, or permanently.
People with hepatitis B or C taking combination therapy are at increased risk of getting severe liver problems. • If you have haemophilia.
Increased bleeding may occur while taking protease inhibitors.
The reason for this is not known.
You may need additional factor VIII to control any bleeding. • If you have diabetes.
In some patients taking antiretroviral medicines including protease inhibitors, there have been reports of increased sugar in the blood and diabetes getting worse.
Also, some people have become diabetic while taking these medicines. → Tell your doctor if any of these applies to you.
You will need extra check-ups, including blood tests, while you ’ re taking your medication.
Look out for important symptoms Some people taking medicines for HIV infection develop other conditions, which can be serious.
You need to know about important signs and symptoms to look out for while you ’ re taking Telzir.
Please read the information in section 4 of this leaflet.
If you have any questions about this information or the advice given: → Talk to your doctor.
Other medicines and Telzir Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you ’ re taking any other medicines, if you’ ve taken any recently, or if you start taking new ones – these include herbal medicines or other medicines you bought without a prescription.
Your doctor will decide if these medicines are suitable for you to take with Telzir and ritonavir.
This is very important, as Telzir or ritonavir can strengthen or weaken the effects of other medicines.
This can sometimes lead to serious medical conditions.
Don ’ t take these medicines with Telzir: • other medicines containing amprenavir (used to treat HIV) • astemizole or terfenadine (commonly used to treat allergy symptoms – these medicines may be available without prescription) • pimozide (used to treat schizophrenia) • cisapride (used to relieve indigestion) • ergot derivatives (used to treat headaches) • rifampicin (used to treat tuberculosis) • amiodarone, quinidine, flecainide and propafenone (heart medicines) • bepridil (used to treat high blood pressure) • products containing St John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum). • These medicines are not recommended with Telzir/ ritonavir:
62 • doses of ketoconazole and itraconazole greater than 200 mg per day (used to treat fungal infections) • doses of rifabutin greater than 150 mg every other day (an antibiotic) • lidocaine given by injection (an anaesthetic) • halofantrine (used to treat malaria) • midazolam and triazolam (used to treat anxiety) • sildenafil and vardenafil (used to treat erectile dysfunction) • lovastatin, simvastatin and doses of atorvastatin greater than 20 mg per day (used to lower cholesterol) • fluticasone propionate and similar medicines used to treat asthma, unless considered essential.
In this case close monitoring is required. • lopinavir/ ritonavir combination (used to treat HIV infection)
You will be closely monitored if you are taking these medicines with Telzir/ ritonavir: • atorvastatin up to 20 mg per day (used to lower cholesterol) • carbamazepine, phenobarbital (used to treat epilepsy) • cyclosporin, rapamycin, tacrolimus (used to suppress the immune system) • desipramine, nortriptyline, paroxetine and similar medicines (used to treat depression) • warfarin and other medicines that stop blood clotting.
Hormonal contraception Taking Telzir and ritonavir while taking the contraceptive pill may harm your liver and may stop the contraceptive from working properly. → Use an alternative non-hormonal type of contraception such as a condom.
No studies have been done on the use of Telzir/ ritonavir with other hormonal therapies, such as hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
Pregnancy and breast feeding If you are pregnant, if you become pregnant, or if you are planning to become pregnant: → Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking Telzir.
Women who are HIV-positive must not breast feed because HIV infection can be passed on to the baby in breast milk.
If you ’ re breast feeding, or thinking about breast feeding: → Talk to your doctor.
You may get a skin rash.
However you can still continue to take Telzir.
It can be treated with antihistamines.
Rarely, the skin rash can be severe and serious (Stevens Johnson syndrome).
If this happens, Telzir must be stopped immediately and you must never take it again.
Driving and using machines Telzir can make you feel dizzy and have other side effects that make you less alert. → Don’ t drive or operate machinery unless you ’ re feeling well.
Stay in regular contact with your doctor Telzir helps to control your condition, but it is not a cure for HIV infection.
You need to keep taking it every day to stop your illness getting worse.
You may still develop other infections and illnesses linked to HIV infection. → Keep in touch with your doctor, and don’ t stop taking Telzir without your doctor ’ s advice.
Protect other people Telzir will not stop you passing HIV infection on to other people, by having sex or by blood transfer.
To protect other people from becoming infected with HIV: → Use a condom when you have oral or penetrative sex. → Don’ t risk blood transfer – for example, don’ t share needles.
63 3.
HOW TO TAKE TELZIR
Always take Telzir exactly as your doctor has told you.
It is very important that you take the full daily dose of Telzir and ritonavir as prescribed by your doctor.
Do not take more than the recommended dose.
Check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure.
Swallow the tablets whole, with some water or another drink.
Telzir tablets can be taken with or without food.
Telzir is also available as a liquid (oral suspension) for people who are unable to swallow tablets.
(Read the package leaflet of Telzir oral suspension for guidance on whether to take it with or without food.)
How much to take Adults The recommended dose is one 700 mg Telzir tablet twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir twice daily.
Children from 6 years of age and weighing at least 39 kg Children can take the adult tablet dose of one 700 mg Telzir tablet twice daily with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily if they can swallow the tablets whole.
Children from 6 years of age and weighing less than 39 kg Use Telzir oral suspension.
Adults with liver disease If you have mild liver disease, the dose is one Telzir tablet (700 mg) twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir only once daily.
If you have moderate or severe liver disease the dose of Telzir has to be lowered.
This dose adjustment can not be made with Telzir tablets.
You must take Telzir oral suspension..
If you take too much Telzir If you have taken more than the prescribed dose of Telzir: → Contact your doctor or pharmacist immediately for advice.
If you forget to take Telzir If you forget to take a dose of Telzir, take it as soon as you remember and then continue your treatment as before.
Don’ t take a double dose to make up for a missed dose.
Don’ t stop Telzir without advice Take Telzir for as long as your doctor recommends.
Don’ t stop unless your doctor advises you to.
4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, Telzir can cause side effects, but not everyone gets them.
When treating HIV, it can be hard to tell whether side effects are caused by Telzir, by other medicines taken at the same time or by the HIV disease itself.
For this reason, it is very important to talk to your doctor about any changes in your health.
Very common side effects These may affect more than 1 in 10 people: • Diarrhoea • Increases in triglycerides (a type of blood fat).
Common side effects These may affect up to 1 in 10 people: • Feeling sick or being sick (nausea or vomiting), pain in the stomach, loose stools • Skin rashes (red, raised or itchy) – if the skin rash is severe, you may have to stop taking this medicine • Headache, feeling dizzy 64 • Feeling tired • Increases in enzymes produced by the liver called transaminases, increases of an enzyme produced by the pancreas called lipase. • Tingling or numbness around the lips and mouth
Uncommon side effects These may affect up to 1 in 100 people: • Large increases in cholesterol (a type of blood fat). • Swelling of the face, lips and tongue (angioedema)
Rare side effects These may affect up to 1 in 1000 people: • A severe or life-threatening skin reaction (Stevens Johnson syndrome).
You may experience muscle problems There have been reports of muscle pain, tenderness or weakness, particularly with antiretroviral therapy including protease inhibitors and nucleoside analogues.
On rare occasions, these muscle disorders have been serious (rhabdomyolysis).
If you notice any muscle problems: → Tell your doctor.
Haemophiliacs may bleed more In patients with haemophilia type A and B, there have been reports of increased bleeding while taking protease inhibitors.
If this happens to you: → Talk to your doctor immediately.
If you get side effects → Tell your doctor or pharmacist if any of the side effects gets severe or troublesome, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet.
Other side effects of combination therapy for HIV
Old infections may flare up People with advanced HIV infection (AIDS) have weak immune systems and are more likely to develop serious infections (opportunistic infections).
When these people start treatment, they may find that old, hidden infections flare up, causing signs and symptoms of inflammation.
These symptoms are probably caused by the body’ s immune system becoming stronger, so that the body starts to fight these infections.
If you get any symptoms of infection or signs of inflammation while you ’ re taking Telzir: → Tell your doctor immediately.
Don’ t take other medicines for the infection without your doctor’ s advice.
Your body shape may change People taking combination therapy may find that their body shape changes, because of changes in fat distribution: • Fat may be lost from the legs, arms or face • Extra fat may build up around the tummy (abdomen) or the breasts or internal organs • Fatty lumps (sometimes called a buffalo hump) may appear on the back of the neck.
It is not yet known what causes these changes, or whether they have any long-term effects on your health.
If you notice changes in your body shape: → Tell your doctor.
You may have problems with your bones Some people taking combination therapy for HIV develop a condition called osteonecrosis.
With this condition, parts of the bone tissue die because of reduced blood supply to the bone.
65 People may be more likely to get this condition: • if they have been taking combination therapy for a long time • if they are also taking anti-inflammatory medicines called corticosteroids • if they drink alcohol • if their immune systems are very weak • if they are overweight.
Signs to look out for include: • stiffness in the joints • aches and pains (especially in the hip, knee or shoulder) • difficulty moving.
If you notice any of these symptoms: → Tell your doctor.
Other effects may show up in tests Combination therapy for HIV can also cause: • increased levels of lactic acid in the blood • increased levels of sugar or fats in the blood • resistance to insulin (so if you’ re diabetic, you may have to change your insulin dose to control your blood sugar).
5.
HOW TO STORE TELZIR
Keep Telzir out of the sight and reach of children.
Telzir does not require any special storage conditions.
Don’ t use Telzir after the expiry date shown on the bottle and the carton.
If you have any unwanted Telzir tablets, don’ t dispose of them in your waste water or your household waste.
Take them back to your pharmacist who will dispose of them in a way that won ’ t harm the environment.
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What Telzir contains
• The active substance is fosamprenavir.
Each tablet contains 700 mg of fosamprenavir as fosamprenavir calcium (equivalent to approximately 600 mg amprenavir).
• The other ingredients are: microcrystalline cellulose, croscarmellose sodium, povidone K30, magnesium stearate, colloidal anhydrous silica, hypromellose, titanium dioxide (E171), glycerol triacetate, iron oxide red (E172).
What Telzir looks like and contents of the pack
Telzir is supplied in plastic bottles containing 60 film-coated tablets.
The tablets are capsule shaped, biconvex, pink coloured and marked with GXLL7 on one side.
Telzir is also available as an oral suspension for those patients unable to swallow the tablets.
66 Marketing Authorisation Holder and Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Marketing Authorisation Holder
Glaxo Wellcome Operations Priory Street Ware Hertfordshire SG12 0DJ United Kingdom
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Road Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
For any information about this medicinal product please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder.
België/ Belgique/ Belgien GlaxoSmithKline s. a. / n. v.
Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11
Luxembourg/ Luxemburg GlaxoSmithKline s. a. / n. v.
Belgique/ Belgien Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11
България ГлаксоСмитКлайн ЕООД Teл.: + 359 2 953 10 34
Magyarország GlaxoSmithKline Kft.
Tel.: + 36 1 225 5300
Č eská republika GlaxoSmithKline s. r. o.
Tel: + 420 222 001 111 gsk. czmail@gsk. com
Malta GlaxoSmithKline Malta Tel: + 356 21 238131
Danmark GlaxoSmithKline Pharma A/ S Tlf: + 45 36 35 91 00 info@glaxosmithkline. dk
Nederland GlaxoSmithKline BV Tel: + 31 (0)30 6938100 nlinfo@gsk. com
Deutschland GlaxoSmithKline GmbH & Co.
KG Tel.: + 49 (0)89 36044 8701 produkt. info@gsk. com
Norge GlaxoSmithKline AS Tlf: + 47 22 70 20 00 firmapost@gsk. no
Eesti GlaxoSmithKline Eesti OÜ Tel: + 372 6676 900 estonia@gsk. com
Österreich GlaxoSmithKline Pharma GmbH Tel: + 43 (0)1 97075 0 at. info@gsk. com
Ελλάδα GlaxoSmithKline A. E. B. E.
Τηλ: + 30 210 68 82 100
Polska GSK Commercial Sp. z o. o.
Tel.: + 48 (0)22 576 9000
España GlaxoSmithKline, S. A.
Tel: + 34 902 202 700 es-ci@gsk. com
Portugal GlaxoSmithKline - Produtos Farmacêuticos, Lda Tel: + 351 21 412 95 00 FI. PT@gsk. com
67 France Laboratoire GlaxoSmithKline Tél: + 33 (0)1 39 17 84 44 diam@gsk. com
România GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) S. R. L.
Tel: + 4021 3028 208
Ireland GlaxoSmithKline (Ireland) Limited Tel: + 353 (0)1 4955000
Slovenija GlaxoSmithKline d. o. o.
Tel: + 386 (0)1 280 25 00 medical. x. si@gsk. com
Ísland GlaxoSmithKline ehf.
Sim: + 354 530 3700
Slovenská republika GlaxoSmithKline Slovakia s. r. o.
Tel: + 421 (0)2 49 10 33 11 recepcia. sk@gsk. com
Italia GlaxoSmithKline S. p. A.
Tel: + 39 (0)45 9218 111
Suomi/ Finland GlaxoSmithKline Oy Puh/ Tel: + 358 (0)10 30 30 30 Finland. tuoteinfo@gsk. com
Κύπρος GlaxoSmithKline Cyprus Ltd Τηλ: + 357 22 89 95 01
Sverige GlaxoSmithKline AB Tel: + 46 (0)8 638 93 00 info. produkt@gsk. com
Latvija GlaxoSmithKline Latvia SIA Tel: + 371 67312687 lv-epasts@gsk. com
United Kingdom GlaxoSmithKline UK Tel: + 44 (0)800 221441 customercontactuk@gsk. com
Lietuva GlaxoSmithKline Lietuva UAB Tel: + 370 5 264 90 00 info. lt@gsk. com
This leaflet was last approved on
68 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
Telzir 50 mg/ ml oral suspension Fosamprenavir Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine. • Keep this leaflet.
You may need to read it again. • If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist (chemist). • This medicine has been prescribed for you personally.
Do not pass it on to other people - it may harm them even if their symptoms seem to be the same as yours. • If you have serious side effects, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
In this leaflet:
1.
What Telzir is and what it is used for 2.
Before you take Telzir 3.
How to take Telzir 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store Telzir 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT TELZIR IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
Telzir is used to treat HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) infection.
The active ingredient in Telzir is fosamprenavir.
Fosamprenavir is a ‘ pro-drug’ of the medicine amprenavir.
This means that it is converted into active amprenavir once it is inside the body.
Telzir is a type of medicine known as an anti-retroviral.
It is taken with low doses of another drug, ritonavir, which boosts the level of Telzir in the blood.
Telzir belongs to a group of anti-retroviral medicines called protease inhibitors.
Protease is an enzyme produced by HIV which enables the virus to multiply in white blood cells (CD4 cells) in your blood.
By stopping protease from working, Telzir stops HIV multiplying and infecting more CD4 cells
Telzir with low doses of ritonavir is used in combination with other anti-retroviral medicines (‘ combination therapy’) to treat adults, adolescents and children aged over 6 years infected with HIV-1.
HIV can become resistant to anti-HIV medicines.
To avoid this happening, and to stop your illness getting worse, it is very important that you keep taking all your medicines exactly as prescribed.
Telzir will not stop you passing on HIV.
HIV infection is spread by sexual contact with someone who’ s got the infection, or by transfer of infected blood (for example by sharing needles).
69 2.
BEFORE YOU TAKE TELZIR
Telzir is to be taken in combination with low doses of ritonavir and other antiretroviral medicines.
It is therefore important that you carefully read the package leaflet provided with these medicines.
If you have any further questions about ritonavir or the other medicines prescribed, please ask your doctor or pharmacist.
Don’ t take Telzir: • if you are allergic (hypersensitive) to fosamprenavir, amprenavir or any of the other ingredients in Telzir (listed in section 6), or to ritonavir.
• if you are taking any of the medicines listed in the section ‘ Don’ t take these medicines with Telzir’.
You will find this section under ‘ Other medicines and Telzir’.
→ Tell your doctor if any of these applies to you.
Take special care with Telzir → Before you take Telzir your doctor needs to know: • If you have a known allergy to medicines containing sulphonamide.
You may also be allergic to Telzir. • If you have liver disease.
Your doctor may lower your dose of Telzir and ritonavir depending on the amount of liver damage.
You will be monitored while you are taking Telzir.
If your liver disease gets worse, you may need to stop taking Telzir for a while, or permanently.
People with hepatitis B or C taking combination therapy are at increased risk of getting severe liver problems. • If you have haemophilia.
Increased bleeding may occur while taking protease inhibitors.
The reason for this is not known.
You may need additional factor VIII to control any bleeding. • If you have diabetes.
In some patients taking antiretroviral medicines including protease inhibitors, there have been reports of increased sugar in the blood and diabetes getting worse.
Also, some people have become diabetic while taking these medicines. → Tell your doctor if any of these applies to you.
You will need extra check-ups, including blood tests, while you’ re taking your medication.
Look out for important symptoms Some people taking medicines for HIV infection develop other conditions, which can be serious.
You need to know about important signs and symptoms to look out for while you’ re taking Telzir.
Please read the information in section 4 of this leaflet.
If you have any questions about this information or the advice given: → Talk to your doctor.
Other medicines and Telzir Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you’ re taking any other medicines, if you’ ve taken any recently, or if you start taking new ones – these include herbal medicines or other medicines you bought without a prescription.
Your doctor will decide if these medicines are suitable for you to take with Telzir and ritonavir.
This is very important, as Telzir or ritonavir can strengthen or weaken the effects of other medicines.
This can sometimes lead to serious medical conditions.
Don’ t take these medicines with Telzir: • other medicines containing amprenavir (used to treat HIV) • astemizole or terfenadine (commonly used to treat allergy symptoms – these medicines may be available without prescription) • pimozide (used to treat schizophrenia) • cisapride (used to relieve indigestion) • ergot derivatives (used to treat headaches) • rifampicin (used to treat tuberculosis) • amiodarone, quinidine, flecainide and propafenone (heart medicines)
70 • bepridil (used to treat high blood pressure). • products containing St John’ s wort (Hypericum perforatum).
These medicines are not recommended with Telzir/ ritonavir: • doses of ketoconazole and itraconazole greater than 200 mg per day (used to treat fungal infections) • doses of rifabutin greater than 150 mg every other day (an antibiotic) • lidocaine given by injection (an anaesthetic) • halofantrine (used to treat malaria) • midazolam and triazolam (used to treat anxiety) • sildenafil and vardenafil (used to treat erectile dysfunction) • lovastatin, simvastatin and doses of atorvastatin greater than 20 mg per day (used to lower cholesterol) • fluticasone propionate and similar medicines used to treat asthma, unless considered essential.
In this case close monitoring is required. • lopinavir/ ritonavir combination (used to treat HIV infection)
You will be closely monitored if you are taking these medicines with Telzir/ ritonavir: • atorvastatin up to 20 mg per day (used to lower cholesterol) • carbamazepine, phenobarbital (used to treat epilepsy) • cyclosporin, rapamycin, tacrolimus (used to suppress the immune system) • desipramine, nortriptyline, paroxetine and similar medicines (used to treat depression) • warfarin and other medicines that stop blood clotting.
Hormonal contraception Taking Telzir and ritonavir while taking the contraceptive pill may harm your liver and may stop the contraceptive from working properly. → Use an alternative non-hormonal type of contraception such as a condom.
No studies have been done on the use of Telzir/ ritonavir with other hormonal therapies, such as hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
Taking Telzir and food Adults should take the Telzir oral suspension without food and on an empty stomach.
Children and adolescents should take the Telzir oral suspension with food.
Pregnancy and breast feeding If you are pregnant, if you become pregnant, or if you are planning to become pregnant: → Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking Telzir.
Women who are HIV-positive must not breast feed because HIV infection can be passed on to the baby in breast milk.
If you’ re breast feeding, or thinking about breast feeding: → Talk to your doctor.
Important information about ingredients of Telzir oral suspension Telzir oral suspension contains propyl and methyl parahydroxybenzoate.
These ingredients may cause allergic reactions (sometimes delayed).
You may get a skin rash.
However you can still continue to take Telzir.
It can be treated with antihistamines.
Rarely, the skin rash can be severe and serious (Stevens Johnson syndrome).
If this happens, Telzir must be stopped immediately and you must never take it again.
Driving and using machines Telzir can make you feel dizzy and have other side effects that make you less alert. → Don’ t drive or operate machinery unless you’ re feeling well.
71 Stay in regular contact with your doctor Telzir helps to control your condition, but it is not a cure for HIV infection.
You need to keep taking it every day to stop your illness getting worse.
You may still develop other infections and illnesses linked to HIV infection. → Keep in touch with your doctor, and don’ t stop taking Telzir without your doctor’ s advice.
Protect other people Telzir will not stop you passing HIV infection on to other people, by having sex or by blood transfer.
To protect other people from becoming infected with HIV: → Use a condom when you have oral or penetrative sex. → Don’ t risk blood transfer – for example, don’ t share needles.
3.
HOW TO TAKE TELZIR
Always take Telzir exactly as your doctor has told you.
It is very important that you take the full daily dose of Telzir and ritonavir as prescribed by your doctor.
Do not take more than the recommended dose.
Check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure.
Shake the bottle for 20 seconds before the first use.
Shake the bottle for 5 seconds before subsequent uses.
A dosing syringe with a 10 ml graduation is supplied with the pack so you can measure your dose accurately.
How much to take
Adults Adults should take the Telzir oral suspensions without food and on an empty stomach.
The recommended dose is 14 ml Telzir oral suspension (700 mg fosamprenavir) twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir (as capsule or oral solution) twice daily.
Children from 6 years of age and weighing at least 25 kg Children should take the Telzir oral suspension with food.
Your doctor will work out the right dose based on your weight.
The recommended dose is 0.36 ml/ kg of Telzir oral suspension (18 mg per kg fosamprenavir) twice daily with 3 mg/ kg ritonavir oral solution twice daily.
No dosing recommendations can be made for children weighing less than 25 kg.
Children can take the adult dose of ritonavir capsules (100 mg twice daily) if they weigh at least 33 kg and can swallow the capsules whole.
As an alternative to taking Telzir oral suspension:
Children can take the adult dose of one 700 mg Telzir tablet twice daily (with ritonavir 100 mg twice daily) if they weigh at least 39 kg and can swallow the tablets whole.
Children less than 6 years of age Telzir is not recommended for children less than 6 years old.
Adults with liver disease If you have mild liver disease, the dose is 14 ml Telzir oral suspension (700 mg fosamprenavir) twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir only once daily.
If you have moderate liver disease the dose is 9 ml Telzir oral suspension (450 mg fosamprenavir) twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir only once 72 daily.
If you have severe liver disease the dose is 6 ml Telzir oral suspension (300 mg fosamprenavir) twice daily with 100 mg ritonavir only once daily.
Step by step instructions Do not mix Telzir with any other medicines in the bottle or the syringe.
1.
Shake the bottle vigorously before use.
2.
Remove the bottle cap and keep it safely.
3.
Push the plastic adapter into the neck of the bottle, while holding the bottle firmly.
4.
Insert the syringe firmly into the adapter.
5.
Turn the bottle upside down.
6.
Pull out the syringe plunger until the first portion of your full dose is withdrawn.
7.
Turn the bottle the right way up and remove the syringe from the adapter.
8.
Put the syringe into your mouth, placing the tip of the syringe against the inside of your cheek.
Slowly push the plunger in, allowing time to swallow.
Don’ t push too hard and squirt the liquid into the back of the throat or you may choke.
9.
Repeat steps 4 to 8 in the same way until you have taken the whole dose.
10.
Do not leave the syringe in the bottle.
Take the syringe and the adapter off and wash them thoroughly in clean water.
Let them dry completely before you use them again.
11.
Close the bottle tightly with the cap.
If you take too much Telzir If you have taken more than the prescribed dose of Telzir: → Contact your doctor or pharmacist immediately for advice.
If you forget to take Telzir If you forget to take a dose of Telzir, take it as soon as you remember and then continue your treatment as before.
Don’ t take a double dose to make up for a missed dose.
Don’ t stop Telzir without advice Take Telzir for as long as your doctor recommends.
Don’ t stop unless your doctor advises you to.
4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, Telzir can cause side effects, but not everyone gets them.
When treating HIV, it can be hard to tell whether side effects are caused by Telzir, by other medicines taken at the same time or by the HIV disease itself.
For this reason, it is very important to talk to your doctor about any changes in your health.
Very common side effects These may affect more than 1 in 10 people: • Diarrhoea • Increases in triglycerides (a type of blood fat).
Common side effects These may affect up to 1 in 10 people: • Feeling sick or being sick (nausea or vomiting), pain in the stomach, loose stools • Skin rashes (red, raised or itchy) – if the skin rash is severe, you may have to stop taking this medicine • Headache, feeling dizzy • Feeling tired • Increases in enzymes produced by the liver called transaminases, increases of an enzyme produced by the pancreas called lipase.
73 • Tingling or numbness around the lips and mouth
Uncommon side effects These may affect up to 1 in 100 people: • Large increases in cholesterol (a type of blood fat). • Swelling of the face, lips and tongue (angioedema)
Rare side effects These may affect up to 1 in 1000 people: • A severe or life-threatening skin reaction (Stevens Johnson syndrome).
You may experience muscle problems There have been reports of muscle pain, tenderness or weakness, particularly with antiretroviral therapy including protease inhibitors and nucleoside analogues.
On rare occasions, these muscle disorders have been serious (rhabdomyolysis).
If you notice any muscle problems: → Tell your doctor.
Haemophiliacs may bleed more In patients with haemophilia type A and B, there have been reports of increased bleeding while taking protease inhibitors.
If this happens to you: → Talk to your doctor immediately.
If you get side effects → Tell your doctor or pharmacist if any of the side effects gets severe or troublesome, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet.
Other side effects of combination therapy for HIV
Old infections may flare up People with advanced HIV infection (AIDS) have weak immune systems and are more likely to develop serious infections (opportunistic infections).
When these people start treatment, they may find that old, hidden infections flare up, causing signs and symptoms of inflammation.
These symptoms are probably caused by the body’ s immune system becoming stronger, so that the body starts to fight these infections.
If you get any symptoms of infection or signs of inflammation while you’ re taking Telzir: → Tell your doctor immediately.
Don’ t take other medicines for the infection without your doctor’ s advice.
Your body shape may change People taking combination therapy may find that their body shape changes, because of changes in fat distribution: • Fat may be lost from the legs, arms or face • Extra fat may build up around the tummy (abdomen) or the breasts or internal organs • Fatty lumps (sometimes called a buffalo hump) may appear on the back of the neck.
It is not yet known what causes these changes, or whether they have any long-term effects on your health.
If you notice changes in your body shape: → Tell your doctor.
You may have problems with your bones Some people taking combination therapy for HIV develop a condition called osteonecrosis.
With this condition, parts of the bone tissue die because of reduced blood supply to the bone.
74 People may be more likely to get this condition: • if they have been taking combination therapy for a long time • if they are also taking anti-inflammatory medicines called corticosteroids • if they drink alcohol • if their immune systems are very weak • if they are overweight.
Signs to look out for include: • stiffness in the joints • aches and pains (especially in the hip, knee or shoulder) • difficulty moving.
If you notice any of these symptoms:
Tell your doctor.
Other effects may show up in tests Combination therapy for HIV can also cause: • increased levels of lactic acid in the blood • increased levels of sugar or fats in the blood • resistance to insulin (so if you’ re diabetic, you may have to change your insulin dose to control your blood sugar).
5.
HOW TO STORE TELZIR
Keep Telzir out of the sight and reach of children.
Do not freeze.
Telzir does not require any other special storage conditions.
Don’ t use Telzir after the expiry date shown on the bottle and the carton.
Throw away the bottle 28 days after first opening it, but don’ t dispose of medicine in your waste water or your household waste.
Take it back to your pharmacist who will dispose of it in a way that won’ t harm the environment.
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What Telzir contains
• The active substance is fosamprenavir.
Each ml of suspension contains 50 mg of fosamprenavir as fosamprenavir calcium salt (equivalent to approximately 43 mg of amprenavir).
• The other ingredients are: hypromellose, sucralose, polysorbate 80, calcium chloride dihydrate, artificial grape bubblegum flavour, natural peppermint flavour, purified water, propylene glycol, methyl parahydroxybenzoate (E218), propyl parahydroxybenzoate (E216).
What Telzir looks like and contents of the pack
Telzir is supplied in plastic bottles containing 225 mloral suspension.
A 10 ml graduated dosing syringe and an adapter are also included in the pack.
The suspension is white to off-white.
Telzir is also available as 700 mg film-coated tablets.
75 Marketing Authorisation Holder and Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Marketing Authorisation Holder
Glaxo Wellcome GmbH & Co.
KG.
Industriestrasse 32-36 D-23843 Bad Oldesloe Germany
Glaxo Group Ltd Greenford Road Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
For any information about this medicinal product please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder.
België/ Belgique/ Belgien GlaxoSmithKline s. a. / n. v.
Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11
Luxembourg/ Luxemburg GlaxoSmithKline s. a. / n. v.
Belgique/ Belgien Tél/ Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11
България ГлаксоСмитКлайн ЕООД Teл.: + 359 2 953 10 34
Magyarország GlaxoSmithKline Kft.
Tel.: + 36 1 225 5300
Č eská republika GlaxoSmithKline s. r. o.
Tel: + 420 222 001 111 gsk. czmail@gsk. com
Malta GlaxoSmithKline Malta Tel: + 356 21 238131
Danmark GlaxoSmithKline Pharma A/ S Tlf: + 45 36 35 91 00 info@glaxosmithkline. dk
Nederland GlaxoSmithKline BV Tel: + 31 (0)30 6938100 nlinfo@gsk. com
Deutschland GlaxoSmithKline GmbH & Co.
KG Tel.: + 49 (0)89 36044 8701 produkt. info@gsk. com
Norge GlaxoSmithKline AS Tlf: + 47 22 70 20 00 firmapost@gsk. no
76 Eesti GlaxoSmithKline Eesti OÜ Tel: + 372 6676 900 estonia@gsk. com
Österreich GlaxoSmithKline Pharma GmbH Tel: + 43 (0)1 97075 0 at. info@gsk. com
Ελλάδα GlaxoSmithKline A. E. B. E.
Τηλ: + 30 210 68 82 100
Polska GSK Commercial Sp. z o. o.
Tel.: + 48 (0)22 576 9000
España GlaxoSmithKline, S. A.
Tel: + 34 902 202 700 es-ci@gsk. com
Portugal GlaxoSmithKline - Produtos Farmacêuticos, Lda Tel: + 351 21 412 95 00 FI. PT@gsk. com
France Laboratoire GlaxoSmithKline Tél: + 33 (0)1 39 17 84 44 diam@gsk. com
România GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) S. R. L.
Tel: + 4021 3028 208
Ireland GlaxoSmithKline (Ireland) Limited Tel: + 353 (0)1 4955000
Slovenija GlaxoSmithKline d. o. o.
Tel: + 386 (0)1 280 25 00 medical. x. si@gsk. com
Ísland GlaxoSmithKline ehf.
Sim: + 354 530 3700
Slovenská republika GlaxoSmithKline Slovakia s. r. o.
Tel: + 421 (0)2 49 10 33 11 recepcia. sk@gsk. com
Italia GlaxoSmithKline S. p. A.
Tel: + 39 (0)45 9218 111
Suomi/ Finland GlaxoSmithKline Oy Puh/ Tel: + 358 (0)10 30 30 30 Finland. tuoteinfo@gsk. com
Κύπρος GlaxoSmithKline Cyprus Ltd Τηλ: + 357 22 89 95 01
Sverige GlaxoSmithKline AB Tel: + 46 (0)8 638 93 00 info. produkt@gsk. com
Latvija GlaxoSmithKline Latvia SIA Tel: + 371 67312687 lv-epasts@gsk. com
United Kingdom GlaxoSmithKline UK Tel: + 44 (0)800 221441 customercontactuk@gsk. com
Lietuva GlaxoSmithKline Lietuva UAB Tel: + 370 5 264 90 00 info. lt@gsk. com
This leaflet was last approved on
77