# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

The & smb4k; Handbook
Alexander Reinholdt
dustpuppy AT users. berlios. de
ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS
Alexander Reinholdt
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/ or modify it under the terms of the & GNU; General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the & GNU; General Public License for more details.
You should have received a copy of the & GNU; General Public License along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA.
& smb4k; is an advanced network neighborhood browser and a front end to the programs of the Samba software suite.
KDE
Smb4K
Samba
Introduction
This handbook describes & smb4k; 0.10. x and to some extent earlier versions.
& smb4k; is an advanced network neighborhood browser and a front end to the programs of the Samba software suite. It provides many handy features that ease your life in a mostly & Windows; -dominated network environment:
Scanning for (active) workgroups, hosts, and shares
Support of the CIFS (Linux;) and SMBFS (FreeBSD) file system
Mounting and unmounting of shares, including unmounting all shares at once
Access to the files of a mounted share using a file manager or terminal
Auto-detection of external mounts and unmounts
Remounting of previously used shares on program start
Miscellaneous infos about remote network items and mounted shares
Network search
WINS server support
Preview of shares
Several methods to look up the initial list of workgroups and domains
Default login
Ability to execute mount and umount SUID root (using sudo)
Special handling of homes shares
Ability to bookmark favorite shares
System tray widget
Support of advanced Samba options
Support of printer shares
KWallet support
Synchronization of a remote share with a local copy and vice versa
Ability to define custom options for individual servers and shares
If you encounter problems while using & smb4k;, please read the Trouble Shooting section of this handbook first. If you cannot find your problem described there, please ask for help on our Smb4K-general mailing list. In case you find a bug, please report it to our bug tracker.
Using & smb4k;
Running & smb4k;
After the installation, you can run & smb4k; either from the K menu or from the command prompt by typing
$smb4k &
& smb4k; does not take any arguments, except those that are known to all & kde; programs.
During start-up, & smb4k; checks for all programs that are mandatorily needed to run the application. If some of them are missing, & smb4k; shows an error message and exits.
Error dialog listing the missing programs
Error dialog that lists the missing programs
You have to install the listed programs or add their location to the PATH environment variable in your shell's configuration file (for the bash 1 shell it is the ~/. bashrc file) in order to be able to run the application.
If all programs have been found, the main window and the system tray widget will be shown and you can start working with & smb4k;.
It is recommended that you configure Samba before using & smb4k;. The swat 8 utility can be used for this purpose. It is part of the Samba software suite and provides an easy-to-use web interface. See its manual page for documentation.
Starting with version 0.9.0, & smb4k; uses the KConfig XT configuration system and all settings that were defined with previous versions are obsolete. To assure a clean transition the old configuration file $HOME/. kde/ share/ config/ smb4krc will be removed on the first time you start the new version of & smb4k;. A message box will warn you before the file is actually removed:
Warning message box
The warning message box
If you plan to revert to a version & lt; 0.9.0, you should cancel the removal and backup the old configuration file.
The Main Window
On the first start-up, the main window of & smb4k; looks similar to the one shown below. The network neighborhood browser (Network Neighborhood), the search dialog (Network Search) and the mounted shares view (Mounted Shares) are arranged in a tab widget. Above them the menubar and toolbars are located. Below them you find the status bar.
Screenshot of the main window
The main window
There are the following four toolbars defined. The contained actions are needed to interact with application, the network and the mounted shares. They can also be found in the menubar or in the popup menus of the dock widgets. For additional information and some important warnings, please also have a look at the sections discussing the network neighborhood browser, search dialog, and mounted shares view.
Main Toolbar
This toolbar is located on the leftmost side and contains actions that can be used to change several settings or to quit the application.
Screenshot of the Main Toolbar
The Main Toolbar
The actions are (from left to right):
Dock Widgets
Hide or show the Network Neighborhood, Network Search, or Mounted Shares dock widget.
Shares View
Choose which view you want to use to display the mounted shares. An icon view and a list view are available.
Configure & smb4k;...
Open the configuration dialog.
Network Toolbar
In this toolbar all actions are organized that are defined in the Network Neighborhood widget.
Screenshot of the Network Toolbar
The Network Toolbar
& Ctrl; R Scan Network|Workgroup|Computer
Scan the network, the highlighted workgroup or computer for new entries. This action is enabled by default and will be disabled if a network scan is running.
& Ctrl; A Abort
Abort any action performed by the network neighborhood browser. This button is disabled by default and will only be enabled if a network scan is running or a share is being mounted.
& Ctrl; O Mount Manually
Open the dialog for mounting shares manually. This feature may be needed if & smb4k; could not find a server from which you want to mount a certain shared resource.
& Ctrl; T Authentication
Open the authentication dialog for the selected server or share. The button is disabled if a workgroup or no item is selected.
& Ctrl; O Custom Options
Open the Custom Options dialog for a selected server or share. The button is disabled if a workgroup or no item is selected.
& Ctrl; B Add Bookmark
Add the highlighted share to your bookmarks. This action is only enabled when a share is selected. Printer shares cannot be bookmarked.
& Ctrl; V Preview
Open the preview dialog. It is only enabled if a share is selected. Printer shares cannot be previewed.
& Ctrl; P Print File
Open the print dialog. It is only enabled if a printer share is selected.
& Ctrl; M Mount
Mount the selected share. By default and if a workgroup or server is selected, the button is disabled.
Search Toolbar
This toolbar contains all actions that are defined in the Network Search widget.
Screenshot of the Search Toolbar
The Search Toolbar
& Ctrl; S Search
Search for the item that was entered in the search dialog.
Abort the network search.
Clear
Clear the search dialog.
& Ctrl; D Add|Mount
Add a host to the network browser or mount a remote share. This action only works with search results in the Search Dialog widget.
Shares Toolbar
Here you find all actions that are defined in the Mounted Shares widget. They are used to work with the mounted shares or to unmount them.
Screenshot of the Shares Toolbar
The Shares Toolbar
& Ctrl; U Unmount
Unmount the share that is selected in the shares view. Please note that the ability to unmount shares is by default restricted to the ones that are owned by you. You can change this behavior by changing the settings in the configuration dialog. If no share is selected in the shares view, this button is disabled.
& Ctrl; F Force Unmounting
Force the unmounting of a share. This feature is disabled by default and you have to enable it in the configuration dialog. Since you can also force the unmounting of shares owned by other users, you have to be EXTREMELY CAUTIOUS when using it.
& Ctrl; N Unmount All
Unmount all shares at once. The restrictions noted above also apply here. If you do not have any shares mounted, this button is disabled.
& Ctrl; Y Synchronize
Initiate the synchronization of the contents of a selected share.
& Ctrl; L Open with Konsole
Open the contents of the selected share in & konsole;.
& Ctrl; I Open with File Manager
Open the contents of the selected share in the default file manager.
The status bar gives some information about the current status of & smb4k;. If the application is processing a user request (eg; mounting a share), a descriptive message is displayed in the leftmost section and a progress bar is shown with a busy indicator. The wallet icon on the right hand side displays the status of the wallet.
The main window is highly configurable. You can hide or show all tabbed widgets (Settings Dock Widgets). They can also be dragged around with the mouse and docked to different positions in the main window. You can even detach them from the main window. The status bar and the toolbars can be hidden/ shown by toggling the menu entry Settings Show Statusbar and the ones under Settings Toolbars, respectively.
The Network Neighborhood Browser
The interaction with the network neighborhood is done with the Network Neighborhood browser. It contains all network items & #8212; & ie; workgroups, servers, and shares & #8212; & smb4k; was able to find. They are organized in a network tree, and you can navigate through it by either clicking the [+] next to the item name or by executing the item itself.
Screenshot of the network neighborhood browser
The network neighborhood browser
Browsing
& smb4k; automatically scans the network neighborhood for active workgroups and domains on start-up and presents them in the network neighborhood browser. Opening a workgroup item shows the servers belonging to it. If you want to access the shares of one of the servers, you have to open the desired server.
There are four methods to retrieve the browse list: The default one is to scan the network neighborhood for all available master browsers. The second and third method directly query a master browser to get the browse list. The difference is that the former is a dynamic one, where the current master browser of your workgroup or domain is looked up and used, and the latter is a static one, where a fixed name or IP address is used. It is recommended that you choose the dynamic method. However, there might be circumstances that make it necessary to use a static name or IP address. The last method searches for all registered IP addresses within a given broadcast area. This might come in handy on poorly performing network neighborhoods.
Under normal circumstances you should n't have any trouble browsing the network neighborhood. In case you experience problems, please read the Trouble Shooting section before thinking about reporting a bug. It lists some common problems and their solutions.
Popup Menu
Although you can interact with the network using keyboard shortcuts, in most cases it is more convenient to use the mouse. By right clicking you can open a popup menu. It contains all actions that are available in the network neighborhood browser. Depending on the position where you clicked (on a network item or on the viewport), some of them may be disabled. The figure below shows the popup menu opened on a remote share.
Screenshot of the popup menu of the network browser
The popup menu of the network browser
The title of the popup menu is set to the name of the network item or displays Network if you clicked on the viewport.
The following menu entries (actions) are available:
Scan the whole network neighborhood, a workgroup/ domain, or a server.
Abort any running process of the network neighborhood browser.
The mount dialog is opened. You can enter the name, IP address, and workgroup/ domain of a share you want to mount manually. This feature comes in handy if the server where the share is located could not be found automatically.
The authentication dialog is opened. You can provide the login and password for the selected server or share. If no item or a workgroup is selected, this menu entry is disabled.
& Ctrl; C Custom Options
The Custom Options dialog is opened. You can set several custom options for the selected server or share. If no item or a workgroup is selected, this menu entry is disabled.
Add a bookmark. This menu entry is only available if a remote share is selected.
Preview the contents of the selected remote share.
Print a file on a remote printer. This menu item is only available if you selected a printer share.
Mount the selected remote share. This menu entry is disabled if you clicked anything different than a share with type "Disk" or "IPC".
Tooltips
For each network item a tooltip is provided that contains various information like the name of the workgroup and master browser, the name and IP address of the host, the name of the share, & etc; If a tooltip is requested for a server, it is queried for additional information about the operating system and the server (eg; Samba).
The tooltips can be disabled in the configuration dialog.
Mounting a Share
There are three options available to mount a remote share:
Execute the icon representing the remote share in the network neighborhood browser. (Depending on your & kde; settings, this is done by either single or double clicking the icon.)
Select the remote share and click the Mount menu entry. Alternatively, you can press the Ctrl; M keyboard shortcut.
If & smb4k; was not able to find the server where the share is located, you can press the Ctrl; O Mount Manually menu entry and a mount dialog will be opened:
Screenshot of the "Mount Manually" dialog
The "Mount Manually" dialog
Here you must enter the share name in the form / /SERVER/ SHARE (This is also correct for FreeBSD users!). The OK button will be enabled and you can press it to mount the share. It is advisable, however, to enter the IP address and the workgroup of the server as well. If you want to add the share to the bookmarks at the same time, tick the Add this share to the bookmarks check box.
Often a share is password protected. In this case, an authentication dialog will appear and you have to enter the correct login and password. & smb4k; will proceed mounting the share unless a wrong user name or password was provided. In that case, the authentication dialog will reappear. If the mount process was successful, the share will appear in the mounted shares view.
If mounting fails, an error dialog will be shown with the error message that was returned by mount. cifs 8. See the Trouble Shooting section for some of the most common errors and their possible solutions.
Printing Files on Remote Printers
To print a file on a remote printer, open the print dialog by clicking the printer icon or choosing the Ctrl; P Print File menu item.
Screenshot of the print dialog
The print dialog
In the Printer section various information about the printer is shown. Under File you have to provide the name of the file you want to print. The number of copies can be defined under Options > >. Press Print... to start the print process. The dialog will stay open until the print process ended.
& smb4k; currently supports PDF, Postscript, image, & DVI;, and text files. While the first three formats will directly be sent to the printer, the latter two need conversion. If you installed the programs dvips 1 and enscript 1, the & DVI; and text files will automatically be converted to Postscript before they are printed.
If you try to print a file with an unsupported mimetype or if the appropriate conversion program is missing, an error message box will appear telling you the mimetype is not supported. In this case you have to convert the file manually to Postscript or PDF or install the needed conversion program.
Previewing Shares
& smb4k; provides the ability to preview remote shares. If you click the Ctrl; V Preview, the contents of the selected remote share will be opened in a preview dialog.
Screenshot of the preview dialog
The preview dialog
The preview dialog acts like a simple file manager. You can navigate through the contents of the remote share by clicking the folder icons in the list view and the Up, Back, and Forward button. The current location is displayed in the combo box on the right hand side. The Reload button reloads the contents of the current folder.
By default, the preview dialog only shows folders and files that are not hidden. You can change this behavior in the configuration dialog. File transfers or the like are not possible.
Providing Authentication Information
Many servers or remote shares are password protected. In that case, a password dialog appears asking you for the user name and password. The same happens, if you click the Ctrl; T Authentication.
Screenshot of the authentication dialog
The authentication dialog
If the authentication dialog opens due to a failed attempt to access a server or share, you will be presented with the reason for the failure. Otherwise, you will only be asked to provide the authentication data for the selected network item.
You have to enter the user name in the respective field. The password, however, may be left blank. Clicking the OK button will commit the data. Depending on your choice in the configuration dialog, the login and password will be stored permanently in a digital wallet, temporarily until & smb4k; exits or not all. In the latter case you will have to provide them every time they are needed.
Defining Custom Options
If you need to define special options for a single server or share that are different from the global ones that are set in the configuration dialog, you can do this with the Custom Options dialog. It is opened by clicking the Ctrl; C Custom Options menu entry.
Screenshot of the custom options dialog for a share
The custom options dialog
Depending on your selection, the dialog will contain different entries. With servers the SMB port, the protocol hint for the'net 'command, and the use of Kerberos can be set whereas with shares the file system port, the user ID, the group ID and the write access can be defined (see figure above). For detailed information on the individual settings, please see here.
The Default button is enabled if the entries in the dialog deviate from the default options you defined in the configuration dialog. By clicking it, you can reset the settings in the dialog to the default. The OK button is enabled if you changed the settings in the dialog. Clicking it will commit the settings and close the dialog.
Under FreeBSD, the dialog contains less entries than when you run a different operating system, because several of the options are not supported.
Adding Bookmarks
A bookmark is added by selecting a remote share (only these can be bookmarked) and pressing the Ctrl; B keyboard shortcut or selecting the Add Bookmark menu item. It will then be accessible through the Bookmarks menu. See the section Handling Bookmarks for more details.
The bookmarks can be used to mount remote shares.
The Network Search Dialog
The Network Search dialog consists of the combo box where you can enter the search item and a list view where the search results are shown.
Screenshot of the network search dialog
The network search dialog
Searching
& smb4k; supports not only the search for hosts but also for shares (since version 0.10.0). To start a search, enter a term or IP address and press the & Enter; key. All network items that match the search criterion are listed in the list view. Hosts that are already present in the network neighborhood browser are additionally equipped with a checkmark and mounted shares show a corresponding emblem. If the search fails, the search dialog reports this by displaying an error message. Starting a new search will clear the list view.
The popup menu contains three of the four actions that are defined for the network search dialog. The Ctrl; S Search action, which does the same like pressing the & Enter; key, is only located in the Search Toolbar.
Screenshot of the network search's popup menu
The network search's popup menu
The entries in the popup menu are:
Clear the whole network search dialog. This action does not only clear the list view, but also the search item history in the combo box.
The name and the function of this menu entry depends on the action depends on the item you selected in the list view: If you selected a server, it is called Add and will add the server to the network neighborhood browser. A selected share will cause the menu entry to be renamed Mount and it will mount the share.
Adding a Host or Mounting a Share
A server that is not already present in the network neighborhood browser can be added to it by either double clicking the item in the list view or by selecting the Ctrl; D Add. The server will then appear in its workgroup or domain. A remote share is mounted similarly by double clicking it or choosing the Ctrl; D Mount.
When mounting a homes share, you are ask to provide the user name and a share with that name is mounted. The homes share itself will, thus, not be labeled as mounted afterwards.
Since the program smbtree 1, that is used for searching, does not discriminate between normal and printer shares, printers are displayed as normal shares in the list view.
The Mounted Shares View
In the shares view, you can interact with the mounted shares on your system.
Different Views
& smb4k; comes with two alternative views: an icon and a list view. They are both shown below.
The icon view:
Screenshot of the shares icon view
The shares icon view
The list view:
Screenshot of the shares list view
The shares list view
The default view is the traditional icon view where the shares are displayed as icons along with their name or mount point. In the list view all shares are displayed with their name or mount point, the file system and the disk usage. More information can be included by adjusting the settings.
You can switch between the two views by either selecting an entry from the Shares View menu or by changing the settings in the configuration dialog.
By default, you will only see your own mounts in the shares view. However, you can tell & smb4k; to show all mounts by altering the respective settings.
The popup menu includes all actions that can be performed on a mounted share. It can be opened by clicking the right mouse button.
Screenshot of the popup menu of the shares view
The popup menu of the shares view
The actions accessible through the popup menu are:
Unmount the selected share. By default, the ability to unmount a share is restricted to the ones that are owned by you. This behavior can be altered in the configuration dialog.
Please be EXTREMELY CAUTIOUS if you decide to enable the ability to unmount shares owned by other users!
Perform a lazy unmount on a share. This menu item is only available under & Linux; and should only be used if a share became inaccessible and could not be unmounted by the Unmount action. To take advantage of it, you have to enable the respective option in the configuration dialog first.
Before a share is actually unmounted, a dialog will appear asking you to confirm the action:
Screenshot of the dialog asking for confirmation if you want to force the unmounting of a share
The dialog asking for confirmation if you want to force the unmounting of a share
If you click the Yes button, the unmount will be carried out. The dialog can be disabled by checking the Do not ask again check box. The unmount will then be performed immediately and without confirmation.
Think twice before using this option!
Unmount all mounted shares at once. By default, only your own shares will be unmounted. But you can enable the ability to unmount all shares that are mounted on the system in the configuration dialog.
Start the synchronization of a share with a local copy or vice versa. This menu entry is only enabled if you installed the program rsync 1.
Open the base folder of a share in & konsole;. This menu item is useful if you need to run shell scripts, & etc;
Open the contents of a share in the default file manager.
Since & smb4k; 0.10.0 the shortcut for this action has changed.
The tooltips provide information about the share name, the mount point, the user and group, the login, the file system, the disk usage, and the free disk space. If the share is inaccessible, this will be indicated in the tooltip.
Tooltips are enabled by default. You can deactivate them in the configuration dialog.
Inaccessible Shares
& smb4k; periodically checks all mounted CIFS (and SMBFS) shares if they are still accessible. If an inaccessible share is encountered, it will be marked with a modified icon and you will not be able to open or synchronize it anymore. Unmounting will still be possible.
The program might freeze for a short period of time due to an inaccessible share. It will recover afterwards.
Icons
The shares views know three different icons that may be presented to the user:
Screenshot of three different icons
Three different icons
The icon on the left indicates that the share is online, accessible, and owned by you. You may perform all available actions on it.
The central icon tells the user that this share is not accessible. & smb4k; wo n't allow you to open it or to do synchronization with it. You will only be able to unmount it.
All shares that look similar to the one on the right are owned by another user. They are only shown if you adjusted the settings to display them. In the default configuration, you are not allowed to unmount these shares, but you can change this behavior.
Drag-and-Drop
& smb4k; supports drag-and-drop in the shares views:
You can drag a share icon from within the shares view onto the desktop or into another application (eg; & dolphin;) and drop it there. You will then maybe get a popup menu asking you if you want to copy, link or move the contents of the share. When choosing the appropriate operation please remember that under most circumstances moving and linking the share might not be a good idea. The popup menu can be avoided if you hold down the & Ctrl; key while you are dragging and dropping the share.
Files and directories can be transferred to a mounted share by dragging them over its icon in the view and drop them there. By default the data will be moved to the share. To copy it, hold down the & Ctrl; key while you are dragging and dropping it. The transfer will only be successful if the share was mounted with read and write permissions.
Unmounting Shares
A share may be unmounted by either clicking the Ctrl; U Unmount or by pressing its keyboard shortcut. In most cases, this will work smoothly and without problems. However, if you try to unmount a foreign share (ie; one that is owned by another user) or one that went offline, unmounting can fail. In the latter case, you should consider to force the unmounting by clicking the Ctrl; F Force Unmounting menu entry (only available under & Linux;). If it is not enabled, you can switch this feature on in the configuration dialog. A lazy unmount will then be performed and the share will definitely get unmounted.
All shares can be unmounted at once by clicking the Ctrl; N Unmount All menu item. Depending on your settings, this action will also unmount foreign and offline shares.
The mounting of shares is described here.
Synchronization
The Ctrl; Y Synchronize will open the synchronization dialog. It will offer you the mount point of the share as source and the rsync prefix as destination. In most cases, you may want to edit the destination to point to the right location. To update the data on the share, you can swap the destination with the source by clicking the Swap Paths button.
Screenshot of the synchronization dialog (input)
& URL; requester for sync'ing
Clicking the Synchronize button starts the synchronization. The input widgets as well as the Swap Paths and Synchronize buttons are disabled then. The progress of the synchronization can be observed in the dialog.
Screenshot of the synchronization dialog (progress)
Progress dialog
Besides the name of the file that is currently transferred, the progress of the current transfer, the overall progress, the number of copied files and the transfer rate are displayed. The total number of files that is shown with the Files transferred entry corresponds to the number of files present on the share and not to the total number of files that will be transferred.
The synchronization can the canceled at any time by clicking the Cancel button.
Opening a Share
& smb4k; provides two possibilities to open a mounted share:
Open a share with & konsole;
You can open the mounted share in & konsole; by selecting the Ctrl; L Open with Konsole menu entry. This is useful if you need to run shell scripts on the share or similar.
Open a share with the default file manager
You can open the share in the default file manager (eg; & dolphin;) by clicking the share icon or selecting the Ctrl; I Open with File Manager menu item.
If a share is marked as inaccessible, it cannot be opened.
Handling Bookmarks
You can add a bookmark to your favorite shares by selecting it in the network neighborhood browser and clicking the Ctrl; B Add Bookmark menu item. Alternatively, you can use the keyboard shortcut.
Bookmarks Menu
The bookmarks can be accessed and managed through the Bookmarks menu:
Screenshot of the bookmark popup menu
Bookmark popup menu
In the menu there are two static items available:
Edit Bookmarks
Open the bookmark editor. This action is disabled if there are no bookmarks.
Add a bookmark. A share in the network neighborhood browser has to be selected to enable this action.
The other entries are shares you already bookmarked. They are listed alphabetically and may either appear with their name or with a label that can be defined in the bookmark editor. By clicking a bookmark the respective share is mounted. If it is (already) mounted, the menu item is disabled.
Bookmark Editor
The bookmarks may be edited or removed via the bookmark editor. It can be opened by clicking the Edit Bookmarks menu item.
Screenshot of the bookmark editor
Bookmark editor
The Label section is editable. You can either double click the field or choose the Edit menu item from the editor's popup menu to enter the edit mode (The popup menu has to be opened over the label field to enabled the Edit menu item.). With the label you can give each bookmark a custom description. It will be used in the Bookmarks menu instead of the share name in the case this feature is enabled in the configuration dialog.
To remove one or several shares, mark the share(s) and choose the Delete action from the editor's popup menu.
The changes can be committed by clicking the OK button.
The System Tray Widget
Location
By default, & smb4k; starts embedded into the system tray:
Screenshot of the system tray widget
System tray widget
The big advantage of running & smb4k; embedded is that you can close (minimize) the main window while the application keeps running in the system tray. So, you can clear up your desktop and use it for your daily work. However, if you prefer to run & smb4k; unembedded, you can change the setting in the configuration dialog. Please note, that in this case you quit & smb4k; when you close the main window.
Usage
By left clicking on the icon the main window can be hidden or shown. A right click will bring up a popup menu that contains several menu items that allow you to work with the mounted shares, manage or mount your bookmarks and to configure & smb4k; without the need to open the main window.
Menus and Menu Items
Screenshot of the popup menu of the system tray icon
System tray icon's popup menu
The following menus and menu items are available:
Mounted Shares
This menu lists all mounted shares and some actions that can be performed on them:
Unmount All
Unmount all shares at once. Depending on your settings, & smb4k; attempts to unmount either only those shares that are owned by you or all that are listed.
For each mounted share you can open a submenu that contains the following entries:
Unmount
Unmount the share.
Force Unmounting
Force the unmounting of the share (Linux; only). For further information read here and here.
Synchronize
Synchronize the mounted share with a local copy or vice versa. For further information read here and here.
Open with & konsole;
Open the base folder of the share in & konsole;.
Open with File Manager
Open the contents of the share in the default file manager (eg; & dolphin;).
Bookmarks
The Bookmarks menu contains a list of your bookmarks and the following bookmark related action(s):
Open the bookmark editor.
Executing one of the bookmarks mounts the respective remote share. It will appear in the Mounted Shares menu as well as in the Mounted Shares view of the main window.
Mount Manually
Open the dialog for "manual" mounts.
Open the configuration dialog. See here for a full list of available settings.
Minimize | Restore
Hide (minimize) or show (restore) the main window. Which text is shown depends on the state of the main window.
& Ctrl; Q Quit
Quit the application.
Configuring & smb4k;
This section describes the settings that are available to configure & smb4k;. To open the configuration dialog, you have to click the Configure & smb4k;... menu item.
User Interface
With the options located here you can change the appearance and behavior of several dialogs and widgets. Please note that if you want to change the appearance of the main window you will find additional options under Settings in the menu bar.
Screenshot of the "Appearance" configuration tab
The "Appearance" configuration tab
Main Window & System Tray: Bookmarks
Show custom bookmark label if available
The custom description (label) of the bookmark is shown. It can be defined in the bookmark editor.
Default: selected
Main Window & System Tray: System Tray
Embed application into the system tray
Embed & smb4k; into the system tray. The system tray widget includes several common actions, so you do not need to open the main window for many tasks. For further information read the System Tray Widget section.
Network Neighborhood: Remote Shares
Show printer shares
Printer shares are shown.
Show hidden shares
All hidden shares except those of type ADMIN$ and IPC$ are shown in the network browser.
Show IPC$ shares
Hidden IPC$ shares are shown. This option can only be chosen if you also ticked the Show hidden shares check box.
Default: not selected
Show ADMIN$ shares
Hidden ADMIN$ shares are shown. This option can only be chosen if you also ticked the Show hidden shares check box.
Network Neighborhood: Columns
Show the type of the share
The type of the shares is shown (i. e. Disk, Printer, or IPC).
Show the IP address of the host
The IP address of a remote host is shown.
Show the comment
The comment of a remote host or share is shown.
Network Neighborhood: Tooltips
Show a tooltip with information about the network item
A tooltip will be shown when you move the mouse pointer over an item in the network neighborhood browser. It contains information about the network item such as the workgroup or domain name, host name, comment, type, & etc;
Mounted Shares: View
Show mounted shares in an icon view
An icon view will be used to show the mounted shares.
Show mounted shares in a list view
A list view will be used to show the mounted shares.
The following settings are specifically defined for the list view:
Show the owner and group
Show the UID and GID that owns the share in the list view.
Show the login
Show the login name that was used for mounting. An entry will only be shown if the share was mounted with the CIFS file system. The column will be empty otherwise.
Show the file system
Show the file system that is used by the share.
Show the free disk space
Show the free disk space that is available on the share.
Show the used disk space
Show the disk space that is in use on the share.
Show the total disk space
Show the total disk space that the share offers.
Show the disk usage
Show the disk usage in percent.
Mounted Shares: Mounted Shares
Show the mount point instead of the share name
The mount point is shown instead of the share name.
Show all shares that are mounted on the system
All mounts that are using either the SMBFS or CIFS file system are shown. By default, only the shares owned by you are displayed.
Mounted Shares: Tooltips
Show a tooltip with information about the share
A tooltip will be shown if you move the mouse pointer over an item in the shares view. It contains information about the underlying item such as the share name, mount point, owner and group, CIFS login, disk usage, & etc;
Preview Dialog: Hidden Files & Directories
Preview hidden files and directories
Show all files and directories including the hidden ones when opening a share's contents in the preview dialog. By default, this feature is deselected.
Network
The options in the Network configuration tab can be used to change the lookup method for the browse list and to make & smb4k; send authentication information when querying the workgroup master browsers. If you want to adjust the behavior of Samba programs (such as nmblookup 1, net 8, or smbclient 1), see the Samba section.
Screenshot of the "Network" configuration tab
The "Network" configuration tab
Browse List
Scan the network neighborhood for available workgroups and domains
& smb4k; will search for all available master browsers on the network by using nmblookup 1. This is the default method and it is very reliable in finding all workgroups and domains of your network neighborhood. However, it suffers a few shortcomings like poor unicode support (eg; umlauts are replaced by dots).
Query the current workgroup master browser
The current master browser of your workgroup or domain is looked up and queried for the browse list. If some of the workgroup names of your network neighborhood contain umlauts or other special characters, you might want to try this method, since unicode is supported. However, sometimes outdated workgroup master browsers might be returned.
Query this custom master browser
The master browser entered in the text box will be queried to retrieve the browse list. It can be specified by using either its NetBIOS name or its IP address. This option might be of use if you have an uncommonly configured network neighborhood.
Scan these broadcast areas
& smb4k; will scan for and return all IP addresses that are registered within the given broadcast area(s). Please note that this is not a "real" IP address scan, because that would take ages. The broadcast areas have to be given in a comma-separated list and in the form x. y. z.255: 192.168.1.255, 192.168.2.255, 10.0.0.255 The IP address/ mask pair (192.168.1.1/ 24) does not work.
Authentication
The master browsers require authentication to return the browse list
If the workgroup master browsers require authentication to return the browse list, you need to check this button. This may be the case for example with some NAS devices. This setting is rarely needed and might even cause a master browser to return an empty browse list. It will not have any effect when you let & smb4k; scan broadcast areas.
Shares
These options determine where & smb4k; will mount the remote shares and how it behaves on start-up and exit regarding mounted or recently used shares. If you want to configure the mount options, please see the Samba section.
Screenshot of the "Shares" configuration tab
The "Shares" configuration tab
Directories
Mount prefix
This is the base folder (mount prefix) where & smb4k; will mount the remote shares. It can be changed by using the & URL; requester (Click the button with the folder icon.) or by directly entering the new path into the text box. Path variables like $HOME are recognized.
Default: $HOME/ smb4k/
Force generated subdirectories to be lower case
All subdirectories that are created by & smb4k; below the mount prefix will be lower case.
Mounting and Unmounting
Unmount all personal shares on exit
All mounted shares that are owned by you will be unmounted on program exit.
Remount recently used shares on program start
All shares that were mounted at the time & smb4k; was shut down will be remounted on program restart. This option affects only the shares that were mounted by you.
Allow the unmounting of shares that are owned by other users
This option will allow you to unmount shares that were mounted by other users. In combination with the options you can define on the Super User page, it is guaranteed that you will be able to unmount them.
USE WITH EXTREME CAUTION!
Checks
Interval between checks
& smb4k; periodically checks for newly mounted and inaccessable shares with an interval that can be defined here. Under normal circumstances, you do not need to change it. But if the server you connected to suffers from high load, you should increase the interval to ease it's situation. The effect on your system's load is generally rather small unless you set the interval below 1000 ms (not recommended).
Default: 2500 ms
Here you can change the settings affecting the authentication.
Screenshot of the "Authentication" configuration tab
The "Authentication" configuration tab
Password Storage
Save logins in a wallet
The login names and passwords are stored in a subfolder named "Smb4K" of the current network wallet (default: "kdewallet"). The advantage of this method is, that the authentication data is stored permanently and encrypted on your hard drive. You only have to provide it once and the next time it is needed, & smb4k; will read it from the wallet. If you uncheck this option, the authentication data will either be stored temporarily or not at all (see below).
Remember logins during program run
If you do not want & smb4k; to store the authentication data in a wallet, you can decide whether it should be stored temporarily or not. If you uncheck this check box, & smb4k; will immediately forget the authentication data you provided and you will have to enter it everytime it is needed. This option has no effect if you chose to store the passwords in a wallet (see above).
Default Login
Use a default login
The default login is used by default to authenticate to a host. If you enable this feature, the text boxes for the user name and the password will become available. You have to fill in at least the user name. Empty passwords are supported.
Samba
Here you can directly influence the command line arguments that are passed to the Samba programs and also manage the custom settings you defined for single shares. Please note, that the settings will have no effect outside & smb4k; and that no changes will be applied to the smb. conf configuration file. For further information, please refer to the manual pages of the Samba software suite.
Screenshot of the "Samba" configuration tab
The "Samba" configuration tab
General Settings: General Options
NetBIOS name
Set the NetBIOS name of your computer. The text box should already be filled with the information found in the smb. conf configuration file or with the hostname of your computer. Under normal circumstances there is no need to change anything here.
Default: NetBIOS name defined in smb. conf or the hostname
Domain
Set the name of the domain/ workgroup your computer is in. The text box should already be filled with the information found in the smb. conf configuration file. Under normal circumstances there is no need to change anything here.
Default: domain name defined in smb. conf
Socket options
Set the TCP socket options. Please refer to the smb. conf 5 manual page to learn more.
Default: socket options defined in smb. conf
NetBIOS scope
Set the NetBIOS scope. It is recommended that you read the smb. conf 5 manual page before entering anything here.
Default: NetBIOS scope defined in smb. conf
General Settings: Remote Ports
SMB port
Sets the remote SMB port number that is used by net 8 and smbclient 1 to communicate with a remote host. Unless you are using a firewall (see also here and here), you do not need to change anything here.
This port is not used for mounting shares.
Default: 139
File system port
Sets the file system port number that is used by mount. cifs 8 when mounting a remote share. The default port number (445) should work for all modern operating systems. If you experience problems, try setting the port number to 139. If the problems only occur with a few hosts, it is recommended not to set the port number here globally, but to use the Custom Options dialog to define the port number individually for the problematic hosts.
Default: 445
General Settings: Authentication
Try to authenticate with Kerberos
Use Kerberos for authentication in an Active Directory environment.
Authenticate with local machine account
Make queries to the remote server using the machine account of the local server.
General Settings: Signing State
Signing state
Set the client signing state. This setting is used by smbclient 1 and smbtree 1.
The following options are available: none, on, off, required
Default: none
Mounting: Common Options
User ID
Sets the owner of the files and directories on the file system. By default, your UID will be used. To change the UID, press the search button and choose one from the drop down menu.
Default: your UID
Group ID
Sets the group that owns the files and directories on the file system. By default, your GID will be used. To change the GID, press the search button and choose one from the drop down menu.
Default: your GID
File mask
Sets the permissions that are applied to files. The value is given in octal and has to have 4 digits. To learn more about the file mask (fmask), you should read the mount 8 and umask 2 manual pages.
Default: 0755
Directory mask
Sets the permissions that are applied to directories. The value is given in octal and has to have 4 digits. To learn more about the folder mask (dmask), you should read the mount 8 and umask 2 manual pages.
Write access
Here you can determine if the shares should be mounted read-write or read-only by default. This option is independent of the file mask and the folder mask settings above.
Default: read-write
Client character set
Sets the character set used by the client side (ie; your computer).
Default: default
Server codepage
Sets the codepage the remote server uses. This option is only available under FreeBSD.
Mounting: Advanced Options
(This widget is not available under FreeBSD.)
Most of the options you can define here require & Linux; kernel 2.6.15 or later to work.
Do permission checks
The client side checks if you have the correct UID and GID to manipulate files and directories on the share. This is in addition to the normal ACL check on the target machine done by the server software. You might want to switch this feature off, if the server(s) support the CIFS Unix extensions and you are, hence, not allowed to access the share.
Attempt to set UID and GID
If the CIFS Unix extensions are negotiated with the server the client side will attempt to set the effective uid and gid of the local process on newly created files, directories, and devices. If this feature is turned off, the default UID and GID defined for the share will be used. It is recommended that you read the manual page of mount. cifs 8 before you change this setting.
Use server inode numbers
Use inode numbers (unique persistent file identifiers) returned by the server instead of automatically generating temporary inode numbers on the client side. This parameter has no effect if the server does not support returning inode numbers or similar. It is recommended that you read the manual page of mount. cifs 8 before you change this setting.
Do not cache inode data
Do not do inode data caching on files opened on the share. In some cases this can provide better performance than the default behavior which caches reads and writes.
Translate reserved characters
Translate six of the seven reserved characters (not backslash, but including the colon, question mark, pipe, asterisk, greater than and less than characters) to the remap range (above 0xF000), which also allows the client side to recognize files created with such characters by & Windows ;’ s POSIX emulation. This can also be useful when mounting to most versions of Samba. This has no effect if the server does not support Unicode.
Do not use locking
Do not use locking. Do not start lockd.
Additional options
Define additional options for use with mount. cifs 8. They have to be provided in a comma-separated list and should not include any options that were already defined in the configuration dialog because this could lead to unwanted side effects. The list is appended AS IS to the options. To find out about the arguments that can be used read the manual page of mount. cifs 8.
Client Programs: net
Protocol hint
With these settings you can give & smb4k; a hint, which protocol should be used with the net 8 command. Since for some actions not all protocols are available, your choice might be ignored for certain tasks.
If only a few and not all servers are affected, you should consider to use the Custom Options dialog to set the protocol hint and leave this option untouched.
The following options are available:
Automatic detection
The protocol will be determined automatically by the net 8 command on run time. This is the default and in most cases you do not need to change it. However, sometimes connection problems occur because the net 8 program has problems negotiating the right protocol. In almost all cases this can be fixed by setting the protocol hint to the RAP protocol.
RPC: Modern operating systems
The RPC protocol is used by the modern & Windows; variants (2000/ XP/ 2003) and by Samba.
RAP: Older operating systems
The RAP protocol is used by older & Windows; systems (95/ 98/ Me). Its disadvantage is, that it does not support long share names. However, & smb4k; uses it as fallback.
ADS: Active Directory environment (LDAP/ Kerberos)
& smb4k; will try to use the ADS protocol if appropriate. Please note, that no command has been implemented yet that uses the ADS protocol, so this setting will have no effect for now.
Default: Automatic detection
Client Programs: nmblookup
Broadcast address
Send a query to the given broadcast address. Without this option the default behavior of nmblookup is to send the query to the broadcast address of the network interfaces as either auto-detected or defined in the interfaces =... parameter of the smb. conf file.
Default: options defined in smb. conf
Try and bind to UDP port 137 to send and receive UDP datagrams
The reason for this option is a bug in Window 95 where it ignores the source port of the requesting packet and only replies to UDP port 137. Under normal circumstances, you do not need to tick this check box. If you experience problems while scanning the network and you want to enable this option, read the manual page of nmblookup 1 before.
Client Programs: smbclient
Name resolve order
Determine what naming services and in what order are used to resolve host names to IP addresses. The option takes a space-separated string of different name resolution options. The options are: "lmhost", "host", "wins" and "bcast". For further information see the manual page of smbclient 1.
Buffer size
Change the transmit/ send buffer size when getting or putting a file from/ to a remote server.
Default: 65520 Bytes
Client Programs: smbtree
Send requests as broadcasts
Query network nodes by sending requests as broadcasts instead of querying the local master browser.
Custom Options
All servers and shares for which you defined custom options are listed here. The options can be changed by either double clicking the entry or by choosing the Edit item from the list view's popup menu (right click on the selected item). To remove an entry choose Remove from the popup menu. The removal of several entries at once is also supported.
This configuration page contains options that influence the behavior of the rsync 1 command that is used to synchronize remote shares with local copies and vice versa. It is only available, if rsync 1 is installed on your system. It is recommend, that you read the manual page before you use the synchronization feature the first time. However, safe settings are pre-defined. You will do no harm, if you start right away.
Screenshot of the "Synchronization" configuration tab
The "Synchronization" configuration tab
Copying: Default Destination
Synchronization prefix
This is the folder where rsync 1 stores the transferred data by default. If you want to synchronize several shares, you should define different directories in the synchronization dialog.
Default: $HOME/ smb4k_sync/
Copying: General
Archive mode
Option: -a / --archive, same as -rlptgoD (no -H)
Switch the archive mode on. This is a quick way of saying you want recursion and want to preserve almost everything. Note that -a does not preserve hardlinks, because finding multiply-linked files is expensive. You must separately specify -H.
Recurse into subdirectories
Option: -r / --recursive
Recurse into subdirectories.
Update files
Option: -u / --update
This forces rsync 1 to skip any files that exist on the destination and have a modification time that is newer than the one of the source file. (If an existing destination file has a modification time equal to the source file's, it will be updated if the sizes are different.)
Update files in place
Option: --inplace
This causes rsync 1 not to create a new copy of the file and then move it into place. Instead rsync 1 will overwrite the existing file, meaning that the rsync algorithm cannot accomplish the full amount of network reduction it might be able to otherwise. One exception to this is if you combine the option with --backup, since rsync 1 is smart enough to use the backup file as the basis file for the transfer.
For further information you ought to read the manual page.
Use relative path names
Option: -R / --relative
Use relative path names. This means that the full path names specified on the command line are sent to the server rather than just the last parts of the file names.
Do n't send implied directories
Option: --no-implied-dirs
This option affects the default behavior of the --relative option. When it is specified, the attributes of the implied directories from the source names are not included in the transfer. This means that the corresponding path elements on the destination system are left unchanged if they exist, and any missing implied directories are created with default attributes. This even allows these implied path elements to have big differences, such as being a symlink to a folder on one side of the transfer, and a real folder on the other side.
Transfer directories without recursing
Option: -d / --dirs
Tell the sending side to include any directories that are encountered. Unlike --recursive, a folders contents is not copied unless the folder name specified is "." or ends with a trailing slash (eg; ".", "dir/.", "dir/", & etc;). Without this option or the --recursive option, rsync 1 will skip all directories it encounters (and output a message to that effect for each one). If you specify both --dirs and --recursive, --recursive takes precedence.
Compress data during transfer
Option: -z / --compress
Compress file data during the transfer.
Copying: Links
Preserve symlinks
Option: -l / --links
Copy symlinks as symlinks.
Transform symlinks
Option: -L / --copy-links
When symlinks are encountered, the item that they point to is copied, rather than the symlink.
Only transform unsafe symlinks
Option: --copy-unsafe-links
Only transform "unsafe" symlinks. This means if a symlink is encountered that is pointing outside the copied tree, the referenced item is transferred rather than the symlink itself.
Ignore unsafe symlinks
Option: --safe-links
This tells rsync 1 to ignore any symbolic links which point outside the copied tree. All absolute symlinks are also ignored. Using this option in conjunction with --relative may give unexpected results.
Preserve hard links
Option: -H / --hard-links
This tells rsync 1 to look for hard-linked files in the transfer and link together the corresponding files on the receiving side. Without this option, hard-linked files in the transfer are treated as though they were separate files.
Note that rsync 1 can only detect hard links if both parts of the link are in the list of files being sent.
Keep directory symlinks
Option: -K / --keep-dirlinks
This option causes the receiving side to treat a symlink to a directory as though it were a real directory, but only if it matches a real directory from the sender. Without this option, the receiver's symlink would be deleted and replaced with a real directory.
Copying: File Permissions, & etc;
Preserve permissions
Option: -p / --perms
This option causes the receiving side to set the destination permissions to be the same as the source permissions.
Preserve group
Option: -g / --group
This option causes rsync 1 to set the group of the destination file to be the same as the on of the source file. If the receiving program is not running as the super-user (or with the --no-super option), only groups that the receiver is a member of will be preserved.
Preserve owner
Option: -o / --owner
This option causes rsync 1 to set the owner of the destination file to be the same as the source file. By default, the preservation is done by name, but may fall back to using the ID number in some circumstances (see the --numeric-ids option for a full discussion). This option has no effect if the receiving rsync 1 is not run as the super user and --super is not specified.
Preserve device and special files
Option: -D / --devices --specials
This option causes rsync 1 to transfer character and block device files as well as special files (such as named sockets and fifos) to the remote system. This option has no effect if the receiving side is not run as the super user and --super is not specified.
Preserve times
Option: -t / --times
This tells rsync 1 to transfer modification times along with the files and update them on the remote system.
Omit directories when preserving times
Option: -O / --omit-dir-times
This tells rsync 1 to omit directories when it is preserving modification times (see --times).
File Deletion & Transfer: File Deletion
Remove synchronized source files
Option: --remove-source-files
This tells rsync 1 to remove from the sending side the files (meaning non-directories) that are a part of the transfer and have been successfully duplicated on the receiving side.
Delete extraneous files
Option: --delete
This tells rsync 1 to delete extraneous files from the receiving side (ones that are n't on the sending side), but only for the directories that are being synchronized. You must have asked rsync 1 to send the whole folder (eg; "dir" or "dir/") without using a wildcard for the folders contents (eg; "dir/ *") since the wildcard is expanded by the shell and rsync 1 thus gets a request to transfer individual files, not the files' parent folder. Files that are excluded from transfer are also excluded from being deleted unless you use the --delete-excluded option or mark the rules as only matching on the sending side.
Delete files before transfer
Option: --delete-before
Request that the file deletions on the receiving side be done before the transfer starts. This is the default if --delete or --delete-excluded is specified without one of the --delete-WHEN options.
Delete files after transfer
Option: --delete-after
Request that the file deletions on the receiving side be done after the transfer has completed.
Delete files during transfer
Option: --delete-during
Request that the file deletions on the receiving side be done incrementally as the transfer happens. This is a faster method than choosing the before- or after-transfer algorithm, but it is only supported beginning with rsync 1 version 2.6.4.
Also delete excluded files
Option: --delete-excluded
In addition to deleting the files on the receiving side that are not on the sending side, this tells rsync 1 to also delete any files on the receiving side that are excluded (see --exclude).
Delete even if I/ O errors occur
Option: --ignore-errors
Tells --delete to go ahead and delete files even when there are I/ O errors.
Force deletion of non-void directories
Option: --force
This option tells rsync 1 to delete a non-empty folder when it is to be replaced by a non-folder. This is only relevant if deletions are not active (see --delete).
File Deletion & Transfer: Restrictions
Do n't delete more than this many files
Option: --max-delete=NUM
This tells rsync 1 not to delete more than NUM files or directories (NUM must be non-zero). This is useful when mirroring very large trees to prevent disasters.
Default: not selected; NUM: 0
File Deletion & Transfer: File Transfer
Do n't transfer any file smaller than
Option: --min-size=NUM
This tells rsync 1 to avoid transferring any file that is smaller than the specified SIZE, which can help in not transferring small, junk files.
Default: not selected; NUM: 0 kB
Do n't transfer any file larger than
Option: --max-size=NUM
This tells rsync 1 to avoid transferring any file that is larger than the specified SIZE.
Keep partially transferred files
Option: --partial
By default, rsync 1 will delete any partially transferred file if the transfer is interrupted. In some circumstances it is more desirable to keep partially transferred files. Using the --partial option tells rsync 1 to keep the partial file which should make a subsequent transfer of the rest of the file much faster.
Put partially transferred files into
Option: --partial-dir=DIR
A better way to keep partial files than the --partial option is to specify a folder DIR that will be used to hold the partial data (instead of writing it out to the destination file). On the next transfer, rsync 1 will use a file found in this folder as data to speed up the resumption of the transfer and then delete it after it has served its purpose. Before you tick this option, you should read the manual page.
Default: not selected; DIR: $HOME
Filtering: General
Auto-ignore files in the same way CVS does
Option: -C / --cvs-exclude
This is a useful shorthand for excluding a broad range of files that you often do n't want to transfer between systems. It uses the same algorithm that CVS uses to determine if a file should be ignored.
Exclude files matching this pattern
Option: --exclude=PATTERN
This option is a simplified form of the --filter option that defaults to an exclude rule and does not allow the full rule-parsing syntax of normal filter rules.
Default: not selected; PATTERN: empty
Read exclude patterns from
Option: --exclude-from=FILE
This option is related to the --exclude option, but it specifies a FILE that contains exclude patterns (one per line). Blank lines in the file and lines starting with ';' or '# 'are ignored. You have to choose an existing file to make this option work.
Default: not selected; FILE: $HOME/ exclude. txt
Do n't exclude files matching this pattern
Option: --include=PATTERN
This option is a simplified form of the --filter option that defaults to an include rule and does not allow the full rule-parsing syntax of normal filter rules.
Read include patterns from
Option: --include-from=FILE
This option is related to the --include option, but it specifies a FILE that contains include patterns (one per line). Blank lines in the file and lines starting with ';' or '# 'are ignored. You have to choose an existing file to make this option work.
Default: not selected; FILE: $HOME/ include. txt
Filtering: Filter Rules
Custom filter rules
Option: -f / --filter=RULE
You can define one or more filter rules here. Each rule has to be prefixed with the --filter= or -f option string, because the contents of the text box will be passed to the rsync 1 command AS IS.
This option allows you to add rules to selectively exclude certain files from the list of files to be transferred. This is most useful in combination with a recursive transfer.
You may use as many --filter options as you like to build up the list of files to exclude.
See the FILTER RULES section of the manual page for detailed information on this option.
Default: empty
Use --filter='dir-merge /. rsync-filter 'filter rule
Option: -F
This option tells rsync 1 to look for per-folder. rsync-filter files that have been sprinkled through the hierarchy and use their rules to filter the files in the transfer.
See the FILTER RULES section of the manual page for detailed information on how this option works.
Use --filter='exclude. rsync-filter 'filter rule
Option: -FF
This option filters out the. rsync-filter files themselves from the transfer.
Advanced: General
Handle sparse files efficiently
Option: -S / --sparse
Try to handle sparse files efficiently so they take up less space on the destination. Conflicts with --inplace because it's not possible to overwrite data in a sparse fashion.
Do n't use this option when the destination is a & Solaris; "tmpfs" file system. It does n't seem to handle seeks over null regions correctly and ends up corrupting the files.
Copy files whole (no rsync algorithm)
Option: -W / --whole-file
With this option the incremental rsync 1 algorithm is not used and the whole file is sent as-is instead. The transfer may be faster if this option is used when the bandwidth between the source and destination machines is higher than the bandwidth to disk (especially when the "disk" is actually a networked file system). This is the default when both the source and destination are specified as local paths.
Do n't cross file system boundaries
Option: -x / --one-file-system
This tells rsync 1 to avoid crossing a file system boundary when recursing. This does not limit the user's ability to specify items to copy from multiple file systems, just rsync 1's recursion through the hierarchy of each folder that the user specified, and also the analogous recursion on the receiving side during deletion. Also keep in mind that rsync 1 treats a "bind" mount to the same device as being on the same file system.
Only update files that already exist
Option: --existing / --ignore-non-existing
This tells rsync 1 to skip updating files that do not exist yet on the destination. If this option is combined with the --ignore-existing option, no files will be updated (which can be useful if all you want to do is to delete missing files).
Ignore files that already exist
Option: --ignore-existing
This tells rsync 1 to skip updating files that already exist on the destination. See also --ignore-non-existing.
Delay updates until the end of transfer
Option: --delay-updates
This option puts the temporary file from each updated file into a holding folder until the end of the transfer, at which time all the files are renamed into place in rapid succession.
It is strongly recommended that you read the manual page before using this option.
Advanced: Backup
Make backups
Option: -b / --backups
With this option, preexisting destination files are renamed as each file is transferred or deleted. You can control where the backup file goes and what (if any) suffix gets appended using the --backup-dir and --suffix options.
Note that if you do n't specify --backup-dir, (1) the --omit-dir-times option will be implied, and (2) if --delete is also in effect (without --delete-excluded), rsync 1 will add a "protect" filter-rule for the backup suffix to the end of all your existing excludes (eg; -f "P *~"). This will prevent previously backed-up files from being deleted. Note that if you are supplying your own filter rules, you may need to manually insert your own exclude/ protect rule somewhere higher up in the list so that it has a high enough priority to be effective (eg;, if your rules specify a trailing inclusion/ exclusion of '* ', the auto-added rule would never be reached).
Backup suffix
Option: --suffix=SUFFIX
This option allows you to override the default backup suffix used with the --backup option. The default suffix is a ~ if no --backup-dir was specified, otherwise it is an empty string.
This option is only available if you ticked the Make backups option above.
Default: not selected; SUFFIX: ~
Backup directory
Option: --backup-dir=DIR
In combination with the --backup option, this tells rsync to store all backups in the specified folder. This is very useful for incremental backups. You can additionally specify a backup suffix using the --suffix option (otherwise the files backed up in the specified folder will keep their original filenames).
Default: not selected; DIR: $HOME
Advanced: Checksums
Force fixed checksum block size
Option: -B / --block-size=SIZE
This forces the block size used in the rsync algorithm to a fixed value. It is normally selected based on the size of each file being updated. See the technical report for details.
Default: not selected; SIZE: 0
Set block/ file checksum seed
Option: --checksum-seed=NUM
Set the MD4 checksum seed to the integer NUM. This 4 byte checksum seed is included in each block and file MD4 checksum calculation. By default the checksum seed is generated by the server and defaults to the current time(). This option is used to set a specific checksum seed, which is useful for applications that want repeatable block and file checksums, or in the case where the user wants a more random checksum seed. Note that setting NUM to 0 causes rsync to use the default of time() for checksum seed.
Skip files based on checksum
Option: -c / --checksum
This forces the sender to checksum every regular file using a 128-bit MD4 checksum. It does this during the initial file system scan as it builds the list of all available files. The receiver then checksums its version of each file (if it exists and it has the same size as its sender-side counterpart) in order to decide which files need to be updated: files with either a changed size or a changed checksum are selected for transfer. Since this whole-file checksumming of all files on both sides of the connection occurs in addition to the automatic checksum verifications that occur during a file's transfer, this option can be quite slow.
Super User
The options listed here are used for a normal user to gain limited super user privileges. You will only be able to apply the necessary changes to the involved system files, if you know the root password. In many cases you do not need super user privileges, because your & Linux; distribution already supports user mounts.
An alternative way to enable mounting is to set the SUID root bit to mount. cifs 8 and umount. cifs 8. The procedure is described in the Trouble Shooting chapter.
If sudo 8 is not installed on your system, this configuration page is disabled.
Screenshot of the "Super User" configuration tab
The "Super User" configuration tab
Actions
Use super user privileges to force the unmounting of (inaccessible) shares
Ticking this option will enable the Ctrl; F Force Unmounting action. If clicked, it will execute a "lazy" unmount that detaches the file system of the mounted share from the file system hierarchy immediately and cleans up all references to the file system as soon as it is not busy anymore. This is a handy feature if you experience problems unmounting shares.
This option requires & Linux; kernel 2.4.11 or later and is not available under other operating systems.
Use super user privileges to mount and unmount shares
Super user privileges will be used to mount and unmount shares.
Remove Entries
The user entries in the sudoers configuration file will be removed. The root password is needed.
Remarks for FreeBSD Users
Under FreeBSD, the SMB protocol is implemented in a different way than with other *NIX operating systems, and, thus, mounting of remote shares works differently. The major difference is the way the logon information is passed during the mount process. While under & Linux; and other operating systems that use Samba's smbmount 8 / mount. cifs 8 programs you may specify the user name and password within the command options or by setting the USER and PASSWD environment variables, under FreeBSD, all logon information is stored in the credentials file ~/. nsmbrc. If the logon information is not available there, you will not be able to mount a password protected share.
Fortunately, you do not have to prepare the ~/. nsmbrc file manually to be able to use & smb4k;. It writes new logon information to the credentials file on the fly, so that it can be used immediately. If you use a WINS server, this one and a few more global things will be considered, too. However, the information & smb4k; writes to ~/. nsmbrc is limited: Only the name of the remote share, its workgroup, the login name (user name) and the encrypted password are provided. If you experience problems due to missing entries, you need to add them manually.
If you do not trust & smb4k;, there are different ways how to fill the ~/. nsmbrc file with the necessary data. The package maintainer of & smb4k; has written a README supplied with the binary FreeBSD package. Please refer to it in the case you prefer the manual or semi-automatic set-up.
Command Reference
The File Menu
& Ctrl; Q File Quit
Quit & smb4k;.
The Network Menu
& Ctrl; R Network
(Re-)scan the network neighborhood, a workgroup, or a computer.
& Ctrl; A Network Abort
Abort the scanning for new workgroups/ domains, servers or shares.
& Ctrl; O Network Mount Manually
Open the dialog to "manually" mount a remote share.
& Ctrl; T Network Authentication
Open the authentication dialog where you can enter login information.
& Ctrl; C Network
Open a dialog where you can define custom options for a server or share.
& Ctrl; V Network Preview
Open the preview dialog that contains a preview of the contents of the selected share.
& Ctrl; P Network
Open the print dialog.
& Ctrl; M Network Mount
Mount the selected remote share.
The Shares Menu
& Ctrl; U Shares Unmount
Unmount the selected share.
& Ctrl; F Shares
Force the unmounting of the selected share. This action is only available under & Linux;.
& Ctrl; N Shares
Unmount all of the mounted shares at once. In the default configuration this is restricted to the user's shares, but this can be altered in the configuration dialog. For further information read the Unmounting Shares section.
& Ctrl; Y Shares Synchronize
Open the synchronization dialog.
& Ctrl; L Shares Open with Konsole
Open the base folder of the selected share in & konsole;.
& Ctrl; I Shares Open with File Manager
Open the contents of the selected share in the default file manager (eg; & dolphin;).
The Bookmarks Menu
& Ctrl; B Bookmarks Add Bookmark
Add the selected share to the bookmarks.
Bookmarks Edit Bookmarks
Open the bookmark editor.
The Settings Menu
Settings Toolbars
In this submenu you can enable or disable the tool bars.
Settings Show Statusbar
Hide or show the status bar.
Settings Dock Widgets
Hide or show the dock widgets in the main window.
Settings Shares View
Select between the shares icon and list view.
Settings Configure & smb4k;...
Open the configuration dialog.
The Help Menu
& help. menu. documentation;
The Utility Programs
& smb4k; comes with several utility programs that are used to mount and unmount the remote shares, kill privileged child processes, and manipulate configuration files. In the following these programs are described.
The utility programs smb4k_cat and smb4k_mv have been superseded by the smb4k_sudowriter command and have, thus, been removed.
smb4k_mount
Name
smb4k_mount & #8212; mount remote Samba and & Windows; shares
Synopsis
smb4k_mount {mode} {options} {share} {mountpoint} & nbsp; nbsp; (Linux; and similar)
smb4k_mount {options} {share} {mountpoint} & nbsp; nbsp; (FreeBSD)
smb4k_mount --help
smb4k_mount --version
Description
smb4k_mount is the mount utility of & smb4k;. It mounts remote Samba and & Windows; shares to a certain mount point using either the SMBFS or CIFS file system. It invokes smbmount 8 or mount. cifs 8 in normal user mode and mount 8 in super user mode. Under FreeBSD, always mount_smbfs 8 is used.
This program is available since & smb4k; version 0.5.0.
Arguments
{mode}
This argument determines if smb4k_mount will switch to normal user mode or to super user mode. It is not available under FreeBSD. Under the other operating systems it is mandatory. These are the possible values:
--no-suid
Run smb4k_mount in normal user mode and thus let it invoke either smbmount 8 or mount. cifs 8 depending on the choice the user made with the file system.
--suid
Run smb4k_mount in super user mode and thus let it invoke mount 8.
-n
The same as the --no-suid argument.
-s
The same as the --suid argument.
{options}
These are the options you can pass to the mount binary (see the smbmount 8, mount. cifs 8, mount 8 or mount_smbfs 8 (FreeBSD) manual page for details).
Linux; and similar: Due to the changes applied to the source of smb4k_mount during the preparation of version 0.8, only the -o and -t arguments are still supported. The use of -t is mandatory and you have to define either the'cifs' or'smbfs' file system with it. The choice of any other file system will cause smb4k_mount to exit with an error message. For the available options that go with the -o parameter, please consult the respective manual pages.
FreeBSD: The full range of arguments available for mount_smbfs 8 is supported. Please refer to its manual page for more information.
{share}
The remote share that is to be mounted.
{mountpoint}
The path where the share should be mounted to.
--help
Display a help screen and exit.
--version
Display the version information and exit.
Examples
Mount a share under & Linux; in normal user mode with the CIFS file system:
$smb4k_mount -n -t cifs -o user=USER, pass=PASSWD / /SERVER/ SHARE / mnt
Mount a share under & Linux; in super user mode with the SMB file system:
$sudo smb4k_mount -s -t smbfs -o username=USER, password=PASSWD / /SERVER/ SHARE / mnt
In the latter case an appropriate entry has to be present in the / etc/ sudoers configuration file to make the command work. See the sudoers 5 manual page for more information.
Author
smb4k_mount was written by Alexander Reinholdt dustpuppy@users. berlios. de.
smb4k_umount
smb4k_umount & #8212; unmount SMBFS and CIFS shares
smb4k_umount {mode} {options} {mountpoint} & nbsp; nbsp; (Linux; and similar)
smb4k_umount {mountpoint} & nbsp; nbsp; (FreeBSD)
smb4k_umount --help
smb4k_umount --version
smb4k_umount is the unmount utility of & smb4k;. It unmounts SMBFS and CIFS shares by invoking smbumount 8 or umount. cifs 8 in normal user mode and umount 8 in super user mode. Under FreeBSD, only umount 8 is used.
This argument determines if smb4k_umount will switch to normal user mode or to super user mode. It is not available under FreeBSD. Under the other operating systems it is mandatory. These are the possible values:
Run smb4k_umount in normal user mode and thus let it invoke either smbumount 8 or umount. cifs 8 depending on the choice the user made with the file system.
Run smb4k_umount in super user mode and thus let it invoke umount 8.
-t filesystem
Define the file system that should be used for unmounting. Only'smbfs' and'cifs' are supported. The use of any other file system will result in an error. This argument is not available under FreeBSD. Under the other operating systems it is mandatory.
-l
Perform a lazy unmount. This option is only available under & Linux; in super user mode. See the manual page of umount 8 for more information. You need & Linux; kernel version 2.4.11 or later.
The path where the share has been mounted to.
Unmount a CIFS share (under & Linux;) with normal user privileges:
$smb4k_umount -n -t cifs / mnt
Unmount a SMBFS share with super user privileges:
$sudo smb4k_umount -s -t smbfs / mnt
smb4k_umount was written by Alexander Reinholdt dustpuppy@users. berlios. de.
smb4k_kill
smb4k_kill & #8212; kill processes
smb4k_kill {pid}
smb4k_kill --help
smb4k_kill --version
smb4k_kill is the kill utility of & smb4k;. It kills processes by invoking the kill 1 command.
This program is available since & smb4k; version 0.5.0, and a major change in its behavior happened in smb4k_kill 0.6 (ie; in April 2007).
{pid}
This is the ID of the process you want to kill.
Example
Kill a process that is running with super user privileges:
$super smb4k_kill 1423
An appropriate entry has to be present in the / etc/ super. tab configuration file to make this command work. See the super. tab 5 manual page for more information.
smb4k_kill was written by Alexander Reinholdt dustpuppy@users. berlios. de.
smb4k_sudowriter
smb4k_sudowriter & #8212; write user entries to the sudoers file
smb4k_sudowriter --adduser & lt; usergt;
smb4k_sudowriter --removeuser & lt; usergt;
smb4k_sudowriter {KDE/ Qt option}
smb4k_sudowriter writes to the sudoers configuration file. You can either add or remove user entries depending on the option you provide. The location of the sudoers file is determined by smb4k_sudowriter.
This program is available since & smb4k; version 0.10.0.
--adduser & lt; usergt;
Add a user to the & smb4k; section of the sudoers file. If that section does not exists, it will be created.
--removeuser & lt; usergt;
Remove a user from the & smb4k; section of the sudoers file. If the user is the only entry, the whole section will be removed.
{KDE/ Qt option}
One of the generic & kde; and & Qt; options that are common to all & kde; programs (eg; --help, --version, & etc;).
Add the user "test" to the sudoers file:
$sudo smb4k_sudowriter --adduser test
An appropriate entry has to be present in the sudoers configuration file to make this command work. See the sudoers 5 manual page for more information.
smb4k_sudowriter was written by Alexander Reinholdt dustpuppy@users. berlios. de.
Trouble Shooting
If you cannot find your problem covered here, please ask for help on the Smb4K-general mailing list or visit http: / /smb4k. berlios. de and look for an updated version of the handbook.
Compilation and Installation
There are no problems with the cmake build system known at the moment. Refer to the Compilation and Installation section in the appendix to find out how to configure and install & smb4k;.
Problem: There is nothing in the network browser.
Solution: This problem may have several causes. Here is a list of common solutions:
Include the'interfaces' option in the [global] section of your smb. conf. It should include the interface(s) that is/ are connected to your network neighborhood, & eg;
interfaces = 192.168.1.1/ 24
or alternatively
interfaces = eth0
You may also add the local interface
interfaces = 192.168.1.1/ 24 127.0.0.1/ 8
interfaces = eth0 lo
Samba allows a few more ways how to define the network interface(s) (see the manual page). However, we recommend that you use the IP/ mask pair (eg; 192.168.1.1/ 24).
Add the WINS server of your network neighborhood & #8212; if available & #8212; to the [global] section of your smb. conf:
wins server = 192.168.1.1
Replace the above IP address with the one of your WINS server.
Open the ports 137 (TCP+UDP), 138 (UDP), 139 (TCP+UDP), and 445 (TCP+UDP) in your firewall. If you have SUSE's firewall running, see below.
Use a different look-up method. Therefore, change the settings under Settings Configure & smb4k;... Network Browse List.
After having applied a change to the smb. conf, please do not forget to restart Samba and & smb4k;. Check if your problem disappeared. If nothing helps, please ask for assistance on the Smb4K-general mailing list or file a bug report.
Problem: The browser window is empty when SUSE's firewall is running.
Solution: Have a look at Novell Cool Solutions or replace your firewall (recommended).
Problem: When using SELinux, the workgroup/ domain only contains the master browser.
Solution: Set SELinux to'permissive '.
Problem: When opening a (certain) & Windows; server, its shares are not displayed.
Solution: As of version 0.6.0, & smb4k; uses the net 8 command to retrieve the list of shares from a host. With the default settings, it will try to guess the protocol that is needed to communicate with the server (RAP or RPC). Unfortunately, this does not seem to work well with & Windows; XP/ 2000/ 2003 servers. The query fails in some cases (sometimes accompanied with an NT_STATUS_IO_TIMEOUT error but mostly with no error message at all). Please try to set the protocol to RAP either through the custom options dialog (recommended) or directly in the configuration dialog.
Note: This does not apply to versions prior to 0.6.0, because they use the RAP protocol based smbclient 1 command to retrieve the browse list.
Problem: Special characters (accents, umlauts, & etc;) are not displayed correctly.
Solution: For a solution see here.
Mounting and Unmounting of Shares
Problem: Mounting a share fails without any error message being displayed. The share is only shown for a few seconds and then vanishes.
Solution: This issues arises sometimes if you are not allowed to mount the shares as normal user. Have a look here for a solution.
Note: & Linux; and similar operating systems
Problem: Mounting fails with the following error message:
mount error 1 = Operation not permitted Refer to the mount. cifs(8) manual page (eg; man mount. cifs)
Solution: There are two possible causes for this:
You are not permitted to use mount. cifs 8 as normal user. To solve this problem, you can either enable the use of sudo in the Super User configuration page or set the SUID root bit for the mount binary:
$chmod +s & #096; which mount. cifs#096;
If you decide to use the latter solution, do not forget to also set the SUID root bit for umount. cifs 8.
It has been reported that mount. cifs 8 might fail if the Samba server uses the
security = share
option instead of
security = user
Change the settings on the server.
Problem: Mounting a share that contains special characters in the name (eg; umlauts) fails with the following error message:
mount error 6 = No such device or address Refer to the mount. cifs(8) manual page (eg; man mount. cifs)
Solution: Please follow the instructions given here. Alternatively, you can try to explicitly define the correct & Linux; charset in the configuration dialog (see here).
Problem: When using sudo 8, mounting fails with the following error message:
mount error 13 = Permission denied Refer to the mount. cifs(8) manual page (eg; man mount. cifs)
Solution: Possibly the'env_reset 'flag has been set in the / etc/ sudoers file (It's the default in Gentoo and Debian for example.). It resets the environment to only contain a limited number of environment variables. Especially, the PASSWD variable is removed that is needed by & smb4k;. You can fix this problem by alternatively doing the following:
Manually insert the following line after the statement beginning with "User_Alias SMB4KUSERS":
Defaults: SMB4KUSERS env_keep=PASSWD
This is the preferred method on a multi-user system.
Remove the & smb4k; user entries from / etc/ sudoers and rewrite them using & smb4k;.
Comment out the'env_reset 'variable (not recommended).
If you are still not able to mount a share, please file a bug report.
Problem: & smb4k; does not seem to care about the UID and GID that was set in the configuration dialog.
Solution: This is a Samba feature. If the target server supports the CIFS Unix extensions, the uid=UID and gid=GID option is ignored. For more information see the mount. cifs 8 manual page.
Problem: Unmounting a share fails with the following error message:
Could not unmount & #060; PATH#062;: Device or resource busy
Solution: First of all, check that you do not access any folder or file of the share with any program. If this is n't the case, you might have encountered a problem, that is known but not related to & smb4k;. It seems that under certain circumstances (that we could not figure out exactly) kdeinit background processes access files and/ or directories of the share and keep them open (kde; & #060; 3.4). Unmounting is not possible unless you send $kill -HUP PID to each kdeinit instance that has access to the share or its files. Replace PID by the pid of the kdeinit instance. You can find it out by using & eg; & ksysguard;.
Alternatively, you can force the unmounting of the share (not recommended). Highlight the share and use the Shares Force Unmounting menu item or press Ctrl; F.
Solution: Make sure the following options are set to the correct values in the [global] section of the smb. conf 5 of each Samba server and client:
dos charset = VAL1 unix charset = VAL2 display charset = VAL3
Replace VAL1, VAL2, VAL3 with the correct values. Read the manual page for more information.
Problem: Mounting a share fails with the following error message:
mount_smbfs: kldload(smbfs): Operation not permitted
Solution: Use sudo 8 to gain super user privileges for mounting (see section Super User). The error occurs, because only root is allowed to load kernel modules.
Note: FreeBSD only
mount_smbfs: cannot setup kernel iconv table (ISO8859-1: tolower): syserr = Operation not permitted
Solution: This error occurs when you switch off sudo 8 support during program run. Since only root is allowed to set up the kernel's iconv table, you have to use it to gain super user privileges for mounting (see section Super User).
Miscellaneous
There are no problems known that might belong in this section.
Reporting Bugs
Before filing a bug report, please read the Trouble Shooting section. Many common problems are already covered there. Also, try the latest version of & smb4k;. Maybe your problem has already been fixed.
Follow these directions for your bug report:
Describe in detail what you did to receive the problem you are reporting.
Provide the version of & smb4k; and & kde;.
Mention your operating system (Linux;, FreeBSD, & etc;) and the distribution that is running on your computer.
Include the full error message if an error dialog was displayed.
Add additional data, & ie; attach the backtrace if you experienced a crash, send a screen shot if you are reporting a & GUI; related problem, & etc;
The recommended method to report a bug is to go to our bug tracking system and fill out the form. But you can also use the dialog that opens when you click the Help Report Bug... menu item.
Credits and License
Copyright (c) 2003 - 2008, Alexander Reinholdt dustpuppy@users. berlios. de
Copyright (c) 2004 -2007, Massimo Callegari massimocallegari@yahoo. it
& underGPL;
CREDIT_FOR_TRANSLATORS
This documentation is licensed under the terms of the GNU; General Public License.
Developers
Alexander Reinholdt dustpuppy@users. berlios. de
Massimo Callegari massimocallegari@yahoo. it
Translators (active and retired)
Brazilian Portuguese: Giovanni Degani tiefox@terra. com. br, Lamarque V. Souza lamarque_souza@hotmail. com
Bulgarian: Atanas Mavrov bugar@developer. bg
Catalan: Leopold Palomo Avellaneda lepalom@wol. es
Czech: Alois Ne#353; por alois. nespor@seznam. cz
Chinese Simplified (zh_CN): Nick Chen nick_chen75@hotmail. com
Chinese Traditional (zh_TW): Jack Liu chuany@chuany. net, Wei-Lun Chao chaoweilun@users. berlios. de
Danish: Michael Brinkloev mhb@qxp. dk
Dutch: Joop Beris jberis@risse. nl
French: Nicolas Ternisien nicolast@libertysurf. fr
German: Alexander Reinholdt dustpuppy@users. berlios. de
Hungarian: Karoly Barcza kbarcza@blackpanther. hu
Icelandic: Arnar Le#243; sson leosson@frisurf. no
Italian: Isidoro Russo risidoro@aliceposta. it
Japanese: Toyohiro Asukai toyohiro@ksmplus. com
Norwegian (Bookmal & Nynorsk): Nils Kristian Tomren project@nilsk. net
Polish: Rados#322; aw Zawartko radzaw@lnet. szn. pl, Jerzy Trzeciak artusek@wp. pl
Russian: Stanislav Yudin decvar@mail. berlios. de
Slovak: Michal & #352; ulek reloadshot@atlas. sk
Swedish: Marc Hansen marc. hansen@gmx. de, Leslie Jensen leslie@eskk. nu
Spanish: Quique quique@sindominio. net, Mart#237; n Carr tincarr@gmail. com
Turkish: Gouml; rkem & #199; etin gorkem@gorkemcetin. com, Serdar Soytetir sendirom@gmail. com
Ukrainian: Ivan Petrouchtchak iip@telus. net
Special Thanks
The & smb4k; team would like to thank everyone who contributed by sending patches. Also, a big "Thank you!" goes to Rashid N. Achilov shelton@sentry. granch. ru, who convinced us to port & smb4k; to FreeBSD and helped us a great deal to achieve this goal.
Installation
How to obtain & smb4k;
The latest stable release is available at http: / /developer. berlios. de/ projects/ smb4k/.
Requirements
& smb4k; officially supports & Linux; (> = 2.2. x) and FreeBSD (> = 4.10). It might also run on other Unix systems.
If you want to compile & smb4k; from source, a standard & kde; installation (4.0.0 or later) including the header files is needed.
In order to use & smb4k; successfully, you have to install the Samba software suite (3. x, 3.2 or later recommended), & GNU; grep, & GNU; awk or similar, & GNU; sed and the & GNU; findutils. If you are using & Linux;, you also need support of the / proc file system compiled into your kernel.
To enable full functionality, you should also install sudo, a TeX software distribution (for dvips), & GNU; enscript, and rsync.
& smb4k; uses about 20 MB of memory to run, but this may vary depending on your platform and configuration.
Links to all required libraries and programs as well as & smb4k; itself can be found on the & smb4k; home page.
The list of changes can be found in the ChangeLog file.
This section describes the configuration, compilation and installation of & smb4k;.
Unpack the downloaded source tarball: $tar -xvfj smb4k-x. x. x. tar. bz2 (Replace x. x. x with the version number)
Create a build directory: $mkdir smb4k_build (The build directory can have any name you want.)
Change into the build directory:
$cd smb4k_build
Configure the source code with at least the following command: $cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX= ` kde4-config --prefix ` -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release. / path/ to/ smb4k-x. x. x/ Several more options can be added. Read the cmake documentation for more information.
Compile the source code:
$make
Install the application. Run $sudo make install in the root directory of the source code. If you want to be able to remove & smb4k; with your package manager, install the'checkinstall 'package and run $sudo checkinstall instead.
Debugging the Source Code
If you experience crashes or similar and want to debug the source code yourself, compile it with debugging symbols. The procedure is similar to the one described in the Compilation and Installation section except that you need to modify the cmake command slightly:
$cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX= ` kde4-config --prefix ` -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug. / path/ to/ smb4k-x. x. x/
Now compile and install the program as stated before. If you do not want to install but only debug the newly compiled program, you may execute & smb4k; from within the source code directory. Change into the smb4k subdirectory and run:
$. / smb4k --nofork
If you found the cause for a bug, please let us know. A backtrace or a patch will be much appreciated.