# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate and diluent for solution for infusion.
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
1 vial TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate contains:
30 mg temsirolimus dissolved in a total volume of 1.2 ml Therefore, 1 ml of TORISEL concentrate contains 25 mg temsirolimus.
After dilution of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent, the concentration of temsirolimus is 10 mg/ ml.
Excipients:
1 vial TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate contains 474 mg anhydrous ethanol.
1 vial of the diluent, provided contains 358 mg anhydrous ethanol.
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Concentrate and diluent for solution for infusion.
The concentrate is a clear, colourless to light-yellow solution, essentially free from visible particulates.
The diluent is a clear to slightly turbid, light-yellow to yellow solution, essentially free from visible particulates.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
TORISEL is indicated for the first-line treatment of patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma who have at least three of six prognostic risk factors (see section 5.1).
4.2 Posology and method of administration
TORISEL must be administered under the supervision of a physician experienced in the use of antineoplastic medicinal products.
The total volume (1.2 ml) of 1 vial TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate must be diluted with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent to achieve a concentration of temsirolimus of 10 mg/ ml.
Withdraw the required amount of the temsirolimus 10 mg/ ml mixture and then inject rapidly into sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection.
For instructions on preparation, see section 6.6.
2 The recommended dose of temsirolimus for advanced renal cell carcinoma administered intravenously is 25 mg infused over a 30- to 60-minute period once weekly (see section 6.6 for instructions on dilution, administration and disposal).
Patients should be given intravenous diphenhydramine 25 to 50 mg (or similar antihistamine) approximately 30 minutes before the start of each dose of temsirolimus.
Treatment with TORISEL should continue until the patient is no longer clinically benefiting from therapy or until unacceptable toxicity occurs.
No special dose modification is required for any of the populations that have been studied (gender, elderly).
Management of suspected adverse reactions may require temporary interruption and/ or dose reduction of temsirolimus therapy.
If a suspected reaction is not manageable with dose delays, then temsirolimus may be reduced by 5 mg/ week decrements.
Paediatric patients Experience in paediatric patients is limited.
The safety and effectiveness in paediatric patients have not been established.
Therefore, the use of TORISEL in the paediatric population is not recommended until further information on effectiveness and safety is available.
Elderly patients No specific dose adjustment is necessary.
Renal impairment No dose adjustment of temsirolimus is recommended in patients with renal impairment.
Temsirolimus should be used with caution in patients with severe renal impairment (see section 4.4).
Hepatic impairment Temsirolimus should be used with caution in patients with hepatic impairment.
Use of temsirolimus in patients with severe hepatic impairment is not recommended (see section 4.4).
4.3 Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to temsirolimus, its metabolites (including sirolimus), polysorbate 80, or to any of the excipients of TORISEL.
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Paediatrics Temsirolimus is not recommended for use in paediatric patients due to insufficient data on safety.
Elderly Based on the results of a phase 3 study, elderly patients may be more likely to experience certain adverse reactions, including oedema and pneumonia.
Renal impairment Temsirolimus elimination by the kidneys is negligible; studies in patients with varying renal impairment have not been conducted (see section 4.2 and 5.2).
TORISEL has not been studied in patients undergoing haemodialysis.
3 Hepatic impairment Temsirolimus is cleared predominantly by the liver.
No data are currently available regarding the influence of hepatic dysfunction and/ or hepatic metastases on temsirolimus disposition (see section 4.2).
Intracerebral bleeding Patients with central nervous system (CNS) tumours (primary CNS tumours or metastases) and/ or receiving anticoagulation therapy may be at an increased risk of developing intracerebral bleeding (including fatal outcomes) while receiving therapy with temsirolimus.
Renal failure Renal failure (including fatal outcomes) has been observed in patients receiving TORISEL for advanced renal cell cancer and/ or with pre-existing renal insufficiency (see section 4.8).
Cataracts Cataracts have been observed in some patients who received the combination of temsirolimus and interferon-α.
Hypersensitivity/ infusion reactions Hypersensitivity/ infusion reactions (including some life-threatening and rare fatal reactions), including and not limited to flushing, chest pain, dyspnoea, hypotension, apnoea, loss of consciousness, hypersensitivity and anaphylaxis, have been associated with the administration of temsirolimus (see section 4.8).
These reactions can occur very early in the first infusion, but may also occur with subsequent infusions.
Patients should be monitored early during the infusion and appropriate supportive care should be available.
Temsirolimus infusion should be interrupted in all patients with severe infusion reactions and appropriate medical therapy administered.
A benefit-risk assessment should be done prior to the continuation of temsirolimus therapy in patients with severe or life-threatening reactions.
If a patient develops a hypersensitivity reaction during the TORISEL infusion, despite the premedication, the infusion must be stopped and the patient observed for at least 30 to 60 minutes (depending on the severity of the reaction).
At the discretion of the physician, treatment may be resumed after the administration of an H1-receptor antagonist (diphenhydramine or similar antihistamine) and a H2-receptor antagonist (intravenous famotidine 20 mg or intravenous ranitidine 50 mg) approximately 30 minutes before restarting the TORISEL infusion.
Administration of corticosteroids may be considered; however, the efficacy of corticosteroid treatment in this setting has not been established.
The infusion may then be resumed at a slower rate (up to 60 minutes) and should be completed within six hours from the time that TORISEL is first added to sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection.
Because it is recommended that an H1 antihistamine be administered to patients before the start of the intravenous temsirolimus infusion, temsirolimus should be used with caution in patients with known hypersensitivity to the antihistamine or in patients who cannot receive the antihistamine for other medical reasons.
Hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylactic/ anaphylactoid reactions, angioedema, exfoliative dermatitis and hypersensitivity vasculitis, have been associated with the oral administration of sirolimus.
Hyperglycaemia/ glucose intolerance/ diabetes mellitus Patients should be advised that treatment with TORISEL may be associated with an increase in blood glucose levels in diabetic and non-diabetic patients.
In a clinical trial, 26% of patients reported hyperglycaemia as an adverse event.
This may result in the need for an increase in the dose of, or initiation of, insulin and/ or hypoglycaemic agent therapy.
Patients should be advised to report excessive thirst or any increase in the volume or frequency of urination.
4 Infections Patients may be immunosuppressed and should be carefully observed for the occurrence of infections, including opportunistic infections.
Interstitial lung disease There have been cases of non-specific interstitial pneumonitis, including rare fatal reports, occurring in patients who received weekly intravenous TORISEL.
Some patients were asymptomatic with pneumonitis detected on computed tomography scan or chest radiograph.
Others presented with symptoms such as dyspnoea, cough, and fever.
Some patients required discontinuation of TORISEL or treatment with corticosteroids and/ or antibiotics, while some patients continued treatment without additional intervention.
Patients should be followed for clinical respiratory symptoms.
Hyperlipaemia The use of TORISEL in renal cell carcinoma patients was associated with increases in serum triglycerides and cholesterol.
In a clinical trial, hyperlipaemia was reported as an adverse event in 27% of patients.
This may require initiation, or increase, in the dose of lipid-lowering agents.
Serum cholesterol and triglycerides should be tested before and during treatment with TORISEL.
Wound healing complications The use of TORISEL has been associated with abnormal wound healing; therefore, caution should be exercised with the use of TORISEL in the peri-surgical period.
Concomitant use of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors Angioneurotic oedema-type reactions (including delayed reactions occurring two months following initiation of therapy) have been observed in some patients who received temsirolimus and ACE inhibitors concomitantly (see section 4.5).
Agents inducing CYP3A metabolism Agents such as carbemazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, rifampicin, rifabutin, rifapentine, and St.
John’ s Wort are strong inducers of CYP3A4/ 5 and may decrease composite exposure of the active moieties, temsirolimus and its metabolite, sirolimus.
Therefore, continuous administration beyond 5-7 days with agents that have CYP3A4/ 5 induction potential should be avoided.
Agents inhibiting CYP3A metabolism Agents such as protease inhibitors (indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir), antifungals (e. g., itraconazole, ketoconazole, voriconazole), calcium channel blockers (e. g., diltiazem, verapamil), macrolide antibiotics (e. g., clarithromycin, erythromycin), and cimetidine, grapefruit juice, aprepitant, fluvoxamine and nefazodone are strong CYP3A4 inhibitors and may increase blood concentrations of the active moieties, temsirolimus and its metabolite, sirolimus.
Therefore, concomitant treatment with agents that have strong CYP3A4 inhibition potential should be avoided.
Concomitant treatment with agents that have moderate CYP3A4 inhibition potential should be carried out with caution (see section 4.5).
Alternative treatments with agents that do not have CYP3A4 inhibition potential should be considered.
Vaccinations Immunosuppressants may affect responses to vaccination.
During treatment with TORISEL, vaccination may be less effective.
The use of live vaccines should be avoided during treatment with TORISEL.
Examples of live vaccines are: measles, mumps, rubella, oral polio, BCG, yellow fever, varicella, and TY21a typhoid vaccines.
Excipients This medicinal product (concentrate-diluent mixture) contains 35% volume ethanol (alcohol); i. e., up to 693.5 mg per dose, equivalent to 17.6 ml beer, 7.3 ml wine per dose.
5 Harmful for those suffering from alcoholism.
To be taken into account in pregnant or breast-feeding women, children and high-risk groups, such as patients with liver disease or epilepsy.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Interaction studies have only been performed in adults.
Concomitant use of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors Angioneurotic oedema-type reactions (including delayed reactions occurring two months following initiation of therapy) have been observed in some patients who received temsirolimus and ACE inhibitors concomitantly (see section 4.4).
Agents inducing CYP3A metabolism Co-administration of TORISEL with rifampicin, a potent CYP3A4/ 5 inducer, had no significant effect on temsirolimus Cmax (maximum concentration) and AUC (area under the concentration vs. time curve) after intravenous administration, but decreased sirolimus Cmax by 65% and AUC by 56%, compared to TORISEL treatment alone.
Therefore, concomitant treatment with agents that have CYP3A4/ 5 induction potential should be avoided (see section 4.4).
Agents inhibiting CYP3A metabolism Co-administration of TORISEL 5 mg with ketoconazole, a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor, had no significant effect on temsirolimus Cmax or AUC; however, sirolimus AUC increased 3.1-fold, and AUCsum (temsirolimus + sirolimus) increased 2.3-fold compared to TORISEL alone.
The effect on the unbound concentrations of sirolimus has not been determined, but is expected to be larger than the effect on whole- blood concentrations due to the saturable binding to red blood cells.
The effect may also be more pronounced at a 25 mg dose.
Substances that are potent inhibitors of CYP3A4 activity (e. g., protease inhibitors, anti-fungals, macrolide antibiotics, nefazodone, selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors) increase sirolimus blood concentrations.
Concomitant treatment of TORISEL with agents that have strong CYP3A4 inhibition potential should be avoided (see section 4.4).
Concomitant treatment with moderate CYP3A4 inhibitors should only be made with caution.
Interaction with medicinal products metabolized by CYP2D6 In 23 healthy subjects, the concentration of desipramine, a CYP2D6 substrate, was unaffected when 25 mg of temsirolimus was co-administered.
No clinically significant effect is anticipated when TORISEL is co-administered with agents that are metabolised by CYP2D6.
Interactions with drugs that are P-glycoprotein substrates In an in vitro study, temsirolimus inhibited the transport of P-glycoprotein substrates with an IC50 value of 2 µM.
The clinical relevance of this finding is not known.
Amphiphilic agents Temsirolimus has been associated with phospholipidosis in rats.
Phospholipidosis has not been observed in mice or monkeys treated with temsirolimus, nor has it been documented in patients treated with temsirolimus.
Although phospholipidosis has not been shown to be a risk for patients administered temsirolimus, it is possible that combined administration of temsirolimus with other amphiphilic agents such as amiodarone or statins could result in an increased risk of amphiphilic pulmonary toxicity.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
There are no adequate data from the use of temsirolimus in pregnant women.
Studies in animals have shown reproductive toxicity.
In reproduction studies in animals, temsirolimus caused embryo/ foetotoxicity
6 that was manifested as mortality and reduced foetal weights (with associated delays in skeletal ossification) in rats and rabbits.
Teratogenic effects (omphalocele) were seen in rabbits.
In male rats, decreased fertility and partly reversible reductions in sperm counts were reported (see section 5.3).
The potential risk for humans is unknown.
TORISEL must not be used during pregnancy, unless the risk for the embryo is justified by the expected benefit for the mother.
Due to the unknown risk related to potential exposure during early pregnancy, women of childbearing potential must be advised not to become pregnant while using TORISEL.
Men with partners of childbearing potential should use medically acceptable contraception while receiving TORISEL (see section 5.3).
It is unknown whether temsirolimus is excreted in human breast milk.
The excretion of temsirolimus in milk has not been studied in animals.
However, sirolimus, the main metabolite of temsirolimus, is excreted in milk of lactating rats.
Because of the potential for adverse reactions in breast-fed infants from temsirolimus, breast-feeding should be discontinued during therapy.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
4.8 Undesirable effects
A total of 626 patients were randomly assigned in a phase 3, three-arm, randomised, open-label study of Interferon alfa (IFN-α) alone, TORISEL alone, and TORISEL and IFN-α.
A total of 616 patients received treatment:
200 patients received IFN-α weekly; 208 received TORISEL 25 mg weekly and 208 patients received a combination of IFN-α and TORISEL weekly.
Based on the results of the phase 3 study, elderly patients may be more likely to experience certain adverse reactions, including face oedema and pneumonia.
The most serious reactions observed with TORISEL are hypersensitivity/ infusion reactions (including some life-threatening and rare fatal reactions), hyperglycaemia/ glucose intolerance, infections, interstitial lung disease, hyperlipaemia, intracerebral bleeding, renal failure, bowel perforation, and wound healing complication.
The most common (≥ 30%) adverse reactions (all grades) observed with TORISEL include anaemia, nausea, rash (including rash, pruritic rash, maculopapular rash, pustular rash), anorexia, oedema (including facial oedema and peripheral oedema), and asthenia.
Cataracts have been observed in some patients who received the combination of temsirolimus and interferon-α.
See section 4.4 for additional information concerning serious adverse reactions, including appropriate actions to be taken if specific reactions occur.
The following list contains adverse reactions seen in clinical trial (Study 1).
Only events for which there is at least reasonable suspicion of a causal relationship to intravenous treatment with TORISEL are listed.
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness.
Adverse reactions are listed according to the following categories:
Very common: ≥ 1/ 10
7 Common: ≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10 Uncommon: ≥ 1/ 1,000 to < 1/ 100
Adverse reactions in clinical trial 1
All
Grade
System Organ Class
Frequency
Adverse reactions
Grades n (%)
3 & 4 n (%)
Investigations
Very common Common Common
Blood creatinine increased Increased aspartate aminotransferase Increased alanine aminotransferase
30 (14) 17 (8) 12 (6)
6 (3) 3 (1) 1 (1)
Blood and lymphatic system disorders
Very common
Thrombocytopaenia
28 (14)
3 (1)
Very common Common Common Common
Anaemia Neutropaenia Leucopoenia Lymphopaenia
94 (45) 15 (7) 13 (6) 11 (5)
41 (20) 6 (3) 1 (1) 9 (4)
Nervous system disorders
Very common
Dysgeusia
31 (15)
0 (0)
Common Uncommon
Ageusia Intracerebral bleeding
11 (5) 1 (1)
0 (0) 1 (1)
Eye disorders
Common
Conjunctivitis (including lacrimation disorders)
15 (7)
1 (1)
Cardiac disorders
Uncommon
Pericardial effusion (including haemodynamically significant pericardial effusions requiring intervention)
2 (1)
1 (1)
8 Adverse reactions in clinical trial 1
All
Grade
System Organ Class
Frequency
Adverse reactions
Grades n (%)
3 & 4 n (%)
Respiratory, thoracic and
Very common
Dyspnoea
58 (28)
18 (9)
mediastinal disorders
Very common Very common Common
Epistaxis Cough Pneumonitis [including fatal pneumonitis] (see section 4.4)
25 (12) 54 (26) 4 (2)
0 (0) 2 (1) 1 (1)
Common
Pleural effusion
8 (4)
5 (2)
Gastrointestinal disorders
Very common
Abdominal pain
44 (21)
9 (4)
Very common Very common Very common Very common Common Common Common Common Uncommon
Vomiting Stomatitis Diarrhoea Nausea Abdominal distension Oral pain Gingivitis Aphthous stomatitis Bowel perforation
40 (19) 42 (20) 57 (27) 77 (37) 9 (4) 5 (2) 5 (2) 8 (4) 1 (0.5)
4 (2) 3 (1) 3 (1) 5 (2) 1 (1) 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (0) 1 (0.5)
Renal and urinary disorders
Common
Renal failure [including fatal outcomes] (see section 4.4)
4 (2)
2 (1)
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
Very common
Rash (including rash, pruritic rash, maculopapular rash, pustular rash)
88 (42)
10 (5)
Very common Very common Very common Very common Common
Pruritus Acne Nail disorder Dry skin Exfoliative Dermatitis
40 (19) 21 (10) 28 (14) 22 (11) 16 (8)
1 (1) 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (1) 0 (0)
Musculoskeletal, and connective tissue disorders
Very common
Back pain
41 (20)
6 (3)
Very common
Arthralgia
37 (18)
2 (1)
Metabolism and nutrition disorders
Very common
Hypokalaemia
20 (10)
7 (3)
Very common
Hyperglycaemia/ diabetes mellitus*
53 (26)
22 (11)
Very common Very common Very common
Hypercholesterolaemia Hyperlipaemia Anorexia
51 (24) 57 (27) 66 (32)
1 (1) 8 (4) 6 (3)
Common
Hypophosphataemia
17 (8)
11 (5)
9 Adverse reactions in clinical trial 1
All
Grade
System Organ Class
Frequency
Adverse reactions
Grades n (%)
3 & 4 n (%)
Infections and infestations
Very common
Bacterial and viral infections (including infection, cellulitis, herpes zoster, herpes simplex, bronchitis, abscess)
42 (20)
6 (3)
Very common
Urinary tract infection (including dysuria, haematuria, cystitis, urinary frequency, urinary tract infection)
31 (15)
4 (2)
Very common Very common Common Common Common
Pharyngitis Rhinitis Pneumonia Upper respiratory tract infection Folliculitis
25 (12) 20 (10) 17 (8) 14 (7) 4 (2)
0 (0) 0 (0) 5 (2) 0 (0) 0 (0)
Vascular disorders
Common
Venous thromboembolism (including deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolus)
5 (2)
3 (1)
Common Common
Hypertension Thrombophlebitis
14 (7) 2 (1)
3 (1) 0 (0)
General disorders and administration site conditions
Very common
Mucositis
39 (19)
2 (1)
Very common Very common Very common
Pain Chest pain Oedema (including oedema, facial oedema, peripheral oedema)
59 (28) 34 (16) 72 (35)
11 (5) 2 (1) 7 (3)
Very common
Pyrexia
51 (24)
1 (1)
Very common Common
Asthenia Impaired wound healing
106 (51) 3 (1)
23 (11) 0 (0)
Immune system disorders
Common
Allergic/ hypersensitivity reactions
18 (9)
0 (0)
*Patients should be advised that treatment with TORISEL may be associated with an increase in blood glucose levels in diabetic and non-diabetic patients.
4.9 Overdose
There is no specific treatment for TORISEL intravenous overdose.
TORISEL has been safely administered to patients with renal cancer with repeated intravenous doses of temsirolimus as high as 220 mg/ m2.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group:
Protein Kinase Inhibitors; ATC code:
L01X E09 10 Temsirolimus is a selective inhibitor of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin).
Temsirolimus binds to an intracellular protein (FKBP-12), and the protein-temsirolimus complex binds and inhibits the activity of mTOR that controls cell division.
Inhibition of mTOR activity results in a G1 growth arrest in treated tumour cells resulting from selective disruption of translation of cell cycle regulatory proteins, such as D-type cyclins, c-myc, and ornithine decarboxylase.
Temsirolimus exerts its effect by binding in a complex with FKBP-12 and mTOR.
When mTOR is bound in this complex, its ability to phosphorylate, and thereby control the activity of protein translation factors (4E-BP1 and S6K, both downstream of mTOR in the P13 kinase/ AKT pathway) that control cell division, is blocked.
In addition to regulating cell cycle proteins, mTOR can regulate translation of the hypoxia-inducible factors, HIF-1 and HIF-2 alpha.
These transcription factors regulate the ability of tumours to adapt to hypoxic microenvironments and to produce the angiogenic factor vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
The anti-tumour effect of temsirolimus, therefore, may also in part stem from its ability to depress levels of HIF and VEGF in the tumour or tumour microenvironment, thereby impairing vessel development.
Clinical Efficacy The safety and efficacy of TORISEL in the treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC) were studied in the following two randomised clinical trials:
Study 1 Study 1 was a phase 3, multi-centre, three-arm, randomised, open-label study in previously untreated patients with advanced renal cell carcinoma and with 3 or more of 6 pre-selected prognostic risk factors (less than one year from time of initial RCC diagnosis to randomisation, Karnofsky performance status of 60 or 70, haemoglobin less than the lower limit of normal, corrected calcium of greater than 10 mg/ dl, lactate dehydrogenase > 1.5 times the upper limit of normal, more than one metastatic organ site).
The primary study endpoint was overall survival (OS).
Secondary endpoints included progression-free survival (PFS), objective response rate (ORR), clinical benefit rate, time to treatment failure (TTF), and quality adjusted survival measurement.
Patients were stratified for prior nephrectomy status within three geographic regions and were randomly assigned (1:1:1) to receive IFN-α alone (n = 207), TORISEL alone (25 mg weekly; n = 209), or the combination of IFN-α and TORISEL (n = 210).
In Study 1, TORISEL 25 mg was associated with a statistically significant advantage over IFN-α in the primary endpoint of OS at the 2nd pre-specified interim analysis (n = 446 events, p = 0.0078).
The TORISEL arm showed a 49% increase in median OS compared with the IFN-α arm.
TORISEL also was associated with statistically significant advantages over IFN-α in the secondary endpoints of PFS, TTF, and clinical benefit rate.
The combination of TORISEL 15 mg and IFN-α did not result in a significant increase in overall survival when compared with IFN-α alone at either the interim analysis (median 8.4 vs.
7.3 months, hazard ratio = 0.96, p = 0.6965) or final analysis (median 8.4 vs.
7.3 months, hazard ratio = 0.93, p = 0.4902).
Treatment with the combination of TORISEL and IFN-α resulted in a statistically significant increase in the incidence of certain grade 3-4 adverse events (weight loss, anaemia, neutropaenia, thrombocytopaenia and mucosal inflammation) when compared with the adverse events observed in the IFN-α or TORISEL-alone arms.
Summary of efficacy results in TORISEL Study 1 a
Parameter
TORISEL
IFN-α
P-value
Hazard ratio
b
n = 209
n = 207
(95% CI)
Pre-specified interim analysis Median overall survival, Months
7.3 (6.1,
(95% CI) Final analysis
10.9 (8.6,
12.7)
8.8)
0.0078
0.73 (0.58, 0.92)
11
Median overall survival, Months
7.3 (6.1,
(95% CI) Median Progression- Free
10.9 (8.6, 12.7)
8.8)
0.0252
0.78 (0.63, 0.97)
Survival by independent
3.2 (2.2,
assessment Months (95% CI) Median Progression- Free
5.6 (3.9, 7.2)
4.0)
0.0042
0.74 (0.60, 0.91)
Survival by investigator
1.9 (1.9,
assessment Months (95% CI) Overall response rate by
3.8 (3.6, 5.2)
2.2)
0.0028
0.74 (0.60, 0.90)
5.3 (2.3,
c
independent assessment% (95% CI)
9.1 (5.2, 13.0)
8.4)
0.1361
NA
CI = confidence interval; NA = not applicable. a.
Based on log-rank test stratified by prior nephrectomy and region. b.
Based on Cox proportional hazard model stratified by prior nephrectomy and region (95% CI are descriptive, only). c.
Based on Cochran-Mantel-Hansel test stratified by prior nephrectomy and region.
In Study 1, 31% of patients treated with TORISEL were 65 or older.
In patients younger than 65, median overall survival was 12 months (95% CI 9.9, 14.2) with a hazard ratio of 0.67 (95% CI 0.52, 0.87) compared with those treated with IFN-α.
In patients 65 or older, median overall survival was 8.6 months (95% CI 6.4, 11.5) with a hazard ratio of 1.15 (95% CI 0.78, 1.68) compared with those treated with IFN-α.
Study 2 Study 2 was a randomised, double-blind, multi-centre, outpatient trial to evaluate the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of three dose levels of TORISEL when administered to previously treated patients with advanced RCC.
The primary efficacy endpoint was ORR, and OS was also evaluated.
One hundred eleven (111) patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1:1 ratio to receive 25 mg, 75 mg, or 250 mg temsirolimus intravenous weekly.
In the 25 mg arm (n = 36), all patients had metastatic disease; 4 (11%) had no prior chemo- or immunotherapy; 17 (47%) had one prior treatment, and 15 (42%) had 2 or more prior treatments for RCC.
Twenty-seven (27, 75%) had undergone a nephrectomy.
Twenty-four (24, 67%) were Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) = 1, and 12 (33%) were ECOG PS = 0.
For patients treated weekly with 25 mg temsirolimus OS was 13.8 months (95% CI:
9.0, 18.7 months); ORR was 5.6% (95% CI:
0.7, 18.7%).
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption Following administration of a single 25 mg intravenous dose of temsirolimus in patients with cancer, mean Cmax in whole blood was 585 ng/ ml (coefficient of variation, CV = 14%), and mean AUC in blood was 1627 ng• h/ ml (CV = 26%).
Distribution Temsirolimus exhibits a polyexponential decline in whole blood concentrations, and distribution is attributable to preferential binding to FKBP-12 in blood cells.
The mean (standard deviation, SD) dissociation constant (Kd) of binding was 5.1 (3.0) ng/ ml, denoting the concentration at which 50% of binding sites in blood cells were occupied.
Temsirolimus distribution is dose-dependent with mean (10th, 90th percentiles) maximal specific binding in blood cells of 1.4 mg (0.47 to 2.5 mg).
Following a single
12 25 mg temsirolimus intravenous dose, mean steady-state volume of distribution in whole blood of patients with cancer was 172 liters.
Metabolism Sirolimus, an equally potent metabolite to temsirolimus, was observed as the principal metabolite in humans following intravenous treatment.
During in vitro temsirolimus metabolism studies, sirolimus, seco-temsirolimus and seco-sirolimus were observed; additional metabolic pathways were hydroxylation, reduction and demethylation.
Following a single 25 mg intravenous dose in patients with cancer, sirolimus AUC was 2.7-fold that of temsirolimus AUC, due principally to the longer half-life of sirolimus.
Elimination Following a single 25 mg intravenous dose of temsirolimus, temsirolimus mean ±SD systemic clearance was 11.4 ± 2.4 l/ h.
Mean half-lives of temsirolimus and sirolimus were 17.7 hr and 73.3 hr, respectively.
Following administration of [14C] temsirolimus, excretion was predominantly via the faeces (78%), with renal elimination of active substance and metabolites accounting for 4.6% of the administered dose.
Temsirolimus and sirolimus were demonstrated to be substrates for P-gp in vitro.
Possible effects of inhibition of P-gp on elimination of temsirolimus and sirolimus in vivo have not been investigated.
Special Populations Hepatic impairment Temsirolimus and sirolimus pharmacokinetics have not been investigated in patients with hepatic impairment (see sections 4.2 and 4.4).
Gender, weight, race, age Temsirolimus and sirolimus pharmacokinetics are not significantly affected by gender or body weight.
No relevant differences in exposure were apparent when data from the Caucasian population was compared with either the Japanese or Black population.
Pharmacokinetic data on temsirolmus and sirolimus are available in patients up to age 79 years.
Age does not appear to affect temsirolimus and sirolimus pharmacokinetics significantly.
Paediatric population Temsirolimus and sirolimus pharmacokinetics in the paediatric population have not been investigated.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
Adverse reactions not observed in clinical studies, but seen in animals at exposure levels similar to or even lower than clinical exposure levels and with possible relevance to clinical use, were as follows: pancreatic islet cell vacuolation (rat), testicular tubular degeneration (mouse, rat and monkey), lymphoid atrophy (mouse, rat and monkey), mixed cell inflammation of the colon/ caecum (monkey), and pulmonary phospholipidosis (rat).
13 Diarrhoea with mixed cell inflammation of the caecum or colon was observed in monkeys and was associated with an inflammatory response, and may have been due to a disruption of the normal intestinal flora.
General inflammatory responses, as indicated by increased fibrinogen and neutrophils, and/ or changes in serum protein, were observed in mice, rats, and monkeys, although in some cases these clinical pathology changes were attributed to skin or intestinal inflammation as noted above.
For some animals, there were no specific clinical observations or histological changes that suggested inflammation.
Temsirolimus was not genotoxic in a battery of in vitro (bacterial reverse mutation in Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli, forward mutation in mouse lymphoma cells, and chromosome aberrations in Chinese hamster ovary cells) and in vivo (mouse micronucleus) assays.
Carcinogenicity studies have not been conducted with temsirolimus; however, sirolimus, the major metabolite of temsirolimus in humans, was carcinogenic in mice and rats.
The following effects were reported in mice and/ or rats in the carcinogenicity studies conducted: granulocytic leukaemia, lymphoma, hepatocellular adenoma and carcinoma, and testicular adenoma.
Reductions in testicular weights and/ or histological lesions (e. g., tubular atrophy and tubular giant cells) were observed in mice, rats, and monkeys.
In rats, these changes were accompanied by a decreased weight of accessory sex organs (epididymides, prostate, seminal vesicles).
In reproduction toxicity studies in animals, decreased fertility and partly reversible reductions in sperm counts were reported in male rats.
Exposures in animals were lower than those seen in humans receiving clinically relevant doses of temsirolimus.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Concentrate:
Anhydrous ethanol all-rac-α -Tocopherol (E 307) Propylene glycol Anhydrous citric acid (E 330)
Diluent:
Polysorbate 80 (E 433) Macrogol 400 Anhydrous ethanol
6.2 Incompatibilities
This medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal products, except those mentioned in section 6.6.
TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate for solution for infusion must not be added directly to aqueous infusion solutions.
Direct addition of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate to aqueous solutions will result in precipitation of medicinal product.
Always dilute TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate for solution for infusion with the supplied diluent before adding to infusion solutions.
TORISEL may only be administered in sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%)
14 solution for injection after the initial dilution of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent.
TORISEL, when diluted, contains polysorbate 80, which is known to increase the rate of di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate extraction (DEHP) from polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
This incompatibility has to be considered during the preparation and administration of TORISEL.
It is important that the recommendations in sections 4.2 and 6.6 be followed closely.
PVC bags and medical devices must not be used for the administration of preparations containing polysorbate 80, because polysorbate 80 leaches DEHP from PVC.
6.3 Shelf life
2 years.
After first dilution of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent:
24 hours when stored below 25°C and protected from light.
After further dilution of the concentrate-diluent mixture with sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection:
6 hours when stored below 25°C and protected from light.
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Store in a refrigerator (2°C-8°C).
Do not freeze.
Keep the vials in the outer carton in order to protect from light.
For storage conditions of the diluted medicinal product, see section 6.3.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate:
Clear glass vial (type 1 glass) with butyl rubber stopper and a plastic flip-top closure sealed with aluminum.
Diluent:
Clear glass vial (type 1 glass) with butyl rubber stopper and a plastic flip-top closure sealed with aluminum.
Pack size:
1 vial of 1.2 ml of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate and 1 vial of 2.2 ml of diluent.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal and other handling
During handling and preparation of admixtures, TORISEL should be protected from excessive room light and sunlight.
TORISEL, when diluted, contains polysorbate 80, which is known to increase the rate of di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) extraction from polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
15 Therefore, PVC bags and medical devices must not be used for the preparation, storage and administration of TORISEL solutions for infusions.
Bags/ containers that come in contact with TORISEL must be made of glass, polyolefin, or polyethylene.
Dilution TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate must be diluted with the supplied diluent before administration in sodium chloride infusion.
In preparing the solution, the following two-step process must be carried out in an aseptic manner according to local standards for handling cytotoxic/ cytostatic drugs:
STEP 1:
DILUTION OF TORISEL 25 MG/ ML CONCENTRATE WITH THE SUPPLIED DILUENT • Withdraw 1.8 ml of the supplied diluent. • Inject the 1.8 ml of diluent into the vial of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate which contains 30 mg of temsirolimus (1.2 ml of concentrate). • Mix the diluent and the concentrate well by inversion of the vial.
Sufficient time should be allowed for air bubbles to subside.
The solution should be a clear to slightly turbid, colourless to light-yellow to yellow solution, essentially free from visual particulates.
One vial of 1.2 ml of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate contains 30 mg of temsirolimus: when the 1.2 ml concentrate is combined with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent, a total volume of 3.0 ml is obtained, and the concentration of temsirolimus will be 10 mg/ ml.
The concentrate-diluent mixture is stable below 25°C for up to 24 hours.
STEP 2:
ADMINISTRATION OF CONCENTRATE-DILUENT MIXTURE IN SODIUM CHLORIDE INFUSION • Withdraw the required amount of concentrate-diluent mixture (containing temsirolimus 10 mg/ ml) from the vial; i. e., 2.5 ml for a temsirolimus dose of 25 mg. • Inject the withdrawn volume rapidly into 250 ml of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection to ensure adequate mixing.
The admixture should be mixed by inversion of the bag or bottle, avoiding excessive shaking, as this may cause foaming.
The resulting solution should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discolouration prior to administration, whenever solution and container permit.
The admixture of TORISEL in sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection should be protected from excessive room light and sunlight.
Administration
• Administration of the final diluted solution should be completed within six hours from the time that the TORISEL is first added to sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection.
• TORISEL is infused over a 30- to 60-minute period once weekly.
The use of an infusion pump is the preferred method of administration to ensure accurate delivery of the medicinal product.
• Appropriate administration materials must be composed of glass, polyolefin, or polyethylene to avoid excessive loss of medicinal product and to decrease the rate of DEHP extraction.
The administration materials must consist of non-DEHP, non-PVC tubing with appropriate filter.
An in-line polyethersulfone filter with a pore size of not greater than 5 microns is recommended for administration to avoid the possibility of particles bigger than 5 microns being infused.
If the administration set available does not have an in-line filter incorporated, a filter should be added at the end of the set (i. e., an end-filter) before
16 the admixture reaches the vein of the patient.
Different end-filters can be used ranging in filter pore size from 0.2 microns up to 5 microns.
The use of both an in-line and end-filter is not recommended.
• TORISEL, when diluted, contains polysorbate 80, which is known to increase the rate of DEHP extraction from PVC.
This should be considered during the preparation and administration of TORISEL following constitution.
It is important that the recommendations in section 4.2 be followed closely.
Disposal Any unused product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Wyeth Europa Ltd Huntercombe Lane South Taplow, Maidenhead Berkshire SL6 0PH United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) EU/ 1/ 07/ 424/ 001
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
Date of first authorisation:
19 November 2007
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA): http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/
17 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
18 A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release
Wyeth Lederle S. p. A.
Via Franco Gorgone Zona Industriale 95100 Catania Italy
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (See Annex I:
Summary of Product Characteristics, section 4.2).
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable
• OTHER CONDITIONS
Pharmacovigilance system The MAH must ensure that the system of pharmacovigilance, as described in version 1.0 presented in Module 1.8.1. of the Marketing Authorisation Application, is in place and functioning before and whilst the product is on the market.
Risk Management Plan The MAH commits to performing the studies and additional pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan, as agreed in version 1.7 of the Risk Management Plan (RMP) presented in Module 1.8.2. of the Marketing Authorisation Application and any subsequent updates of the RMP agreed by the CHMP.
As per the CHMP Guideline on Risk Management Systems for medicinal products for human use, the updated RMP should be submitted at the same time as the next Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR).
In addition, an updated RMP should be submitted
• When new information is received that may impact on the current Safety Specification, Pharmacovigilance Plan or risk minimisation activities
• Within 60 days of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached
• At the request of the EMEA
19 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
20 A.
LABELLING
21 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING CARTON
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate and diluent for solution for infusion.
Temsirolimus.
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each vial of 1.2 ml of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate contains 30 mg temsirolimus.
After first dilution of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent, the concentration of temsirolimus is 10 mg/ ml.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
The other ingredients in the concentrate are:
Anhydrous ethanol, all-rac-α -tocopherol (E 307), propylene glycol, anhydrous citric acid (E 330).
The diluent contains: polysorbate 80 (E 433), macrogol 400, anhydrous ethanol.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
Concentrate and diluent for solution for infusion:
Contents:
One vial of 1.2 ml TORISEL concentrate for solution for infusion.
One vial of2.2 ml diluent.
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
For intravenous use after dilution and administration in infusion.
The 1.2 ml of concentrate must be diluted with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent before administration of the dose in sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection.
Read the package leaflet before use and for dilution instructions.
22 6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
Contains ethanol.
See leaflet for further information.
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
Read the leaflet for the shelf life of the diluted product.
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Store in a refrigerator.
Do not freeze.
Keep the vials in the outer carton in order to protect from light.
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Wyeth Europa Ltd.
Huntercombe Lane South Taplow, Maidenhead Berkshire, SL6 0PH United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 424/ 001
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
23 14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Justification for not including Braille accepted.
24 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS CONCENTRATE VIAL
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate.
Temsirolimus. i. v. use
2.
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
DILUTE BEFORE USE.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
5.
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT
1.2 ml
6.
OTHER
Store in a refrigerator (2ºC-8ºC)
Do not freeze.
Keep the vial in the outer carton.
25 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS DILUENT VIAL
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Diluent for TORISEL. i. v. use
2.
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
See package leaflet.
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
5.
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT
2.2 ml.
6.
OTHER
Contains:
Polysorbate 80 (E 433), macrogol 400, anhydrous ethanol.
26 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
27 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate and diluent for solution for infusion Temsirolimus
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you are given this medicine.
- Keep this leaflet.
You may need to read it again.
- If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
- If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effect not listed in this leaflet, please
tell your doctor or pharmacist.
In this leaflet:
1.
What TORISEL is and what it is used for 2.
Before you receive TORISEL 3.
How TORISEL is given 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store TORISEL 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT TORISEL IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
TORISEL is used as an initial treatment for advanced cancer of the kidney.
TORISEL is a selective inhibitor of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) that blocks tumour cell growth and division.
2.
BEFORE YOU RECEIVE TORISEL
Do not use TORISEL
- If you are allergic (hypersensitive) to temsirolimus, to polysorbate 80 or any of the other ingredients
of TORISEL
- If you are allergic (hypersensitive) to sirolimus (used to prevent the body from rejecting
transplanted kidneys) since sirolimus is released from temsirolimus in the body.
Take special care with TORISEL
- If you are allergic (hypersensitive) to antihistamines or cannot take antihistamines for other medical
reasons.
- If you have high cholesterol, TORISEL may elevate triglycerides and/ or cholesterol.
This may
require treatment with lipid-lowering agents (medicine used to reduce cholesterol in the blood).
- If you are going to have an operation, if you have had recent major surgery, or if you still have an
unhealed wound following surgery, you should tell your doctor before receiving this medicine, as TORISEL may increase the risk of problems with wound healing.
- If you are planning to have a vaccination during treatment with TORISEL, the vaccination may be
less effective.
The use of certain vaccinations should be avoided during treatment with TORISEL.
- If you have a history of kidney failure or kidney problems.
- If you have a history of liver problems.
28
- If you are a child or adolescent under 18 years of age, your doctor will consider the potential benefit
to you in relation to any risk.
- If you are over 65 years of age, you may be more likely to have certain side effects including
swelling of your face and pneumonia.
- If you have tumours in your brain or spinal cord, or are taking medicines to prevent your blood from
clotting (such as warfarin), you may be more likely to have bleeding into your brain.
TORISEL may also
- increase blood glucose levels and worsen diabetes mellitus.
This may result in the need for insulin
and/ or oral antidiabetic agent therapy.
Tell your doctor if you experience any excessive thirst or increased frequency and quantity of urination.
- weaken your immune system; therefore, you may be at risk of getting an infection while you are
taking TORISEL.
- cause shortness of breath, cough, and fever.
Tell your doctor if you experience these symptoms.
- increase the risk of cerebral haemorrhage (bleeding in the brain).
- cause cataracts when taken with interferon-α (a medicine used in the treatment of hepatitis and
cancer).
- cause serious allergic reactions.
Tell your doctor if you experience difficulty in breathing and/ or
swelling of the face.
Using TORISEL with other medicines
Some medicines can interfere with the breakdown or metabolism of TORISEL.
In particular, you should inform your doctor if you are taking any of the following:
- protease inhibitors used in the treatment of HIV
- antibiotics (including rifampicin) or antifungal medicines (including ketoconazole) used to treat
infections
- nefazodone or selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors used to treat depression
- anti-epileptic medicines, including carbamazepine, phenytoin and phenobarbital
- rifabutin used to treat infection in people with HIV and other diseases
- herbal medicines or natural remedies containing St.
John’ s Wort (Hypericum perforatum) used to
treat mild depression
- Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE)-inhibitors used to treat high blood pressure or other
cardiovascular problems (such as enalapril, ramipril, lisinopril), amphiphilic medicines used to treat heart arrhythmias (such as amiodarone), or statins used to treat high cholesterol
Using TORISEL with food and drink
- Grapefruit juice may increase blood concentrations of TORISEL and should be avoided.
Please tell your doctor if you are taking, or have recently taken, any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding
TORISEL has not been studied in pregnant women, and it must not be used during pregnancy.
It is important that you tell your doctor if you are pregnant or are planning to become pregnant before receiving TORISEL.
29 Women of childbearing potential must avoid pregnancy by using an effective method of birth control during treatment with TORISEL.
Men with partners of childbearing potential should use medically acceptable contraception while receiving TORISEL.
Women should not breast-feed during treatment with TORISEL, as this medicine may interfere with the growth and development of the baby.
Ask your doctor for advice before breast-feeding your baby, as it is not known if TORISEL passes into breast milk.
Driving and using machines
No studies on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
However, the very common side effects include feeling or being sick (nausea and vomiting); therefore, it is recommended you do not drive immediately after treatment.
Important information about some of the ingredients of TORISEL
This medicine contains ethanol (alcohol), equivalent to 17.6 ml beer, 7.3 ml wine per dose.
Harmful for those suffering from alcoholism.
To be taken into account in pregnant or breast-feeding women, children and high-risk groups such as patients with liver disease or epilepsy.
3.
HOW TORISEL IS GIVEN
TORISEL will always be prepared and given to you by a doctor or another healthcare professional as an intravenous infusion (into your vein).
TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate must be diluted with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent before administration in sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection (see dilution instructions at the end of the package leaflet).
The recommended dose is 25 mg infused (as a drip) over a 30- to 60-minute period once weekly.
You should receive an injection of antihistamine (to try to prevent allergic reaction to TORISEL) directly into your vein approximately 30 minutes before your dose of TORISEL.
Treatment with TORISEL should continue until you are no longer benefiting from therapy or until unacceptable side effects occur.
If too much TORISEL is given or you miss a dose
As this medicine is prepared and given by a healthcare professional, it is unlikely you will be given too much.
If you are concerned about this, or think you may have missed a dose, tell your doctor immediately.
4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, TORISEL can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.
30 Very common serious side effects observed in more than 1 in 10 patients treated with TORISEL are:
- Decreased number of white cells in the blood, which may increase your risk of infection.
Common serious side effects observed in more than 1 in 100 patients treated with TORISEL are:
- Blood clots in the veins.
- Allergic (hypersensitivity)/ infusion reactions (including some life-threatening and rare fatal
reactions [rare is less than 1 in 1,000 patients]).
You should inform your doctor immediately if you have symptoms of angioedema, such as swollen face, tongue or pharynx, and difficulty in breathing.
- Decreased number of cells in the blood, which help the blood to clot.
- Pleural effusion (fluid around the lungs).
The following side effects and frequencies are those that have been seen in patients treated with TORISEL:
Very Common side effects occurring in more than 1 in 10 patients are:
General feeling of weakness, swelling due to fluid retention, pain (including abdominal, back, chest and joint pain), feeling or being sick (nausea and vomiting), diarrhoea, fever, sore throat, sores and inflammation in the mouth and/ or the digestive tract, cough nose bleed, runny nose, rash, itching, nail disorder, acne, dry skin, anorexia, shortness of breath, low levels of potassium in the blood (which may cause muscle weakness), low red blood cell count, high blood sugar, high cholesterol and other blood fats, abscess, infections, urinary tract infections, abnormal kidney function (including kidney failure), change in the sense of taste.
Common side effects occurring in less than 1 out of 10 patients, but more than 1 per 100 patients, are:
Gum redness and swelling, mouth pain (including sores inside the mouth), stomach bloating, high blood pressure, redness and swelling of the tissues around the eye, including watery eye disorder, taste loss, redness and swelling of the follicles in the skin, allergic (hypersensitivity) reactions, severe scaling of the skin, and problems with healing after surgery.
Blood tests that show changes in the way the liver is working, low levels of phosphate in the blood, increased blood clotting (including thrombosis of the veins, embolism in the lung), upper respiratory infections, pneumonia, interstitial lung disease, decreased number of white blood cells, decreased number of lymphocytes.
If any of the side effects get serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
Uncommon side effects occurring in less than 1 out of 100 patients, but more than 1 per 1,000 patients are:
Pericardial effusion (fluid around the heart that may require drainage and can affect the pumping of blood).
5.
HOW TO STORE TORISEL
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
31 Do not use TORISEL after the expiry date, which is stated on the vial label and carton.
The first two numbers indicate the month; the next four numbers indicate the year.
Store in a refrigerator (2°C-8°C).
Do not freeze.
Keep the vials in the outer carton in order to protect from light.
After first dilution of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent, the mixture may be stored for up to 24 hours below 25°C and protected from light prior to further dilution.
After further dilution of the concentrate-diluent mixture with sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection, the solution may be stored for up to 6 hours below 25°C and protected from light.
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What TORISEL contains
The active substance is temsirolimus.
Each vial of 1.2 ml of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate contains 30 mg of temsirolimus.
The other ingredients in TORISEL are anhydrous ethanol, all-rac-α -tocopherol (E 307), propylene glycol and anhydrous citric acid (E 330).
The diluent contains polysorbate 80 (E 433) macrogol 400 and anhydrous ethanol.
What TORISEL looks like and contents of the pack
TORISEL is a concentrate for infusion supplied with a diluent.
The concentrate is a clear, colourless to light-yellow solution.
The diluent is a clear to slightly turbid, light-yellow to yellow solution.
The solutions are essentially free from visable particulates.
Each pack of TORISEL contains one vial of 1.2 ml concentrate and one vial of 2.2 ml diluent.
Marketing Authorisation Holder Wyeth Europa Ltd Huntercombe Lane South Taplow, Maidenhead Berkshire SL6 0PH United Kingdom
Manufacturer Wyeth Lederle S. p. A.
Via Franco Gorgone Zona Industriale 95100 Catania, Italy
32 For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder:
België/ Belgique/ Belgien Luxembourg/ Luxemburg Wyeth Pharmaceuticals S. A. / N. V.
Tél/ Tel: +32 10 49 47 11 Fax: +32 10 49 48 70
Magyarország Wyeth Kft Tel: +36 1 453 33 30 Fax: +36 1 240 4632
Č eská republika Wyeth Whitehall Czech s. r. o.
Tel: +420 2 67 294 111 Fax: +420 2 67 294 199
Malta Vivian Corporation Ltd.
Tel: +35621 344610 Fax: +35621 341087
Danmark Wyeth Danmark Tlf: +45 44 88 88 05 Fax: +45 44 88 88 06
Nederland Wyeth Pharmaceuticals B. V.
Tel: +31 23 567 2567 Fax: +31 23 567 2599
Deutschland Wyeth Pharma GmbH Tel: +49 180 2 29 93 84 Fax: +49 251 204 1128
Polska Wyeth Sp. z o. o.
Tel: +48 22 457 1000 Fax: +48 22 457 1001
España Wyeth Farma S. A.
Tel: +34 91 334 65 65 Fax: +34 91 663 65 53
Portugal Wyeth Lederle Portugal (Farma) Lda.
Tel: +351 21 412 82 00 Fax: +351 21 412 01 11
France Wyeth Pharmaceuticals France Tél: +33 1 41 02 70 00 Fax: +33 1 41 02 70 10
Slovenská republika Wyeth Whitehall Export GmbH, organizač ná zlož ka Tel: +42 1 2 654 128 16 Fax: +42 1 2 654 128 17
Ireland Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Tel: +353 1 449 3500 Fax: +353 1 449 3522
Suomi/ Finland Wyeth Puh/ Tel: +358 20 7414 870 Fax: +358 20 7414 879
Ísland Icepharma hf.
Tel: +354 540 8000 Fax: +354 540 8001
Sverige Wyeth AB Tel: +46 8 470 3200 Fax: +46 8 730 0666
Italia Wyeth Lederle S. p. A.
Tel: +39 06 927151 Fax: +39 06 23325555
Norge Wyeth Tlf: +47 40 00 23 40 Fax: +47 40 00 23 41
33 Ελλάδα Wyeth Hellas A. E. B. E.
Tηλ: +30 2 10 99 81 600 Φαξ: +30 2 10 99 21 994
United Kingdom Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Tel: +44 845 367 0098 Fax: +44 1628 414802
Κύπρος Wyeth Hellas (Cyprus Branch) AEBE Tηλ: +357 22 817690 Φαξ: +357 22 751855
България / Eesti/ Latvija/ Lietuva/ Österreich/ România/ Slovenija Wyeth-Lederle Pharma GmbH Tel/ Tãlr: +43 1 89 1140 Факс / Faks/ Fakss/ Faksas/ Fax: +43 1 89 114600
This leaflet was last approved in
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) web site: http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/
34 _____________________________________________________________________________________
The following information is intended for medical or healthcare professionals only:
During handling and preparation of admixtures, TORISEL should be protected from excessive room light and sunlight.
Bags/ containers that come in contact with TORISEL must be made of glass, polyolefin, or polyethylene.
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) bags and medical devices must not be used for the administration of preparations containing polysorbate 80 because polysorbate 80 leaches di-2-ethylhexylphthalate (DEHP) from PVC.
Dilution
TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate must be diluted with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent before administration in sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection.
In preparing the solution, the following two-step process must be carried out in an aseptic manner according to local standards for handling cytotoxic/ cytostatic drugs:
STEP 1:
DILUTION OF CONCENTRATE WITH THE SUPPLIED DILUENT
• Withdraw 1.8 ml of the supplied diluent. • Inject the 1.8 ml of extracted diluent into the vial of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate, which contains 30 mg of temsirolimus (1.2 ml of concentrate). • Mix the diluent and the concentrate well by inversion of the vial.
Sufficient time should be allowed for air bubbles to subside.
The solution should be a clear to slightly turbid, colourless to light-yellow to yellow solution, essentially free from visual particulates.
One vial of 1.2 ml of TORISEL 25 mg/ ml concentrate contains 30 mg of temsirolimus: when the 1.2 ml concentrate is combined with 1.8 ml of withdrawn diluent, a total volume of 3.0 ml is obtained and the concentration of temsirolimus will be 10 mg/ ml.
The concentrate-diluent mixture is stable below 25°C for up to 24 hours.
STEP 2:
ADMINISTRATION OF CONCENTRATE-DILUENT MIXTURE IN SODIUM CHLORIDE INFUSION
• Withdraw the required amount of concentrate-diluent mixture (which contains temsirolimus 10 mg/ ml) from the vial; i. e., 2.5 ml for a temsirolimus dose of 25 mg. • Inject the withdrawn volume rapidly into 250 ml of sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection to ensure adequate mixing.
The admixture should be mixed by inversion of the bag or bottle, avoiding excessive shaking, as this may cause foaming.
The resulting solution should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discolouration prior to administration, whenever solution and container permit.
The admixture of TORISEL in sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection should be protected from excessive room light and sunlight.
35 Administration
• Administration of the final diluted solution should be completed within six hours from the time that the TORISEL is first added to sodium chloride 9 mg/ ml (0.9%) solution for injection.
• TORISEL is infused over a 30- to 60-minute period once weekly.
The use of an infusion pump is the preferred method of administration to ensure accurate delivery of the medicinal product.
• Appropriate administration materials must be composed of glass, polyolefin, or polyethylene to avoid excessive loss of medicinal product and to decrease the rate of DEHP extraction.
The administration materials must consist of non-DEHP, non-PVC tubing with appropriate filter.
An in-line polyethersulfone filter with a pore size of not greater than 5 microns is recommended for administration to avoid the possibility of particles bigger than 5 microns being infused.
If the administration set available does not have an in-line filter incorporated, a filter should be added at the end of the set (i. e., an end-filter) before the admixture reaches the vein of the patient.
Different end-filters can be recommended used ranging in filter pore size from 0.2 microns up to 5 microns.
The use of both an in-line and end-filter is not recommended.
• TORISEL, when diluted, contains polysorbate 80, which is known to increase the rate of DEHP extraction from PVC.
This incompatibility has to be considered during the preparation and administration of TORISEL.
It is important that the recommendations in sections 4.2 and 6.6 in the SPC be followed closely.
Disposal
Any unused product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.
36