# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

The & parley; Handbook
Ewald Arnold
& Ewald. Arnold. mail;
Eric Bischoff
& Eric. Bischoff. mail;
Reviewer
Anne-Marie Mahfouf
& Anne-Marie. Mahfouf. mail;
Frederik Gladhorn
& Frederik. Gladhorn. mail;
ROLES_OF_TRANSLATORS
& Ewald. Arnold;
& Anne-Marie. Mahfouf;
& Frederik. Gladhorn;
& parley; is a vocabulary trainer. It helps you to memorize your vocabulary, for example when you are trying to learn a foreign language. & parley; is not limited to language learning but supports a multitude of subjects.
KDE
KVocTrain
Parley
vocabulary
training
learning
Introduction
What is it?
& parley; is a vocabulary trainer. It helps you to memorize your vocabulary, for example when you are trying to learn a foreign language. You can create your own files with the words you need or select from a great variety of files on its homepage. There you can find files containing language vocabulary and also anatomy, music, geography, chemistry or exam preparation.
& parley; is very flexible and uses the flash card learning approach. It automatically keeps track of your progress and lets you sort your vocabulary as you wish. But unlike real flash cards you can use different learning methods with & parley;
Flashcards contain expressions on the front side and their translation on the back. You start with a pile of cards. If you know the translation on a card, you can put it into a second pile of cards. If you fail, you keep it in the first one to try again later.
& parley; s main focus is not to teach you grammar or other sophisticated things. However, there are some exercise forms which may help you in this matter.
Quick Start to & parley;
parley; main window
parley; main window
For a start you could download vocabulary files directly from the Internet using File Download New Vocabularies....
Get Vocabularies dialog
Get Vocabularies dialog
Here, for example, I choose the file "Basic vocabulary German-English" with a click on the Install button in the dialog, the file is saved in your home folder ~/ share/ apps/ kvtml.
The Basic vocabulary German-English file
The vocabulary file
On the left of the main window you see a list of lessons. To select a lesson for training tick the box in front of it. After selecting one or more lessons let's start learning by clicking Start Practice in the toolbar.
Written Practice Dialog
Written Practice Dialog
After starting the practice & parley; asks you to enter a translation. Let's assume that you are not too sure about it. Just click once on Show More and the first letter of the word appears in the entry box. Click again and the second letter shows up. If you prefer to see the word completely, click on the Show Solution button. If you want to check your answer click on Verify. To ignore words or to mark them as known without entering them, click on the Skip (Do Not Know) or Skip (I know It) buttons respectively. In the progress box you can see the number of words you have answered correctly and the seconds remaining for your answer. You can configure this option on the Advanced page in the Configure Practice settings.
In case you find writing the words too hard, why not try a multiple choice test? After stopping the practice click on Configure Practice and choose a different practice method. You can also change the order of languages.
Configure Practice Dialog
Configure Practice Dialog
This is how a Multiple Choice test looks like:
Multiple Choice Practice Dialog
Multiple Choice Practice Dialog
Using & parley;
Overview
This is the main window of & parley;. It consists of two areas: the lesson list in the left third of the window and the current vocabulary list in the other two thirds.
Screenshot
The lesson list
The lesson list on the left shows all lessons in your vocabulary file. If you mark a lesson, it will become the current one. In this case it is survival training.
The ticked box left of the name of each lesson indicates that it is to be included in the practice. You may choose as many lessons for a test as you like.
The vocabulary list
Depending on your selection, one or more lessons are displayed on the right side of the screen.
If you mark a range of entries to work with, their background color changes. Many editing functions work for multiple entries simultaneously.
The color in the column with the original will vary if you have two or more columns with translations. If the cursor is in one of the translations the color represents its grade to the original. See section entry dialog for more on this.
The search bar
The search bar is located above the vocabulary table.
You can use the search bar to filter your vocabulary. If you type in a string, you will only see entries with this string in the vocabulary table.
The status bar
The status bar is located at the bottom of the main window. It is empty at the moment.
Available file formats
& parley; can read and write the following file formats:
its native xml-style document type with the extension. kvtml.
If you want to share documents with others, use this format as it is the only file format that is capable of storing all properties in & parley;.
simple text files with special delimiters between the entries which are also used by simple database programs. The extension is. csv in this case.
There are a lot of files on the Internet which use the tab stops or one or two colons to separate the languages. To select this separator use the tab for setting the Open/ Save options in the General page of the Configure - & parley; dialog.
& parley; reads the first few bytes of a file and guesses its file format. If none of the special types like. kvtml or. lex are recognized, it will try the. csv format.
Available word types
& parley; has the following internal word types. Furthermore every document can contain user defined types.
Type name
Description
Example
Adjective
describing the properties of things or persons
expensive, good
Adverb
tells you when, how, where.. something is happening
today, strongly
Article
definite article
indefinite article
a, an
the
Conjunction
serves to bind words or sentences
and, but
Proper Noun
names of a person, a creature, sometimes a thing
Big Ben, Tom
Noun
male
female
neutral
names of things, feelings
table, coffee (there is no distinction of genders in English)
Numeral
ordinal
cardinal
counting or numbering of things
first, second
one, two
Phrase
special combination of words
to kill two birds with one stone
Preposition
tells you about the relationship or location
behind, between
Pronoun
Possessive pronoun
Personal pronoun
tells about the ownership of something
stands as a replacement for a noun
my, your
you, she
Interrogatory
introduces questions
who, what
Verb
regular verb
irregular verb
who is doing something or what is happening
to cook, cooked, cooked
to go, went, gone
How should I learn?
The usual way to learn with & parley; is to use one of its practice modes.
It keeps track of your knowledge of the expressions by assigning them to one of seven levels ranging from Level 1 to Level 7.
Several options are implemented which can be configured in the dialog for the practice options.
To keep the amount of expressions in a query in a reasonable range, you may restrict it to one lesson and/ or a certain word type. Research in psychology of learning suggests that the number of entries in one lesson should not exceed about 30.
The range of a query can depend on the current grade, the number of queries and the last query date.
Learning is efficient if you repeat new vocabulary in growing intervals. There is a blocking and expiring mechanism for that case, so that you are not obliged to modify the settings after each cycle. Correctly answered expressions are blocked at least for the given time and will only be shown after the period of time defined as expiration time.
For your personal taste or just for becoming acquainted with a new word, you may choose a query that shows the solution together with several other randomly chosen words. This is called multiple choice query.
Special word types need special queries. For this reason there are queries for the conjugation of verbs, comparison form of adjectives and the articles of nouns.
When querying, & parley; shows the expressions in random order until you confirm all as known. If you did not select a special lesson, all lessons are queried one after the other.
When you leave & parley;, expressions left in a running query are stored accordingly. At a later restart you can resume the query (this does not apply to special queries with verbs, articles and comparisons at the moment). Those expressions are marked with a green check mark in the main view.
Sharing files and downloading dictionaries
Contributing your files to & parley;
If you have created a kvtml file, please send an email to & Anne-Marie. Mahfouf. mail; with the file attached and I will put the file in the contributed kvtml files on the & kde; -Edu website so other people will be able to use it.
If you modify existing files or create new files based on copyrighted material you must ask the author for permission. Even taking literal examples from schoolbooks might be problematic! The files must be licensed under a free license, please indicate it in your mail when you send the file.
Downloading and installing existing files
You can easily get and install existing files using the File Get New Vocabularies... menu, provided you have an Internet connection. The following dialog is then displayed:
Get New Vocabularies... dialog
Get New Vocabularies... dialog
Choose the file you want to get and click the Install button. The file is then downloaded from its location on the Internet, saved on your hard disk and opened in & parley; current window.
The files you download are saved in your home folder ~/ share/ apps/ kvtml.
Other dictionaries on the web
If you are German an want to learn English (or vice versa) you can download the monthly vocabulary list provided by the German magazine Spotlight-Online.
The & parley; distribution contains an executable called spotlight2kvtml to transform those lists in kvtml format. The original files come as & Windows; Word DOC-files so you have to save them as ANSI-TXT files before starting conversion. StarOffice or kword can do this job.
spotlight2kvtml needs the 3 parameters filename, month and year and produces a file in the same folder with the same name and the extension kvtml:
spotlight2kvtml 0199. txt 01 99
Thanks to a contribution by Andreas Neuper you can download files from Langenscheidt. This is a german site and contains files in several languages. This distribution contains his perl script langen2kvtml to transform those lists in kvtml format.
langen2kvtml needs only the original filename as parameter and tries to extract as much information as possible from the source file. For example is keeps the lesson names, conjugations and articles.
It produces a file in the same folder with the same name and the extension kvtml.
Files in kvtml format are available at:
& kde; -Edu Contributed Learning Files
Dictionaries in ascii-format are for example available at:
ftp. gwdg. d e/ pub/ misc/ dictionary/ english/ words. gz (approx. 1035 kB)
Dictionaries from the *Quick project in CSV format but encoded in UTF8 so you should have all characters rendered correctly. The files are available from its download section. They are in compressed & Windows;. EXE format so you have to use unzip to extract the files.
If you know another source please tell me to include it here.
Translator applications
If you do not want to learn but just need quick translations of expressions in larger dictionaries you might be unhappy with & parley; if your computer does n't have much memory and MHz. A 150000 entry file consumes about 60M and takes ages to load if your system is short of memory.
In this case you might want to try one of the following:
kdsing (kde;).
steak/ xsteak (console/ X).
Ding (TCL).
Interesting links
Similar projects
You might also want to try one of the other vocabulary trainers I have found (sorted by the time when I found them):
kwordquiz; (kde;)
SVT (console)
Other interesting links
Maybe you are interested in the one or the other links I found while working on & parley;.
& GNU; Unifont Projekt
SEUL Educational Projects
Reference and Introduction to Phonetic Symbols
The International Phonetic Association
Configuring & parley;
& parley; settings for all documents.
TODO
Credits and License
Thanks
I'd like to thank the following people personally for their contribution to & parley;:
Peter Hedlund who kept KVocTrain alive and started the KDE 4 port which eventually would become Parley
David Capel
Avgoustinos Kadis
Daniel Laiding
Johannes Simon
I also want to thank all the other unnamed persons, especially the whole & kde; team, for their help, constructive criticism, suggestions or bug-reports.
Copyright
& parley; copyright 2007-2008 & Frederik. Gladhorn; & Frederik. Gladhorn. mail;
Documentation copyright 2007-2008 & Frederik. Gladhorn; & Frederik. Gladhorn. mail;
CREDIT_FOR_TRANSLATORS
& underFDL; & underGPL;
Installation
How to obtain & parley;
Please visit the parley; homepage to learn how to obtain Parley.
& install. intro. documentation;
For a start you could open an example file by using the File Open Example... menu. There are 2 files which you may use in order to get to know all the functions of & parley;. The file sample-en. kvtml & eg; shows you some vocabulary words in English, German and French.
A green check mark in the second column means that this entry is active. A red and white "X" indicates a deactivated entry that will not be practiced. See Editing Entries for more information on active entries.
Of course it is also possible to use the vocabulary list as an ordinary dictionary and to look up manually.
pronunciation. You can use IPA characters from the phonetic alphabet. See more about this in the according options dialog page.
an additional comment.
Using the keyboard
Tab
The cursor is moved to the smart search input field. If you start typing an expression in this field, & parley; will search the next best match after each key. The cursor in the vocabulary is then moved to this location.
If you press Return it will move to the next match.
If you only want entries that match from the beginning of the expression you must press Ctrl; Return.
Pressing Shift; Tab or Tab will move back to the vocabulary.
The cursor moves inside the vocabulary table one column or line accordingly. If it reaches the edge of the vocabulary table, it will not move.
Page Up, Page Down
The cursor in the vocabulary is moved up or down one page (the amount of visible lines -1). If it has to jump beyond the edge of the vocabulary table, it will not move.
& Ctrl; Return
Invokes the Edit Properties dialogue for this entry.
Ins
Appends a new row at the end of the vocabulary. The cursor jumps into the Original row. You may type your entry right away or invoke the Edit Properties dialogue for modification of this entry.
If you have selected smart appending you will be prompted to enter expressions in the original language and their translations until you stop by pressing the ESC key.
Del
After confirmation in a safety dialogue, the current row or selection is removed from the vocabulary.
Ctrl; + or Ctrl; -
By pressing & Ctrl; and + or -, you can choose the previous or next item in the combo box determining the current lesson.
Using the mouse
Double clicking in a field in the table lets you edit this field.
Left mouse click on one of the header buttons will sort this column in ascending order. Another click will sort it in descending order. In case the column is displayed in alphabetical order, you can see a triangle at the end of the button showing the sorting direction.
Keeping the left mouse button pressed for about 1 second on one of the table header buttons will pop up its header menu.
Working on selections
If you mark several expressions, you can modify their properties together or save the selection as a new file.
The edit dialog has a different appearance for selections. Some properties are disabled as it does n't make sense to edit the expressions themselves or remarks of a whole range simultaneously.
All fields which may be modified are empty at the beginning to represent their unmodified state. Modifications of properties will only be saved if you confirm them by clicking on the Apply button.
Example
The direction of the learning can be switched randomly to avoid one way learning only.
All these settings can be summarized into profiles and retained under an arbitrary name.
Dialogs
Document Properties dialog
Open this dialog with Vocabulary Document Properties. This dialog also consists of several pages the determine properties that belong only to the current document. They are stored with the vocabulary.
General properties
General Document Properties screenshot
General Document Properties
Title
Here you enter the title of the document which is displayed in the window's title bar.
Authors
Usually you will enter your name in this field. If there are more than one author you might use a line for each person.
License
If you want to restrict (or better allow) the use of you vocabulary you should enter the according permission or license here.
I recommend something like the Free Document License
Remark
This field should contain things that do not fall in one of the other categories.
Lesson descriptions
Lesson descriptions dialog screenshot
Lesson descriptions
Here you add, modify or delete descriptions of your lessons.
The buttons should be pretty selfexplanatory except Clean Up. This one will remove all lesson descriptions that are unused in the current document.
Types descriptions
Similar to the previous section about lessons, you can edit your own expression types on this page.
Since the dialog page looks the same as the one before there is no picture.
Tenses
On the next page you may add the tenses you need.
Usage labels
The last page provides the possibility to enter your own usage labels.
If you think an important item is missing (from the above tense, type or usage label section) you should tell me, so I can include them in the application as standard item.
This way all the other users can benefit.
Document Options
Document Options dialog screenshot
Allow sorting
If you have created your vocabulary with a certain order, you can use this check box to turn sorting off for this document. A click in the header button will then no longer sort the row.
Version 0.7 of & parley; additionally offered the choice to either use 8Bit or Unicode to store the vocabulary files. This is no more supported. The files are always stored in Unicode to prevent wrong rendering of characters.
Unfortunately there is no backwards compatibility to versions below 0.6 any more but I think the benefit is worth it.
Language Properties dialog
Open this dialog with Vocabulary Language Properties.
Language Properties dialog screenshot
Language Elements
The following pages of this dialog determine for each language of this dictionary several elements that are used in the according queries.
Articles
For every gender you enter here the definite and the indefinite article. If there is none for this language, you leave the field empty.
Conjugation
In the similar manner you input the descriptor for the first, second and third person each in plural and singular.
Because many languages do not distinguish in the third person plural, there is a check box to determine this.
Leave the unneccessary fields empty.
Settings dialog
Open this dialog with Settings Configure & parley;.... The settings in this dialog are global and affect all vocabularies equally.
General
General settings dialog screenshot
General Settings Dialog
Save vocabularies automatically on close and quit
If you check this option, & parley; will automatically save the document if it was modified when you use the close button or when you quit & parley;.
As a side effect it also does not ask for confirmation to save when quitting with modified data but saves the vocabulary without asking.
Create a backup every 15 minutes
& parley; will automatically save the document if it was modified after the period you enter here when the option is checked.
An interval of 0 also stops this behavior.
Smart appending
If this feature is activated, you will repeatedly be prompted with the entry dialog. After entering the first original you have to enter the corresponding translations. Afterwards you proceed with the next original and its translations until you stop by pressing the & Esc; key.
When you are in this mode and modify the lesson in the dialog it has the same meaning as selecting the lesson in the toolbar. This way it is preselected when the next entry dialog appears.
The required lessons will have to be created in advance in the document settings.
Apply changes without asking
When checked, all options are save upon termination of & parley;. Otherwise you have to select the appropriate menu item.
Column Resizing
When you resize your main window it is convenient, if the columns resize automatically, too.
This is possible in two manners:
Automatic
& parley; makes each columns the same width except the leftmost with the lesson names which has half the size of the others. The second column which contains the picture that describes the state of the row has a fixed width.
Percentage
The widths of the columns are altered with the same factor the main window grew or shrunk.
If the last button labeled Fixed is set, no resizing of the columns is done.
Languages
Language Settings dialog screenshot
Language Settings dialog
Language code
Each column can be assigned a language. This is internally done with the usual international language codes & eg; en, de, it. These codes are also stored with the document.
You should always use the correct codes to be able to share vocabularies with others. Merging vocabularies also relies on the correct language codes.
Alternative code
Sometimes it may be useful to have a second language code because some languages have the usual short code and one or two longer codes. For German for example it is common to use de but either deu or ger is also possible according to ISO639-2.
Language name
Here you can give the language code a descriptive name in your own language which is shown in the header buttons in the main view.
Picture
Additionally you can add a nice icon to your language which is shown in the table header button.
& kde; 2 stores those pixmaps under $KDEDIR / share/ locale/ l10n/ language -code.
Keybord Layout
To be written.
Delete
Clicking an this button deletes the currently selected language code in the list.
Add
After entering a new language code in the field to its left, you use this button to append it to your list. After that you need to fill in the fields for the long name and the picture for the header button.
Add Language Data From KDE Database
Clicking on this drop down box opens a list that contains all the countries that are known in your & kde; installation. Ordered by country you can add your desired language properties to your personal list.
Maybe you want to change the language name or the according picture but I strongly recommend you keep at least the 2-byte language code and its 3-byte alternative if you do not have a special reason. This is to achieve compatible document files that can be shared among all users.
Add Language Data From ISO639-1
Clicking on this drop down box opens a list that contains all the language codes that are covered by ISO639-1.
Basically the previous two drop down boxes provide the same data. The former contains the language codes known in & kde; sorted by country whereas the second contains all ISO639-1 codes sorted alphabetically.
View
View Settings dialog screenshot
View Settings dialog
Table font
Lets you choose a font to display the vocabulary in the main view.
IPA font
Lets you choose a font to display the characters from the international phonetic alphabet. This is used to show the pronunciation of the expression on the bottom in the statusbar.
Probably you do not have an IPA enabled font since those characters are seldom used. You may download a free font from http: / /bibliofile. mc. duke. edu/ gww/ fonts/ Unicode. html or http: / /www. hclrss. demon. co. uk/ unicode/ fonts. html. Install these fonts for example with kfontinst.
If you have StarOffice installed you probably have the font Lucida Sans Unicode which also contains most of the needed characters (but be sure to select the font which ends with Unicode).
I also found a Reference and Introduction to Phonetic Symbols that explains a bit about the background. There is also The International Phonetic Association where you can find even more information.
Grade Colors
Every grade can be assigned an individual color. For example I prefer green for best grade and red for worst.
If you do not want any colors but just black on white, uncheck the Use Colors check box.
Copy & Paste
Copy & Paste Settings dialog screenshot
Copy & Paste Settings dialog
Separator
This is a sequence of one ore more characters which divide the parts of an expression when transferring data from or to an other application over the clipboard.
The most common item is TAB which uses the tabulator character. Another possibility is to use the semicolon, if you want to export data to a database file in CSV format. This character is also used to read such files correctly.
Order
When pasting via the clipboard & parley; does not know which languages the different fields belong to and just would insert them from left to right.
To facilitate correct behavior, if you arranged your vocabulary in an other way, you can determine your desired order with this area.
The buttons right to the list box move the current language up or down. Skip will insert a hole which means that the later calculated field from the clipboard is skipped.
Use current document
When checked, the items in the clipboard are assumed to be in the same language order as the current document.
Query
Query Settings dialog screenshot
Query Settings dialog
Time Per Query
Here you can influence the behavior of & parley; when you do not know the answer in time.
You may set a time limit & parley; grants you to remember the correct answer.
Additionally you can tell & parley; what to do when this limit is reached. Besides of waiting unlimited time you may select to be shown the solution or to continue immediately with the next question.
Furthermore you can activate a little progress bar to show the remaining time for the current answer.
If you exceed the time limit several times in series in continuous mode & parley; will assume that there is currently no person in front of the screen and stop the query.
Swap direction randomly
Usually a query is only in one direction, depending on the column you used to start the query. With this check box you can determine, that the directions are altered randomly.
Use alternative learning method
The normal learning style is to learn a single lesson at a time, and when you answer correctly the first time it is removed from the current learning list.
The alternative method was developed by Sebastian Leitner in his book "So lernt man lernen, Angewandte Lernpsychologie - ein Weg zum Erfolg" (Freiburg: Heider, 1972) (English: Learn how to learn, applied learning psychology - A way to success).
The idea of Leitner's method is to try learn those questions you have a hard time to learn, and do not bother you with those that you do know. This is accomplished by requiring you to answer correctly to each question four times in a row.
In real life it works by creating four rows of cards. Each row, above the bottom one, can only hold a certain number of cards. The top row can hold seven cards, the others can hold two cards. (In the original game, the bottom row can only hold three card, thus limiting the number of cards in the game to 20. This "limitation" is not present in & parley;.)
In the bottom row are the questions that have yet to be asked and the questions that have previously been answered incorrectly. When a question is answered correctly, it is removed from the row it was in and moved to the back of row above. If answered incorrectly, the card is moved to the back of the bottom row. If the row a card is placed in exceed the maximum number of cards for that row, the next question is taken from the front of that row, else the question is taken from the front of the bottom row. A card is removed from the game when it would otherwise be moved to the fifth row, & ie; it has been answering correctly while located in the top row.
Thresholds
Thresholds Settings dialog screenshot
Thresholds Settings dialog
With this dialog you determine which entries are included in the next selection for random query.
If you have activated the blocking mechanism on the next dialog page, the thresholds from Grade, Query count, Bad count and Last query are disabled and not taken into account.
Lesson
Designate which lessons to include or leave out. An arbitrary number of lessons can be selected for the calculation.
For convenience there are two additional buttons to selected all entries or none.
Starting with version 0.7.0 this part is stored with the document instead of storing globally.
Word type
Select the word type. & parley; does not pay any attention to subtypes.
Grade
The same for the grade.
Query count
Choose how often the selection must be queried.
Bad count
The same for the amount of times the entry was not known.
Last query
Include queries before or within the given time span.
Entries which have not been queried yet are always included if you choose before.
Entries are only included if all conditions are fulfilled. If you want a property to be ignored, choose Do not care for it.
Blocking
Blocking Settings dialog screenshot
Blocking Settings dialog
On this page you select the time, an known entry is excluded from queries resp. when it must be queried at the latest.
There are two conditions which must be fulfilled, otherwise you will be shown an according warning:
The time must increase from level to level
The time for blocking must be less than for expiring in the same level.
If at least one of blocking or expiring is active, the thresholds from Grade, Query count, Bad count and Last query on the previous dialog page are not taken into account.
Profiles
A Profile is a set of settings (settings related to queries) which you can save/ load in order to use again later. This Profiles... button at the bottom of the Configure & parley; dialog allows you to see existing profiles, to load a new profile and to save your current settings in a new profile.
Clicking on the Profiles... button will display the following dialog.
Profiles dialog
Profiles dialog
Save
Saves the current query settings under the current name.
Load
Load the settings from the profile in the listbox.
New
Creates a new profile with the current settings.
Delete
Removes the current profile.
Close
Closes the Profiles dialog.
Entry dialog
Common Properties
Here you enter a new expression into a table cell or modify existing entries and their properties. This dialog is accessed when a cell is chosen and you select Edit Edit Selected Area... from the menu or the Edit Expression... button in the Random Query.
Entry dialog screenshot
Entry dialog
Expression
Contains your words.
Selects the desired lesson.
The button on the right also invokes the Edit Lesson Names dialog where you can edit lessons.
Pronunciation
In this field you can describe how the word is pronounced.
This is possible either by using simple ascii characters and maybe an fancy and very personal phonetic description or better by using the international phonetic alphabet. The button on the right invokes a dialog where you can select all the characters that belong to this alphabet.
Type
Lets you choose one of the predefined types for your expression. If you change the type for an entry, all the other entries in that row will be assigned the new type.
See the table for all available types.
Subtype
Some types also include subtypes. If there is no subtype available this field is disabled.
Every entry in a row can have a different subtype. This is useful for nouns as the gender of a noun may be different in different languages.
The button to the right of this field invokes the Edit User Defined Types dialog so you can edit the Type Descriptions immediately.
Usage Labels
One or more usage labels can be selected to describe the usual usage of the expression, & eg; medicine or chemistry.
The button on the right invokes the the Edit User-Defined Usage Labels dialog to enter a new usage label.
Selecting from the international phonetic alphabet
If you have an IPA-enabled font installed your dialog should look like this:
IPA dialog screenshot
International phonetic alphabet dialog
If you do not have such a font you can find a link to a free one in the section about the view options.
Additional Properties
For most of these fields there are special queries, too.
Additional entry dialog screenshot
Additional entry dialog
Synonyms
Here you may enter words that have the same meaning as the expression. There is also a query type for this expression.
Antonyms
This is for words that have the opposite meaning. This field can also be queried.
Example
Additionally you may enter here an example sentence for the expression. There is a simple query type which prompts you with the content of this field but with dots instead of the word in question.
This is an optional field to store additional information.
Paraphrase
Here you may enter a description in different words. There is also a query type for this expression.
Suggestions For Multiple Choice Query
Multiple choice dialog screenshot
Multiple choice dialog
If you want to create an efficient multiple choice query it is good to offer expressions that are similar to the solution to make it more difficult. If you do not offer them, & parley; has only the possibility to create such queries with randomly chosen expressions which are rather easy to guess. You can enter up to five expressions for this purpose.
Additional properties for verbs
You can edit the entries on the Conjugation page only when you selected verb as word type.
Verb entry dialog screenshot
Verb entry dialog
For every tense & parley; knows you can enter the conjugations of the verb for the different persons. The tense can be selected from the list. After doing this the entry fields are updated accordingly.
Because some languages do not distinguish in the 3rd person of the plural you may use the according check box.
Next searches for the next tense with already entered conjugations.
Additional properties for adjectives
You can edit the entries on the Comparison page only when you selected adjective as word type.
Comparison entry dialog screenshot
Comparison entry dialog
Here you enter the the comparison forms of the adjective.
Properties from or to the original
For some properties it is possible to set up values from the original or to the original. For example you can have a grade when querying the translation (= > from the original). The opposite is the grade when querying the original when one of the translations is given (= > to the original).
From/ to entry dialog screenshot
From/ to entry dialog
Contains the current grade of this expression.
False friend
Sometimes there is a word in a foreign language that looks like a word in your native language so you think it must have the same meaning. But in fact, it is not.
Enter such words in this field.
Last Query Date
This is the date when this entry was last queried. If it was never queried yet you only see #150; #150;.
For convenience reasons there are two buttons to set the current date or reset to never queried.
Due to internal reasons, it is not possible to store dates before August 12 1999 with every version of & parley;. Versions 0.8 and later are no more affected.
Altogether
Designates how often this entry was queried.
Wrong
Shows the amount of times you did not know the right answer.
Docking to the main window
Docking buttons
Docking buttons
If you have to enter or change a lot of words you may want to place the main window next to the entry dialog and occupy the whole screen. You may do this manually or use one of the two buttons in the bottom (see picture above). The left one resizes the windows to an optimal height and places them one upon the other. The second places them accordingly side by side.
After closing the entry dialog the main window returns to its previous position and size.
Query dialogs
Normal Random Query
After selecting Create Random Query the main window disappears.
Then all entries that match your current thresholds are put into a list and shown in random order with the following dialog box.
Random Query dialog screenshot
Random Query dialog
In the dialog area with the original expression there are some properties you can enable to give you some hints. You have to enter the solution in the according text field.
Show All
Shows the complete solution in the translation field.
Show More
Each click on this button will show one more character of the solution to give you a little help.
Verify
Compares your answer with the correct solution. Currently your solution must match exactly to be accepted. If the answer was correct the color of the translation changes to green, otherwise to red
Do Not Know
Tells & parley; that you did not know the answer and that the according grade must be lowered.
I Know It
Click this button to tell & parley; that you knew the answer correctly. This entry is then removed from the current bad list.
Edit Expression...
If you find a mistake with a query you can invoke the edit dialog immediately and correct it.
Stop Query
Stop query mode and show vocabulary again.
In the right bottom corner you see two progressbars that indicate the remaining time and the amount of queries to come.
The query of the current lesson is repeated until all its expressions are known. The amount of retries of the current lesson is shown below the progress indicator. Once the current lesson is finished & parley; continues with the next (provided that you have set up the query options accordingly).
I regret to admit, but usually I don`t know the solution. For this reason the Return key has special behavior, which I found convenient:
First pressing Return shows the complete solution (at the beginning the button Show More is the default button) and makes Do not know the default button.
Pressing Return the second time will leave this dialog and tell & parley; that you did not know the answer.
At the moment you must decide for yourself, if you knew the answer or failed. Later versions may provide a more or less smart algorithm to make this decision from the answer you entered.
If you knew the correct answer, the grade is increased by one step. If you did not know it, the grade is reset to level 1 which is worst.
Random query with Multiple Choice
Multiple Choice query dialog screenshot
This type of query works similar to the previous one. The solution is shown together with random other expressions and you have to choose one answer from the five provided.
This query works most efficiently if you provide similar solutions on the according entry dialog pages. Additionally a false friend is added if available.
Query of conjugations
Verb Training dialog
Verb Training dialog
This dialog appears after starting the query of the verbs with Learning Language Names Verbs.
All tenses are queried that have definitions for conjugations. Of course you must know all of them for a successful result.
Query of articles
Article query dialog screenshot
Article query dialog
This dialog appears after starting the query of articles with Learning Language Names Articles.
In this dialog the article of the noun is queried.
It is important to having selected the correct subtype in the entry dialog.
Query of comparison forms
Comparison query dialog screenshot
Comparison query dialog
All expressions that contain also comparison forms are shown. One word is chosen randomly and you must complete the remaining two.
Query of synonyms, antonyms, paraphrases and example sentences.
Synonym query dialog screenshot
Synonym query dialog
The queries for the above mentioned additional properties of your expression look basically the same for all types.
You are prompted the expression and have to enter the according property. Querying by example is a bit different since & parley; takes the expression and replaces it by some dots so this is mainly useful when your expression is a single word.
Document Statistics dialog
General document statistics screenshot
General document statistics
On this page you find the most important general information about your document:
The Filename
The Title
The name of the Author
and the number of Entries and Lessons.
All languages in the dictionary
Per language statistics screenshot
Per language statistics
Depending on the amount of translations your document contains, you will have none, one or more additional pages. Each page contains two pictures for each lesson describing the amount of entries per grade in each lesson.
A click with the & RMB; on one of the pixmaps will popup a menu which shows the exact numbers.
Command Reference
The Main & parley; Window
The File Menu
Ctrl; N File New
Creates a new document.
Ctrl; O File Open...
Opens an existing document.
File Open Recent...
Opens one of the recently opened documents.
File Open Example...
Opens an example file shipped with & parley;
Ctrl; G File Get New Vocabularies...
Opens the Get Hot New Stuff dialog to allow you to install new & kde; -Edu vocabulary files via the Internet.
File Merge..
Merges another vocabulary to the current.
Only those parts of the second vocabulary are merged, that have the same international language code as your current one.
So always use the correct codes. This helps you share vocabularies with others. & parley; supports you in this and offers all codes in the according options page
Ctrl; S File Save
Saves the document.
File Save As...
Saves the document under another name.
File Save Entries in Query As...
Saves the entries marked in query as a new vocabulary.
Ctrl; P File Print...
Opens the standard & kde; print dialog
File Quit
Exits & parley;.
The Edit Menu
& Ctrl; C Edit Copy
Copies the current row to the clipboard. The entries are separated by a special sequence of characters which can be chosen in the options dialog.
& Ctrl; V Edit Paste
Pastes from clipboard. The entries are divided by the above mentioned separator character and inserted as a new row with one or more columns. You can also adjust the order in which the columns are concatenated before copying all to the clipboard.
Pasting multiple lines (eg; from a CSV data base file) will append them all as new rows one after another.
& Ctrl; A Edit
Marks the whole vocabulary as selected for further processing.
Ctrl; & Shift; A Edit Deselect
Removes all multiple selection marks.
Ctrl; F Edit Find...
Searches for the clipboard content in the vocabulary file using the search field in the toolbar.
Insert Edit Append New Entry
Appends one or more new expressions. See Insert key section for more information.
Ctrl; Return Edit...
Edits current expression. See Enter key section for more information.
Delete Edit Remove Selected Area
Removes selection. See Delete key for more information.
The Vocabulary Menu
Vocabulary Show Statistics
Invokes the statistics dialog to display the most important facts about your vocabulary.
Vocabulary Assign Lessons...
Searches the vocabulary for entries that are not yet assigned a lesson. They are randomly assigned new lessons.
Vocabulary Clean Up
Searches for entries which are exactly the same (original and all translations) and removes all but one.
Vocabulary Append Language
Appends a new column (a new language).
Vocabulary Set Language
Sets the language code and name for a column.
Vocabulary Remove Language
Removes one of the translations.
Vocabulary Document Properties
Invokes the document properties dialog.
Vocabulary Language Properties
Invokes the language properties dialog.
The Learning Menu
Learning Language Names
Provides a submenu for each language with all the query dialogs. Exactly the same as the menu appearing in a table header button.
Learning Resume Query
Resumes the previous random query if you terminated one before. Remaining entries appear with a green check mark.
Learning Resume Multiple Choice
Resumes the previous random query with multiple choice.
The Settings Menu
Settings Show/ Hide Toolbar
Toggles the visibility of the toolbar buttons.
Settings Show/ Hide Statusbar
Toggles on or off the status line at the bottom.
Settings Configure Shortcuts...
Configure the keyboard keys you use to access the different actions.
Settings Configure Toolbars...
Configure the items you want to put in the toolbar
Settings Configure & parley;...
Display the & parley; settings dialog
The Help menu
& help. menu. documentation;
Table Header Menu
The following context menu will appear when you keep the third button (your original expressions) in the table header pressed for about a second.
Create Random Query
Creates a random query on this column with all unknown expressions according to your thresholds.
Create Multiple Choice
Creates a random multiple choice query on this column with all unknown expressions according to your thresholds.
Train Verbs
All of the verbs with its conjugations are queried.
Article Training
Queries the articles if the gender of the nouns is defined.
Comparison Training
Queries comparison forms.
Synonyms
Queries the synonyms.
Antonyms
Queries the antonyms.
Queries the examples.
Paraphrase
Queries the paraphrases.
Sort alphabetically
Sorts this row in ascending resp. descending order.
Set Language
Chooses a language for this column. If your desired language does not yet exists in this menu, you have to add it with the options dialog.
The following two topics only appear if you keep a header button pressed that belongs to a translation.
Reset Grades
Resets the properties of all the selected entries to their initial state as if you just had appended them.
If you have chosen a lesson in the appropriate box in the toolbar, then only those lesson members are reset. Otherwise all entries are affected.
Remove Column
Removes this column and all its entries.
& parley; is my first & GUI; application for & kde;, so I had to borrow a lot of code from other applications. The biggest chunks are taken from
& klpq; (table functionality in versions up to 0.7)
& kontour; (XML; reading/ writing).
& khexedit; (about dialog in versions up to 0.7).
Andrea Marconi for localization to Italian
Hans Kottman for localization to French
Grzegorz Ilczuk for localization to Polish
Eric Bischoff for converting the documentation to DocBook
& parley; Program copyright 1999-2003 & Ewald. Arnold; & Ewald. Arnold. mail; 2004-2006 Peter Hedlund peter@peterandlinda. com 2007 & Frederik. Gladhorn; & Frederik. Gladhorn. mail;
Requirements
In order to successfully compile & parley;, you need the & kde; libraries as well as the & Qt; C++ library. All required libraries can be found on & kde-ftp;.
Compilation and installation
& install. compile. documentation;
On the bottom of the main window you also see the status line. It usually contains:
I tried to optimize the work flow for the use with the keyboard. So all of the important functions are reachable this way.
Left Arrow
The cursor in the vocabulary is moved one column to the left. If it has reached the leftmost column, nothing happens.
Right Arrow
Up Arrow
The cursor in the vocabulary is moved one row upwards. If it has reached the topmost row, nothing happens.
Down Arrow
The cursor in the vocabulary is moved one row downwards. If it has reached the bottommost row, nothing happens.
Page Up
Page Down
The cursor in the vocabulary is moved one page downwards. If the cursor would exceed the last possible row, nothing happens.
If you click on an entry, the whole row is marked for further processing.
If you keep the & Ctrl; key pressed while clicking on an entry, the whole row is added to yoor selection.
When you additionally press a & Shift; key when clicking on an entry, the selection will be extended from the current entry to the previously selected entry.
To keep the amount of expressions reasonable, restrict the query to a lesson and/ or a word type. I personally prefer about 50 words per cycle and subdivide the lessons accordingly.
Learning is efficient, if you do not repeat the words for a certain length of time, depending on the current grade.
Special word types need special queries.
& kvoctrain; is a & kde; vocabulary program to help you train your vocabulary, when you are trying to learn a foreign language for example.
It is intended as a replacement for index (flash) cards.
Here is & kvoctrain; the first time you run it, either from the kmenu; Edutainment Languages or with Alt; F2 and type kvoctrain in the field.
The Katakana file
The Katakana file
This file consists in 26 lessons and should allow me to learn Katakana writing for the basics letters and syllables. So lets start with lesson 1. Open Configure & kvoctrain;... in the Settings menu and go to the Thresholds page. You can set which lessons you want to learn. We highlight Lesson 1 and click on Apply to save the Setting and on OK to close the dialog.
In the Learning menu, choose what you want to learn. For example I choose ri as I want to learn the Katakana signs associated with Romaji. I then choose Create Multiple Choice From jp and the following dialog appears:
Lesson 1 - Multiple choice query
Lesson 1 - Multiple choice query
Using & kvoctrain;
As you can see below, the entries of the vocabulary are arranged similar to a spreadsheet. Each column represents an expression or word in one language or some other information. The leftmost column contains the name of the lesson this entry belongs to. The second describes the state of the line and the third is always the original word. The others to the right of it represent the respective translations.
[main view]
In the picture above, you can see that several properties of the vocabulary have a visual representation:
Colors show the grade (Level 1 to 7) of your knowledge
T:
the type of this word
P:
R:
your personal remarks
While & kvoctrain; is loading, saving a large file or otherwise busy doing something time consuming, you will see a progress bar on the right in this status line.
About charsets, encodings, unicode and such strange things
Every human-readable text file is represented by a sequence of bytes or octets. The actual meaning of those bytes can happen in a lot of different ways, depending on the system where it is displayed or which language the text is intended for.
Since usually a byte is the smallest common unit for data on computers each character you see on a screen is represented by exactly one byte. Each byte can stand for a value from 0 to 255 and therefore you are able to display up to 256 different characters within one file.
Usually you have the ascii characters, & eg; a through z, A through Z, 0 through 9 and additional language dependent characters. For example, the German umlauts & auml; or & uuml; or a lot of other special symbols from Russian, Greek, Hebrew or even Chinese. All this tots up to far more than 256 different symbols.
At this point it should be obvious that you have to take care to select the correct charset, which is needed on a lot of computer systems to display the bytes in the same way as they are intended.
A better approach is to combine two ore more bytes into a representation for a single character on the screen. This is for example what Unicode does. Unicode is a standard that currently uses a range from 0 to 65535 (and even more) to designate a given symbol. Almost each symbol of almost any language on earth (and even a lot more, & eg; well known icons or klingon) is assigned a unique and unambiguous number.
Unfortunately the handling of Unicode is a bit more complicated and does not work with most of the current tools. Texts in unicode might also be longer. A compromise is to use UTF-8 which uses 7 bits (8 bits form one byte) for the most common characters from the ascii set and switches to 2, 3 or even 4 or more bytes if needed.
Every vocabulary file for & kvoctrain; is basically such a simple text file using Unicode.
To support as many languages as possible & kvoctrain; version 0.7 offered the possibility to choose a special charset for each language. If you have saved your files in the former 8Bit-Mode you might see the wrong characters when you load with version 0.8 and higher. Contact me in this case.
If you want to learn more about this issue you should visit the following links:
http: / /www. hut. fi/ u/ jkorpe la/ chars. html
http: / /linuxdoc. org/ HOWTO/ Unicode-HOWTO. html
http: / /czyborra. com/ c harsets/ codepages. html
Version 0.7 of & kvoctrain; also offered the choice for a special charset. In & Qt; version 3 there is no need for this any more.
If you have important files that are rendered wrong in the new version you may contact me since it might be worth the effort to create some conversion tool.
Settings Configure & kvoctrain;...
& kvoctrain; is tested with & kde; 3.0 and & Qt; 3.0. It should also basically run under & kde; 2. x and & Qt; 2. x if compiled accordingly but I cannot promise.
ewald@ewald-arnold. de
e. bischoff@noos. fr
annma@kde. org
Ewald Arnold
& Enter;
Invokes a dialog to enter a new original expression and appends a new row with this expression at the end of the vocabulary. The cursor is moved to the end of the vocabulary afterwards.
Article
Document properties dialog
General properties
Lesson descriptions
Type descriptions
Usage labels
Document options
Document options dialog screenshot
Language properties dialog
Language Properties dialog screenshot
Article
The settings of this dialog are global and affect all vocabularies equally.
Automatic backup interval
Language settings dialog screenshot
Language settings dialog
Delete
View settings dialog screenshot
View settings dialog
Copy & Paste settings dialog screenshot
Copy & Paste settings dialog
Query settings dialog screenshot
Query settings dialog
Thresholds settings dialog screenshot
Thresholds settings dialog
Blocking settings dialog screenshot
Blocking settings dialog
Closes the Profiles dialog.
Usage label
Synonym
Antonym
Paraphrase
Normal random query
Random query dialog screenshot
Random query dialog
Edit
Random query with multiple choice
Multiple choice query dialog screenshot
Multiple choice query dialog
Conjugation query dialog
Conjugation query dialog
This dialog appears after starting the query of the verbs.
Document statistics dialog
The filename
The title
The name of the author
File New
Ctrl; Enter; Edit Edit selected area
Query verbs
Query comparison
Query synonyms
Query antonyms
Query the examples
Query paraphrase
Sort
Reset properties
Remove language
Kkvoctrain; main window