# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Tredaptive 1000 mg/ 20 mg modified-release tablets.
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each modified-release tablet contains 1000 mg of nicotinic acid and 20 mg of laropiprant.
Excipient Each modified-release tablet contains 128.4 mg of lactose monohydrate.
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Modified-release tablet.
Capsule-shaped, white to off-white tablet, with “ 552” debossed on one side.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
Tredaptive is indicated for the treatment of dyslipidaemia, particularly in patients with combined mixed dyslipidaemia (characterised by elevated levels of LDL-cholesterol and triglycerides and low HDL-cholesterol) and in patients with primary hypercholesterolaemia (heterozygous familial and non-familial).
Tredaptive should be used in patients in combination with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), when the cholesterol lowering effect of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor monotherapy is inadequate.
It can be used as monotherapy only in patients in whom HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are considered inappropriate or not tolerated.
Diet and other non-pharmacological treatments (e. g. exercise, weight reduction) should be continued during therapy with Tredaptive.
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Posology The starting dose is one modified-release tablet (1000 mg nicotinic acid/ 20 mg laropiprant) once a day.
After four weeks, it is recommended that patients be advanced to the maintenance dose of 2000 mg/ 40 mg taken as two modified-release tablets (1000 mg/ 20 mg each) once daily.
Daily doses greater than 2000 mg/ 40 mg have not been studied and therefore are not recommended.
If Tredaptive is missed for less than 7 consecutive days, patients can resume therapy at the last administered dose.
If Tredaptive is missed for 7 or more consecutive days, therapy should be resumed at the 1000 mg/ 20 mg dose for 1 week, before advancing to the maintenance dose of 2000 mg/ 40 mg.
2 Those patients switching from 2000 mg or more of prolonged-release nicotinic acid can initiate Tredaptive at the 2000 mg/ 40 mg dose.
Patients switching from less than 2000 mg of prolonged-release nicotinic acid should initiate therapy at the starting dose of 1000 mg/ 20 mg and advance to the 2000 mg/ 40 mg maintenance dose after four weeks.
For patients switching from immediate-release nicotinic acid to Tredaptive, therapy should be initiated at the 1000 mg/ 20 mg dose and advanced to the 2000 mg/ 40 mg maintenance dose after four weeks.
Method of administration The tablets should be taken whole, with food, in the evening or at bedtime.
To preserve the modified-release properties, the tablets must not be split, broken, crushed, or chewed before swallowing.
To reduce the possibility of flushing, alcohol or hot drinks should be avoided at the time of ingestion of the medicinal product.
Use in the elderly No dose adjustment is required for elderly patients.
Use in paediatric patients Safety and effectiveness of Tredaptive in paediatric patients have not been established.
Therefore, treatment is not recommended in this age group.
Use in patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency Use of Tredaptive in patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency has not been studied.
Like other nicotinic acid medicinal products, Tredaptive is contraindicated in patients with significant or unexplained hepatic dysfunction.
It should be used with caution in patients with renal insufficiency, because nicotinic acid and its metabolites are primarily excreted by the kidneys (see sections 4.3, 4.4 and 5.2).
Concomitant therapy Acetylsalicylic acid provides no additional reduction of flushing beyond that achieved by Tredaptive.
Therefore, treatment with acetylsalicylic acid to alleviate flushing symptoms is not necessary (see section 5.1).
Because co-administration of bile acid sequestrants may reduce the bioavailability of acidic medicinal products such as nicotinic acid, it is recommended that Tredaptive be administered > 1 hour before or > 4 hours after administration of a bile acid sequestrant (see section 4.5).
4.3 Contraindications
• Hypersensitivity to the active substances or to any of the excipients. • Significant or unexplained hepatic dysfunction. • Active peptic ulcer disease. • Arterial bleeding.
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
When Tredaptive is co-administered with a statin, please refer to the Summary of Product Characteristics for that particular medicinal product.
Hepatic effects Switching from immediate-release (crystalline) nicotinic acid to Tredaptive has not been studied.
However, cases of severe hepatic toxicity, including fulminant hepatic necrosis, have occurred in
3 patients who have switched from immediate-release nicotinic acid to long-acting nicotinic acid at equivalent doses.
Therefore, patients switching from immediate-release nicotinic acid to Tredaptive should be initiated at the 1000 mg/ 20 mg dose.
Tredaptive should be used with caution in patients who consume substantial quantities of alcohol and/ or have a past history of liver disease.
Like other lipid-lowering therapies, nicotinic acid medicinal products have been associated with abnormal liver function tests (see section 4.8).
Transaminase elevations were reversible upon discontinuation of therapy.
Liver function tests are recommended before initiation, every 6 to 12 weeks for the first year, and periodically (e. g. semi-annually) thereafter.
Patients who develop increased transaminase levels should be monitored until the abnormalities have resolved.
Should an increase in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of ≥ 3 X ULN persist, reduction of dose or withdrawal of Tredaptive is recommended.
Effect on skeletal muscle Rare cases of rhabdomyolysis have been associated with concomitant administration of lipid-altering doses (≥ 1000 mg/ day) of nicotinic acid and HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) (see section 4.8).
Physicians contemplating combined therapy with statins and Tredaptive should carefully weigh the potential benefits and risks and should carefully monitor patients for any signs and symptoms of muscle pain, tenderness, or weakness, particularly during the initial months of therapy and when the dose of either medicinal product is increased.
Periodic serum creatine kinase (CK) should be considered in such situations, but there is no assurance that such monitoring will prevent the occurrence of severe myopathy.
Caution should be exercised in patients with pre-disposing factors for rhabdomyolysis. • Age > 70 years • Renal impairment • Uncontrolled hypothyroidism • Personal or familial history of hereditary muscular disorders • Previous history of muscular toxicity with a statin or fibrate • Alcohol abuse.
If muscle pain, weakness or cramps occur while a patient is receiving Tredaptive with a statin, their CK levels should be measured.
If these levels are found, in the absence of strenuous exercise, to be significantly elevated (> 5 x ULN), treatment should be stopped.
Renal dysfunction Because nicotinic acid and its metabolites are excreted through the kidneys, Tredaptive should be used with caution in patients with renal dysfunction.
Effect on glucose Nicotinic acid medicinal products have been associated with increases of fasting blood glucose levels (see section 4.8).
Diabetic or potentially diabetic patients should be observed closely.
Adjustment of diet and/ or hypoglycaemic therapy may be necessary.
4 Acute coronary syndrome As with other nicotinic acid medicinal products, caution should be used when Tredaptive is used in patients with unstable angina or in the acute phase of an MI, particularly when such patients are also receiving vasoactive medicinal products such as nitrates, calcium channel blockers, or adrenergic blocking agents.
Haematologic effects As with other nicotinic acid medicinal products, Tredaptive (2000 mg/ 40 mg) was associated with small reductions in platelet count (see section 4.8).
Therefore, patients undergoing surgery should be carefully evaluated.
Effect on uric acid As with other nicotinic acid medicinal products, Tredaptive (2000 mg/ 40 mg) was associated with small increases in uric acid levels (see section 4.8).
Therefore, Tredaptive should be used with caution in patients with or predisposed to gout.
Hypophosphatemia As with other nicotinic acid medicinal products, Tredaptive was associated with small decreases in phosphorus levels.
Therefore, patients with a risk for hypophosphatemia should be closely followed.
Further As with other nicotinic acid medicinal products, patients with a history of jaundice, hepato-biliary disorder or peptic ulcer should be observed closely (see sections 4.2 and 4.3).
Excipient Tredaptive contains lactose.
Patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption should not take this medicine.
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Simultaneous use of alcohol or hot drinks can enhance the effects of flushing and should therefore be avoided around the time of ingestion of Tredaptive.
Nicotinic acid Effects of nicotinic acid on other medicinal products Antihypertensive therapy:
Nicotinic acid may potentiate the effects of ganglionic blocking agents and vasoactive medicinal products such as nitrates, calcium channel blockers, and adrenergic receptor blocking agents, resulting in postural hypotension.
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors:
When simvastatin is combined with nicotinic acid, a modest increase in AUC and Cmax of simvastatin acid (the active form of simvastatin) was observed, which may be devoid of clinical relevance.
The pharmacokinetic interaction of Tredaptive with statins has been studied only with simvastatin (see section 4.4).
Effects of other medicinal products on nicotinic acid Bile acid sequestrants:
Because co-administration of bile acid sequestrants may reduce the bioavailability of acidic medicinal products such as nicotinic acid, it is recommended that Tredaptive be administered > 1 hour before or > 4 hours after administration of a bile acid sequestrant.
5 Supplements containing nicotinic acid:
Vitamins or other nutritional supplements containing (≥ 50 mg/ day) of nicotinic acid (or nicotinamide) have not been studied with Tredaptive.
Physicians should consider the nicotinic acid intake from vitamins and nutritional supplements when prescribing Tredaptive.
Medicinal product / laboratory test interactions:
In urine glucose tests, nicotinic acid may also give false-positive reactions with cupric sulfate solution (Benedict’ s reagent).
Laropiprant Effects of laropiprant on other medicinal products Midazolam:
Multiple doses of laropiprant 40 mg did not affect the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, a sensitive CYP3A4 substrate.
Therefore, laropiprant is not an inducer or inhibitor of CYP3A4.
However, the plasma concentration of a metabolite of midazolam, 1'-hydroxymidazolam, was increased approximately 2-fold with multiple doses of laropiprant.
Because 1'-hydroxymidazolam is an active metabolite, the sedative effect of midazolam may be increased and caution should be used when laropiprant is co-administered with midazolam.
Other medicinal products:
Co-administration of laropiprant 40 mg with midazolam increased the AUC0-∞ and Cmax of 1'-hydroxymidazolam, a midazolam metabolite, by 98% and 59%, respectively.
1'-hydroxymidazolam is metabolised predominantly by uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) 2B4 and 2B7.
Clinical and in vitro studies support the conclusion that laropiprant is a mild to moderate inhibitor of UGT2B4/ UGT2B7.
Very few medicinal products are known to be metabolised predominantly by UGT2B4 or UGT2B7.
Caution should be used when Tredaptive is co-administered with medicinal products metabolised predominantly by UGT2B4 or UGT2B7, for instance zidovudine.
In interaction studies, laropiprant did not have clinically significant effects on the pharmacokinetics of the following medicinal products: simvastatin, warfarin, oral contraceptives, rosiglitazone and digoxin.
Based on these data, laropiprant is not expected to cause interactions with substrates of CYP isozymes 3A4, 2C9, 2C8 and human P-glycoprotein (P-gp).
In in vitro studies, laropiprant did not inhibit CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, or CYP2E1-mediated reactions.
Clopidogrel:
In a clinical study, there was no meaningful effect of laropiprant on the inhibition of ADP-induced platelet aggregation by clopidogrel, but there was a modest increase in the inhibition of collagen-induced platelet aggregation by clopidogrel.
The clinical significance of these observations is unknown.
Acetylsalicylic acid:
In a clinical study, concomitant administration of laropiprant with acetylsalicylic acid did not have an effect on collagen-induced platelet aggregation or on bleeding time compared to treatment with acetylsalicylic acid alone (see section 5.1).
Effects of other medicinal products on laropiprant CYP3A4 Inhibitor:
Clarithromycin (a potent inhibitor of CYP3A4 and P-gp) did not have a clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of laropiprant.
Laropiprant is not a substrate of human P-gp, and therefore other inhibitors of CYP3A4 and/ or P-gp are also not expected to have a clinically meaningful impact on the pharmacokinetics of laropiprant.
6 4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
Pregnancy Tredaptive There are no data from the combined use of nicotinic acid and laropiprant in pregnant women.
The combination has not been tested in reproductive toxicity studies.
The potential risk for humans is unknown.
Therefore, Tredaptive should not be used during pregnancy unless clearly necessary.
Nicotinic acid There are no adequate data from the use of high dose nicotinic acid in pregnant women.
Animal studies are insufficient with respect to reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3).
Laropiprant There are no data from the use of laropiprant in pregnant women.
Studies in animals have shown reproductive toxicity at high doses of laropiprant (see section 5.3).
Lactation Tredaptive No studies in lactating animals have been conducted with Tredaptive.
A decision on whether to continue/ discontinue breast-feeding or to continue/ discontinue therapy should be made taking into account the benefit of breast-feeding to the child and the benefit of Tredaptive to the woman.
Nicotinic acid Nicotinic acid is excreted in human breast milk.
Laropiprant It is unknown whether laropiprant is excreted in human breast milk.
Animal studies have shown excretion of laropiprant in milk.
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
No studies on the effects on the ability to drive and use machines have been performed.
However, when driving vehicles or operating machines, it should be taken into account that dizziness has been reported (see section 4.8).
4.8 Undesirable effects In clinical trials, over 2500 patients received Tredaptive alone or with an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor.
Adverse reactions have usually been mild and transient.
Flushing Flushing is the most common adverse reaction of Tredaptive.
Flushing is most prominent in the head, neck, and upper torso.
In a pool of four active- or placebo-controlled clinical trials (N=2548), flushing was reported by the investigator as a possibly, probably, or definitely treatment-related adverse reaction in 12.3% of patients taking Tredaptive.
In these studies, the percentage of patients taking Tredaptive, nicotinic acid (pooled prolonged-release formulations) or pooled placebo/ simvastatin who discontinued due to any flushing-related symptom (redness, warmth, itching and tingling) was 7.2%, 16.6%, and 0.4%, respectively.
Discontinuations due to other specific adverse reactions among patients taking Tredaptive were infrequent (< 1%).
7 Overall adverse reactions with Tredaptive In addition to flushing, clinical adverse reactions reported by the investigators as possibly, probably, or definitely related to Tredaptive in ≥ 1% of patients treated with Tredaptive alone (n=947) or co-administered with statin (n=1601) and clinically meaningful adverse reactions (< 1%), for up to one year are listed below.
The frequencies of adverse reactions are ranked according to the following:
Very common (≥ 1/ 10), Common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10), Uncommon (≥ 1/ 1,000 to < 1/ 100), Rare (≥ 1/ 10,000 to < 1/ 1,000), Very rare (< 1/ 10,000).
System organ class Investigations
Adverse reaction elevations in ALT and/ or AST (consecutive, ≥ 3 X ULN), fasting glucose, uric acid (see below)
Frequency Common
elevations in CK (≥ 10 X ULN), total bilirubin, reductions in phosphorus and platelet counts (see below)
Uncommon
Nervous system disorders Gastrointestinal disorders Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
dizziness, headache, paraesthesia diarrhoea, dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting erythema, pruritus, rash, urticaria
Common Common Common
Vascular disorders
flushing
Very common
General disorders and administration site conditions
feeling hot
Common
Immune system disorders
Hypersensitivity reaction (see below)
Uncommon
Hypersensitivity reactions
An apparent hypersensitivity reaction has been reported (< 1%) This is characterised by multiple symptoms that may include: angio-oedema, pruritus, erythema, paraesthesia, loss of consciousness, vomiting, urticaria, flushing, dyspnoea, nausea, incontinence of urine and stool, cold sweats, shivering, chills, increased blood pressure, lip swelling, burning sensation, drug eruption, arthralgia, leg swelling, and tachycardia.
Investigations Marked and persistent increases of serum transaminases have been reported infrequently (see section 4.4).
In controlled clinical studies, the incidence of clinically important elevations in serum transaminases (ALT and/ or AST ≥ 3 X ULN, consecutive) was 1.0% for patients treated with Tredaptive with or without a statin.
These elevations were generally asymptomatic and returned to baseline after discontinuation of therapy or with continued treatment.
Clinically important elevations of CK (≥ 10 X ULN) were seen in 0.3% of the patients treated with Tredaptive with or without a statin (see section 4.4).
Other abnormal laboratory values reported were elevations in LDH, fasting glucose, uric acid, total bilirubin, and amylase, and reductions in phosphorus and platelet counts (see section 4.4).
As with other nicotinic acid medicinal products, elevations in fasting glucose (a median increase of approximately 4 mg/ dL), and uric acid (mean change from baseline of +14.7%), and reductions in platelet counts (a mean change from baseline of -14.0%) were reported in
8 controlled clinical studies with Tredaptive (2000 mg/ 40 mg) (see section 4.4).
In diabetic patients a median increase in HbA1c of 0.2% was observed (where modification of hypoglycaemic therapy was allowed).
Nicotinic acid-related adverse reactions The following nicotinic acid-related adverse reactions have been seen in clinical trials or post-marketing experience with other nicotinic acid medicinal products at unknown frequency or in clinical trials with Tredaptive (or the nicotinic acid component of Tredaptive) in < 1% of the patients treated:
Cardiac disorders:
Atrial fibrillation and other cardiac arrhythmias, palpitations, tachycardia.
Nervous system disorders:
Migraine, syncope.
Eye disorders:
Cystoid macular oedema, toxic amblyopia.
Respiratory, thoracic, and mediastinal disorders:
Dyspnoea.
Gastrointestinal disorders:
Abdominal pain, mouth oedema, eructation, peptic ulcer.
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders:
Acanthosis nigricans, dry skin, hyperpigmentation, macular rash, sweating (night or cold sweat), vesicular rash.
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders:
Muscular weakness, myalgia.
Metabolism and nutrition disorders:
Impaired glucose tolerance, gout.
Infections and infestations:
Rhinitis.
Vascular disorders:
Hypotension, orthostatic hypotension.
General disorders and administration site conditions:
Asthaenia, chills, face oedema, generalised oedema, pain, peripheral oedema.
Immune system disorders:
Angio-oedema, type I hypersensitivity.
Hepatobiliary disorders:
Jaundice.
Psychiatric disorders:
Anxiety, insomnia.
4.9 Overdose
Tredaptive In the event of an overdose, it is reasonable to employ the usual symptomatic and supportive measures.
Cases of overdose have been reported; the maximum dose of Tredaptive taken was 5000 mg/ 100 mg.
All patients recovered without sequelae.
The most commonly reported adverse reactions from the subjects who received this higher dose were consistent with a high dose of nicotinic acid and included: flushing, headache, pruritus, nausea, dizziness, vomiting, diarrhoea, epigastric and abdominal pain/ discomfort, and back pain.
Laboratory abnormalities included increased amylase and lipase, decreased haematocrit and occult blood in the stool.
Nicotinic acid For an overdose of nicotinic acid, supportive measures should be employed.
Laropiprant During controlled clinical trials in healthy subjects, single doses of up to 900 mg laropiprant and multiple doses up to 450 mg once daily for 10 days were generally well tolerated.
There is no experience with doses of laropiprant above 900 mg in humans.
Prolongation of collagen-induced platelet aggregation was observed in subjects taking multiple doses of 300 mg or greater (see section 5.1).
9 5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmacotherapeutic group: nicotinic acid and derivatives, ATC code:
C10AD52.
Tredaptive contains nicotinic acid, which at therapeutic doses is a lipid-modifying agent, and laropiprant, a potent, selective antagonist of the prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) receptor subtype 1 (DP1).
Nicotinic acid lowers the levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), total cholesterol (TC), very low density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C), apolipoprotein B (apo B, the major LDL protein), triglycerides (TG), and lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a), a modified LDL particle) and elevates the levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and apolipoprotein A-I (apo A-I, the major protein component of HDL).
Laropiprant suppresses PGD2 mediated flushing associated with administration of nicotinic acid.
Laropiprant has no effect on lipid levels nor does it interfere with the effects of nicotinic acid on lipids.
Nicotinic acid Mechanism of action The mechanisms by which nicotinic acid modifies the plasma lipid profile are not fully understood.
Nicotinic acid inhibits release of free fatty acids (FFA) from adipose tissue, which may contribute to the reduced plasma LDL-C, TC, VLDL-C, apo B, TG, and Lp(a), as well as elevated HDL-C, and apo A-I, all of which are associated with lower cardiovascular risk.
Additional explanations that do not invoke plasma FFA reduction as the central driver of lipid profile modification include nicotinic acid-mediated inhibition of de novo lipogenesis or esterification of fatty acids into TG in the liver.
Pharmacodynamic effects Nicotinic acid causes a relative shift in the distribution of LDL subclasses from small, dense (most atherogenic) LDL particles to larger LDL particles.
Nicotinic acid also elevates the HDL2 subfraction to a greater extent than the HDL3 subfraction, thereby increasing the HDL2: HDL3 ratio, which is associated with decreased cardiovascular disease risk.
HDL is hypothesised to participate in the transport of cholesterol from tissues back to the liver, to suppress vascular inflammation associated with atherosclerosis, and to have anti-oxidative and anti-thrombotic effects.
Like LDL, cholesterol-enriched triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, including VLDL, intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL), and remnants, can also promote atherosclerosis.
Elevated plasma TG levels are frequently found in a triad with low HDL-C levels and small LDL particles, as well as in association with non-lipid metabolic risk factors for coronary heart disease (CHD).
Treatment with nicotinic acid reduces the risk of death and cardiovascular events, and slows progression or promotes regression of atherosclerotic lesions.
The Coronary Drug Project, a five year study completed in 1975, showed that nicotinic acid had a statistically significant benefit in decreasing nonfatal, recurrent myocardial infarctions (MI) in men 30 to 64 years old with a history of MI.
Though total mortality was similar in the two groups at five years, in a fifteen-year cumulative follow-up there were 11% fewer deaths in the nicotinic acid group compared to the placebo cohort.
10 Laropiprant Mechanism of action Nicotinic acid-induced flushing is mediated primarily by release of prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) in the skin.
Genetic and pharmacologic studies in animal models have provided evidence that PGD2, acting through DP1, one of the two receptors for PGD2, plays a key role in nicotinic acid-induced flushing.
Laropiprant is a potent and selective antagonist of DP1.
Laropiprant is not expected to inhibit the production of prostaglandins.
Pharmacodynamic effects Laropiprant has been shown to be effective in reducing flushing symptoms induced by nicotinic acid.
The reduction in flushing symptoms (assessed by patient questionnaires) was correlated with a reduction in nicotinic acid-induced vasodilatation (assessed by measurements of skin blood flow).
In healthy subjects receiving Tredaptive, pretreatment with acetylsalicylic acid 325 mg had no additional beneficial effects in reducing nicotinic acid-induced flushing symptoms compared to Tredaptive alone (see section 4.8).
Laropiprant also has affinity for the thromboxane A2 receptor (TP) (although it is substantially less potent at TP as compared to DP1).
TP plays a role in platelet function; however, therapeutic doses of laropiprant had no clinically relevant effect on bleeding time and collagen-induced platelet aggregation (see section 4.5).
Clinical studies Effect on lipids Tredaptive was consistently efficacious across all prespecified patient subpopulations defined by race, gender, baseline LDL-C, HDL-C and TG levels, age and diabetes status.
Patients taking Tredaptive (2000 mg/ 40 mg) with or without a statin, versus placebo, had significantly decreased LDL-C (-18.9% vs. -0.5%), TG (-21.7% vs.
3.6%), LDL-C: HDL-C (-28.9% vs.
2.3%), non-HDL-C (-19.0% vs.
0.8%), apo B (-16.4% vs.
2.5%), TC (-9.2% vs. -0.6%), Lp(a) (-17.6% vs.
1.1%), and TC: HDL-C (-21.2% vs.
1.9%) and also had significantly increased HDL-C (18.8% vs. -1.2%), and apo A-I (11.2% vs.
4.3%) as measured by percent change from baseline.
In general, the between-group treatment effects on all lipid parameters were consistent across all patient subgroups examined.
Patients receiving Tredaptive, nicotinic acid (prolonged-released formulation), or placebo were also taking statins (29% atorvastatin [5-80 mg], 54% simvastatin [10-80 mg], 17% other statins [2.5-180 mg] (pravastatin, fluvastatin, rosuvastatin, lovastatin)), of which 9% were also taking ezetimibe [10 mg].
The effect on lipids was similar whether Tredaptive was given as monotherapy or was added to ongoing statin therapy with or without ezetimibe.
The placebo-adjusted LDL-C, HDL-C and TG responses appeared greater among women compared to men and appeared greater among elderly patients (≥ 65 years) compared to younger patients (< 65 years).
In a multicentre, double-blind, 12-week factorial study, Tredaptive 1000 mg/ 20 mg co-administered with simvastatin, when compared with simvastatin alone or Tredaptive 1000 mg/ 20 mg alone, for 4 weeks, significantly lowered LDL-C (-44.2%, -37.4%, -8.2% respectively), TG (-25.8%, -15.7%, -18.7% respectively), TC (-27.9%, -25.8%, -4.9% respectively) and significantly increased HDL-C (19.2%, 4.2%, 12.5% respectively).
Tredaptive (2000 mg/ 40 mg) co-administered with simvastatin when compared with simvastatin alone or Tredaptive (2000 mg/ 40 mg) alone for 12 weeks, significantly lowered LDL-C (-47.9%, -37.0%, -17.0% respectively), TG (-33.3%, -14.7%, -21.6% respectively), apo B
11 (-41.0%, -28.8%, -17.1% respectively), and TC (-29.6%, -24.9%, -9.1% respectively), as well as LDL-C: HDL-C (-57.1%, -39.8%, -31.2% respectively), non-HDL-C (-45.8%, -33.4%, -18.1% respectively), and TC: HDL-C (-43.0%, -28.0%, -24.9% respectively), and significantly increased HDL-C (27.5%, 6.0%, 23.4% respectively).
Further analysis showed Tredaptive (2000 mg/ 40 mg) co-administered with simvastatin when compared with simvastatin alone significantly increased apo A-I (8.6%, 2.3% respectively) and significantly decreased Lp(a) (-19.8%, 0.0% respectively).
Efficacy and safety of Tredaptive in combination with simvastatin > 40 mg were not included in this study.
Flushing In two large clinical trials measuring patient-reported flushing symptoms, patients taking Tredaptive experienced less flushing than those taking nicotinic acid (prolonged-release formulations).
In patients continuing in the first study (24 weeks), the frequency of moderate or greater flushing in patients treated with Tredaptive declined and approached that of patients receiving placebo (see Figure 1), whereas in patients treated with nicotinic acid (prolonged-release formulation) the flushing frequency remained constant (after Week 6).
Flushing efficacy of laropiprant has not been established past 24 weeks.
Figure 1.
Average number of days per week with moderate or greater* flushing symptoms across weeks 1-24 2 Number of Days per Week
1
0 0 1 2 3 4 5† 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Weeks on Treatment
● Tredaptive (1000 mg/ 20 mg to 2000 mg/ 40 mg at week 5) ▲ Nicotinic acid (prolonged-release 1000 mg to 2000 mg at week 5) ○ Placebo *Includes patients with moderate, severe, or extreme flushing symptoms † Dose advancement at Week 5
In the second study (16 weeks) where acetylsalicylic acid was allowed, patients taking Tredaptive experienced significantly fewer days per week with moderate or greater flushing compared to nicotinic acid (prolonged-release formulation taken as a 12-week multi-step 500 mg to 2000 mg titration) (p < 0.001).
12 5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption Nicotinic acid Following a 2000 mg dose of nicotinic acid administered orally as two modified-release tablets of nicotinic acid/ laropiprant with food, nicotinic acid was absorbed with a median time to peak plasma concentration (Tmax) of 4 hours, a mean area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC0-last) of approximately 58.0 μ M·hr and a mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of approximately 20.2 μ M.
Bioavailability with or without food is at least 72% based on the recovery of the nicotinic acid dose in the urine.
The oral bioavailability of nicotinic acid is not altered when it is taken with a high-fat meal.
Laropiprant Following a 40 mg dose of laropiprant administered orally as two modified-release tablets of nicotinic acid/ laropiprant with food, laropiprant is rapidly absorbed with a median Tmax of 1 hour, a mean AUC0-∞ of approximately 13 μ M·hr, and a mean Cmax of approximately 1.6 μ M.
The rate and extent of absorption are not altered with a high-fat meal.
The pharmacokinetics of laropiprant are linear, displaying approximately dose-proportional increases in AUC and Cmax and no evidence of time-dependent clearance.
The mean absolute bioavailability of laropiprant is approximately 71% following a 40 mg dose when administered as two modified-release tablets of nicotinic acid/ laropiprant after an overnight fast.
Distribution Nicotinic acid Nicotinic acid is less than 20% bound to serum proteins.
Laropiprant The mean volume of distribution at steady state following a single 40 mg intravenous dose of laropiprant to healthy subjects is approximately 70 litres.
Laropiprant is highly bound (> 99%) to plasma proteins, and its binding is independent of concentration.
Laropiprant crosses the placenta in rats and rabbits.
Metabolism Nicotinic acid Nicotinic acid undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism through two pathways that are dose and dose-rate dependent.
The first pathway results in the formation of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotinamide.
In humans, nicotinamide is further predominantly metabolised to N-methylnicotinamide (MNA) and to N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide (2PY).
In the second pathway, glycine is conjugated with nicotinic acid to form nicotinuric acid (NUA).
With low doses of nicotinic acid or lower rates of absorption, the first pathway predominates.
At higher doses or higher rates of absorption, the NAD pathway is saturable, and an increasing fraction of the oral dose reaches the bloodstream unchanged as nicotinic acid.
The glycine conjugation pathway is not saturated across the clinically relevant dose range, based on the dose-proportional increase in the plasma concentrations of NUA from 1000 mg to 2000 mg.
In in vitro studies, nicotinic acid and its metabolites did not inhibit CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, or CYP3A4-mediated reactions or UGT1A1-mediated 3-glucuronidation of estradiol.
13 Laropiprant Laropiprant is metabolised primarily via acyl glucuronidation, with a smaller component of oxidative metabolism, followed by excretion of the glucuronide into faeces (via bile) and urine.
Laropiprant and its acyl glucuronide conjugate are the major circulating components in human plasma.
In vitro studies have shown that the acyl glucuronide conjugate of laropiprant had at least a 65-fold reduced affinity for DP1 as compared to laropiprant; thus, it is not expected to contribute to the overall DP1 activity of laropiprant.
The major component (73% of radioactivity) in faeces is laropiprant (comprising unabsorbed active substance and/ or hydrolysed glucuronic acid conjugate).
In urine, the primary component is the acyl glucuronide conjugate (64% of radioactivity) with smaller contributions from the parent compound (5%).
The oxidative metabolism of laropiprant is catalysed primarily by CYP3A4, whereas several UGT isoforms (1A1, 1A3, 1A9 and 2B7) catalysed the acyl glucuronidation.
Elimination Nicotinic acid Nicotinic acid is predominantly excreted in the urine as metabolites.
Laropiprant Laropiprant is eliminated primarily via acyl glucuronidation, followed by excretion of the glucuronide in faeces (via bile) and urine.
Following oral administration of 14C-laropiprant in humans, approximately 68% of the dose was recovered in faeces (primarily as parent compound, comprising unabsorbed active substance and/ or hydrolysed glucuronic acid conjugate) and 22% was recovered in urine (primarily as metabolites).
The majority of the dose was excreted within 96 hours.
The apparent terminal half-life (t1/ 2) following a 40 mg dose of laropiprant administered as two modified-release tablets of nicotinic acid/ laropiprant with food was approximately 17 hours.
Pharmacokinetic steady state is achieved within 2 days of once-daily dosing of laropiprant, with minimal accumulation in AUC (approximately 1.3-fold) and Cmax (approximately 1.1-fold).
Characteristics in patients Renal insufficiency Tredaptive:
Use in patients with renal insufficiency has not been studied.
Nicotinic acid: see section 4.4.
Laropiprant:
Administration of laropiprant 40 mg in non-dialysed patients with severe renal insufficiency resulted in no clinically meaningful change in the AUC and Cmax of laropiprant, compared to healthy control subjects.
As no effect was observed in severe renal insufficiency, no effect is expected in patients with mild and moderate renal insufficiency; however, the effects of end-stage renal failure and dialysis on laropiprant pharmacokinetics cannot be inferred from this study.
Hepatic insufficiency Tredaptive:
Use in patients with hepatic insufficiency has not been studied.
Nicotinic acid: see sections 4.3 and 4.4.
Laropiprant:
Consistent with the characteristics of a medicinal product that is primarily cleared by metabolism, moderate hepatic disease has a significant impact on laropiprant pharmacokinetics, with an increase in AUC and Cmax of approximately 2.8- and 2.2-fold respectively.
14 Gender Nicotinic acid:
No dose adjustment is necessary based on gender.
Gender has no clinically meaningful effect on pharmacokinetics of nicotinic acid (prolonged-release formulation).
There is no difference in the oral bioavailability of nicotinic acid in men and women receiving Tredaptive.
Women have a modest increase in plasma concentrations of nicotinuric acid and nicotinic acid compared to men.
Laropiprant:
No dose adjustment is necessary based on gender.
Gender had no clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of laropiprant.
Elderly Nicotinic acid:
There is no pharmacokinetic data in the elderly (≥ 65 years).
Age has no clinically meaningful effect on pharmacokinetics of nicotinic acid (prolonged-release formulation) based on a composite analysis of subjects ages 18-65 years.
There is no change in the oral bioavailability of nicotinic acid with age.
Laropiprant:
No dose adjustment is necessary in the elderly.
Age had no clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of laropiprant.
Paediatric Tredaptive:
No studies have been performed in paediatric patients.
Race Nicotinic acid:
No dose adjustment is necessary based on race.
Race has no clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of nicotinic acid (prolonged-release formulation) based on pharmacokinetic data including subjects of Hispanic, White, Black, and Native American racial groups.
Laropiprant:
No dose adjustment is necessary based on race.
Race had no clinically meaningful effect on the pharmacokinetics of laropiprant based on a composite analysis of pharmacokinetic data including subjects of White, Hispanic, Black, Asian, and Native American racial groups.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
Tredaptive Effects in non-clinical studies were observed only at exposures considered sufficiently in excess of the maximum human exposure, indicating little relevance to human use.
The safety of concomitant administration of nicotinic acid and laropiprant was assessed in dogs and rats.
Toxicologic findings in these co-administration studies were consistent with those seen with nicotinic acid and laropiprant administered individually.
Nicotinic acid Degeneration in the stomach and hepatocyte vacuolation were observed in rats following 6 months of dosing at systemic exposure values at least 179 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
Retinopathy and/ or corneal lesions were observed in dogs following 6 months of dosing at systemic exposure values at least 240 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
15 Nicotinic acid was not carcinogenic in mice when administered for the duration of their life.
Mice in this study received approximately 9 to 13 times a human nicotinic acid dose of 2000 mg/ day as determined on a mg/ m2 basis.
Nicotinic acid showed no mutagenic effects in the in vitro assays.
No studies are available on possible effects of high dose nicotinic acid on fertility or on postnatal development after in utero exposure.
Nicotinic acid induced reproduction toxic effects in rats when dosed at 1000 mg/ kg/ day during days 5-16 of gestation.
Decreased placental and fetal weights were observed.
Laropiprant Ketonuria and hepatocellular centrilobular hypertrophy were observed in rats in repeated dose toxicity studies for up to 6 months dosing.
The hepatocellular centrilobular hypertrophy was consistent with rodent specific enzyme induction.
The no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) was at least 118 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
Increases in serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were observed in all dog studies, at systemic exposure levels at least 14 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
No other effects were observed in dog studies with exposures at least 100 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
Laropiprant was not carcinogenic in 2 year studies in mice and rats at the highest doses tested, which represents at least 218 to 289 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
Laropiprant was not mutagenic or clastogenic in a series of genetic toxicology studies.
No adverse effects on fertility were observed in male or female rats given laropiprant prior to mating and throughout mating, at systemic exposure levels at least 289 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
Laropiprant was not teratogenic in rats or in rabbits at least 153 and 438 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
Reproduction toxicity studies showed slight treatment-related decreases in mean maternal weight gain and foetal body weight, slight increases in pup mortality, and increased incidence of supernumerary rib and incomplete ossification of the sternebra in the foetus were observed in rats at systemic exposure levels at least 513 times the human exposure based on the AUC of the recommended daily human dose.
6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Hypromellose (E464) Colloidal anhydrous silica (E551) Sodium stearyl fumarate Hydroxypropylcellulose (E463) Microcrystalline cellulose (E460) Croscarmellose sodium Lactose monohydrate Magnesium stearate
16 6.2 Incompatibilities
Not applicable.
6.3 Shelf life
2 years.
6.4 Special precautions for storage
PVC/ Aclar blisters:
Store in the original package in order to protect from light and moisture.
Aluminium/ Aluminium blisters:
Do not store above 30 C.
Store in the original package in order to protect from light and moisture.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
Opaque PVC/ Aclar blister with push-through aluminium lidding containing 14 modified-release tablets.
Pack sizes of 14, 28, 56, 84, 98, 168, 196 modified-release tablets, multi-packs containing 196 (2 packs of 98) modified-release tablets and 49 x 1 modified-release tablets in a perforated unit dose blister.
Aluminium/ Aluminium blister with push-through lidding containing 7 modified-release tablets.
Pack sizes of 14, 28, 56, 168 modified-release tablets and 32 x 1 modified-release tablets in a perforated unit dose blister.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
No special requirements.
7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.
Hertford Road, Hoddesdon Hertfordshire EN11 9BU United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 001 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 002 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 003 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 004 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 005 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 006 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 007
17 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 008 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 009 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 010 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 011 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 012 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 013 EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 014
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
3 July 2008
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/.
18 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
19 A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release
Merck, Sharp & Dohme Ltd.
Shotton Lane Cramlington Northumberland NE23 3JU United Kingdom
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable
• OTHER CONDITIONS
Pharmacovigilance system
The MAH must ensure that the system of pharmacovigilance, as described in version 3 dated September 2007 presented in Module 1.8.1. of the Marketing Authorisation Application, is in place and functioning before and whilst the product is on the market.
Risk Management Plan
The MAH commits to performing the studies and additional pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan, as agreed in version 3.1 dated 23 April 2008 of the Risk Management Plan (RMP) presented in Module 1.8.2. of the Marketing Authorisation Application and any subsequent updates of the RMP agreed by the CHMP.
As per the CHMP Guideline on Risk Management Systems for medicinal products for human use, the updated RMP should be submitted at the same time as the next Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR).
In addition, an updated RMP should be submitted • When new information is received that may impact on the current Safety Specification, Pharmacovigilance Plan or risk minimisation activities • Within 60 days of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached • At the request of the EMEA
20 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
21 A.
LABELLING
22 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
OUTER CARTON (for Alu/ Alu blister)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Tredaptive 1000 mg/ 20 mg modified-release tablets Nicotinic acid/ laropiprant
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each modified-release tablet contains 1000 mg of nicotinic acid and 20 mg of laropiprant.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains lactose monohydrate.
See the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
14 modified-release tablets 28 modified-release tablets 56 modified-release tablets 168 modified-release tablets 32 x 1 modified-release tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
23 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 30°C.
Store in the original package in order to protect from light and moisture.
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.
Hertford Road, Hoddesdon Hertfordshire EN11 9BU United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 009 14 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 010 28 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 011 56 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 013 168 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 014 32 x 1 modified-release tablets
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Tredaptive
24 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
OUTER CARTON (for PVC/ Aclar blister)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Tredaptive 1000 mg/ 20 mg modified-release tablets Nicotinic acid/ laropiprant
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each modified-release tablet contains 1000 mg of nicotinic acid and 20 mg of laropiprant.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains lactose monohydrate.
See the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
14 modified-release tablets 28 modified-release tablets 56 modified-release tablets 84 modified-release tablets 98 modified-release tablets 168 modified-release tablets 196 modified-release tablets Multi-pack containing 196 (2 packs of 98) modified-release tablets 49 x 1 modified-release tablets
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
25 8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Store in the original package in order to protect from light and moisture.
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.
Hertford Road, Hoddesdon Hertfordshire EN11 9BU United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 001 14 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 002 28 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 003 56 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 004 84 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 005 98 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 006 168 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 007 196 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 008 49 x 1 modified-release tablets EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 012 196 (2 packs of 98) modified-release tablets
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
26 16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
Tredaptive
27 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE INTERMEDIATECARTON
Multi-packs of 196 (2 packs of 98 modified-release tablets) – without blue box (for PVC/ Aclar blister)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Tredaptive 1000 mg/ 20 mg modified-release tablets Nicotinic acid/ laropiprant
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each modified-release tablet contains 1000 mg of nicotinic acid and 20 mg of laropiprant.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
Contains lactose monohydrate.
See the package leaflet for further information.
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
Component of a multi-pack comprising 2 packs, each containing 98 modified-release tablets.
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Oral use.
Read the package leaflet before use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
28 9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Store in the original package in order to protect from light and moisture.
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.
Hertford Road, Hoddesdon Hertfordshire EN11 9BU United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 08/ 459/ 012
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
29 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS
BLISTER
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Tredaptive 1000 mg/ 20 mg modified-release tablets Nicotinic acid/ laropiprant
2.
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
MSD
3.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
4.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
5.
OTHER
30 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
31 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
Tredaptive 1000 mg/ 20 mg modified-release tablets nicotinic acid/ laropiprant
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine.
- Keep this leaflet.
You may need to read it again.
- If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
- This medicine has been prescribed for you.
Do not pass it on to others.
It may harm them,
even if their symptoms are the same as yours.
- If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this
leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
In this leaflet:
1.
What Tredaptive is and what it is used for 2.
Before you take Tredaptive 3.
How to take Tredaptive 4.
Possible side effects 5.
How to store Tredaptive 6.
Further information
1.
WHAT TREDAPTIVE IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
The name of your medicine is Tredaptive.
It contains two different active substances: • nicotinic acid, a lipid modifying medicine, and • laropiprant, which reduces symptoms of flushing, a common side effect of nicotinic acid.
The medicine comes as a modified-release tablet.
This means one or more active substances are released slowly over a period of time.
Tredaptive is used in addition to diet • to lower your ‘ bad’ cholesterol level.
It does this by lowering the levels of total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, fatty substances called triglycerides and apo B (a part of LDL) in the blood; • to raise levels of ‘ good’ cholesterol (HDL cholesterol) and apo A-I (a part of HDL).
What should I know about cholesterol?
Cholesterol is one of several fats found in your blood.
Your total cholesterol is made up mainly of ‘ bad’ (LDL) and ‘ good’ (HDL) cholesterol.
LDL cholesterol is often called ‘ bad’ cholesterol because it can build up in the walls of your arteries and form plaque.
Over time, this plaque build-up can lead to a clogging of your arteries.
This clogging can slow or block blood flow to vital organs such as the heart and brain.
When the blood flow is blocked, the result can be a heart attack or stroke.
HDL cholesterol is often called ‘ good’ cholesterol because it helps keep the ‘ bad’ cholesterol from building up in the arteries and because it protects against heart disease.
Triglycerides are another fat in your blood.
They may raise your risk of having heart problems.
32 In most people, at first there are no signs of cholesterol problems.
Your doctor can measure your cholesterol with a simple blood test.
Visit your doctor regularly to keep track of your cholesterol and discuss your goals with your doctor.
Tredaptive is used if you need to improve cholesterol and fat levels in your blood (primary hypercholesterolaemia (heterozygous familial and non-familial) or mixed dyslipidaemia): • when you cannot control your cholesterol levels with a statin (class of cholesterol-lowering medicines working in the liver); • when you cannot tolerate a statin or when a statin is not recommended for you.
Tredaptive can be used by itself or with other medicines to treat cholesterol problems.
You should stay on a diet designed to lower cholesterol or other non-pharmacological treatments (e. g. exercise, weight reduction) while you take this medicine.
2.
BEFORE YOU TAKE TREDAPTIVE
Do not take Tredaptive if • you are allergic (hypersensitive) to nicotinic acid, to laropiprant, or to any of the other ingredients of Tredaptive (listed in section 6). • you currently have liver problems. • you have an ulcer in your stomach. • you have arterial bleeding.
Do not take Tredaptive if any of the above apply to you.
If you are not sure, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before taking Tredaptive.
Take special care with Tredaptive Tell your doctor about all of your medical conditions.
Check with your doctor or pharmacist before and while taking your medicine if: • you have any allergies. • you have ever had liver disease, jaundice (a liver disorder causing yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes), or hepatobiliary (liver and bile duct) disease. • you have kidney problems. • you have thyroid problems. • you drink large amounts of alcohol. • you or close family members have a hereditary muscle disorder, or you have ever had muscle problems during treatment with cholesterol-lowering medicines called “ statins” or fibrates. • you have unexplained muscle pain, muscle tenderness, or muscle weakness.
If you have these symptoms talk to your doctor immediately. • you have high blood sugar or diabetes. • you have heart problems. • you are going to have an operation. • you have gout. • you have low levels of phosphorus. • you are over 70 years old.
33 If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before taking Tredaptive.
Blood tests and monitoring • See your doctor regularly to check your LDL (bad) and HDL (good) cholesterol levels and your triglyceride level. • Your doctor should do a blood test before you start taking Tredaptive to check how well your liver is working. • Your doctor may also want you to periodically have blood tests after you start taking Tredaptive, to check how well your liver is working and for other side effects.
Children and adolescents Tredaptive has not been studied in children and adolescents who are under 18 years of age.
Using other medicines Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines.
This includes medicines obtained without a prescription, vitamins, and herbal supplements.
In particular, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any of the following: • medicines used to lower blood pressure. • medicines used to lower cholesterol called ‘ statins’, a class of medicine that works in the liver. • medicines used to lower cholesterol called ‘ bile acid sequestrants’, such as colestyramine. • zidovudine, a medicine used for HIV. • midazolam, a medicine to make you sleepy before some medical procedures. • vitamins or supplements that contain nicotinic acid. • clopidogrel, a medicine to help prevent harmful blood clots.
If you are not sure if any of the above apply to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before taking Tredaptive.
Taking Tredaptive with food and drink • Take Tredaptive with food. • To lower your chance of flushing, avoid drinking alcohol or hot drinks near the time you take your dose of Tredaptive. • It is important to follow the advice given in section 3 How to take Tredaptive.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding Talk with your doctor before taking Tredaptive if: • You are pregnant or plan to become pregnant.
It is not known if Tredaptive will harm your unborn baby. • You are breast-feeding or plan to breast-feed.
It is not known if Tredaptive will pass into your breast milk.
However, nicotinic acid a component of Tredaptive does pass into breast milk.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking any medicine.
Your doctor will decide if Tredaptive is right for you.
34 Driving and using machines The effects of Tredaptive on the ability to drive and use machines have not been studied.
However, some people get dizzy after taking Tredaptive.
If you get dizzy, you should avoid driving or operating machines after taking Tredaptive.
Important information about some of the ingredients of Tredaptive Tredaptive contains a sugar called lactose.
If you have been told by your doctor that you have an intolerance to some sugars, contact your doctor before taking this medicine.
3.
HOW TO TAKE TREDAPTIVE
Always take Tredaptive exactly as your doctor has told you.
You should check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure.
How much to take • You should start by taking one tablet a day. • After 4 weeks, your doctor may raise your dose to two tablets a day.
How to take • Take Tredaptive once a day, in the evening or at bedtime. • Take Tredaptive with food. • Swallow each tablet whole.
In order for your medicine to work as intended, do not split, break, crush, or chew the tablet before you swallow it. • Avoid drinking alcohol or hot drinks near the time you take your dose of Tredaptive.
This will lower your chance of flushing (redness of the skin, feeling warm, itching, or tingling, particularly in your head, neck, chest and upper back). • Taking aspirin before you take Tredaptive does not reduce your flushing more than taking Tredaptive alone.
Therefore, taking aspirin to reduce flushing symptoms is not necessary.
If you take aspirin for any other reason, continue to follow your doctor's advice.
If you take more Tredaptive than you should • In the event of an overdose, the following adverse events were reported: flushing, headache, pruritus (itching), nausea, dizziness, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain/ discomfort, and back pain. • If you take more than you should, talk to a doctor or pharmacist straight away.
If you forget to take Tredaptive • If you miss a dose, do not take an extra dose.
Continue with your usual dose the next evening or at bedtime.
However, if you do not take Tredaptive for 7 or more days in a row, talk to your doctor before restarting Tredaptive.
If you stop taking Tredaptive Do not stop taking Tredaptive without talking to your doctor.
Your cholesterol problem may return.
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
35 4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, Tredaptive can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.
Side effects of Tredaptive are:
Very common (affects more than 1 in 10 patients) • flushing (which usually includes redness of the skin, feeling warm, itching, or tingling, particularly in the head, neck, chest and upper back).
If flushing occurs, symptoms are generally most noticeable at first and usually lessen over time.
Common (affects less than 1 in 10 patients) • diarrhoea • nausea (feeling sick) • dizziness • rash • pruritus (itching) • hives • upset stomach or heartburn • getting sick (vomiting) • headache • tingling or numbness of the hands or feet
Uncommon (affects less than 1 in 100 patients) In addition, one or more of the following symptoms have been reported as part of an allergic reaction to Tredaptive. • swelling of the face, lips, tongue, and/ or throat that may cause difficulty in breathing or swallowing (angioedema, which may require treatment right away) • fainting • shortness of breath • loss of control over urine and stool • cold sweats • shivering • chills • increased blood pressure • swelling of the lips • burning sensation • whole body rash • joint pain • swelling of the legs • rapid heart rate.
If any of the side effects get serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, please tell your doctor or pharmacist.
36 5.
HOW TO STORE TREDAPTIVE
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
Do not use Tredaptive after the expiry date (EXP) which is stated on the carton and the blister.
PVC/ Aclar blisters:
Store in the original packaging in order to protect from light and moisture.
Aluminium/ Aluminium blisters:
Do not store above 30°C.
Store in the original packaging in order to protect from light and moisture.
Medicines should not be disposed of via wastewater or household waste.
Ask your pharmacist how to dispose of medicines no longer required.
These measures will help to protect the environment.
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What Tredaptive contains • The active substances are nicotinic acid and laropiprant.
Each tablet contains 1000 mg nicotinic acid and 20 mg laropiprant. • The other ingredients are: hypromellose (E464), colloidal anhydrous silica (E551), sodium stearyl fumarate, hydroxypropylcellulose (E463), microcrystalline cellulose (E460), croscarmellose sodium, lactose monohydrate, and magnesium stearate.
What Tredaptive looks like and contents of the pack Each modified-release tablet is a capsule-shaped, white to off-white tablet, with “ 552” debossed on one side.
Opaque PVC/ Aclar blister with push-through aluminium lidding in pack sizes of 14, 28, 56, 84, 98, 168, 196 modified-release tablets, multi-packs containing 196 (2 packs of 98) modified-release tablets and 49 x 1 modified-release tablets in perforated unit dose blister.
Aluminium/ Aluminium blister with push-through lidding in pack sizes of 14, 28, 56, 168 modified-release tablets and 32 x 1 modified-release tablets in perforated unit dose blister.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
Marketing Authorisation Holder Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.
Hertford Road, Hoddesdon Hertfordshire EN11 9BU United Kingdom
Manufacturer Merck Sharp & Dohme Ltd.
Shotton Lane, Cramlington Northumberland NE23 3 JU United Kingdom
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder:
37 Belgique/ België/ Belgien Merck Sharp & Dohme B. V.
Succursale belge/ Belgisch bijhuis Tél/ Tel: +32 (0) 800 38 693 MSDBelgium_info@merck. com
Luxembourg/ Luxemburg Merck Sharp & Dohme B. V.
Succursale belge Tél: +32 (0) 800 38 693 MSDBelgium_info@merck. com
България Мерк Шарп и Доум България ЕООД Тел.: +359 2 819 3740 info-msdbg@merck. com
Magyarország MSD Magyarország Kft.
Tel.: +36 1 888 53 00 hungary_msd@merck. com
Č eská republika Merck Sharp & Dohme IDEA, Inc., org. sl.
Tel.: +420 233 010 111 msd_cr@merck. com
Malta Merck Sharp & Dohme (Middle East) Limited Tel: +357 22866700 info_cyprus@merck. com
Danmark Merck Sharp & Dohme Tlf: +45 43 28 77 66 Tredaptive@msd. dk
Nederland Merck Sharp & Dohme BV Tel: +31 (0) 23 5153153 msdbvnl@merck. com
Deutschland MSD SHARP & DOHME GMBH Tel: +49 (0) 89 4561 2612 Infocenter@msd. de
Norge MSD (Norge) AS Tlf: +47 32 20 73 00 msdnorge@msd. no
Eesti Merck Sharp & Dohme OÜ Tel: +372 613 9750 msdeesti@merck. com
Österreich Merck Sharp & Dohme GmbH Tel: +43 (0) 1 26 044 msd-medizin@merck. com
Eλλάδα BIANEΞ Α .Ε Τηλ: +3 0210 80091 11 Mailbox@vianex. gr
Polska MSD Polska Sp. z o. o.
Tel.: +48 22 549 51 00 msdpolska@merck. com
España Merck Sharp & Dohme de España, S. A.
Tel: +34 91 321 06 00 Tredaptive@msd. es
Portugal Merck Sharp & Dohme, Lda Tel: +351 21 4465700 informacao_doente@merck. com
France Laboratoires Merck Sharp & Dohme – Chibret Tél: +33 (0) 1 47 54 87 00 contact@msd-france. com
România Merck Sharp & Dohme Romania S. R. L.
Tel: +4021 529 29 00 msdromania@merck. com
38 Ireland Merck Sharp and Dohme Ireland (Human Health) Limited Tel: +353 (0)1 2998700 medinfo_ireland@merck. com
Slovenija Merck Sharp & Dohme, inovativna zdravila d. o. o.
Tel: + 386 1 5204201 msd_slovenia@merck. com
Ísland Icepharma hf.
Sími: +354 540 8000 ISmail@merck. com
Slovenská republika Merck Sharp & Dohme IDEA, Inc.
Tel.: +421 2 58282010 msd_sk@merck. com
Ι talia Merck Sharp & Dohme (Italia) S. p. A.
Tel: +39 06 361911 doccen@merck. com
Suomi/ Finland MSD Finland Oy Puh/ Tel: +358 (0) 9 804650 info@msd. fi
Κύπρος Merck Sharp & Dohme (Middle East) Limited Τηλ: +357 22866700 info_cyprus@merck. com
Sverige Merck Sharp & Dohme (Sweden) AB Tel: +46 (0) 8 626 1400 medicinskinfo@merck. com
Latvija SIA “ Merck Sharp & Dohme Latvija” Tel: +371 67364 224 msd_lv@merck. com
United Kingdom Merck Sharp and Dohme Limited Tel: +44 (0) 1992 467272 medinfo_uk@merck. com
Lietuva UAB “ Merck Sharp & Dohme” Tel. +370 5 278 02 47 msd_lietuva@merck. com
This leaflet was last approved in {MM/ YYYY}.
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) website: http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/.
39