# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

& Show
& Edit...
& Print...
Print Preview...
Cut
& Copy
& Paste
& Delete
Toggle To-do Completed
& Toggle Reminder
& Dissociate From Recurrence...
Send as iCalendar...
Copy to Calendar
& Move to Calendar
Displays information about current attendees. To edit an attendee, select it in this list and modify the values in the area below. Clicking on a column title will sort the list according to that column. The RSVP column indicates whether or not a response is requested from the attendee.
Name
Email
Role
Status
RSVP
Delegated To
Delegated From
%1 does not look like a valid email address. Are you sure you want to invite this participant?
Invalid Email Address
Merged calendar
Calendars Side by Side
Unable to display the work week view since there are no work days configured. Please properly configure at least 1 work day in the Time and Date preferences.
Edit Calendar Filters
Press this button to define a new filter.
Press this button to remove the currently active filter.
New Filter %1
Do you really want to permanently remove the filter "%1"?
Delete Filter?
Location: %1
Scale:
Set the Gantt chart zoom level
Select the Gantt chart zoom level from one of the following: 'Hour 'shows a range of several hours, 'Day' shows a range of a few days, 'Week 'shows a range of a few months, and'Month' shows a range of a few years, while'Automatic 'selects the range most appropriate for the current event or to-do.
Hour
Day
Week
Month
Automatic
Center on Start
Center the Gantt chart on the event start date and time
Click this button to center the Gantt chart on the start time and day of this event.
Pick Date
Move the event to a date and time when all attendees are available
Click this button to move the event to a date and time when all the attendees have time available in their Free/ Busy lists.
Reload
Reload Free/ Busy data for all attendees
Pressing this button will cause the Free/ Busy data for all attendees to be reloaded from their corresponding servers.
Shows the Free/ Busy status of all attendees
Shows the Free/ Busy status of all attendees. Double-clicking on an attendee's entry in the list will allow you to enter the location of their Free/ Busy Information.
Attendee
The meeting already has suitable start/ end times.
The meeting has been moved to Start: %1 End: %2.
No suitable date found.
Of the %1 participants, %2 have accepted, %3 have tentatively accepted, and %4 have declined.
You are changing the organizer of this event. Since the organizer is also attending this event, would you like to change the corresponding attendee as well?
The number of the week from the beginning of the month on which this event or to-do should recur.
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
Last
2nd Last
3rd Last
4th Last
5th Last
The weekday on which this event or to-do should recur.
The month during which this event or to-do should recur.
Sets how often this event or to-do should recur.
& Recur every
day(s)
week(s) on:
Set %1 as the day when this event or to-do should recur.
Recur on %1
month(s)
& Recur on the
Sets a specific day of the month on which this event or to-do should recur.
The day of the month on which this event or to-do should recur.
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
20th
21st
22nd
23rd
24th
25th
26th
27th
28th
29th
30th
31st
6th Last
7th Last
8th Last
9th Last
10th Last
11th Last
12th Last
13th Last
14th Last
15th Last
16th Last
17th Last
18th Last
19th Last
20th Last
21st Last
22nd Last
23rd Last
24th Last
25th Last
26th Last
27th Last
28th Last
29th Last
30th Last
31st Last
day
Sets a weekday and specific week in the month on which this event or to-do should recur
year(s)
& Recur on day
& Day
Sets a specific day in a specific month on which this event or to-do should recur.
& of
& On
& On the
Sets a specific day in a specific week of a specific month on which this event or to-do should recur.
of
Day #
Recur on & day #
Sets a specific day within the year on which this event or to-do should recur.
of the & year
of the year
Exceptions
A date that should be considered an exception to the recurrence rules for this event or to-do.
& Add
Add this date as an exception to the recurrence rules for this event or to-do.
& Change
Replace the currently selected date with this date.
Delete the currently selected date from the list of dates that should be considered exceptions to the recurrence rules for this event or to-do.
Displays current dates that are being considered exceptions to the recurrence rules for this event or to-do.
Edit Exceptions
Recurrence Range
Sets a range for which these recurrence rules will apply to this event or to-do.
Begin on:
The date on which the recurrences for this event or to-do should begin.
& No ending date
Sets the event or to-do to recur forever.
Sets the event or to-do to stop recurring after a certain number of occurrences.
End & after
& occurrence(s)
Sets the event or to-do to stop recurring on a certain date.
End & on:
Date after which the event or to-do should stop recurring
Begins on: %1
Edit Recurrence Range
Sets the type of recurrence this event or to-do should have.
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Yearly
Recurrence Types
& Daily
Sets the event or to-do to recur daily according to the specified rules.
& Weekly
Sets the event or to-do to recur weekly according to the specified rules.
& Monthly
Sets the event or to-do to recur monthly according to the specified rules.
& Yearly
Sets the event or to-do to recur yearly according to the specified rules.
& Enable recurrence
Enables recurrence for this event or to-do according to the specified rules.
Appointment Time
Displays appointment time information.
Recurrence Rule
Options concerning the type of recurrence this event or to-do should have.
Recurrence Range...
Options concerning the time range during which this event or to-do should recur.
Exceptions...
The end date '%1 'of the recurrence must be after the start date '%2' of the event.
A weekly recurring event or task has to have at least one weekday associated with it.
Recurrence
Manage & Templates...
Apply or create templates for this item
Push this button to run a tool that helps you manage a set of templates. Templates can make creating new items easier and faster by putting your favorite default values into the editor automatically.
Do you really want to cancel?
KOrganizer Confirmation
Attendees
The Attendees tab allows you to Add or Remove Attendees to/ from this event or to-do.
Unable to find template '%1 '.
Error loading template file '%1 '.
Create to-do
Counter proposal
Unknown
Reminder Dialog
Application/ Script
Audio
%1 before the start
%1 after the start
%1 before the end
%1 after the end
Yes
Edit Reminders
before the to-do starts
after the to-do starts
before the to-do is due
after the to-do is due
Select the reminder trigger relative to the start or due time
Use this combobox to specify if you want the reminder to trigger before or after the start or due time.
KOrgPlugins
Summary
Reminder
Recurs
Start Date
Start Time
End Date
End Time
Categories
Go back one month
Go back one week
Go forward one week
Go forward one month
,
%1 %2
Unable to add the exception item to the calendar. No change will be done.
Error Occurred
Unable to add the future items to the calendar. No change will be done.
Attendee "%1" added to the calendar item "%2"
Attendee added
%1 - %2
- %1
All Day
Unable to modify this to-do, because it cannot be locked.
Unable to lock item for modification. You cannot make any changes.
Locking Failed
Dissociate event from recurrence
Split future recurrences
What's Next?
Events:
To-do:
Events and to-dos that need a reply:
%1, %2 - %3
(Due: %1)
Calendar
View Columns
Click to add a new to-do
Flat View
Display to-dos in flat list instead of a tree
Checking this option will cause the to-dos to be displayed as a flat list instead of a hierarchical tree; the parental relationships are removed in the display.
New & To-do...
New Sub-to-do...
& Make this To-do Independent
Make all Sub-to-dos & Independent
& Copy To
& Move To
Purge Completed
unspecified
1 (highest)
2
3
4
5 (medium)
6
7
8
9 (lowest)
Search
Select Categories
No
Priority
Complete
Due Date/ Time
Description
Cannot move to-do to itself or a child of itself.
Drop To-do
& Edit
Edit this journal entry
Opens an editor dialog for this journal entry
Delete this journal entry
& Print
Print this journal entry
Opens a print dialog for this journal entry
Time Tracker
No category
(%1%)
Some attendees were removed from the incidence. Shall cancel messages be sent to these attendees?
Attendees Removed
Send Messages
Do Not Send
No calendars found, event cannot be added.
Unable to save %1 "%2".
Import Calendar
Please select import method for calendar at %1.
Add as new calendar
Merge into existing calendar
Open in separate window
KOrganizer Theming Stub
DO NOT USE - Stub doing various things with KOrganizer themes
© 2007 Loïc Corbasson
Theme to use
Personal
Email Settings
Save
Saving Calendar
System Tray
Show/ Hide Options
Enable this setting to show the KOrganizer reminder daemon in your system tray (recommended).
The daemon will continue running even if it is not shown in the system tray.
Regional
General Time and Date
Holidays
Use holiday region:
(None)
Working Period
Check this box to make KOrganizer mark the working hours for this day of the week. If this is a work day for you, check this box, or the working hours will not be marked with color.
Default Values
Appointments
Reminders
Default reminder time:
minute(s)
hour(s)
General
Display Options
Date Navigator
Agenda View
pixels
days
Month View
Todo View
Other Options
Colors
Select here the event category you want to modify. You can change the selected category color using the button below.
Choose here the color of the event category selected using the combo box above.
Resources
Select the calendar you want to modify. You can change the selected calendar color using the button below.
Choose here the color of the calendar selected using the combo box above.
Fonts
Event text
Additional email addresses:
Add, edit or remove additional e-mails addresses here. These email addresses are the ones you have in addition to the one set in personal preferences. If you are an attendee of one event, but use another email address there, you need to list this address here so KOrganizer can recognize it as yours.
Additional email address:
Edit additional e-mails addresses here. To edit an address select it from the list above or press the "New" button below. These email addresses are the ones you have in addition to the one set in personal preferences.
New
Press this button to add a new entry to the additional e-mail addresses list. Use the edit box above to edit the new entry.
Remove
(EmptyEmail)
Configure & Plugin...
This button allows you to configure the plugin that you have selected in the list above
Position
Show at the top of the agenda views
Show at the bottom of the agenda views
Calendar Decorations
Print Plugins
Other Plugins
Unable to configure this plugin
Delete %1
Add %1
Edit %1
Timezone:
& Add Timezones...
& Remove Timezone %1
Timezone: %1
Country Code: %1
Abbreviations:
Comment: %1
No URL configured for uploading your free/ busy list. Please set it in KOrganizer's configuration dialog, on the "Free/ Busy" page. Contact your system administrator for the exact URL and the account details.
No Free/ Busy Upload URL
The target URL '%1 'provided is invalid.
Invalid URL
The software could not upload your free/ busy list to the URL '%1 '. There might be a problem with the access rights, or you specified an incorrect URL. The system said: %2. Please check the URL or contact your system administrator.
Sets the Title of this event or to-do.
Set the title
Title:
Sets where the event or to-do will take place.
Set the location
& Location:
Allows you to select the categories that this event or to-do belongs to.
Set the categories
Categories:
& Select...
Access:
Sets whether the access to this event or to-do is restricted. Please note that KOrganizer currently does not use this setting, so the implementation of the restrictions will depend on the groupware server. This means that events or to-dos marked as private or confidential may be visible to others.
Set the secrecy level
Rich text
Select this option if you would like to enter rich text into the description field of this event or to-do.
Toggle Rich Text
Set the description in plain text or rich text
Sets the description for this event, to-do or journal. This will be displayed in a reminder if one is set, as well as in a tooltip when you hover over the event.
& Reminder:
Activates a reminder for this event or to-do.
Set a reminder
Sets how long before the event occurs the reminder will be triggered.
Set an alarm
Advanced...
Push this button to create an advanced alarm for this event or to-do
Set an advanced alarm
1 advanced reminder configured
No attendees
Please specify a title.
Date & & Time
Sets options for due and start dates and times for this to-do.
Select the timezone for this event. It will also affect recurrences
Sets the start date for this to-do
Start:
Sets the start time for this to-do.
Sets the due date for this to-do.
& Due:
Sets the due time for this to-do.
Time associated
Set if this to-do's start and due dates have times associated with them.
Sets the current completion status of this to-do as a percentage.
%1%
completed
Sets the priority of this to-do on a scale from one to nine, with one being the highest priority, five being a medium priority, and nine being the lowest. In programs that have a different scale, the numbers will be adjusted to match the appropriate scale.
& Priority:
Please specify a valid due date.
Please specify a valid due time.
Please specify a valid start date.
Please specify a valid start time.
The start date cannot be after the due date.
Start: %1
Due: %1
completed on
Error message: %1
Error while processing an invitation or update.
You changed the invitation "%1". Do you want to email the attendees an update message?
You removed the invitation "%1". Do you want to email the attendees that the event is canceled?
You removed the invitation "%1". Do you want to email the attendees that the todo is canceled?
The event "%1" includes other people. Do you want to email the invitation to the attendees?
The todo "%1" includes other people. Do you want to email the invitation to the attendees?
This %1 includes other people. Should email be sent out to the attendees?
Group Scheduling Email
Send Email
Do you want to send a status update to the organizer of this task?
Send Update
Your status as an attendee of this event changed. Do you want to send a status update to the event organizer?
You had previously accepted an invitation to this event. Do you want to send an updated response to the organizer declining the invitation?
You are not the organizer of this event. Editing it will bring your calendar out of sync with the organizer's calendar. Do you really want to edit it?
No summary given
Counter proposal: %1
Proposed new meeting time: %1 - %2
Select Addresses
Send email to these recipients
Clicking the Ok button will cause an email to be sent to the recipients you have entered.
Cancel recipient selection and the email
Clicking the Cancel button will cause the email operation to be terminated.
Click the Help button to read more information about Group Scheduling.
(EmptyName)
New Event...
New & Journal...
& Move
& Cancel
There are no items before %1
Delete all items before %1 without saving? The following items will be deleted:
Delete Old Items
Reason unknown
Cannot write archive file %1. %2
Cannot write archive. %1
calendar. html
Appointment
Business
Meeting
Phone Call
Education
Holiday
Vacation
Special Occasion
Travel
Miscellaneous
Birthday
No Item Selected Select an event, to-do or journal entry to view its details here.
View the details of events, journal entries or to-dos selected in KOrganizer's main view here.
Could not load calendar '%1 '.
The time zone setting was changed. Do you want to keep the absolute time of the items in your calendar, which will show them to be at a different time than before, or move them to be at the old time also in the new time zone?
Keep Absolute Times?
Keep Times
Move Times
Todo completed: %1 (%2)
Journal of %1
The item "%1" is filtered by your current filter rules, so it will be hidden and not appear in the view.
Filter Applied
Do you really want to permanently remove the item "%1"?
Delete Item?
Paste failed: unable to determine a valid target date.
Unable to turn sub-to-do into a top-level to-do, because it cannot be locked.
Make sub-to-dos independent
"%1" was successfully copied to %2.
Copying Succeeded
Unable to copy the item "%1" to %2.
Copying Failed
Unable to remove the item "%1" from %2. However, a copy of this item has been put into %3.
Moving Failed
"%1" was successfully moved from %2 to %3.
Moving Succeeded
Unable to add the item "%1" into %2. This item has not been moved.
Do you want to dissociate the occurrence at %1 from the recurrence?
& Dissociate
Do you want to dissociate the occurrence at %1 from the recurrence or also dissociate future ones?
& Only Dissociate This One
& Also Dissociate Future Ones
Dissociate occurrence
Dissociating the occurrence failed.
Dissociating Failed
Dissociate future occurrences
Dissociating the future occurrences failed.
No item selected.
The item information was successfully sent.
Publishing
Unable to publish the item '%1 '
Forwarding
Unable to forward the item '%1 '
The free/ busy information was successfully sent.
Sending Free/ Busy
Unable to publish the free/ busy data.
The item has no attendees.
The groupware message for item '%1 'was successfully sent. Method: %2
Unable to send the item '%1 '. Method: %2
*. ics|iCalendars
Do you want to overwrite %1?
Cannot write iCalendar file %1. %2
The journal entries can not be exported to a vCalendar file.
Data Loss Warning
Proceed
*. vcs|vCalendars
Cannot write vCalendar file %1. %2
& Previous Day
& Previous Week
& Next Week
No filter
The item "%1" has sub-to-dos. Do you want to delete just this item and make all its sub-to-dos independent, or delete the to-do with all its sub-to-dos?
Delete Only This
Delete All
Deleting sub-to-dos
The item "%1" is marked read-only and cannot be deleted; it probably belongs to a read-only calendar.
Removing not possible
The calendar item "%1" recurs over multiple dates; are you sure you want to delete it and all its recurrences?
Also Delete & Future
The calendar item "%1" recurs over multiple dates. Do you want to delete only the current one on %2, also future occurrences, or all its occurrences?
The calendar item "%1" recurs over multiple dates. Do you want to delete only the current one on %2 or all its occurrences?
Delete Current
Delete & All
Delete all completed to-dos?
Purge To-dos
Purge
Purging completed to-dos
Unable to purge to-dos with uncompleted children.
Delete To-do
Unable to edit "%1" because it is locked by another process.
Unable to copy the item to %1.
Unable to move the item to %1.
No running instance of KMail found.
%1/ %2
Scroll to week number %1
Click here to scroll the display to week number %1 of the currently displayed year.
%1
A column header of the %1 dates in the month.
Scroll backward to the previous year
Click this button to scroll the display to the same approximate day of the previous year
Scroll backward to the previous month
Click this button to scroll the display to the same approximate date of the previous month
Scroll forward to the next month
Click this button to scroll the display to the same approximate date of the next month
Scroll forward to the next year
Click this button to scroll the display to the same approximate day of the next year
Select a month
Select a year
Select the dates you want to display in KOrganizer's main view here. Hold the mouse button to select more than one day. Press the top buttons to browse to the next / previous months or years. Each line shows a week. The number in the left column is the number of the week in the year. Press it to select the whole week.
undefined
This file is not a KOrganizer theme file.
KOrganizer Reminder Daemon
(c) 2003 Cornelius Schumacher
Cornelius Schumacher
Former Maintainer
Reinhold Kainhofer
Allen Winter
Janitorial Staff
TestKabc
Cannot load system tray icon.
Suspend All Reminders
Dismiss All Reminders
Enable Reminders
Start Reminder Daemon at Login
No active reminders.
Do you want to quit the KOrganizer reminder daemon? you will not get calendar reminders unless the daemon is running.
Close KOrganizer Reminder Daemon
Do you want to start the KOrganizer reminder daemon at login? you will not get calendar reminders unless the daemon is running.
Start
Do Not Start
Dismiss Reminder
Dismiss the reminders for the selected incidences
Dismiss All
Dismiss the reminders for all listed incidences
Edit...
Edit the selected incidence
Suspend
Suspend the reminders for the selected incidences by the specified interval
Reminders: Click on a title to toggle the details viewer for that item
Title
Date, Time
Trigger Time
The event or to-do title
The reminder is set for this date/ time
The date/ time the reminder was triggered
Select an event or to-do from the list above to view its details here.
Suspend & duration:
Suspend the reminders by this amount of time
Each reminder for the selected incidences will be suspended by this number of time units. You can choose the time units (typically minutes) in the adjacent selector.
week(s)
Suspend the reminders using this time unit
Each reminder for the selected incidences will be suspended using this time unit. You can set the number of time units in the adjacent number entry input.
"%1" is a read-only item so modifications are not possible.
Could not start KOrganizer so editing is not possible.
An internal KOrganizer error occurred attempting to modify "%1"
Reminder: %1
New Calendar
read-only
Edit Free/ Busy Location
Location of Free/ Busy information for %1 %2:
Sets the identity corresponding to the organizer of this to-do or event. Identities can be set in the'Personal 'section of the KOrganizer configuration, or in the'Personal'- > 'About Me'- > 'Password & User Account' section of the System Settings. In addition, identities are gathered from your KMail settings and from your address book. If you choose to set it globally for KDE in the System Settings, be sure to check'Use email settings from System Settings' in the'Personal 'section of the KOrganizer configuration.
Identity as organizer:
Set the organizer identity
Edits the name of the attendee selected in the list above, or adds a new attendee if there are no attendees in the list.
Name:
Click to add a new attendee
Edits the role of the attendee selected in the list above.
Role:
Select the attendee participation role
Edits the current attendance status of the attendee selected in the list above.
Status:
Select the attendee participation status
Request a response from the attendee
Edits whether to send an email to the attendee selected in the list above to request a response concerning attendance.
Request response
& New
Add an attendee
Adds a new attendee to the list. Once the attendee is added, you will be able to edit the attendee's name, role, attendance status, and whether or not the attendee is required to respond to the invitation. To select an attendee from your address book, click the'Select Addressee 'button instead.
& Remove
Remove the selected attendee
Removes the attendee selected in the list above.
Select Addressee...
Open your address book
Opens your address book, allowing you to select new attendees from it.
Please edit the example attendee, before adding more.
Firstname Lastname
name
Select the organizer
Select the identity to use as the organizer for this incidence.
Organizer: %1
Delegated to %1
Delegated from %1
Not delegated
Edit Journal: %1
New Journal
Template does not contain a valid journal.
This will hide the menu bar completely. You can show it again by typing %1.
Import & Calendar...
Merge the contents of another iCalendar
Select this menu entry if you would like to merge the contents of another iCalendar into your current calendar.
& Import From UNIX Ical Tool
Import a calendar in another format
Select this menu entry if you would like to import the contents of a non-iCalendar formatted file into your current calendar.
Get & Hot New Stuff...
Export & Web Page...
& iCalendar...
& vCalendar...
Archive Old Entries...
Purge Completed To-dos
What's & Next
& Day
& Month
Work Week
& Week
& Event List
& To-do List
& Journal
Timeline
Timespent
& Refresh
Filter
In Horizontally
Out Horizontally
In Vertically
Out Vertically
To & Today
Today
Scroll to Today
& Backward
Back
Scroll Backward
& Forward
Forward
Scroll Forward
Event
Create a new Event
To-do
Create a new To-do
Journal
Create a new Journal
& Make Sub-to-do Independent
& Publish Item Information...
Send & Invitation to Attendees
Request Update
Send & Cancellation to Attendees
Send Status & Update
Request Change
& Mail Free Busy Information...
& Send as iCalendar...
& Upload Free Busy Information
& Address Book
Show Date Navigator
Show To-do View
Show Item Viewer
Show Calendar Manager
Configure & Date & & Time...
Manage View & Filters...
Manage Categories...
& Configure Calendar...
*. vcs *. ics|Calendar Files
You have no ical file in your home directory. Import cannot proceed.
KOrganizer successfully imported and merged your. calendar file from ical into the currently opened calendar.
KOrganizer encountered some unknown fields while parsing your. calendar ical file, and had to discard them; please check to see that all your relevant data was correctly imported.
ICal Import Successful with Warning
KOrganizer encountered an error parsing your. calendar file from ical; import has failed.
KOrganizer does not think that your. calendar file is a valid ical calendar; import has failed.
New calendar '%1 '.
Cannot download calendar from '%1 '.
Added calendar for URL '%1 '.
Unable to create calendar '%1 '.
Merged calendar '%1 '.
Opened calendar '%1 '.
Your calendar will be saved in iCalendar format. Use'Export vCalendar 'to save in vCalendar format.
Format Conversion
Cannot upload calendar to '%1 '
Saved calendar '%1 '.
Do you want to overwrite file "%1"?
Unable to write the output file.
Unable to write the temporary file for uploading.
Unable to upload the export file.
Web page successfully written to "%1"
Export failed. %1
Export Status
Unable to save calendar to the file %1.
Error
The calendar has been modified. Do you want to save it?
*. ics *. vcs|Calendar Files
Could not start control module for date and time format.
Could not load calendar.
The downloaded events will be merged into your current calendar.
& Show Event
& Edit Event...
& Delete Event
& Show To-do
& Edit To-do...
& Delete To-do
Attach as & link
Attach & inline
Attach inline & without attachments
Cancel
Removing attachments from an email might invalidate its signature.
Remove Attachments
Undo
Undo: %1
Redo
Redo (%1)
The calendar contains unsaved changes. Do you want to save them before exiting?
Unable to save the calendar. Do you still want to close this window?
Unable to exit. Saving still in progress.
Saving of '%1 'failed. Check that the calendar is properly configured. Ignore problem and save remaining resources or cancel save?
Save Error
Continue Save
Cancel Save
URL '%1 'is invalid.
Filter Details
Name:
Select this option if you do not want to show recurring events and to-dos in your views. Daily and weekly recurring items may take a lot of space, so it might be handy to hide them.
Hide & recurring events and to-dos
If this box is checked, the filter will hide all to-do items from the list, that have been completed. Optionally, only items that have been completed a given number of days are hidden.
Hide completed to-dos
This option will allow you to select which completed to-dos should be hidden. When you choose Immediately, it will hide the to-do as soon as you check it. You can increase or decrease the number of days in the spinbox.
Days after completion:
Here you can give the number of days a to-do item has to be completed to be hidden from the to-do list. If you select "Immediately", all completed to-dos will be hidden. If you, for example, choose a value of 1, all to-do items will be hidden, that have been marked finished longer than 24 hours ago.
This option hides all to-dos from your list, where the start date has not been reached. (Note that the start date is not the due date of the to-do item.)
Hide & inactive to-dos
When this option is enabled, this filter will show all items which do not contain the selected categories.
Show all except selected
When this option is enabled, this filter will show all items containing at least the selected items.
Show only selected
Change...
This option hides all to-dos from your list which are assigned to someone else. Only to-dos which have least one attendee will be checked. If you are not in the list of attendees the to-do will be hidden.
Hide to-dos not assigned to me
Alarms
Specify a file containing a sound to play when the reminder triggers
Time
Set the reminder trigger time
This spinbox allows you to set the reminder trigger time. The time unit is set in the combobox immediately adjacent.
Select the reminder trigger time unit
This combobox allows you to set the units for the reminder trigger time. The trigger time value is set in the spinbox immediately adjacent.
Select the reminder trigger relative to the start or end time
Use this combobox to specify if you want the reminder to trigger before or after the start or end time.
before the event starts
after the event starts
before the event ends
after the event ends
& How often:
Select how often the reminder should repeat
Use this selector to choose how many times you want the recurring reminder to repeat.
time(s)
& Interval:
Set the reminder to repeat
Check this if you want to the reminder to recur on a periodic interval.
& Repeating:
Select the time between reminder repeats
Use this selector to choose the time between repeating reminders.
Minute(s)
every
Type
Display optional text when the reminder is triggered
Check this option if you want to display optional text in a popup notice when the reminder triggers.
& Display
Play a sound when the reminder is triggered
Check this option if you want to play a sound when the reminder triggers.
& Sound
Run an application or script when the reminder is triggered
Check this option if you want to run an application (or script) when the reminder triggers.
Application / script
Send email when the reminder is triggered
Check this option if you want to send an email message when the reminder triggers.
Send email
Display & text:
Specify any text you desire to display in the popup notice when the reminder triggers.
Sound & file:
Use the adjacent file browser to help you find the file you want to use when playing a sound when the reminder triggers.
audio/ x-wav audio/ x-mp3 application/ ogg
& Application / Script:
Specify a file containing the application to run when the reminder triggers
Use the adjacent file browser to help you find the file you want to use when running an application when the reminder triggers.
*. *|All files
Arguments:
Specify arguments to pass to the application when the reminder triggers
Enter the application arguments to use when running an application when the reminder triggers.
& Text of the message:
Specify text of an email message to send when the reminder triggers
Enter the text you would like to be in the email message sent when the reminder triggers.
Specify a list of addresses to send email when the reminder triggers
Enter a list of comma-separated addresses to which an email should be sent when the reminder triggers.
& To:
Remove the currently selected reminder
Click this button if you want to remove the currently selected reminder. Be careful with this option as there is no way to undo this operation.
Create a new reminder using the settings specified below
Click this button if you want to create a new reminder using the settings specified below. You can continue to change the settings as needed.
Create a new reminder from the currently selected reminder
Click this button if you want to create a new reminder using the settings stored in the currently selected reminder. You can continue to change the settings as needed.
Duplicate
The list of reminders for this event or to-do
This area displays a list of all the reminders you have specified for this event or to-do.
Offset
Repeat
Publish
By publishing Free/ Busy information, you allow others to take your calendar into account when inviting you for a meeting. Only the times you have already busy are published, not why they are busy.
Check this box to upload your Free/ Busy information automatically. It is possible to skip this option and mail or upload your Free/ Busy information using the Schedule menu of KOrganizer. Note: If KOrganizer is acting as a KDE Kolab client, this is not required, as the Kolab2 server taking care of publishing your Free/ Busy information and manages the access to it from other users.
Publish your free/ busy information automatically
Configure minimum the interval of time in minutes between each upload here. This configuration is only effective in case you choose to publish your information automatically.
Minimum time between uploads (in minutes):
Configure the number of calendar days you wish to be published and available to others here.
Publish
days of free/ busy information
Server Information
Enter the URL for the server on which your Free/ Busy information shall be published here. Ask the server administrator for this information.
Enter your groupware server login password here.
Password:
Enter the login information relative to your account on the server here. A Kolab2 server specificity: Registered your UID (Unique IDentifier). By default your UID would be your email address on the Kolab2 server but it may also be different. In the last case enter your UID.
Username:
Check this box to make KOrganizer remember your password and skip asking you each time it uploads your Free/ Busy information, by storing it in the configuration file. For security reasons, it is not recommended to store your password in the configuration file.
Remember password
Server URL:
& Retrieve
By retrieving Free/ Busy information that others have published, you can take their calendar into account when inviting them to a meeting.
Check this box to retrieve other peoples' Free/ Busy information automatically. Note that you have to fill the correct server information to make this possible.
Retrieve other peoples' free/ busy information automatically
Set this to retrieve user@domain. ifb instead of user. ifb from the server
Check this box to download a free/ busy file in the format "user@domain. ifb" (for example joe@company. com. ifb). Otherwise, it will download a free/ busy file in the format user. ifb (for example joe. ifb). Ask the server Administrator if you are not sure about how to configure this option.
Use full email & address for retrieval
Enter the URL for the server on which the Free/ Busy information is published here. Ask the server administrator for this information. Here is a Kolab2 Server URL example: "https: / /kolab2. example. com/ freebusy/"
Username:
Password:
Remember password
Use email settings from System Settings
Check this box to use the KDE-wide e-mail settings, which are defined using the System Settings "About Me" Module. Uncheck this box to be able to specify your full name and e-mail.
Default Email Attachment Method
The default way of attaching dropped emails to an event
Always ask
Only attach link to message
Attach complete message
Attach message without attachments
Export to HTML with every save
Check this box to export the calendar to a HTML-file every time you save it. By default, this file will be called calendar. html and placed in the user home folder.
Enable automatic saving of manually opened calendar files
Check this box to save your calendar file automatically when you exit KOrganizer without asking and periodically, as you work. This setting does not affect the automatic saving of the standard calendar, which is automatically saved after each change.
Save & interval in minutes
Set the interval between automatic saving of calendar events in minutes here. This setting only applies to files that are opened manually. The standard KDE-wide calendar is automatically saved after each change.
Confirm deletes
Check this box to display a confirmation dialog when deleting items.
New Events, To-dos and Journal Entries Should
Be added to the standard calendar
Select this option to always record new events, to-dos and journal entries using the standard calendar.
Be asked which calendar to use
Select this option to choose the calendar to be used to record the item each time you create a new event, to-do or journal entry. This choice is recommended if you intend to use the shared folders functionality of the Kolab server or have to manage multiple accounts using Kontact as a KDE Kolab client.
Show Reminder Daemon in the System Tray
Check this box to show the KOrganizer reminder daemon in the system tray.
Select your timezone from the list of locations on this drop down box. If your city is not listed, select one which shares the same timezone. KOrganizer will automatically adjust for daylight savings.
Day begins at
Enter the start time for events here. This time should be the earliest time that you use for events, as it will be displayed at the top.
Select from which region you want to use the holidays here. Defined holidays are shown as non-working days in the date navigator, the agenda view, etc.
Daily starting hour
Enter the start time for the working hours here. The working hours will be marked with color by KOrganizer.
Daily ending hour
Enter the ending time for the working hours here. The working hours will be marked with color by KOrganizer.
Exclude holidays
Check this box to prevent KOrganizer from marking the working hours on holidays.
Default appointment time
Enter the default time for events here. The default is used if you do not supply a start time.
Default duration of new appointment (HH: MM)
Enter default duration for events here. The default is used if you do not supply an end time.
Enable reminders for new Events
Check this box if you want to enable reminders for all newly created Events. You can always turn-off the reminders in the Event editor dialog.
By default, enable reminders for new events
Enable reminders for new To-dos
Check this box if you want to enable reminders for all newly created To-dos. You can always turn-off the reminders in the To-do editor dialog.
By default, enable reminders for new to-dos
Default reminder time
Enter the default reminder time for all newly created items. The time unit is specified in the adjacent combobox.
Default time for reminders
Enter the default reminder time units for all newly created items. The time is specified in the adjacent spinbox.
Default time unit for reminders
Enable tooltips for displaying summaries
Check this box to display summary tooltips when hovering the mouse over an event or a to-do.
To-dos use category colors
Check this box so that to-dos will use category colors and not colors specific to their due, due today or overdue state
Show items that recur daily
Check this box to show the days containing daily recurring events in bold typeface in the Date Navigator, or uncheck it to give more prominence to other (non daily recurring) events.
Show items that recur weekly
Check this box to show the days containing weekly recurring events in bold typeface in the Date Navigator, or uncheck it to give more prominence to other (non weekly recurring) events.
Show to-dos instead of events when in Todo View
Check this box to show the days containing to-dos in bold typeface in the Date Navigator when in to-do view.
Show journals instead of events when in Journal View
Check this box to show the days containing journals in bold typeface in the Date Navigator when in journal view.
Hour size
Select the height of the hour rows in the agenda grid, in pixels. Increasing this value will make each row in the agenda grid taller.
Set the height (in pixels) for an hour in the agenda grid
Next x days
Select the number of "x" days to be displayed in the next days view. To access the the next "x" days view, choose the "Next X Days" menu item from the "View" menu.
Show this many days at a time in the Next "x" days view
Show icons in agenda view items
Check this box to display icons (alarm, recursion, etc.) in agenda view items.
Display icons in agenda view items
Show to-dos
Check this box to display to-dos in the agenda view.
Display to-dos in the agenda view
Show current-time (Marcus Bains) line
Check this box to display a line in the day or week view indicating the current-time line (Marcus Bains line).
Display the current-time indicator
Show seconds on the current-time (Marcus Bains) line
Check this box if you want to show seconds on the current-time line.
Display seconds with the current-time indicator
Time range selection in agenda view starts event editor
Check this box to start the event editor automatically when you select a time range in the daily and weekly view. To select a time range, drag the mouse from the start time to the end time of the event you are about to plan.
Enable automatic event editor with time range selection
Color Usage
Category inside, calendar outside
Select the "Category inside, calendar outside" option if you would like to draw calendar items in their associated category color, with the item's border drawn in the color of its calendar. Please use the Colors and Fonts configuration page for setting these colors.
Draw agenda items in their category color inside and calendar color for their border
Calendar inside, category outside
Select the "Calendar inside, category outside" option if you would like to draw calendar items in their associated calendar color, with the item's border drawn in the color of its category. Please use the Colors and Fonts configuration page for setting these colors.
Draw agenda items in their calendar color inside and category color for their border
Only category
Select the "Only category" option if you would like to draw calendar items (both inside and border) in the color of their associated category. Please use the Colors and Fonts configuration page for setting these colors.
Draw agenda items using their category color for the inside and border
Only calendar
Select the "Only calendar" option if you would like to draw calendar items (both inside and border) in the color of their calendar. Please use the Colors and Fonts configuration page for setting these colors.
Draw agenda items using their calendar color for the inside and border
Multiple Calendar Display
Merge all calendars into one view
Select the "Merge all calendars into one view" option if you would like all your calendars to be shown together in one agenda view.
Show all calendars merged together
Show calendars side by side
Select the "Show calendars side by side" option if you would like to see two calendars at once, in a side-by-side view.
Show two calendars side-by-side
Switch between views with tabs
Select "Switch between views with tabs" if you would like to alternate between calendars using the tab key.
Tab through calendars
Enable scrollbars in month view cells
Check this box to display scrollbars when clicking on a cell in the month view; they will only appear when needed though.
Show icons in month view items
Check this box to display icons (alarm, recursion, etc.) in month view items.
Display icons in month view items
Check this box to display to-dos in the month view.
Display to-dos in the month view
Show journals
Check this box to display journals in the month view.
Display journals in the month view
Month view uses full window
Check this box to use the full KOrganizer window when displaying the month view. If this box is checked, you will gain some space for the monthly view, but other widgets, such as the date navigator, the item details and the calendars list, will not be displayed.
Draw month items in their category color inside and calendar color for their border
Draw month items in their calendar color inside and category color for their border
Draw month items using their category color for the inside and border
Draw month items using their calendar color for the inside and border
Always display completed to-dos at the bottom of the list
Check this box if you want all completed to-dos to be always grouped at the bottom of the to-do list.
To-do list view uses full window
Check this box to use the full KOrganizer window when displaying the to-do list view. If this box is checked, you will gain some space for the to-do list view, but other widgets, such as the date navigator, the to-do details and the calendars list, will not be displayed.
Record completed to-dos in journal entries
Check this box to record the completion of a to-do in a new entry of your journal automatically.
Holiday color
Select the holiday color here. The holiday color will be used for the holiday name in the month view and the holiday number in the date navigator.
Agenda view background color
Select the agenda view background color here.
Agenda view current-time line color
Select a color to use for the current-time (Marcus Bains) line.
Use this color for the Agenda View current-time (Marcus Bains) line
Working hours color
Select the working hours color for the agenda view here.
To-do due today color
Select the to-do due today color here.
To-do overdue color
Select the to-do overdue color here.
"No category" color (for "Only category" drawing schemes)
Select a color to use for the "no category" or "unset category" situation, when an item does not belong to any category. This color is used when drawing items in the agenda or month views using the "Only category" scheme.
Use this color when drawing items without a category
Time bar
Press this button to configure the time bar font. The time bar is the widget that shows the hours in the agenda view. This button will open the "Select Font" dialog, allowing you to choose the hour font for the time bar.
Month view
Press this button to configure the month view font. This button will open the "Select Font" dialog, allowing you to choose the font for the items in the month view.
Agenda view
Press this button to configure the agenda view font. This button will open the "Select Font" dialog, allowing you to choose the font for the events in the agenda view.
Current-time line
Press this button to configure the current-time line font. This button will open the "Select Font" dialog, allowing you to choose the font for the current-time line in the agenda view.
Use Groupware communication
Check this box to enable automatic generation of mails when creating, updating or deleting events (or to-dos) involving other attendees. You should check this box if you want to use the groupware functionality (e. g. Configuring Kontact as a KDE Kolab client).
Send copy to owner when mailing events
Check this box to get a copy of all e-mail messages that KOrganizer sends at your request to event attendees.
Mail Client
KMail
Select this option to use KMail as the mail transport. The mail transport is used for groupware functionality.
Sendmail
Select this option to use sendmail as the mail transport. The mail transport is used for groupware functionality. Please check if you have sendmail installed before selecting this option.
Free/ Busy Publish URL
URL for publishing free/ busy information
Free/ Busy Publish Username
Username for publishing free/ busy information
Free/ Busy Publish Password
Password for publishing free/ busy information
Enable Automatic Free/ Busy Retrieval
Use full email address for retrieval
With this setting, you can change the filename that will be fetched from the server. With this checked, it will download a free/ busy file called user@domain. ifb, for example nn@kde. org. ifb. Without this set, it will download user. ifb, for example nn. ifb.
Free/ Busy Retrieval URL
Free/ Busy Retrieval Username
Free/ Busy Retrieval Password
Password for retrieving free/ busy information
Regularly archive events
If auto-archiving is enabled, events older than this amount will be archived. The unit of this value is specified in another field.
The unit in which the expiry time is expressed.
In days
In weeks
In months
URL of the file where old events should be archived
Archive events
Archive to-dos
What to do when archiving
Delete old events
Archive old events to a separate file
Default todo attachment method
The default way of attaching dropped emails to a task
Show timezone selectors in the event and todo editor dialog.
Send Outlook-like pseudo counter proposals
Check whether hostname and retrieval email address match
With this setting you can configure whether the domain part of the free/ busy url has to match the domain part of the user id you are looking for. For example if this option is'true 'then looking for the free/ busy data of joe@mydomain. com on the server www. yourdomain. com will fail.
Full & name
Enter your full name here. This name will be displayed as "Organizer" in to-dos and events you create.
Email address
Enter here your e-mail address. This e-mail address will be used to identify the owner of the calendar, and displayed in events and to-dos you create.
Highlight color
Select the highlight color here. The highlight color will be used for marking the currently selected area in your agenda and in the date navigator.
Select the working hours background color for the agenda view here.
Month view background color
Select the Month view background color here.
Select the highlight color here. The highlight color will be used for marking the currently selected area in your Month and in the date navigator.
Select the working hours background color for the Month view here.
Default event color
Select the default event color here. The default event color will be used for events categories in your Month. Note that you can specify a separate color for each event category below.
& File
& Import
& Export
& View
& Zoom
& Go
& Actions
Schedule
& Settings
& Sidebar
& Help
Main
Views
Schedule
Filters Toolbar
The list of addressees to receive the invitation
This is a list of all the addresses you have currently selected to receive the iCalendar invitation.
Create a new recipient
Click this button and you will be able to enter a name and email for a new addressee to add to the recipients list
Remove the recipient currently selected
Click this button to remove the recipient currently selected from the list
Select a recipient from your address book
Click this button to show another dialog where you will be able to select a recipient from your address book
The recipient's name
This field contains the name of the recipient
Email:
The recipient's email address
This field contains the email address of the recipient
Find Events - KOrganizer
& Search for:
Search pattern, use wildcards '* 'and'? 'as desired.
Enter your search pattern here. Wildcards '* '(matches any string) and'? '(matches any character) are supported. For example, to match any string starting with the letter'a', use the search pattern a*.
*
Search For
Search for Events with matching criteria
Check this box if you want to search for Event items that match the search criteria.
& Events
Search for Journals with matching criteria
Check this box if you want to search for Journal items that match the search criteria.
& Journals
Search for To-dos with matching criteria
Check this box if you want to search To-do items that match the search criteria.
To-dos
Search In
Include item categories in your search
Check this box if you want to match item categories against your search pattern.
Categories
Include item locations in your search
Check this box if you want to match item locations against your search pattern.
Locations
Include item descriptions in your search
Check this box if you want to match item descriptions against your search pattern.
Descriptions
Include item summaries in your search
Check this box if you want to match item summaries against your search pattern.
Summaries
Date Range
From:
Include items with a starting date on or after this date
Search for items with a starting date on or after the date you specify here.
2008-08-18
Include items with ending date on or before this date
Search for items with an ending date on or before the date you specify here.
Include Events only if their date range falls into the range specified above
Check this box if you want to include Events that occur within the date range specified. Events that do not fall completely within the date range will be excluded from the search results.
Include Events within the specified date range
Include To-dos in the search that do not have a due date
Check this box to include To-dos without a due date in the search results.
Include To-dos & without a due date
Template Management
The list of managed templates
This is a list of all the templates you have currently accessible for creating new calendar items.
Create a new template from the current settings
Click on this button to create a new template based on the current settings in the editor. You can use this template to quickly add new items in the future.
& New...
Remove the currently selected template
Clicking this button will permanently remove the selected template from your list of managed templates.
Apply the selected template settings
Clicking this button will apply the settings from the selected template to the item you are currently editing.
Apply
Timezone
& OK
Your names
Your emails
p, li {white-space: pre-wrap;} Print day options:
Date & & Time Range
If you want to print more days at once, you can define a range of dates with this option and the End date option. This option is used to define the start date.
& Start date:
2009-01-19
It is possible to print only those events which are inside a given timerange. With this time selection box you can define the start of this time range. The end time should be defined with the End time option. Note you can automatically modify these settings if you check Extend time range to include all events.
Start & time:
hh: mm
If you want to print more days at once, you can define a range of dates with this option and the Start date option. This option is used to define the end date.
& End date:
It is possible to print only those events which are inside a given timerange. With this time selection box you can define the end of this time range. The start time should be defined with the Start time option. Note you can automatically modify these settings if you check Extend time range to include all events.
End time:
Check this option to automatically determine the required time range, so all events will be shown.
Extend time range to include all events
Print Layout
The Filofax format prints the information for the days selected without a timeline.
Print date range as & Filofax format, all on one page
The timetable print view has the times to the left of the page
Print as & timetable view, one page per day
Security Exclusions
Check this option to exclude confidential events.
Exclude confidential
Check this option to exclude private events
Exclude private
Check this option to exclude the time in description box
Exclude time from timetable detail display items
You should check this option if you want to print to-dos which are due on one of the dates which are in the supplied date range.
Include to-dos that are due on the printed day(s)
Check this option to include the more detailed description for each event.
Include & descriptions
Check this option to draw note lines
Show note & lines
Check this option to limit events to a single line.
Limit events in each day to a & single line
If you want to use colors to distinguish certain categories on the print, check this option.
& Use colors
p, li {white-space: pre-wrap;} Print to-dos options:
& Title:
To-do List
To-dos to Print
Print & all to-dos
Print & unfinished to-dos only
Print only to-dos due in the & range:
Include Information
& Description
& Priority
Due date
Percentage completed
Connect sub-to-dos with its parent
Strike & out completed to-do summaries
Sorting Options
Sort field:
Sort direction:
p, li {white-space: pre-wrap;} Print incidence options:
Details (visiblility, secrecy, etc.)
& Attendees
& Notes, subitems
Attachments
Draw note lines in empty area
p, li {white-space: pre-wrap;} Print week options:
Here you can choose which events should be printed based on their date. This check enables you to enter the start date of the date range. Use the End date to enter the end date of the daterange.
All events which start later than the given time will not be printed.
All events which start earlier than the given time will not be printed.
Here you can choose which events should be printed based on their date. This check enables you to enter the end date of the date range. Use the Start date to enter the start date of the daterange.
The Filofax view prints one week per page, so all days have a large surface.
Print as & Filofax page
This view is similar to the weekview in KOrganizer. The week is printed in landscape layout. You can even use the same colors for the items if you check Use Colors.
Print as & timetable view
This view is similar to the week view in KOrganizer. The only difference with the timetable view is the page layout. Timetables are printed in landscape, the split week view in portrait.
Print as split week view
Check this option if you want to have to-dos on the print, placed by their due date.
Check this option to draw note lines.
Show note & lines in Filofax layout
The timetable view supports colors. If you want to make use of colors you should check this option. The category colors will be used.
p, li {white-space: pre-wrap;} Print month options:
When you want to print more months at once, you can define a month range. This option defines the first month to be printed. Use the option End month to define the last month in this range.
& Start month:
When you want to print more months at once, you can define a month range. This option defines the last month to be printed. Use the option Start month to define the first month in this range.
& End month:
Enable this to print week numbers at the left of each row.
Print week & numbers
With this option it is possible to leave out the daily recurring to-dos and events in the print. They take a lot of space and make the month view needlessly complicated.
Print daily recurring to-dos and events
Similar to "Print daily recurring to-dos and events". Weekly to-dos and events will be omitted when making a print of the selected month.
Print weekly recurring to-dos and events
Check this option to show note lines.
Print Incidences of Type
& To-dos
Yearly Print Options
Print & year:
Number of & pages:
Show sub-day events as:
Show holidays as:
Text
Time Boxes
p, li {white-space: pre-wrap;} Print journal options:
& All journal entries
Date & range:
[Binary data]
Properties for %1
Attachment name
Give the attachment a name
Type any string you desire here for the name of the attachment
Type:
Store attachment inline
Store the attachment file inside the calendar
Checking this option will cause the attachment to be stored inside your calendar, which can take a lot of space depending on the size of the attachment. If this option is not checked, then only a link pointing to the attachment will be stored. Do not use a link for attachments that change often or may be moved (or removed) from their current location.
Location:
Provide a location for the attachment file
Enter the path to the attachment file or use the file browser by pressing the adjacent button
Size:
New attachment
Attachments:
Displays items (files, mail, etc.) that have been associated with this event or to-do.
Add an attachment
Shows a dialog used to select an attachment to add to this event or to-do as link or as inline data.
Remove the selected attachment
Removes the attachment selected in the list above from this event or to-do.
& Open
& Properties...
& Link here
& Copy here
Add Attachment
Do you really want to remove the attachment labeled "%1"?
Remove Attachment?
Search Calendar
& Search
Start searching
Invalid search expression, cannot perform the search. Please enter a search expression using the wildcard characters '* 'and'? 'where needed.
No items were found that match your search pattern.
Export Calendar as Web Page
Export
You are about to set all preferences to default values. All custom modifications will be lost.
Setting Default Preferences
Reset to Defaults
View Type
Destination
To-dos
Events
KOrganizer
A Personal Organizer
(c) 1997-1999 Preston Brown (c) 2000-2004,2007 Cornelius Schumacher (c) 2004-2005 Reinhold Kainhofer
Maintainer
Preston Brown
Original Author
Richard Apodaca
Mike Arthur
Jan-Pascal van Best
Laszlo Boloni
Barry Benowitz
Christopher Beard
Kalle Dalheimer
Ian Dawes
Thomas Eitzenberger
Neil Hart
Declan Houlihan
Hans-Jürgen Husel
Tim Jansen
Christian Kirsch
Tobias König
Martin Koller
Uwe Koloska
Glen Parker
Dan Pilone
Roman Rohr
Rafał Rzepecki
Part of work sponsored by Google with Summer of Code 2005
Don Sanders
Bram Schoenmakers
Günter Schwann
Herwin Jan Steehouwer
Mario Teijeiro
Nick Thompson
Bo Thorsen
Larry Wright
Thomas Zander
Fester Zigterman
This list shows all the calendars currently known to KOrganizer. Use the associated checkboxes to make a calendar active or inactive. Use the context menu to add, remove or edit calendars in the list. Events, journal entries and to-dos are retrieved and stored from their respective calendars. Calendars can be accessed from groupware servers, local files, etc... If you have more than one active calendar, you will be prompted for which calendar to store new items into, unless configured to always store to the default calendar.
Calendars
Add calendar
Press this button to add a new calendar to KOrganizer. Events, journal entries and to-dos are retrieved and stored from their respective calendars. Calendars can be accessed from groupware servers, local files, etc... If you have more than one active calendar, you will be prompted for which calendar to store new items into, unless configured to always store to the default calendar.
Edit calendar settings
Press this button to edit the calendar currently selected in the list above.
Remove calendar
Press this button to delete the calendar currently selected in the list above.
Add Calendar Folder
Please enter a name for the new calendar folder
Unable to create the calendar folder %1.
Calendar Configuration
Please select the type of the new calendar:
Unable to create a calendar of type %1.
%1 calendar
Unable to create the calendar.
Do you really want to remove the calendar %1?
You cannot remove your standard calendar.
Failed to remove the calendar folder %1. Perhaps it is a built-in folder which cannot be removed, or maybe the removal of the underlying storage folder failed.
Rename Calendar Folder
Please enter a new name for the calendar folder
Cannot edit the calendar folder %1.
& Add Calendar...
Reload
& Save
Show & Info
Calendar Colors
& Assign Color...
& Disable Color
Use as & Default Calendar
& Add Calendar Folder...
Unable to print, no valid print style was returned.
Printing error
Print
Print Style
Page & orientation:
Use Default Orientation of Selected Style
Use Printer Default
Portrait
Landscape
& Preview
Start date:
No start date
End date:
Duration:
No end date
Due date:
No due date
except
Repeats:
No reminders
,
Organizer:
Location:
Description:
Notes:
No Subitems
none
unknown
Start Date: %1
Start Time: %1
Due Date: %1
Due Time: %1
%1:
Status: %1
Priority: %1
Secrecy: %1
No Attachments
No Attendees
%1 (%2): %3
Status: %1
Secrecy: %1
Show as: Busy
Show as: Free
This task is overdue!
Settings:
Categories:
%1 - %2
%1 - %2 (Week %3)
%1 - %2 (Week %3)
%1 %2
Due Date
Percent Complete
Ascending
Descending
To-do list
Due
This printing style does not have any configuration options.
%1, %2
%1-%2 %3
%1-%2 %3, %4
%1, %2 %3
To-do: %1
%1%
Person: %1
%1 %2 - %3
%1 %2 - %3 %4
printed: %1
Print & incidence
Prints an incidence on one page
Print day
Prints all events of a single day on one page
Print & week
Prints all events of one week on one page
Print month
Prints all events of one month on one page
Print to-dos
Prints all to-dos in a (tree-like) list
The General tab allows you to set the most common options for the event.
Details
& General
Recurrence
The Recurrence tab allows you to set options on how often this event recurs.
The Free/ Busy tab allows you to see whether other attendees are free or busy during your event.
Edit Event: %1
New Event
You did not modify the event so no counter proposal has been sent to the organizer.
No Changes
My counter proposal for: %1
Template does not contain a valid event.
Edit To-do: %1
New To-do
Template does not contain a valid to-do.
Active Calendar
Default Calendar
Birthdays
Set Your Status
Set your status
Import the specified files as separate calendars
Merge the specified files into the standard calendar
Open the specified files as calendars in a new window
Calendar files or urls. Unless -i, -o or -m is explicitly specified, the user will be asked whether to import, merge or open in a separate window.
Sets options related to the date and time of the event or to-do.
& Start:
Set the start date
Select the starting date for this event.
Set the start time
Select the starting time for this event.
Select the timezone for the start date/ time
Select the timezone for the end date/ time
& End:
Set the end date
Select the ending date for this event.
Set the end time
Time associated
Reminder:
Show time as:
Sets how this time will appear on your Free/ Busy information.
Set this event as Busy or Free time
Busy
Free
You have not yet definitely responded to this invitation.
Accept
Accept the invitation
Click this button to accept the invitation.
Decline
Decline the invitation
Click this button to decline the invitation.
Shows the duration of the event or to-do with the current start and end dates and times.
From: %1 To: %2 %3
Please specify a valid start time, for example '%1 '.
Event Entry Validation
Please specify a valid end time, for example '%1 '.
Please specify a valid start date, for example '%1 '.
Please specify a valid end date, for example '%1 '.
The event ends before it starts. Please correct dates and times.
You specified a starting date/ time in the past '%1 '
You specified an ending date/ time in the past '%1 '
Also & Future Items
The item you try to change is a recurring item. Shall the changes be applied only to this single occurrence, also to future items, or to all items in the recurrence?
The item you try to change is a recurring item. Shall the changes be applied only to this single occurrence or to all items in the recurrence?
Changing Recurring Item
Only & This Item
& All Occurrences
Event Viewer
Show in Context
Archive/ Delete Past Events and To-dos
& Archive
Archiving saves old items into the given file and then deletes them in the current calendar. If the archive file already exists they will be added. (How to restore)
Archive now items older than:
The date before which items should be archived. All older events and to-dos will be saved and deleted, the newer (and events exactly on that date) will be kept.
Automatically archive items older than:
If this feature is enabled, KOrganizer will regularly check if events and to-dos have to be archived; this means you will not need to use this dialog box again, except to change the settings.
The age of the events and to-dos to archive. All older items will be saved and deleted, the newer will be kept.
Day(s)
Week(s)
Month(s)
Archive & file:
*. ics|iCalendar Files
The path of the archive. The events and to-dos will be added to the archive file, so any events that are already in the file will not be modified or deleted. You can later load or merge the file like any other calendar. It is not saved in a special format, it uses the iCalendar format.
Type of Items to Archive
Here you can select which items should be archived. Events are archived if they ended before the date given above; to-dos are archived if they were finished before the date.
& Delete only, do not save
Select this option to delete old events and to-dos without saving them. It is not possible to recover the events later.
The archive file name is not valid.
Sets the title of this journal.
& Date:
& Time:
Allows you to select the categories that this journal belongs to.
Select Categories...
Please specify a valid date, for example '%1 '.
Please specify a journal title.
Manage %1 Templates
Template Name
Please enter a name for the new template:
New %1 Template
A template with that name already exists, do you want to overwrite it?
Duplicate Template Name
Overwrite
Are you sure that you want to remove the template %1?
Remove Template
... that you can select whether the week starts on Monday or on Sunday in the System Settings? KOrganizer uses this setting. Look at Regional & Language- > Country/ Region & Languages in the System Settings, or select Settings, Configure Date & Time... from the menu bar. Select the Time & Dates tab.
... that you can edit to-dos quickly by right clicking on the property you wish to change; like the priority, the category or the date?
... that your calendar can display birthdays from your address book? It is even possible to set up reminders for them. To activate this, add the corresponding'birthdays' calendar from the Calendar Manager.
... that you can store your calendar on an FTP server? Use the standard file dialog to save the calendar to a URL like ftp: / /username@ftpserver/ filename. You can make your calendar active and load and save it as if it were local, or add it permanently to your calendar list, by adding a remote file from the Calendar Manager. Just make sure that no two KOrganizer applications are working on the same file, at the same time.
... that you can create hierarchical to-dos by clicking with the right mouse button on an existing to-do and selecting New Sub-to-do from the context menu?
... that a color can be assigned to each category? Events with a certain category will be shown in that color. You can assign these in the section Colors within the dialog which appears after selecting Settings, Configure KOrganizer... from the menu bar.
... that you can view and edit a calendar with Konqueror? Just click on the calendar file to make Konqueror open it.
... that it is possible to add an attachment to an event or to-do? To do so, add a link to the Attachments tab within the Edit Event or Edit To-do dialog.
... that you can export your calendar to HTML? Select File, Export, Export Web Page... from the menu bar to open the Export calendar as web page dialog.
... that you can purge completed to-dos in one step? Go to the File menu and choose Purge Completed.
... that you can create a new sub-to-do by pasting a to-do while another one is selected?
This plugin shows information on a day's position in the year.
%1 / %2
Week %1
%1 (%2)
Week %1 (%2)
%1 %2
Configure Day Numbers
Show Date Number
Show day number
Show days to end of year
Show both
This plugin provides links to Wikipedia's'This Day in History 'pages.
This day in history
http: / /en. wikipedia. org/ wiki/
MMMM_d
This month in history
MMMM_yyyy
Configure Picture of the Day
Thumbnail Aspect Ratio Mode
Ignore aspect ratio
The thumbnail will be scaled freely. The aspect ratio will not be preserved.
Keep aspect ratio
The thumbnail will be scaled to a rectangle as large as possible inside a given rectangle, preserving the aspect ratio.
Keep aspect ratio by expanding
The thumbnail will be scaled to a rectangle as small as possible outside a given rectangle, preserving the aspect ratio.
This plugin provides the Wikipedia Picture of the Day.
Loading …
Loading Picture of the Day …
Picture Page
Bereshit
Noach
Lech L'cha
Vayera
Chaye Sarah
Toldot
Vayetze
Vayishlach
Vayeshev
Miketz
Vayigash
Vayechi
Shemot
Vaera
Bo
Beshalach
Yitro
Mishpatim
Terumah
Tetzaveh
Ki Tisa
Vayakhel
Pekudei
Vayikra
Tzav
Shemini
Tazria
Metzora
Acharei Mot
Kedoshim
Emor
Behar
Bechukotai
Bemidbar
Naso
Behaalotcha
Shelach
Korach
Chukat
Balak
Pinchas
Matot
Masei
Devarim
Vaetchanan
Ekev
Reeh
Shoftim
Ki Tetze
Ki Tavo
Nitzavim
Vayelech
Haazinu
Sh. HaHodesh
Erev Pesach
Sh. HaGadol
Pesach
Chol Hamoed
Yom HaShoah
Yom HaAtzmaut
Yom HaZikaron
Yom Yerushalayim
Lag BaOmer
Erev Shavuot
Shavuot
Tzom Tammuz
Sh. Hazon
Sh. Nahamu
Tisha B'Av
S'lichot
Erev R. H.
Rosh Hashana
Sh. Shuvah
Tzom Gedalia
Erev Y. K.
Yom Kippur
Erev Sukkot
Sukkot
Hoshana Rabah
Shmini Atzeret
Simchat Torah
Erev Hanukah
Hanukah
Tzom Tevet
Sh. Shirah
Tu B'Shvat
Sh. Shekalim
Purim Katan
Ta'anit Ester
Sh. Zachor
Erev Purim
Purim
Shushan Purim
Sh. Parah
Omer
Configure Holidays
Use Israeli holidays
Show weekly parsha
Show day of Omer
Show Chol HaMoed
%1
This plugin provides the date in the Jewish calendar.
Print list
Prints a list of events and to-dos
Print & year
Prints a calendar for an entire year
Print & journal
Prints all journals for a given date range
Journal entries
Print What's Next
Prints a list of all upcoming events and todos.
event
task
journal entry
Reminder Time
The date/ time of the reminder
%1 (%2 years)
& Timespan
This plugin provides a Gantt-like Timespan view.
Timespan View Plugin
Zoom In
Zoom Out
Center View
Counter-Event Viewer
Minutes
Hours
Days
Before the Start
After the Start
Before the End
After the End
& Display reminder
Reminder & text:
Could not upload file.
KOrganizer Timezone Test
Time zone:
[No selection]
& Journal entries
Events have to be completely included
Find Events
& Find
The item "%1" will be permanently deleted.
This item will be permanently deleted.
Delete Confirmation
Delete
This journal entry will be permanently deleted.
Show Resource View
Unable to create subresource %1.
Resource Configuration
& Add Resource...
Resource Colors
Show in the month view
Print & Year:
No (unset) category color
& Add...
The item labeled "%1" will be permanently deleted.
Upload & Hot New Stuff...
Scheduler Mail Client
Mail client
Month view uses category colors
Month view uses resource colors
Show to-dos in day, week and month views
1 minute
5 minutes
10 minutes
15 minutes
30 minutes
Default Reminder Time
Apply Template
Please specify a summary.
Journal for %1
Select & Addressee...
Filter:
categories-view
Show timezone selectors
for %1 %2
Attendees:
Zoom to Fit
Cannot write archive to final destination.
& New Month View
Calendar: %1
Underline text
Center text
Enter the default reminder time here.
& New To-do...
Any Category
Reminders Enabled
Sort Id
& Purge Completed
& Templates...
& Remove...
Edit
Owner:
& Free/ Busy
Agenda view uses resource colors
%1 hours (
Owner:
Go to & Today
Print Calendar
& List
& Timeline View
& Timespent View
Previous year
Previous month
Next month
Next year
Co-Maintainer
Floating
& Title:
Time:
Sets the time associated with this journal entry
To-dos:
[Add Journal Entry]
Show & Resource Buttons
Add...
Search:
CalPrintIncidence_Base
CalPrintYear_Base
This plugin provides numbers of days and weeks.
... that you can synchronize your calendar data with the data on a Palm Pilot by using KPilot?
Reset
& Reminder Dialog
Email & address(es):
CalPrintWeek_Base
Edit Attachment
to %1 - %2
to (week number) %1 - %2 (Week %3)
Project View
Select Mode
main task
& Project
This plugin provides a Gantt diagram as project view.
Project View Plugin
Exchange Plugin
Exchange server:
Port:
User:
Mailbox URL:
Start date:
End date:
& Download...
& Upload Event...
Delete Event
& Configure...
This plugin imports and export calendar events from/ to a Microsoft Exchange 2000 Server.
Please select an appointment.
& Upload