# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	GNOME
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-GNOME/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

Glossary
applet
An applet is a small, interactive application that resides within a panel, for example the
desktop
The part of the GNOME Desktop where there are no interface graphical items, such as panels and windows.
desktop background
The image or color that is applied to your desktop.
desktop object
An icon on your desktop that you can use to open your files, folders, and applications. You can use desktop objects to provide convenient access to files, folders, and applications that you use frequently.
DNS name
A unique alphabetic identifier for a computer on a network.
drawer
A drawer is a sliding extension to a panel that you can open or close from a drawer icon.
file extension
The final portion of a file's name, after the last period (.) in the name. For example, the file extension of the file
The file extension can identify the type of a file.
format
To format media is to prepare the media for use with a particular file system. When you format media, you overwrite any existing information on the media.
GNOME-compliant application
An application that uses the standard GNOME programming libraries is called a GNOME-compliant application. For example,
IP address
A unique numeric identifier for a computer on a network.
keyboard shortcut
A
launcher
A launcher starts a particular application, executes a command, or opens a file. A launcher can reside in a panel or in a menu.
menubar
A menubar is a bar at the top of an application window that contains the menus for the application.
MIME type
A Multipurpose Internet Mail Extension (MIME) type identifies the format of a file. The MIME type enables applications to read the file. For example, an email application can use the
mount
To mount is to make a file system available for access. When you mount a file system, the file system is attached as a subdirectory to your file system.
pane
A pane is a subdivision of a window. For example, the
preference tool
A dedicated software tool that controls a particular part of the behavior of the GNOME Desktop.
shortcut keys
Shortcut keys are keystrokes that provide a quick way to perform an action.
stacking order
The stacking order is the order in which windows are stacked on top of each other on your screen.
statusbar
A statusbar is a bar at the bottom of a window that provides information about the current state of what you are viewing in the window.
symbolic link
A special type of file that points to another file or folder. When you perform an action on a symbolic link, the action is performed on the file or folder to which the symbolic link points.
toolbar
A toolbar is a bar that contains buttons for the most commonly-used commands in an application. Typically, a toolbar appears under a menubar.
Uniform Resource Identifier
A Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) is a string that identifies a particular location in a file system or on the Web. For example, the address of a web page is a URI.
Uniform Resource Locator
A Uniform Resource Locator (URL) is the address of a particular location on the Web.
view
A
workspace
A workspace is a discrete area in the GNOME Desktop in which you can work.
Feedback
This section contains information on reporting bugs in GNOME, making suggestions and comments about GNOME applications or documentation, and ways in which you can help GNOME.
Reporting Bugs
If you have found a bug in one of GNOME applications, please report it! Developers do read all the bug reports and try to fix these bugs. Please try to be as specific as possible when describing the circumstances under which the bug shows (what commands did you enter? which buttons did you click?). If there were any error messages, be sure to include them, too.
The easiest way to report bugs is by using
You can also submit bugs and browse the list of known bugs by connecting to the
Please note that some of GNOME applications are developed outside of GNOME, or by commercial companies (these products are still free software). For example,
Suggestions and Comments
If you have a suggestion or want to request a new feature for one of the applications, it can also be done using the bug tracking database. Submit your suggestion as a bug report as described in
Documentation Comments
If you found an inaccuracy or misprint in one of GNOME documents, or have any comments or suggestions about documentation, please let us know! The easiest way of doing so is by submitting a bug report as explained before and selecting
Alternatively, you can just send your comments by email to the
Joining the GNOME Project
We hope you enjoy using GNOME and that you find working with GNOME productive. However, there is always room for improvement.
GNOME invites you to join our free software community if you have some spare time. There are many different fields. GNOME needs programmers, but it also needs translators, documentation writers, testers, artists, writers, and more.
For more information on joining GNOME, please visit
For more information on giving feedback on GNOME, such as bug reports, suggestions, and corrections to documentation, see
@@image: 'figures/yelp_window.png'; md5=c7138987ae131fe2c57846a281245d31
@@image: 'figures/yelp_preferences.png'; md5=b8beb6c866957938b5e39bc7f72611ec
@@image: 'figures/yelp_add_bookmark.png'; md5=562a62662f47655337c9bf341ef69f6e
@@image: 'figures/yelp_edit_bookmarks.png'; md5=6fb478c10bb9df68dc8d82f3ed4ac89b
Tools and Utilities
This section describes some of the tools and utilities in the GNOME Desktop.
Running Applications
Run Application dialog, using
The
To run a command from the command line perform the following steps:
From a panel
You can add the
Using shortcut keys
Press
Open the
The
Enter the command that you want to run in the blank field, or choose from the list of known applications.
If you enter only the location of a file, an appropriate application will launch to open it. If you enter a web page address, your default web browser will open the page. Prefix the web page address with http://, as in http://www.gnome.org.
To choose a command that you ran previously, click the down arrow button beside the command field, then choose the command to run.
You can also use the
Select the
Click on the
Taking Screenshots
screenshots, taking
You can take a screenshot in any of the following ways:
From any panel
You can add a
Use shortcut keys
To take a screenshot, use the following shortcut keys:
Default Shortcut Keys
Function
Print Screen
Takes a screenshot of the entire screen.
Alt
Takes a screenshot of the window which is active.
You can use the
From the Menubar
Choose
From the Terminal
You can use the
You can also use options on the
Option
--window
Takes a screenshot of the window that has focus.
seconds
--delay=
Takes a screenshot after the specified number of seconds, and displays the
--include-border
Takes a screenshot including the border of the window.
--remove-border
Takes a screenshot without the border of the window.
--border-effect=shadow
Takes a screenshot and adds a shadow bevel effect around it.
--border-effect=border
Takes a screenshot and adds a border effect around it.
--interactive
Opens a window that lets you set options before taking the screenshot.
--help
Displays the options for the command.
When you take a screenshot, the
Yelp Help Browser
Yelp
Introduction
The

Starting Yelp
To Start
You can start

Choose
Command Line
Execute the following command:
Interface
When you start


Menubar
File
Use this menu to Open a New Window, view the About this Document page, Print the current document, or Close the window.
Edit
Use this menu to Copy, Select all, Find..., or to set your Preferences.
Go
Use this menu to navigate Back, Forward, to the Help Topics page. When viewing a DocBook document, use this menu to navigate to the Next Section, Previous Section or to the Contents.
Bookmarks
Use this menu to Add Bookmark(s), or Edit Bookmark(s).
Help
View information about Yelp Help Browser and contributors to the project through the
Toolbar
Back
Use this button to navigate back in your document history.
Forward
Use this button to navigate forward in your document history.
Help Topics
Use this button to return to the main table of contents (shown in
Browser Pane
The browser pane is where you will be presented with the table of contents or the documentation. Use the table of contents to navigate to the documentation you need.
Using Yelp
Open a Document
In an application, click
Use the Table of Contents to navigate to the desired document.
You can drag a Docbook XML file from Nautilus to the Yelp window or launcher.
Press the
To open a document in
Alternatively, you may view a particular document by invoking Yelp Help Browser from the command line or dragging files to Yelp. See
Open a New Window
To open a new window:
Click
Use the key combination
About This Document
To view information about the currently open document:
Click
This option is only available for DocBook documentation. Legal notices and documentation contributors are usually listed in this section.
Print a Page
To print any page that you are able to view in
Click
Print a Document
To print an entire document:
Click
This option is only available for DocBook documentation.
Close a Window
To close a window in
Click
Use the key combination
Set Preferences
To set your preferences in
Click



Use system fonts
Check this option to display documentation using the default fonts used by the GNOME Desktop.
To choose your own fonts to display documentation, uncheck this option and click on the buttons next to the text
Variable Width
This is the font to use when a static or fixed width font is not required. The majority of text will be of this type.
Fixed Width
This is the font to use when all text characters need to be of the same size. This font is usually used to indicate commands, program blocks, or other text that falls under these categories.
Browse with caret
Click this option if you would like see a caret or cursor in the
Go Back in Document History
To go back in the document history:
Click
Use the key combination
Use the
Go Forward in Document History
To go forward in the document history:
Click
Use the key combination
Use the
Go to Help Topics
To go to the Help Topics:
Click
Use the key combination
Use the
Go to Previous Section
To go to the previous section:
Click
Use the key combination
This option is only available in DocBook formatted documents.
Go to Next Section
To go to the next section:
Click
Use the key combination
Go to Contents
To go to the contents for a document:
Click
Add a Bookmark
To add a bookmark for a particular document:
Click
Use the key combination

Add Bookmark Window

Edit Bookmarks
To edit your collection of bookmarks:
Click
Use the key combination

Edit Bookmarks Window

Open
Use this button to open the selected bookmark in a new window.
Rename
Use this button to rename the title of your bookmark.
Remove
Use this button to delete the bookmark from your collection.

Get Help
To get help using
Click
Advanced Features
Opening Specific Documents
Opening Documents from the File Manager
To open a document, such as an XML file, from the file manager, open the document in
Using the Command Line to Open Documents
Yelp Help Browser supports opening documents from the command line. There are a number of URIs (Uniform Resource Identifiers) that can be used. These include:
file:
Use this URI when you want to access a file with yelp, for example:
yelp file:///usr/share/gnome/help/gcalctool/C/gcalctool.xml

Use this URI when you want to access GNOME help documents, which are typically written in DocBook format.
yelp ghelp:gcalctool
If you want to open the help document at a particular section, append a question mark to the end of the URI, followed by the section id.
yelp ghelp:user-guide?yelp-advanced-cmdline
man:
Use this URI when you want to access a particular man page. You can append the section of the man page you would like to view if there are multiple man pages with the same name. The section number should be enclosed in parenthesis and therefore it may be necessary to escape the argument so that the shell does not interpret the parenthesis.
yelp man:gcalctool
or
yelp 'man:intro(1)'
yelp 'man:intro(2)'
info:
Use this URI when you want to access a particular GNU info page.
yelp info:make
Refreshing Content on Demand

More Information
This section details some of the helper applications which
Scrollkeeper

GNOME Documentation Utilites
The documentation distributed with GNOME uses this set of utilities for a variety of things:
Ease translation of documents to different languages.
Provide a set of tools to help package and install documentation into the correct location and register the documentation with scrollkeeper.
Perform conversion from DocBook format to a format suitable for display.

Homepage and Mailing List
For further information on
Joining the GNOME Documentation Project
If you are interesting in helping produce and update documentation for the GNOME project, please visit the Documentation Project homepage:
@@image: 'figures/lockscreen_icon.png'; md5=a5937cc295f73c51d54a0761ae924000
Desktop Sessions
Needs better intro
This chapter needs work
This chapter provides the information you need to log in to and shut down GNOME, and to start, manage, and end a desktop session.
Starting a Session
sessions
starting
A
Logging in to GNOME begins your session. The login screen is your gateway to the GNOME Desktop: it is where you enter your username and password and select options such as the language you want GNOME to use for your session.
Normally, logging out ends the session, but you can choose to save the state of your session and restore it next time you use GNOME: see
Logging in to GNOME
logging in
to session
start session
To log in to a session, perform the following steps:
On the login screen, click on the
Enter your username in the
Enter your password in the
When you log in successfully, GNOME will take a short amount of time to start up. When it is ready, you will see the Desktop and you can begin using your computer.
The first time you log in, the session manager starts a new session. If you have logged in before and saved the settings for the previous session when you logged out, then the session manager restores your previous session.
If you want to shut down or restart the system before you log in, click on the
Your system distributor or vendor may have altered the login screen so that it no longer has a
Using a Different Language
different language, logging in
language, logging in in different
to session in different language
To log in to a session in a different language, perform the following actions.
On the login screen, click on the
When you log in to a session in a different language, you are changing the language for the user interface but are not changing the keyboard layout. To choose a different keyboard layout, use the
Your system distributor or vendor may have altered the login screen so that it no longer has a
Locking Your Screen
Lock screen icon.
locking screen
Lock button
Locking your screen prevents access to your applications and information, allowing you to leave your computer unattended. While your screen is locked, the
To lock the screen, perform one of the following actions:
Choose
If the
The
To unlock the screen, move your mouse or press any key, enter your password in the locked screen dialog, then press
If another user wants to use the computer while it is locked, they can move the mouse or press a key and then click
You can leave a message for a user who has locked their screen. Move the mouse or press any key and then click
Setting Programs to Start Automatically When You Log In
preference tools
Sessions
startup
You can choose for certain programs to be started automatically when you log in to a session. For example, you might want a web browser to be started as soon as you log in. Programs which start automatically when you log in are called
The
Startup Programs Tab
You can use the Startup Programs tab to add, modify, and remove startup programs.
A list of startup programs is displayed on this tab. The list shows a short description of each program, along with a checkbox which denotes whether the startup program is enabled or not. Programs which are not enabled will not be started automatically when you log in.
Enabling/Disabling Startup Programs
To enable a program to start up automatically, check the checkbox corresponding to that program.
To disable a program from starting automatically, uncheck the checkbox.
Adding A New Startup Program
To add a new startup program, perform the following steps:
Click
Use the
Use the
Enter a description of the application in the
Click
Removing A Startup Program
To remove a startup program, select it from the list of startup programs and click
Editing A Startup Program
To edit an existing startup program, select it from the list of startup programs and click
Session Options Tab
The session manager can remember which applications you have running when you log out and can automatically restart them when you log in again. If you would like this to happen every time you log out, check
Ending a Session
ending
logging out
quit
shutdown
When you have finished using your computer, you can choose to do one of the following:
Log out, leaving the computer ready for another user to begin working with it. To log out of GNOME, choose
Shut down your computer and switch off the power. To shut down, choose
Depending on your computer's configuration, you can also
Some vendors and distributors allow you to hibernate your computer in two ways, often called Hibernate and
When you end a session, applications with unsaved work will warn you. You can choose to save your work, or cancel the command to log out or shut down.
Before you end a session, you might want to save your current settings so that you can restore the session later. In the
@@image: 'figures/four_hide_button.png'; md5=932231a03b23ecdb2563af3460091151
@@image: 'figures/panel_object_popup_menu.png'; md5=35135b4653e42312c3e83f399ec6d406
@@image: 'figures/sample_applet.png'; md5=d61c0b0d5b4a5758c5c8ec210c1682e1
@@image: 'figures/force_quit.png'; md5=4e6cd725cd4977eaeab464ce4ff266ce
@@image: 'figures/logout_icon.png'; md5=b695adb45b2eaed0d80203635a70a5bb
@@image: 'figures/run_button.png'; md5=68e8f81b231ed542e57349c93241f3f7
@@image: 'figures/searchtool_button.png'; md5=e6210d7a387eccba73a76c215f078611
@@image: 'figures/show_desktop_button.png'; md5=c228bbe71372d2a5afb76c3c7943e739
@@image: 'figures/open_drawer.png'; md5=ce13f1ec9eaed826ef4e113de0cd5d9c
@@image: 'figures/openwindows_menu.png'; md5=5de74eda192636868298a97043530d75
@@image: 'figures/notification_area_icon.png'; md5=973b76c720b51d9495208ab2d62ecdec
@@image: 'figures/menu_bar_applet.png'; md5=dd0eee59732d5d03d0f90299ef9fa1bd
Using the Panels
This chapter describes how to use the panels at the top and bottom of the GNOME Desktop, how to customize the objects that appear on them, and how to add new panels to the desktop.
panels
introduction
A panel is an area in the GNOME Desktop where you have access to certain actions and information, no matter what the state of your application windows. For example, in the default GNOME panels, you can launch applications, see the date and time, control the system sound volume, and more.
You can customize panels to your liking. You can change their behavior and appearance, and you can add or remove objects from your panels. You can create multiple panels, and choose different properties, objects, and backgrounds for each panel. You can also hide panels.
By default, the GNOME Desktop contains a panel at the top edge of the screen, and a panel at the bottom edge of the screen. The following sections describe these panels.
Top Edge Panel
top edge panel
By default, the top edge panel contains the following objects:
Your distribution of GNOME may have altered this default setup.

The Menu Bar contains the
A set of application launcher icons
The exact number of icons depends on your GNOME distribution, but in general you will find at least a launcher for the

Displays icons from other applications that may require your attention, or that you may want to access without switching from your current application window. For more on this, see
Until an application adds an icon to the notification area, only a narrow bar is visible.

The

The

The
Bottom Edge Panel
bottom edge panel
By default, the bottom edge panel contains the following objects:
default contents

Click on this button to minimize all open windows and show the desktop. Click it again to restore all of the windows to their previous state.

Displays a button for each window that is open. The

Enables you to switch between your workspaces. For more on workspaces, see
Managing Panels
managing
The following sections describe how to manage your panels.
To interact with a panel, you must click on a vacant space on the panel rather than on any of the objects it holds. If the hide buttons are visible on the panel, you can also middle-click or right-click on one of them to select the panel.
Moving a Panel
moving
To move a panel to another side of the screen, press and hold
A panel that is not set to expand to the full width of the screen can be dragged away from the edge of the screen and placed anywhere. See
Panel Properties
modifying properties
You can change the properties of each panel, such as the position of the panel, the hide behavior, and the visual appearance.
To modify the properties of a panel, right-click on a vacant space on the panel, then choose
General Properties Tab
In the
Dialog Element
Description
Orientation
Select the position of the panel on your screen. Click on the required position for the panel.
Size
Use the spin box to specify the size of the panel.
Expand
By default, a panel expands to the full length of the edge of the screen where it is located. A panel that does not expand can be moved away from the screen edges to any part of the screen.
Autohide
Select this option if you want the panel to only be fully visible when the mouse pointer is over it. The panel hides off-screen along its longest edge, leaving a narrow part visible along the edge of the desktop. Move the mouse pointer over the visible part of the panel to make it move back into view.
Show hide buttons
Select this option to display hide buttons at each end of your panel. Clicking on a hide button moves the panel lenthways, hiding it off-screen except for the hide button at the opposite end. Click this hide button to restore the panel to being fully visible.
Arrows on hide buttons
Select this option to display arrows on the hide buttons, if the hide button is enabled.
Background Properties Tab
You can choose the type of background for the panel in the
None (use system theme)
Select this option to have the panel use the settings in the
Solid color
Select this option to specify a single color for the panel background. Click on the
Use the
Background image
Select this option to specify an image for the panel background. Click on the button to browse for an image file. When you have selected the file, click
changing background
You can also drag a color or image on to a panel to set the color or image as the background of the panel. You can drag a color or image from many applications. For example:
You can drag a color from any color selector dialog.
You can drag an image file from the
You can drag a color or a pattern from the
Click
Hiding a Panel
hiding
You can hide or show a panel if it has hide buttons. If the hide buttons are not visible on a panel, modify the panel properties so that the hide buttons are visible.
Hide buttons are at either end of a panel. The hide buttons contain an optional arrow icon. The following illustration shows hide buttons.
A horizontal panel and a vertical panel, both with hide buttons.
To hide a panel, click on one of the hide buttons. The panel shrinks in the direction of the arrow on the hide button. The hide button at the other end of the panel remains visible.
To show a hidden panel again, click on the visible hide button. The panel expands in the direction of the arrow on the hide button. Both hide buttons are now visible.
You can set a panel to autohide. When you set autohide, the panel hides automatically when the mouse is not pointing to the panel. The panel reappears when you point to the part of the screen where the panel resides. To set your panel to autohide,
Adding a New Panel
adding new
To add a panel, right-click on a vacant space on any panel, then choose
Deleting a Panel
deleting
To delete a panel from the GNOME Desktop, right-click on the panel that you want to delete, then choose
You must always have at least one panel in the GNOME Desktop. If you have only one panel in the GNOME Desktop, you cannot delete that panel.
Panel Objects
panel objects
This section describes the objects that you can add to and use from your panels.
Interacting With Panel Objects
interacting with
You use the mouse buttons to interact with a panel object in the following ways:
Left-click
Launches the panel object.
Middle-click
Enables you to grab an object, then drag the object to a new location.
Right-click
Opens the panel object popup menu.
To Select an Applet
applets
selecting
Some restrictions apply on where you can click on an applet in order to display the panel object popup menu, or to move the applet, as follows:
Some applets have popup menus of applet-specific commands that open when you right-click on particular parts of the applet. For example, the
Some applets have areas that you cannot use to select the applet. For example, the
Adding an Object to a Panel
adding
To add an object to a panel, perform the following steps:
Right-click on a vacant space on a panel to open the panel popup menu.
Choose
The
You can type a part of the name or description of an object in the
To restore the full list, delete the text in the
Either drag an object from the list to a panel, or select an object from the list and click
You can also add any item in the
Each launcher corresponds to a
Modifying the Properties of an Object
The command that starts a launcher application.
The location of the source files for a menu.
The icon that represents the object.
Some panel objects, such as launchers and drawers, have a set of associated properties. The properties are different for each type of object. The properties specify details such as the following:
To modify the properties of an object, perform the following steps:
panel object popup menu, illustration
Right-click on the object to open the panel object popup menu, as shown in
Panel Object Popup Menu
Panel object popup menu. Menu items: Properties, Remove From Panel, Lock, Move.
Choose
Close the
Moving a Panel Object
You can move panel objects within a panel, and from one panel to another panel. You can also move objects between panels and drawers.
To move a panel object, middle-click and hold on the object and drag the object to a new location. When you release the middle mouse button, the object anchors at the new location.
Alternatively, you can use the panel object popup menu to move an object, as follows:
Right-click on the object, then choose
Point to the new location for the object, then click any mouse button to anchor the object to the new location. This location can be on any panel that is currently in the GNOME Desktop.
Movement of a panel object affects the position of other objects on the panel. To control how objects move on a panel, you can specify a movement mode. To specify the movement mode, press one of the following keys as you move the panel object:
Key
Movement Mode
No key
Switched movement
The object swaps places with other panel objects. Switched movement is the default movement mode.

Free movement
The object jumps over other panel objects into the next vacant space on the panel.

Push movement
The object pushes other panel objects further along the panel.
Locking a Panel Object
locking
locking panel objects
You can lock panel objects so that the objects stay in the same position on the panel. Use this if you do not want some panel objects to change position when you move other panel objects.
To lock an object to its current location in the panel, right-click on the object to open the panel object popup menu, then select
Removing a Panel Object
removing
To remove an object from a panel, right-click on the object to open the panel object popup menu and then choose
Applets
An applet is a small application whose user interface resides within a panel. The following figure shows the following applets, from left to right:



Sample applets. The context describes the graphic.
Launchers
launchers
A
You can find launchers in the panels, in the panel menubar, and on the desktop. A launcher is represented by an icon in all of these locations.
You might use a launcher to do any of the following:
Start a particular application.
Execute a command.
Open a folder.
Open a Web browser at a particular page on the Web.
Open special
You can modify the properties of a launcher. For example, the properties of a launcher include the name of the launcher, the icon that represents the launcher, and how the launcher runs. For more on this, see
In certain situations, a launcher in a menu might not show an icon. For example, if it specifies no icon to display, or if the entire menu is set to show no icons.
Adding a Launcher to a Panel
adding to panel
You can add a launcher to a panel in one of the following ways:
From the panel popup menu
Right-click on any vacant space on the panel, then choose
To create a new launcher, select
Alternatively, to add an existing launcher to the panel, select
From any menu
To add a launcher to a panel from a menu, perform one of the following steps:
Open a menu that contains the launcher. Drag the launcher on to the panel.
Open the menu that contains the launcher and right-click on the title of the launcher. Choose
From the file manager
To add a launcher to a panel from the file manager, find the
Modifying a Launcher
To modify the properties of a launcher in a panel, perform the following steps:
Right-click on the launcher to open the panel object popup menu.
Choose
Click
Launcher Properties
When you create or edit a launcher, the following properties can be set:
Type
Use the drop-down list to specify whether this launcher starts an application or opens a location:
Application
The launcher starts an application.
Application in Terminal
The launcher starts an application through a terminal window.
Location
The launcher opens a file, web page or other location.
If you are editing a location launcher, this drop-down list will not be displayed. If you are editing an application launcher, the
Name
This is the name that is displayed if you add the launcher to a menu or to the desktop.
Command
For an application launcher, specify a command to execute when you click on the launcher. For sample commands, see
For a location launcher, specify the location to be opened. Click
Comment
This is displayed as a tooltip when you point to the launcher icon on the panel.
To choose an icon for the launcher, click on the icon button, which displays a generic icon by default. An icon selector dialog is displayed. Choose an icon from the dialog.
To change the icon for the launcher, click on the button showing the current icon. An icon selector dialog is displayed. Choose an icon from the dialog.
Launcher Commands and Locations
Examples of commands and locations that you can use in the
If you choose
Sample Application Command
Action
gedit
Starts the
gedit /home/user/loremipsum.txt
Opens the file
nautilus /home/user/Projects
Opens the folder
If you choose
Sample Location
file:///home/user/loremipsum.txt
Opens the file
file:///home/user/Projects
http://www.gnome.org
Opens the GNOME website in your default browser.
ftp://ftp.gnome.org
Opens the GNOME FTP site in your default browser.
Buttons
buttons
action buttons
You can add buttons to your panels to provide quick access to common actions and functions.
Force Quit Button
Force Quit
Force Quit button
terminating applications
applications
terminating
Force Quit icon.
The
To add a
To terminate an application, click on the
Lock Screen Button
Lock
The
To add a
Right-click on the
Lock Screen Menu Items
Menu Item
Activate Screensaver
Activates the screensaver immediately.
This will also lock the screen if you have set
Lock Screen
Locks the screen immediately. This command performs the same function as when you click on the
Properties
Opens the
Log Out Button
Log Out icon.
Log Out
Log Out button
The
To add a
To log out of your session or switch users, click on the
Run Button
Run Application icon.
Run
Run button
The
To add a
To open the
For more information on the
Search Button
Search Tool icon.
Search
Search button
The
To add a
To open the
For more information on the
Show Desktop Button
Minimize Windows
Minimize Windows button
Show Desktop icon.
You can use the
To add a
To minimize all windows and show the desktop, click on the
Menus
menus
You can add the following types of menu to your panels:

To add a

To add a

To add a submenu to a panel, open the submenu, right-click on a launcher, then choose
Drawers
drawers
A drawer is an extension of a panel. You can open and close a drawer in the same way that you can show and hide a panel. A drawer can contain all panel objects, including launchers, menus, applets, and other drawers. When you open a drawer, you can use the objects in the same way that you use objects on a panel.
The following figure shows an open drawer that contains two panel objects.
Open drawer. The context describes the graphic.
The arrow on the icon indicates that it represents a drawer or menu.
You can add, move, and remove objects from drawers in the same way that you add, move, and remove objects from panels.
To Open and Close a Drawer
opening
closing
To open a drawer, click on the drawer's icon in a panel. You can close a drawer in the following ways:
Click on the drawer's icon.
Click on the drawer hide button.
To Add a Drawer to a Panel
You can add a drawer to a panel in the following ways:
Right-click on any vacant space on the panel, then choose
In the
You can add a menu as a drawer object to a panel.
To add a menu as a drawer to a panel, open the menu from the panel. Right-click on any launcher in the menu, then choose
To Add an Object to a Drawer
adding objects to
You add an object to a drawer in the same way that you add objects to panels. For more information, see
To Modify Drawer Properties
You can modify the properties of each drawer individually. For example, you can change the visual appearance of the drawer and whether it has hide buttons.
To modify properties for a drawer perform the following steps:
Right-click on the drawer, then choose
Select the properties for the drawer in the dialog. The following table describes the elements on the
Specify the width of the drawer when it is open.
Icon
Choose an icon to represent the drawer. Click on the
Select this option to display hide buttons on your drawer. When you click one of the buttons, the drawer will close.
Select this option to display arrows on the hide buttons, if the hide buttons are enabled.
You can use the
Click
Default Panel Objects
This section covers the panel objects that appear in the default GNOME desktop.
Window Selector Applet
window selector icon
window selector
You can view a list of all windows that are currently open. You can also choose a window to give focus to. To view the window list, click on the
Window selector applet displayed from the top edge panel.
To give focus to a window, select the window from the
The
Notification Area Applet
Notification Area
Notification Area applet
Notification Area icon.
The
Menu Bar
Menu Bar applet. Menus: Applications, Places, System.
The
Window List
The
State
Indicates...
The button is pressed in.
The window has focus.
The button appears faded. The button text is surrounded by square brackets.
The window is minimized.
The button is not pressed in, and is not faded.
The window is displayed on the desktop and is not minimized.
There is a number in parentheses at the end of the button title.
The button represents a group of buttons.
Usage
You can use
To give focus to a window
If you click on the Window List button that represents a window that is on the desktop but does not have focus, the applet gives focus to the window.
To minimize a window
If you click on the Window List button that represents the window that has focus, the applet minimizes the window.
To restore a minimized window
If you click on the Window List button that represents a minimized window, the applet restores the window.
You can change the order of the Window List buttons by dragging a button to a different location on the Window List.
Preferences
To configure the
Window List Content
To specify which windows to display in the Window List, select one of the following options:
Show windows from current workspace
Select this option to only show the windows that are open in the current workspace.
Show windows from all workspaces
Select this option to show the windows that are open in all workspaces.
Window Grouping
To specify when the Window List should group windows that belong to the same application, select one of the following options:
Never group windows
Select this option to never group windows of the same application under one button.
Group windows when space is limited
Select this option to group windows of the same application under one button when the space on the panel is restricted.
Always group windows
Select this option to always group windows of the same application under one button.
Restoring Minimized Windows
To define how the Window List behaves when you restore windows, select one of the following options.
Restore to current workspace
Select this option to restore a window from the applet to the current workspace, even if the window did not previously reside in the current workspace.
Restore to native workspace
Select this option to switch to the workspace in which a window originally resided when you restore the window from the applet.
These options are only available if
@@image: 'figures/titlebar_window.png'; md5=b3624c3e2eeb934a16ff5689c8163f44
@@image: 'figures/workspace_switcher_applet.png'; md5=00b75c538008ce6d01801ae2eb907af9
Desktop Overview
This chapter introduces you to some of the very basic components of the desktop. These components include
This chapter describes the default configuration of GNOME. Your vendor or system administrator may have configured your desktop to look different than what is described here.
GNOME Desktop components, introducing
When you start a desktop session for the first time, you should see a default startup screen, with panels, windows, and various icons.
The major components of the GNOME Desktop are as follows:
Desktop
The desktop itself is behind all of the other components on the desktop. You can place objects on the desktop to access your files and directories quickly, or to start applications that you use often. See
Panels
The
Panels can be customized to contain a variety of tools, such as other menus and launchers, and small utility applications, called
Windows
Most applications run inside of one or more windows. You can display multiple windows on your desktop at the same time. Windows can be resized and moved around to accommodate your workflow. Each window has a
Workspaces
You can subdivide your desktop into separate
File Manager
The
Control Center
You can customize your computer using the
Your vendor or system administrator can make configuration changes to suit your needs, so your desktop might not match exactly what is described in this manual. Nevertheless, this manual provides a useful introduction to using the various components of your desktop.
The Desktop
The desktop lies behind all other components on your screen. When no windows are visible, the desktop is that part of the screen between the top and bottom panels. You can place files and folders on the desktop that you want to have easy access to.
The desktop also has several special objects on it:
The
Your Home Folder, labelled
The
When you insert a CD, a flash drive, or other removable media, or a device containing files such as a music player or a digital camera, an icon representing this device will appear on the desktop.
As you work with your computer, the desktop becomes obscured by the windows you are working with. To quickly reveal the desktop by minimizing all windows, you can do one of the following:
Click on the
Press
Either action will also restore your windows to their previous state. Alternatively, you can switch to another workspace to see the desktop.
You can change the colour of the desktop background or the image displayed there. For more on this, see
The files and folders you put on the desktop are stored in a special folder within your Home Folder, called
windows
overview
A
You can control a window's position of the screen, as well as its size. You can control which windows overlap other windows, so the one you want to work with is completely visible. For more about moving and resizing windows, see
Each window is not necessarily a different application. An application usually has one main window, and may open additional windows at the request of the user.
The rest of this section describes the different types of windows and how you can interact with them.
Types of Windows
There are two main types of window:
Application windows
Application windows allow all the minimize, maximize and close operations through the buttons on the titlebar. When opening an application you will usually see a window of this type appear.
Dialog windows
Dialog windows appear at the request of an application window. A dialog window may alert you to a problem, ask for confirmation of an action, or request input from you.
For example, if you tell an application to save a document, a dialog will ask you where you want to save the new file. If you tell an application to quit while it is still busy, it may ask you to confirm that you want it to abandon work in progress.
Some dialogs do not allow you to interact with the main application window until you have closed them: these are called
You can select the text in a dialog with the mouse. This allows you to copy it to the clipboard (by right-clicking the text and selecting
Manipulating Windows
You can change the size and position of windows on the screen. This allows you to see more than one application and do different tasks at the same time. For example, you might want to read text on a web page while writing with a word processor, or to change to another application to do a different task or check its progress.
You can


Titlebar for a Typical Application Window
Titlebar of application window frame.
All actions can also be carried out from the Window Menu. To open this, click on the Window Menu button at the left-hand edge of the titlebar. Common actions can also be carried out with keyboard shortcuts: see
Move the window
Drag the titlebar to move the window. You can click on any part of the titlebar except the buttons at either end to begin the drag action. The window will move on the screen as you drag the mouse. On less powerful computers, the movement of the window may be represented by moving an outline of its frame.
You can also choose Move from the Window Menu, or press
You can also press-and-hold
As you move the window, some parts of the screen will give slight resistance to movement. This is to help you align windows more easily to the edges of the desktop, the panels, and the edges of other windows.
You can also press-and-hold
If the
Resize the window
Drag one of the borders to expand or contract the window on that side. Drag a corner to change two sides at once. The
You can also choose Resize from the Window Menu, or press
Minimize the window
Click on the Minimize button in the titlebar, the leftmost of the group of three on the right. This removes the window from view. The window can be restored to its previous position and size on the screen from the
You can also choose Minimize from the Window Menu, or press
A minimized window is shown in the window list and the window selector with [ ] around its title.
Maximize the window
Click on the Maximize button in the titlebar, the middle of the group of three on the right. This expands the window so it fills the screen (the panels remain visible).
You can also choose Maximize from the Window Menu, or press
If you prefer, you can assign the double-click action to
Unmaximize the window
When a window is maximized, click again on the Maximize button to restore it to its previous position and size on the screen.
You can also choose Unmaximize from the Window Menu, press
Close the window
Click the Close button, the rightmost of the group of three on the right. Closing the window may also close the application itself. The application will ask you to confirm closing a window that contains unsaved work.
Workspaces commands or a link to them still to go in this section, perhaps
Giving Focus to a Window
To work with an application, you need to give the
You can give the focus to a window in any of the following ways:
With the mouse, click on any part of the window, if the window is visible.
On the bottom panel, click on the
On the top panel, click the
If the window you choose is on a different workspace, you will be switched to that workspace. For more on workspaces, see
With the keyboard, hold the
You can customize the shortcut used to perform this action with the
workspaces
Workspaces allow you to manage which windows are on your screen. You can imagine workspaces as being virtual screens, which you can switch between at any time. Every workspace contains the same desktop, the same panels, and the same menus. However, you can run different applications, and open different windows in each workspace. The applications in each workspace will remain there when you switch to other workspaces.
By default, four workspaces are available. You can switch between them with the
Workspaces Displayed in Workspace Switcher
Workspace Switcher. The context describes the graphic.
Each workspace can have any number of applications open in it. The number of workspaces can be customized: see
Workspaces enable you to organize the GNOME Desktop when you run many applications at the same time. One way to use workspaces is to allocate a specific function to each workspace: one for email, one for web browsing, one for graphic design, etc. However, everyone has their own preference and you are in no way restricted to only using workspaces like this.
Switching Between Workspaces
switching between
You can switch between workspaces in any of the following ways:
In the
Move the mouse pointer over the
Press
Press
The arrow shortcut keys work according to how your workspaces are set out in the
Adding Workspaces
specifying number of
To add workspaces to the GNOME Desktop, right-click on the
Applications
An
To launch an application, open the
The applications that are part of GNOME include the following:







Further standard GNOME applications include games, music and video players, a web browser, software accessibility tools, and utilities to manage your system. Your distributor or vendor may have added other applications, such as a word processor and a graphics editor. They may also provide you with a way to install further applications.
All GNOME applications have many features in common, which makes it easier to learn how to work with a new GNOME application. The rest of this section describes some of these features.
Common Features
The applications that are provided with the GNOME Desktop share many common features, such as similar open and save dialogs and similar-looking icons. This is because they have all been developed using the GNOME development platform. An application developed using this platform is called a
Some of the features of GNOME-compliant applications are as follows:
Consistent look-and-feel
GNOME-compliant applications have a consistent look-and-feel. You can use the
Menubars, toolbars, and statusbars
Most GNOME-compliant applications have a menubar, a toolbar, and a statusbar. The menubars usually have a similar structure; for example, the
A
Default shortcut keys
GNOME-compliant applications use the same shortcut keys to perform the same actions. See
Drag-and-drop
When you drag-and-drop something into a GNOME-compliant application, it will recognize the format of the items that you dragged and will handle them in an appropriate manner. For example, when you drag a HTML file from a
Working With Files
The work you do with an application is stored in
All GNOME applications use the same dialogs for opening and saving files, presenting you with a consistent interface. The following sections cover the open and the save dialog in detail.
Choosing a File to Open
The
The right-hand pane of the dialog lists files and folders in the current location. You can use the mouse or the arrow keys on your keyboard to select a file.
Once a file is selected in the list, perform one of the following actions to open it:
Click
Press
Press
Double-click the file.
If you open a folder or a location instead of a file, the
To change the location shown in the right-hand pane, do one of the following:
Open a folder that is listed in the current location.
Open an item in the left-hand pane. This pane lists places such as your Documents folder, your Home Folder, media such as CDs and flash drives, places on your network, and your
Click one of the buttons in the path bar above the file listing pane. This shows the hierarchy of folders that contain your current location. Use the arrow buttons to either side of the button bar if the list of folders is too long to fit.
The lower part of the
Filtering the File List
You can restrict the file list to show only files of certain types. To do this, choose a file type from the drop-down list beneath the file list pane. The list of file types depends on the application you are currently using. For example, a graphics application will list different image file formats, and a text editor will list different types of text file.
Find-as-you-type
If you know the name of the file you want to open, begin typing it: the file list will jump to show you files whose names begin with the characters you type. Arrow keys will now select from only these files. The characters you have typed appear in a pop-up window at the base of the file list.
To cancel find-as-you-type, press
Choosing a folder
You might sometimes need to choose a folder to work with rather than open a file. For example, if you use
Open Location
You can type a full or relative path to the file you want to open. Press
Type a path from the current location, or an absolute path beginning with
A drop-down of possible file and folder names is displayed once you begin typing. Use
If the part of the name typed uniquely identifies a file or folder, the name is auto-completed. Press
Opening Remote Locations
You can open files in remote locations by choosing the location from the left panel, or by typing a path to a remote location into the
If you require a password to access the remote location, you will be asked for it when you open it.
Adding and Removing Bookmarks
To add the current location to the bookmarks list, press
To remove a bookmark from the list, select it and press
Changes you make to the bookmarks list also affect the
Showing hidden files
To show hidden files in the file list, right-click in the file list and choose
Saving a File
The first time you save your work in an application, the
You can enter a filename and choose a location to save in from the drop-down list of bookmarks and commonly-used locations.
Saving in another location
To save the file in a location not listed in the drop-down list, click the
The expanded
Replacing an existing file
If you type in the name of an existing file, you will be asked whether you wish to replace the existing file with your current work. You can also do this by choosing the file you want to overwrite in the browser.
Typing a Path
To specify a path to save a file, type it into the
Creating a New Folder
If you would like to create a new folder to save your file in, press the
@@image: 'figures/naut_browser_mode.png'; md5=44b92e32cdc342cd5624b1be5626386d
@@image: 'figures/naut_spatial_mode.png'; md5=f2f8e037d14274ac04e1df45664f2103
@@image: 'figures/naut_spatial_view.png'; md5=08673c38f4b4327f94f298c73b0d270b
@@image: 'figures/naut_button_bar.png'; md5=447c19259a84de017f4431ea205bed03
@@image: 'figures/naut_go_to_location.png'; md5=f5731ef77db819a54be69cab8806529a
@@image: 'figures/naut_search_bar.png'; md5=60a9a159dee2d7ad5c035ed794845798
@@image: 'figures/naut_search_results.png'; md5=cdb07b97b638c6157d40d57373fcc5d4
@@image: 'figures/naut_refine_search.png'; md5=c3d58f408fd7ec2f6965a0f06e05c43e
@@image: 'figures/nautilus_restore_saved_search.png'; md5=1b7dbb7d82639abe4d9f8cc75bc2c80f
@@image: 'figures/naut_spatial_icon_view.png'; md5=c2dd3a38476c26a924c2673c6bb6de93
@@image: 'figures/naut_spatial_list_view.png'; md5=99693c429ea6f6889793a85b0c8fb099
@@image: 'figures/naut_zoom_out_button.png'; md5=372c3f4288c029af11bac9c9012f7d8c
@@image: 'figures/naut_normal_size_button.png'; md5=5bf2b3af293a950536ca593cd49b2f5e
@@image: 'figures/naut_zoom_in_button.png'; md5=0369994f20b3221243b5b7550a5a9318
@@image: 'figures/move_pointer.png'; md5=1a4e4a188a0132fc783c465d42c52426
@@image: 'figures/copy_pointer.png'; md5=228984e885befffd71ae4eadd7ee790e
@@image: 'figures/link_pointer.png'; md5=8fb4e2d2fcaea8b59a653a3d8fc85b5a
@@image: 'figures/ask_pointer.png'; md5=bd23edcf2659006110ce30a14f0abb35
@@image: 'figures/naut_trash_launcher.png'; md5=42951c298a8bc2e3cd779e636e64efcd
@@image: 'figures/naut_emblem.png'; md5=4dfffab4440360f5b2a307b42fa50691
@@image: 'figures/naut_link_emblem.png'; md5=7fefb663977d2a003bc86b8eb61e9100
@@image: 'figures/naut_nowrite_emblem.png'; md5=06a5b7050d82e38d2f54048a1f698092
@@image: 'figures/naut_noread_emblem.png'; md5=e54419d1a042a072d0a56effcc13278a
Working with Files
This chapter describes how to use the
file manager
File Manager Functionality
The
Create folders and documents
Display your files and folders
Search and manage your files
Run scripts and launch applications
Customize the appearance of files and folders
Open special locations on your computer
Write data to a CD or DVD
Install and remove fonts
The file manager lets you organize your files into folders. Folders can contain files and may also contain other folders. Using folders can help you find your files more easily.

Every user has a Home Folder. The Home Folder contains all of the user's files. The desktop is another folder. The desktop contains special icons allowing easy access to the users Home Folder, Trash, and also removable media such as floppy disks, CDs and USB flashdrives.

In GNOME many things are files, such as word processor documents, spreadsheets, photos, movies, and music.
File Manager Presentation

Spatial mode is the default in GNOME, but your distributor, vendor, or system administrator may have configured
The following explains the difference between the two modes:
Browser mode: browse your files and folders
The file manager window represents a browser, which can display any location. Opening a folder updates the current file manager window to show the contents of the new folder.
As well as the folder contents, the browser window displays a toolbar with common actions and locations, a location bar that shows the current location in the hierarchy of folders, and a sidebar that can hold different kinds of information.
In Browser Mode, you typically have fewer file manager windows open at a time. For more information on using browser mode see

Nautilus in browser mode.
Spatial mode: navigate your files and folders as objects
The file manager window represents a particular folder. Opening a folder opens the new window for that folder. Each time you open a particular folder, you will find its window displayed in the same place on the screen and the same size as the last time you viewed it (this is the reason for the name 'spatial mode').
Using spatial mode may lead to more open file manager windows on the screen. On the other hand, some users find that representing files and folders as though they were real physical objects with particular locations makes it easier to work with them. For more information on using spatial mode see
Three Folders Opened in Spatial Mode.
Notice how, when in spatial mode,
Spatial Mode
navigating
The following section describes how to browse your system using the
For a comparison of browser mode and spatial mode, see
Spatial Windows
A new spatial window opens each time you open a folder. To open a folder, do one of the following:
Double-click the folder's icon on the desktop or an existing window
Select the folder, and press
Select the folder, and press
Choose an item from the
To close the current folder while opening the new one, hold down

Contents of a folder in a spatial mode.
Displaying a folder in spatial mode.
In spatial mode each open
Some people consider spatial mode better, particularly for moving files or folders to different location, others find the number of open windows daunting.
Because spatial mode will fill your screen with
Spatial Window Components

The Spatial Window Components
Component
Contains menus that you use to perform tasks in the file manager.
You can also open a popup menu from file manager windows. To open this popup menu right-click in a file manager window. The items in this menu depend on where you right-click. For example, when you right-click on a file or folder, you can choose items related to the file or folder. When you right-click on the background of a view pane, you can choose items related to the display of items in the view pane.
View pane
Shows the contents of the following:
Folders
FTP sites
Windows shares
WebDAV servers
Locations that correspond to special URIs
Statusbar
Displays status information.
Parent folder selector
This drop-down list shows the hierarchy of the folder. Choose a folder from the list to open it.
Hold down
Displaying Your Home Folder in a Spatial Window
Home location
displaying
To display your Home Folder, perform one of the following actions:
Double-click on the
From a folder window's menubar, choose
From the top panel menubar, choose
The spatial window displays the contents of your Home Folder.
Displaying a Parent Folder
A parent folder is the folder that contains the current folder. To display the contents of your current folder's parent, do one of the following:
Choose
Press
Choose from the parent folder selector at the bottom left of the window.
To close the current folder while opening the parent, hold down
Closing Folders
To close folders you may simply click on the close window button, this however may not be the most efficient way to close many windows. If you would like to view only the current folder, and not the folders you opened to reach the current folder, choose
Displaying a Folder in a Browser Window
If you wish to display a single folder in browser mode, while otherwise continuing to work in spatial mode, perform the following steps:
Select a folder while in spatial mode.
Choose
Opening a Location
You can open a folder or other location in spatial mode by typing its name.
Choose
Browser Mode
The following section describes how to browse your system using the
The File Browser Window
Choose
While in spatial mode you may open a folder in browser mode by right clicking on that folder and choosing
If
You can access the file browser in the following ways:
Contents of a Folder in a File Browser Window
A folder in a file browser window.
In some distributions of the GNOME Desktop, the
The File Browser Window Components

File Browser Window Components
Contains buttons that you use to perform tasks in the file manager.







Location bar
The location bar is a very powerful tool for navigating your computer. It can appear in three different ways depending on your selection. For more on using the location bar see


Side pane
Performs the following functions:
Shows information about the current file or folder.
Enables you to navigate through your files.
To display the side pane, choose
Places
Displays places of particular interest.
Information
Displays the icon and information about the current folder. Buttons may appear in the side pane, these buttons enable you to perform actions on the current folder, other than the default action.
Tree
Displays a hierarchical representation of your file system. You can use the
History
Contains a history list of files, folders, FTP sites, and URIs that you have recently visited.
Notes
Enables you to add notes to your files and folders.
Emblems
Contains emblems that you can add to a file or folder.
To close the side pane, click on the
Showing and Hiding File Browser Window Components
window components, showing and hiding
To show or hide any of the components of the file browser described in
To hide the side pane, choose
To hide the toolbar, choose
To hide the location bar, choose
To hide the statusbar, choose
Using the Location Bar
The file browser's location bar can show either a location field, a button bar, or a search field. Each is useful in different situations.
Button bar
By default the button bar is shown. This shows a row of buttons representing the current location's hierarchy, with a button for each containing folder. Click on the button to jump between folders in the hierarchy. You can return to the original folder, which is shown as the last button in the row.
You can also drag buttons, for example to another location, in order to copy a folder.
The button bar.
Text Location Bar
The text location bar shows the current location as a text path, for example: '/home/user/Documents'. The location field is particularly useful for jumping to a known folder very quickly.
To go to a new location, type a new path or edit the current one, then press
To always use the text location bar, click on the toggle button at the left of the location bar.
To quickly switch to the text location bar while using the button bar, press
The location bar.
Search bar
By pressing
The search bar.
Displaying Your Home Folder
Home folder
To quickly display your Home Folder, perform one of the following actions from a file browser window:
Choose
Click on the
Click on the
The file browser window displays the contents of your Home Folder.
Displaying a Folder
The contents of a folder can be displayed in either list or icon view by selecting the appropriate item in the location bar
Double-click on the folder in the view pane.
Use the
Click on the
Press
Use the
To change to the folder that is one level above the current folder, choose
The parent folder of the current folder which you are browsing is the one which exists, in a hierarchical representation, one level above the current. To display the contents of parent folder, perform one of the following steps:
Press the
Choose
Press the
Using the Tree From the Side Pane
Tree, using
The
In the

Tree Tasks
Task
Open the
Choose
Close the
Choose another item from the drop-down list at the top of the side pane.
Expand a folder in the
Click on the arrow next to the folder in the
Collapse a folder in the
Display the contents of a folder in the view pane.
Select the folder in the
Open a file.
Select the file in the
You can set your preferences so that the
Using Your Navigation History
navigating history list
The file browser window maintains a history list of files, folders, FTP sites, and URI locations you have recently visited. You can use the history list to navigate to quickly return to these places. Your history list contains the last ten items that you viewed.
To clear your history list choose
Navigating Your History List Using the Go Menu
To display a list of previously-viewed items, choose the
Navigating Your History List Using the Toolbar
To use the toolbar to navigate your history list, perform one of the following actions:
To open the folder or URI in your history list, click on the
To open the folder or URI in your history list, click on the
To display a list of previously-viewed items, click on the down arrow to the right of the
To display a list of items that you viewed after you viewed the current item, click on the down arrow to the right of the
Navigating Your History List Using History in the Side Pane
To display the
To display an item from your history list in the view pane, double-click on the item in the
Opening Files
opening files
When you open a file, the file manager performs the default action for that file type.
For example, opening a music file will play it with the default music playing application, opening a text file will allow you to read and edit it in a text editor, and opening an image file will display the image.
The file manager checks the contents of a file to determine the type of a file. If the first lines do not determine the type of the file, then the file manager checks the
If you open an executable text file, that is, one that Nautilus considers can be run as a program, then you will be asked what you want to do: run it, or display it in a text editor. You can modify this behaviour in the
Executing the Default Action
executing default actions for files
To execute the default action for a file, double-click on the file. For example, the default action for plain text documents is to display the file in a text viewer. In this case, you can double-click on the file to display the file in a text viewer.
You can set your file manager preferences so that you click once on a file to execute the default action. For more information, see
Executing Non-Default Actions
executing non-default actions for files
To execute actions other than the default action for a file, select the file that you want to perform an action on. In the
Adding Actions
adding actions
To add actions associated with a file type, perform the following steps:
In the view pane, select a file of the type to which you want to add an action.
Choose
Either choose an application in the open with dialog or browse to the program with which you wish to open this type.
The action you have chosen is now added to the list of actions for that particular file type. If there was no prior action associated with the type, the newly added action is the default.
You may also add actions in the
Modifying Actions
modifying actions
To modify the actions associated with a file or file type, perform the following steps:
In the view pane, select a file of the type to which you want to modify the action.
Choose
Choose
Use
Searching For Files
searching files
The
Enter characters present in the name or contents of the file or folder you wish to find and press
The result of a search.
If you are not happy with your search you can refine it by adding addition conditions. This allows you to restrict the search to a specific file type or location. To add search conditions click the
Restricting a search.
Saving Searches
Nautilus searches can also be saved for future use. Once saved, searches may be reopened later.
Browsing the results of a saved search.
Saved searches behave exactly like regular folders, for example you can open, move or delete files from within a saved search.
Managing Your Files and Folders
managing files and folders
This section describes how to work with your files and folders.
Directories and File Systems
Linux and Unix file systems are organised in a hierarchical, tree-like structure. The highest level of the file system is the
For example,
Underneath the root (


















Using Views to Display Your Files and Folders
viewer components
views
The file manager includes views that enable you to show the contents of your folders in different ways, icon view, and list view.
Icon view
The Home Folder displayed in a icon view.
Your Home Folder displayed in a icon view.

List view
The Home Folder displayed in a list view.
Your Home Folder displayed in a list view.

You may use the
To Arrange Your Files in Icon View
icon view
arranging files in
When you display the contents of a folder in icon view, you can specify how to arrange the items in the folder. To specify how to arrange items in icon view, choose
At the top is an option that enables you to arrange your files manually.
The middle section contains options that enable you to sort your files automatically.
The bottom section contains options that enable you to modify how your files are arranged.
Choose the appropriate options from the submenu, as described in the following table:
Manually
Select this option to arrange the items manually. To arrange the items manually, drag the items to the location you require within the view pane.
By Name
Select this option to sort the items alphabetically by name. The order of the items is not case sensitive. If the file manager is set to display hidden files, the hidden files are shown last.
By Size
Select this option to sort the items by size, with the largest item first. When you sort items by size, the folders are sorted by the number of items in the folder. The folders are not sorted by the total size of the items in the folder.
By Type
Select this option to sort the items alphabetically by object type. The items are sorted alphabetically by the description of their
By Modification Date
Select this option to sort the items by the date the items were last modified. The most recently modified item is first.
By Emblems
Select this option to sort the items by any emblems that are added to the items. The items are sorted alphabetically by emblem name. Items that do not have emblems are last.
Compact Layout
Select this option to arrange the items so that the items are closer to each other.
Reversed Order
Select this option to reverse the order of the option by which you sort the items. For example, if you sort the items by name, select the
To Arrange Your Files in List View
list view
When you display the contents of a folder in list view, you can specify how to arrange the items in the folder. To specify how to arrange items in list view, click on the header of the column specifying the property by which you wish to arrange the items. To inverse the sorting order click on the same column header again.
To add or remove columns from the list view choose
The file manager remembers how you arrange the items in a particular folder. The next time that you display the folder, the items are arranged in the way that you selected. In other words, when you specify how to arrange the items in a folder, you customize the folder to display the items in that way. To return the arrangement settings of the folder to the default arrangement settings specified in your preferences, choose
To Change the Size of Items in a View
zooming in and out
You can change the size of items in a view. You can change the size if the view displays a file or a folder. You can change the size of items in a view in the following ways:
To enlarge the size of items in a view, choose
To reduce the size of items in a view, choose
To return items in a view to the normal size, choose
You can also use the zoom buttons on the location bar in a browser window to change the size of items in a view.
Zoom Buttons
Button
Button Name
Zoom Out button.

Click on this button to reduce the size of items in a view.
Normal Size button.

Click on this button to return items in a view to normal size.
Zoom In button.

Click on this button to enlarge the size of items in a view.
The file manager remembers the size of items in a particular folder. The next time that you display the folder, the items are displayed in the size that you selected. In other words, when you change the size of items in a folder, you customize the folder to display the items at that size. To return the size of the items to the default size specified in your preferences, choose
Selecting Files and Folders
selecting files and folders
You can select files and folders in several ways in the file manager. Typically this is achieved by clicking on the files using the mouse, as explained in
Selecting Items in the File Manager
Select an item
Click on the item.
Select a group of contiguous items
In icon view, drag around the files that you want to select.
In list view, click on the first item in the group. Press-and-hold
Select multiple items
Press-and-hold
Alternatively, press-and-hold
Select all items in a folder
Choose
To perform the default action on an item, double-click on the item. You can set your file manager preferences so that you click once on a file to execute the default action. For more information, see
Selecting Files Matching a Specific Pattern

Pattern
Files Matched
note.*
This pattern would match files called note, with any extension.
*.ogg
This pattern would match all files with the .ogg extension
*memo*
This pattern would match all files or folders whose name contains the word memo.
To perform the Select Pattern command Choose
Drag-and-Drop in the File Manager
drag-and-drop
You can use drag-and-drop to perform several tasks in the file manager. When you drag-and-drop, the mouse pointer provides feedback about the task that you perform.
Mouse Pointer
Move an item
Drag the item to the new location.
Move pointer.
Copy an item
Grab the item, then press-and-hold
Copy pointer.
Create a symbolic link to an item
Grab the item, then press-and-hold
Symbolic link pointer.
Ask what to do with the item you drag
Grab the item, then press-and-hold
Move here
Moves the item to the location.
Copy here
Copies the item to the location.
Link here
Creates a symbolic link to the item at the location.
Set as Background
If the item is an image, sets the image to be the background. You can use this command to set the background of the desktop, the side pane or the view pane.
Cancel
Cancels the drag-and-drop operation.
Ask pointer.
Moving a File or Folder
moving files and folders
You can move a file or folder by dragging it with the mouse, or with the cut and paste commands. The following sections describe these two methods.
Drag to the New Location
To drag a file or folder to a new location, perform the following steps:
Open two file manager windows:
The window containing the item you want to move.
The window you want to move it to, or the window containing the folder you want to move it to.
Drag the file or folder that you want to move to the new location. If the new location is a window, drop it anywhere in the window. If the new location is a folder icon, drop the item you are dragging on the folder.
To move the file or folder to a folder that is one level below the current location, do not open a new window. Instead, drag the file or folder to the new location in the same window.
For more on dragging items, see
Cut and Paste to the New Location
You can cut a file or folder and paste the file or folder into another folder, as follows:
Select the file or folder that you want to move, then choose
Open the folder to which you want to move the file or folder, then choose
Copying a File or Folder
copying files and folders
You can copy a file or folder by dragging it with the mouse, or with the copy and paste commands. The following sections describe these two methods.
To copy a file or folder, perform the following steps:
Drag the file or folder that you want to move to the new location. Press-and-hold
To copy the file or folder to a folder that is one level below the current location, do not open a new window. Instead, grab the file or folder, then press-and-hold
Copy and Paste to the New Location
You can copy a file or folder and paste the file or folder into another folder, as follows:
Select the file or folder that you want to copy, then choose
Open the folder to which you want to copy the file or folder, then choose
Duplicating a File or Folder
duplicating files and folders
To create a copy of a file or folder in the current folder, perform the following steps:
Select the file or folder that you want to duplicate.
Choose
A copy of the file or folder appears in the current folder.
Creating a Folder
creating folders
To create a folder, perform the following steps:
Open the folder where you want to create the new folder.
Choose
An
Type a name for the folder, then press
Templates and Documents
creating documents
You can create templates from documents that you frequently create. For example, if you often create invoices, you can create an empty invoice document and save the document as
You can also access the templates folder from a file browser window. Choose
The template name is displayed as a submenu item in the
You can also create subfolders in the template folder. Subfolders display as submenus in the menu.
You can also share templates. Create a symbolic link from the template folder to the folder containing the shared templates.
To Create a Document
If you have document templates, you can choose to create a document from one of the installed templates.
To create a document perform the following steps:
Select the folder where you want to create the new document.
Choose
The names of any available templates are displayed as submenu items from the
Double-click on the template name for the document that you want to create.
Rename the document before saving to the appropriate folder.
Renaming a File or Folder
renaming folders
To rename a file or folder perform the following steps:
Select the file or folder that you want to rename.
Choose
The name of the file or folder is selected.
Type a new name for the file or folder, then press
Moving a File or Folder to Trash
Trash
moving files or folders to
To move a file or folder to
Select the file or folder that you want to move to
Choose
Alternatively, you can drag the file or folder to the
When you move a file or folder from a removable media to
Deleting a File or Folder
deleting files or folders
When you delete a file or folder, the file or folder is not moved to
To delete a file or folder perform the following steps:
Select the file or folder that you want to delete.
Choose
This shortcut is independent from the
Alternatively, select the file or folder you want to delete, and press
Creating a Symbolic Link to a File or Folder
creating symbolic link
to file or folder, creating
A symbolic link is a special type of file that points to another file or folder. When you perform an action on a symbolic link, the action is performed on the file or folder to which the symbolic link points. However, when you delete a symbolic link, you delete the link file, not the file to which the symbolic link points.
To create a symbolic link to a file or folder, select the file or folder to which you want to create a link. Choose
Alternatively, grab the item to which you want to create a link, then press-and-hold
By default, the file manager adds an emblem to symbolic links.
The permissions of a symbolic link are determined by the file or folder to which a symbolic link points.
Viewing the Properties of a File or Folder
viewing properties
To view the properties of a file or folder, perform the following steps:
Select the file or folder whose properties you want to view.
Choose
Use the properties dialog to view the properties of the file or folder.
Click
The following table lists the properties that you can view or set for files and folders, the exact information shown depends on the object type:
Property
The name of the file or folder. You can change the name here and the file or folder will be renamed when you click on
The type of object, file or folder for example.
The system path for the object. This represents where the object is situated on your computer, relative to the system root.
Volume
The volume on which a folder resides. This is the physical location of the folder, on which media it resides, for example which hard disk or CDROM drive.
Free space
The amount of free space on the media upon which a folder resides. This represents the maximum amount of data you can copy to this folder.
MIME Type
The official naming of the type of file.
Modified
The date and time at which the object was last changed.
Accessed
The date and time at which the object was last viewed.
File Permissions
Permissions are settings assigned to each file and folder that determine what type of access users can have to the file or folder. For example, you can determine whether other users can read and edit a file that belongs to you, or only have access to read it but not make changes to it.
Each file belongs to a particular user, and is associated with a group that the owner belongs to. The super user "root" has the ability to access any file on the system.
You can set permissions for three categories of users:
Owner
The user that created the file or folder.
Group
A group of users to which the owner belongs.
Others
All other users not already included.
For each category of user, different permissions can be set. These behave differently for files and folders, as follows:
read
Files can be opened
Directory contents can be displayed
write
Files can be edited or deleted
Directory contents can be modified
execute
Executable files can be run as a program
Directories can be entered
For more on changing the permissions for a file or folder, see
Changing Permissions
Changing Permissions for a File
changing permissions
permissions
changing file
To change the permissions of a file, perform the following steps:
Select the file that you want to change.
Choose
Click on the
To change the file's group, choose from the groups the user belongs to in the drop-down selector.
For each of the owner, the group, and all other users, choose from these permissions for the file:
None
No access to the file is possible. (You can't set this for the owner.)
Read-only
The users can open a file to see its contents, but not make any changes.
Read and write
Normal access to a file is possible: it can be opened and saved.
To allow a file to be run as a program, select
Changing Permissions for a Folder
To change the permissions of a folder, perform the following steps:
Select the folder that you want to change.
To change the folder's group, choose from the groups the user belongs to in the drop-down selector.
For each of the owner, the group, and all other users, choose from these folder access permissions:
No access to the folder is possible. (You can't set this for the owner.)
List files only
The users can see the items in the folder, but not open any of them.
Access files
Items in the folder can be opened and modified, provided their own permissions allow it.
Create and delete files
The user can create new files and delete files in the folder, in addition to being able to access existing files.
To set permissions for all the items contained in a folder, set the
Adding Notes to Files and Folders
You can add notes to files or folders. You can add notes to files or folders in the following ways:
From the properties dialog
From
To Add a Note Using the Properties Dialog
notes
adding to files and folders
To add a note to a file or folder, perform the following steps:
Select the file or folder to which you want to add a note.
Click on the
Click

To Add a Note Using Notes in the Side Pane
Open the file or folder to which you want to add a note in the view pane.
Choose
Type the note in the side pane. A note emblem is added to the file or folder in the view pane, and a note icon is added to the side pane. You can click on this icon to display the note.
To delete a note, delete the note text from
Using Bookmarks For Your Favorite Locations
bookmarks
You can keep a list of
Your bookmarks are listed in the following places:
The
The
The
The side pane in the
The list of commonly used locations in the
To open an item that is in your bookmarks, choose the item from a menu.
Adding a Bookmark
To add a bookmark, open the folder or location that you want to bookmark, then choose
If you are using a
To Edit a Bookmark
To edit your bookmarks perform the following steps:
Choose
Select the bookmark on the left side of the
Use this text box to specify the name that identifies the bookmark in the menus.
Use this field to specify the location of the bookmark.
Folders on your system use the
To delete a bookmark, select the bookmark on the left side of the dialog. Click
Using Trash
Trash icon, empty.
Trash is a special folder that holds files that you no longer want to keep. Files in the Trash are not deleted permanently until you empty the trash. This two-stage process is in case you change your mind, or accidentally remove the wrong file.
You can move the following items to
Files
Desktop objects
If you need to retrieve a file from
To Display Trash
You can display the contents of
From a file browser window
Choose
From a spatial window
Choose
From the desktop
Double-click on the
To Empty Trash
emptying
You can empty the contents of
Choose
Right-click on the
When you empty trash, you destroy all files in the trash. Be sure that the trash only contains files you no longer need.
Hidden Files
hidden
files
By default,
Hidden files, whose filename begins with a period (.),
Backup files, whose filename ends with a tilde (~)
Files that are listed in a particular folder's
You may hide or show hidden files in a particular folder by selecting
To set
Hiding a File or Folder
create
To hide a file or folder in
filename
foldername
You may need to refresh the relevant
Item Properties
properties
file properties
The
Change the icon for an item: see
Add or remove emblems for an item: see
Change the UNIX file permissions for an item: see
Choose which application is used to open an item, and others of the same type.
Add notes to an item: see
To open the item properties window, perform the following steps:
Select the item whose properties you want to examine or change. If you select more than one item, the properties window will show the properties that are in common to all items.
Do one of the following:
Right-click on the selected item and choose
Press
Modifying the Appearance of Files and Folders
modifying appearance of files and folders
The
Icons and Emblems
icons
emblems
The file manager displays your files and folders as icons. Depending on the type of the file the icon may be a image representative of the file type, a small thumbnail or preview showing the files contents. You can also add emblems to your file and folder icons. Such emblems appear in addition to the file icon and provide another means to manage your files. For example you can mark a file as important by adding an
File icon with Important emblem.
Notice how the file on the left is distinguished from the file on the right by the addition of the
The file manager automatically applies emblems for the following types of files:
Symbolic links
Items for which you have the following permissions:
No read permission
No write permission
The following table shows the default emblems:
Default Emblem
Symbolic link emblem.

No write permission emblem.
No read permission emblem.
Changing the Icon for a File or Folder
changing
To change the icon that represents an individual file or folder, perform the following steps:
Select the file or folder that you want to change.
On the
Use the
To restore an icon from a custom icon to the default icon, Select the file or folder that you want to change, choose
Adding an Emblem to a File or Folder
adding to file
adding to folder
To add an emblem to an item perform the following steps:
Select the item to which you want to add an emblem.
Right-click on the item, then choose
Click on the
Select the emblem to add to the item.
In browser windows you may also add emblems to items by dragging them from the emblem side pane.
Creating a New Emblem
To Create a new emblem, perform the following steps:
Choose
Click on the
Type a name for the emblem in the
Click on the
Click
Changing Backgrounds
changing backgrounds
backgrounds
changing screen component
The file manager includes background patterns and emblems that you can use to change the appearance of your folders. Background patterns and emblems can also be used on the desktop, on folders and certain side panes in the file browser, and on panels.
To change the background of a window, pane, or panel, perform the following steps:
Choose
Click the
To change the background, drag a pattern or color to the desired window, pane, or panel. To reset the background, drag the
You can set the background of all folders in the file manager by dragging a pattern or color with your right or middle mouse button. When you release the drag, you will see a popup menu with the option to set the pattern or color as the background for all folders.
You can add a new pattern to the list by clicking the
You can add a new color to the list by clicking the
Using Removable Media
removable media
The file manager can initiate various actions when removable media appear, such as mounting it, opening a file manager window showing its contents, or running a suitable application that can handle it (for example a music player for an audio CD). See
To Mount Media
mounting
To
To mount media, insert the media in the appropriate device. An icon that represents the media is added to the desktop. The icon is added only if your system is configured to mount the device automatically when media is detected.
If your system is not configured to mount the device automatically, you must mount the device manually. Double-click on the
You cannot change the name of a removable media icon.
To Display Media Contents
displaying media contents
You can display media contents in any of the following ways:
Double-click on the icon that represents the media on the desktop.
Right-click on the icon that represents the media on the desktop, then choose
A file manager window displays the contents of the media. To reload the display, click on the
To Display Media Properties
displaying media properties
To display the properties of removable media, right-click on the icon that represents the media on the desktop, then choose
To close the properties dialog, click
To Eject Media
ejecting
To eject media, right-click on the media icon on the desktop, then choose
You cannot eject media from a motorized drive when the media is mounted. To eject media, first unmount the media. For example, to remove a USB flash drive, perform the following steps:
Close all file manager windows,
Right-click on the icon that represents the drive on the desktop, then choose
Remove the USB flash drive.
You must unmount removable media before ejecting. Do not remove a USB flash drive before you unmount the flash drive. If you do not unmount the media first you might lose data.
Writing CDs or DVDs
writing CDs
CDs, writing
burning CDs
Writing to a CD or DVD may be useful for backing up your important documents. To do this, your computer must have a CD or DVD writer.
A simple way to check what sort of CD or DVD drive your computer has is to choose
You can start choosing files to burn to a disc at any time. The file manager provides a special folder for files and folders that you wish to write to a CD or DVD. From there you can easily write all of the content (which you place in this special folder) to a CD or DVD.
Creating Data Discs
To write a CD or DVD, perform the following steps:
Open
In a File Browser window, the
Drag the files and folders that you want to write to CD or DVD to the CD/DVD Creator folder.
Insert a writable CD or DVD into the CD/DVD writer device on your system.
Press the
Use the
Write disc to
Select the device to which you want to write the CD from the drop-down list. To create an CD image file, select the
Disc name
Type a name for the CD in the text box.
Data size
Shows the size of the data to be written to disc. The blank disk must be at least this size.
Write speed
Select the speed at which you want to write the CD from the drop-down list.
Click on the
If you selected the
A
You can set the CD/DVD Creator folder to open automatically when you instert a blank disc. See
The filesystem written to the CD will be readable with long filenames on all recent operating systems. Both the Joliet and the Rock Ridge CD-ROM filesystem extensions are used.
Copying CDs or DVDs
You can create a copy of a CD or DVD, either to another disc or to an image file stored on your computer. To create a copy, perform the following steps:
Insert the disc you want to copy.
Choose
Right-click on the CD icon, and choose
The
If you have only one drive with write capabilities, the process will first create a disc image file on your computer. It will then eject the original disk, and ask you to change it for a blank disk on which to write the copy.
If you want to create more than one copy, choose the Image File option on the
Creating a Disc from an Image File
You can write a disc image to a CD or DVD. For example, you may have downloaded a disc image from the internet, or previously created one yourself. Disc images usually have a
To write a disc image, right-click on the disc image file, then choose
Navigating Remote Servers
The
To Access a remote server
accessing
You can use the file manager to access a remote server, be it an FTP site, a Windows share, a WebDav server or an SSH server.
To access a remote server, choose
To connect to a remote server, start by choosing the service type, then enter the server address.
If required by your server, you may provide the following optional information :
Port
Port to connect to on the server. This should only be used if it is necessary to change the default port, you would normally leave this blank.
Folder
Folder to open upon connecting to server.
User Name
The user name of the account used to connect to the server. This should be supplied with the connection information if needed. The user name information is not appropriate for a public FTP connection.
Name to use for connection
The designation of the connection as it will appear in the file manager.
Share
Name of desired windows share. This is only applicable to Windows shares.
Domain name
Windows domain. This is only applicable to Windows shares.
If the server information is provided in the form of a URI, or you require a specialized connection, choose
Once you have filled in the information, click on the
To Access Network Places
network places
If your system is configured to access places on a network, you can use the file manager to access the network places.
To access network places, open the file manager and choose


Accessing Special URI Locations
special URI locations
URI, special
Nautilus has certain special URI locations that enable you to access particular functions from the file manager.
These are intended for advanced users: in most cases, an easier method of accessing the function or location exists.

Special URI Locations
URI Location
burn:///
This is a special location where you can copy files and folders that you want to write to a CD. From here you can write the contents of the location to a CD easily. See also
network:///
Displays network locations to which you can connect, if your system is configured to access locations on a network. To access a network location, double-click on the network location. You can also use this URI to add network locations to your system. See also
Nautilus Preferences
customizing
preferences
preferences, file manager
file manager preferences
Use the
To display the
You can set preferences in the following categories:
The default settings for views.
The behavior of files and folders, executable text files, and Trash.
The information that is displayed in icon captions and the date format.
The columns that appear in the list view and their order.
Preview options to improve the performance of the file manager.
How removable media and connected devices are handled.
Views Preferences
You can specify a default view, and select sort options and display options. You can also specify default settings for icon views and list views.
To specify your default view settings, choose

View new folders using
Select the default view for folders. When you open a folder, the folder is displayed in the view that you select. This can be the icon view, the list view, or the compact view, which is a variant of the icon view that is organized in columns rather than rows..
Arrange items
Select the characteristic by which you want to sort the items in folders that are displayed in this view.
Sort folders before files
Select this option to list folders before files when you sort a folder.
Show hidden and backup files
Select this option to display files that are normally not shown in folders. For more on hidden files, see

Select the default zoom level for folders that are displayed in this view. The zoom level specifies the size of items in a view.
Use compact layout
Select this option to arrange the items in icon view so that the items in the folder are closer to each other.
Text beside icons
Select this option to place the icon captions for items beside the icon rather than under the icon.
All columns have the same width
Select this option to make all columns in a compact view have the same width.
Show only folders
Select this option to display only folders in the
Behavior Preferences
behavior
To set your preferences for files and folders, choose
Single click to open items
Select this option to perform the default action for an item when you click on the item. When this option is selected, and you point to an item, the title of the item is underlined.
Double click to open items
Select this option to perform the default action for an item when you double-click on the item.
Always open in browser windows
Select this option to use
Run executable text files when they are opened
Select this option to run an text executable file when you choose the file. An executable text file is a text file that can execute, that is, a shell script.
View executable text files when they are opened
Select this option to display the contents of an executable text file when you choose the executable text file.
Ask each time
Select this option to display a dialog when you choose an executable text file. The dialog asks whether you want to execute the file or display the file.
Ask before emptying the Trash or deleting files
Select this option to display a confirmation message before
Include a Delete command that bypasses Trash
Select this option to add a
The
The popup menu that is displayed when you right-click on a file, folder, or desktop object.
When you select an item then choose the
Display Preferences
caption preferences
icon captions
An icon caption displays the name of a file or folder in an icon view. The icon caption also includes three additional items of information on the file or folder. The additional information is displayed after the file name. Normally only one item of information is visible, but when you zoom in on an icon, more of the information is displayed. You can modify what additional information is displayed in icon captions.
To set your preferences for icon captions, choose
Select the items of information that you want to display in the icon caption from the three drop-down lists. Select the first item from the first drop-down list, select the second item from the second drop-down list, and so on. The following table describes the items of information that you can select:
Choose this option to display the size of the item.
Choose this option to display the description of the MIME type of the item.
Date Modified
Choose this option to display the last modification date of the item.
Date Accessed
Choose this option to display the date that the item was last accessed.
Choose this option to display the owner of the item.
Choose this option to display the group to which the item belongs.
Permissions

Octal Permissions

Choose this option to display the MIME type of the item.
Choose this option to display no information for the item.
The date
List Columns Preferences
You can specify what information is displayed in list view in file manager windows. You can specify which columns are displayed in list view, and the order in which the columns are displayed.
To set your preferences for list columns, choose
To specify a column to display in list view, select the option that corresponds to the column, then click on the
Use the
To use the default columns and column positions, click on the
The following table describes the columns that you can display:
Choose this option to display the name of the item.
Choose this option to display the description of the MIME type of the item from the
Preview Preferences
preview
The file manager include some file preview features. The preview features can affect the speed with which the file manager responds to your requests. You can modify the behavior of some of these features to improve the speed of the file manager. For each preview preference, you can select one of the options described in the following table:
Always
Performs the action for both local files, and files on other file systems.
Local Files Only
Performs the action for local files only.
Never
Never performs the action.
To set your preview preferences, choose

Show text in icons
Select an option to specify when to preview the content of text files in the icon that represents the file.
Show thumbnails
Select an option to specify when to show thumbnails of image files. The file manager stores the thumbnail files for each folder in a
Only for files smaller than
Specify the maximum file size for files for which the file manager creates a thumbnail.
Preview sound files
Select an option to specify when to preview sound files.
Count number of items
Select an option to specify when to show the number of items in folders. When in icon view, you might need to increase your zoom level to see the number of items in each folder.
Media Preferences
You can configure how
Ask what to do
Make
Do Nothing
Do nothing.
Open Folder
Treat the media or device like an ordinary folder and open it in a
Open with other Application
Select an application to run with the
The most common media formats can be configured in the
To configure the handling for other media formats, first select the format in the

Never prompt or start programs on media insertion
Select this option to prevent
Browse media when inserted
When this option is selected,
Extending Nautilus
running scripts
scripts, running from file manager
Nautilus can be extended in two main ways. Through
Nautilus Scripts
Nautilus can run scripts. Scripts are typically simpler in operation than full
To run a script on a particular file, select the file in the view pane. Choose
You may also access scripts from the context menu.
If you do not have any scripts installed, the script menu will not appear.
Installing File Manager Scripts
The file manager includes a special folder where you can store your scripts. All executable files in this folder will appear in the Scripts menu. The script folder is located at $HOME/.gnome2/nautilus-scripts.
To install a script, simply copy the script to the script folder and give it the user executable permission.
To view the contents of your scripts folder, if you already have scripts installed, choose
A good source to download
Writing File Manager Scripts
When executed from a local folder, scripts will be passed the selected file names. When executed from a remote folder (e.g. a folder showing web or ftp content), scripts will be passed no parameters.
The following table shows variables passed to the script :
Environment variable
NAUTILUS_SCRIPT_SELECTED_FILE_PATHS
newline-delimited paths for selected files (only if local)
NAUTILUS_SCRIPT_SELECTED_URIS
newline-delimited URIs for selected files
NAUTILUS_SCRIPT_CURRENT_URI
URI for current location
NAUTILUS_SCRIPT_WINDOW_GEOMETRY
position and size of current window
Nautilus Extensions

nautilus-actions
This extension allows you to easily assign actions based on file type
nautilus-send-to
This extension provides a simple way to send a file or folder to another using email, instant messaging, or Bluetooth.
nautilus-open-terminal.
This extension provides an easy way to open a terminal at the selected starting location.
Some popular
If you are looking for the
Using the Main Menubar
This chapter describes how to use the GNOME Panel Menubar.
The panel menubar is your main point of access to GNOME. Use the
The following sections describe these three menus.
By default, the panel menubar is on the
Applications Menu
Applications menu
The
Each submenu correponds to a category. For example, in the
To launch an application, perform the following steps:
Open the
Move the mouse down the menu to the category the application you want is in. Each submenu opens as your mouse passes over the category.
Click the menu item for the application.
When you install a new application, it is automatically added to the
Places Menu
Places menu
The
Your Home folder
The Desktop folder, which corresponds to the items displays in the desktop.
The items in your Nautilus bookmarks. For more on this, see
Your computer, which shows all your drives.
The Nautilus CD/DVD Creator. For more on this, see
The local network. For more on this, see
The last three items on the menu perform actions rather than open locations.


The
System Menu
The
The
The
The
The
Choose
Choose
For more on logging out and shutting down, see
Customizing the Panel Menubar
You can modify the contents of the following menus:



To edit the items in these menus, right-click on the panel menubar, and choose
The
To remove an item from a menu, deselect it in the list. The item can be added back to the menu by selecting it once again.
The
Configuring Your Desktop
This chapter describes how to use the preference tools to customize the GNOME Desktop.
A preference tool is a small application that allows you to change settings in the GNOME Desktop. Each preference tool covers a particular aspect of your computer. For example, with the
To open a preference tool, choose
With a few exceptions, the changes you make to settings in a preference tool take effect immediately, without needing to close the preference tool. You can keep the preference tool window open while you try the changes, and make further changes if you wish.
Some applications or system components may add their own preference tools to the menu.
Some preference tools let you modify essential parts of your system, and therefore require administrative access. When you open the preference tool, a dialog box will prompt you for your password. These are in the
Personal
Assistive Technologies Preferences
accessibility
setting assistive technology preferences
Assistive Technologies
Use the




Assistive Technology Preferences
Enable assistive technologies
Select this option to enable assistive technologies in the GNOME Desktop.
Note that for technical reasons, you have to log in again after enabling this option for it to be fully effective.
Keyboard Shortcuts Preferences
Keyboard Shortcuts
configuring
keyboard shortcuts
Use the
A
To edit a keyboard shortcut, perform the following steps:
Click the action in the list. If you are using the the keyboard, use the arrow keys to select the shortcut and press
Press the new key or key combination you want to assign to the action.
To clear a shortcut, press
To cancel assigning a shortcut, click elsewhere in the window or press
The shortcuts you can customize are grouped as follows:
These are general shortcuts for the whole desktop, such as logging out,
Sound
Shortcuts for controlling your music player and the system volume.
Window Management
Shortcuts for working with windows and workspaces, such as maximizing or moving the current window, and switching to another workspace. For more information on these kinds of actions, see
Accessibility
Shortcuts for starting assistive technologies, such as a screen reader, a magnifier or an on-screen keyboard.
Custom Shortcuts
Custom shortcuts that have been added with the
To add a custom shortcut, use the
To remove a custom shortcut, use the
Preferred Applications
default applications
preferred applications
Use the

You can customize the preferences for the




For each preferred application category, a drop-down menu contains a list of possible applications you can choose from. The list depends on the applications installed on your computer.
In each category, the last item in the menu (
Custom Command Options
custom command
The following table summarizes the various options you can choose from when you select
Custom command options
Enter the command to execute to start the custom application. For the
Run in terminal
Select this option to run the command in a terminal window. Select this option for an application that does not create a window in which to run.
Execute flag (Terminal only)
Most terminal applications have an option that cause them to treat the remaining command line options as commands to run (
Run at start (Accessibility only)
Select this option to run the command as soon as your session begins. For more accessibility options, see
Look and Feel
Appearance Preferences
The
Theme,
Desktop Background,
Fonts,
User Interface.
Theme Preferences
themes
setting controls options
setting window frame options
setting icons options
setting frame theme options
Theme
A theme is a group of coordinated settings that specifies the visual appearance of a part of the GNOME Desktop. You can choose themes to change the appearance of the GNOME Desktop. Use the
A theme contains settings that affect different parts of the GNOME Desktop, as follows:
Controls

Colors

It is important to choose pairs of colors that have a good contrast with each other, otherwise text may become hard to read.
Window frame

Icons

Pointer

To Create a Custom Theme
The themes that are listed in the
To create a custom theme, perform the following steps:
Start the
Select a theme in the list of themes.
Click on the
Select the controls option that you want to use in the custom theme from the list in the
Click on the
Click on the
Click
On the
Type a name and a short description for the custom theme in the dialog, then click
To Install a New Theme
You can add a theme to the list of available themes. The new theme must be an archive file that is tarred and zipped. That is, the new theme must be a
To install a new theme, perform the following steps:
Click on the
Enter the location of the theme archive file in the location entry. Alternatively, select the theme archive file in the file list. When you have selected the file, click
Click on the
To Delete a Theme Option
You can delete controls options, window frame options, or icons options.
To delete a controls option, window frame option, or icons option, perform the following steps:
Click on the tab for the type of option that you want to delete.
Select the theme option you want to delete.
Use the
Desktop Background Preferences
customizing background
GNOME Desktop preference tools
Background
customizing desktop background
The
You can customize the desktop background in the following ways:
Select an image for the desktop background. The image is superimposed on the desktop background color. The desktop background color is visible if you select a transparent image, or if the image does not cover the entire desktop.
Select a color for the desktop background. You can select a solid color, or create a gradient effect with two colors. A gradient effect is a visual effect where one color blends gradually into another color.
You can also drag a color or a pattern to the desktop from the

Desktop Background
Choose an image from the list. Alternately, you can use the
Style
To specify how to display the image, select one of the following options from the





Add
Click on the
Choose the image that you want to remove, then click
To specify a color scheme, use the options in the
You can specify a color scheme in one of the following ways:
Choose
To choose the color that you require, click on the
Choose
Click on the
Click on the
Choose
Click on the
Click on the
Font Preferences
Font
fonts
window title
terminal
rendering
Use the
Choosing Fonts
The font selector button shows the name of the font and its point size. The name is also shown in bold, italic, or regular type.
To change the font, click the font selector button. The font picker dialog opens. Select the font family, style, and point size from the lists. The preview area shows your current choice. Click
You can choose fonts for the following parts of the desktop:
Application font
This font is used in the menus, toolbars, and dialog boxes of applications.
Document font
This font is used to display documents in applications.
In some applications, you can override this choice in the application's preferences dialog.
Desktop font
This font is used in icon labels on the desktop.
Window title font
This font is used in the titlebars of windows.
Fixed width font
This font is used in the
Font Rendering
You can set the following options relating to how fonts are displayed on the screen:
Rendering
To specify how to render fonts on your screen, select one of the following options:




Details
Click on this button to specify further details of how to render fonts on your screen.




Interface Preferences
toolbars, customizing appearance
Menus & Toolbars
in applications, customizing appearance
You can use the
As you make changes to the settings, the preview display in the window updates. This allows you to see the changes if no application windows are currently open.
Show icons in menus
Select this option to display an icon beside items in application menus and the panel menu. Not all menu items have an icon.
Editable menu shortcut keys
Selecting this option allows you to define new keyboard shortcuts for menu items.
To change an application shortcut key, open the menu, and with the mouse pointer on the menu item you wish to change, press the new combination of keys. To remove a shortcut key, press
When using this feature, you will not be warned if assigning a new shortcut key to a command also removes it from another command.
There is no way to restore the original, default keyboard shortcut for a command.
This feature does not maintain shortcuts that are normally common to all applications, such as
Toolbar button labels
Choose one of the following options to specify what to display on the toolbars in your GNOME-compliant applications:




Windows Preferences
window manager
Use the

Select windows when the mouse moves over them
Select this option to give focus to a window when you point to the window. The window retains focus until you point to another window.
Raise selected windows after an interval
Select this option to raise windows a short time after the window receives focus.
Interval before raising
Specify the interval to wait before raising a window that has received focus.
Double-click titlebar to perform this action
Select the behavior that you want to occur when you double-click on a window titlebar. Select one of the following options:






If a window is already maximized or rolled up, double-clicking on the titlebar will return it to its normal state.
To move a window, press-and-hold this key then grab the window
Select the key to press-and-hold when you drag a window to move the window.
The position of the Control, Alt and Super keys on the keyboard can be modified in the Keyboard Layout Options dialog, see
Screensaver Preferences
screensaver
A
Use the
You can modify the following settings:
Screensaver
Select the
The
The
Which screensavers are shown in the remainder of the list depends on your distributor or vendor.
Regard the computer as idle after...
Your computer becomes idle after this amount of time has passed with no input from you, such as moving the mouse or typing. This may affect power management (the monitor may power down for example) or instant messaging (chat applications may set your status as "away"). Use the slider to set the length of time in minutes or hours.
Activate screensaver when computer is idle
Select this option to have the screensaver start after the set length of time.
Lock screen when screensaver is active
When this option is selected, the screensaver will prompt you for your password when you try to return to the desktop. For more on locking your screen, see
Internet and Network
Network Settings
The
You will be prompted for the administrator password when you start
Getting started
The
Connections
Shows all network interfaces, it also allows you to modify their settings.
General
Allows you to modify your system host name and domain name.
DNS
Contains two sections, the
Hosts
Shows the list of aliases for accessing other computers.
To modify a connection settings
In the
Ethernet and IRLAN interfaces
You can modify the way the interface is configured (DHCP or manually), if the interface is configured manually, you can also modify the interface IP address, netmask and gateway.
Wireless interfaces
You can modify the way the interface is configured (DHCP or manually), if the interface is configured manually, you can also modify the interface IP address, netmask and gateway, you can also modify the network name (ESSID) for this interface.
Parallel line interfaces
You can modify the interface IP address, as well as the remote IP address.
PPP/Modem interfaces
You can modify the modem device, whether you want it to dial using tones or pulses, the modem volume, the phone number, the username and password that your ISP provided and other advanced settings for PPP.
To activate or deactivate an interface
In the
To change your host name and domain name
In the
To add a new domain name server
In the
To delete a domain name server
In the
To add a new search domain
In the
To delete a search domain
In the
To add a new host alias
In the
To modify a host alias
In the
To delete a host alias
In the
To save your current network configuration as a "Location"
Press the
To delete a location
Press the
To switch to a location
Select one location from the
Network Proxy Preferences
Network Proxy
network proxy
setting preferences
Internet
configuring connection
proxy
The
You can configure the GNOME Desktop to connect to a
Why would one want to use a proxy? This description makes it sounds like it's a user preference, rather than being dictated by the network you're on. We should make this more clear.
Since it is possible that you need to use a different proxy configuration in different places,
Direct internet connection
Select this option to connect to the Internet without a proxy server.
Manual proxy configuration
Select this option to connect to the Internet through a proxy server and configure the proxy settings manually.
HTTP proxy
Enter the domain name or IP address of the proxy server to use when you request an HTTP service. Enter the port number of the HTTP service on the proxy server in the
If the HTTP proxy server requires authentication, click the
Secure HTTP proxy
Enter the domain name or IP address of the proxy server to use when you request a secure HTTP service. Enter the port number of the secure HTTP service on the proxy server in the
FTP proxy
Enter the domain name or IP address of the proxy server to use when you request an FTP service. Enter the port number of the FTP service on the proxy server in the
Socks host
Enter the domain name or IP address of the Socks host to use. Enter the port number for the Socks protocol on the proxy server in the
Automatic proxy configuration
Select this option if you want to connect to the Internet through a proxy server, and you want to configure the proxy server automatically.
Automatic proxy configuration works by means of a so-called PAC file, which your browser downloads from a web server. If you don't specify the URL for a PAC file in the
Autoconfiguration URL
Enter the URL of a PAC file that contains the information required to configure the proxy server automatically.
Set which hosts should not use the proxy in the
Remote Desktop Preferences
setting session sharing preferences
The

Session Sharing Preferences
Allow other users to view your desktop
Select this option to enable remote users to view your session. All keyboard, pointer, and clipboard events from the remote user are ignored.
Allow other users to control your desktop
Select this option to enable other to access and control your session from a remote location.
When a user tries to view or control your desktop


Select the following security considerations when a user tries to view or control your session:
Password
Enter the password that the client who attempts to view or control your session must enter.
Hardware
Keyboard Preferences
Keyboard
keyboard
configuring general preferences
Use the
To open the
Use the

Key presses repeat when key is held down
Select this option to enable keyboard repeat. If keyboard repeat is enabled, when you press-and-hold a key, the action associated with the key is performed repeatedly. For example, if you press-and-hold a character key, the character is typed repeatedly.
Delay
Select the delay from the time you press a key to the time that the action repeats.
Speed
Select the speed at which the action is repeated.
Cursor blinks in text boxes and fields
Select this option to enable the cursor to blink in fields and text boxes.
Use the slider to specify the speed at which the cursor blinks in fields and text boxes.
Type to test settings
The test area is an interactive interface so you can see how the keyboard settings affect the display as you type. Type text in the test area to test the effect of your settings.
Keyboard Layouts Preferences
Use the
This will allow GNOME to make use of special media keys on your keyboard, and to show the correct characters for your keyboard's language.
Keyboard model
Use the browse button (labelled with the currently selected keyboard model) to choose another keyboard make and model.
Separate layout for each window
When this option is selected, each window has its own keyboard layout. Changing to a different layout will only affect the current window.
This allows you to to type with a Russian keyboard layout in a word processor, then switch to your web browser and type with an English keyboard layout, for example.
Selected Layouts
You can switch between selected layouts to change the characters your keyboard produces when you type. To add a layout, click
To switch between keyboard layouts, use the
To add a layout to the list of selected layouts, click the
Click
Click the
Keyboard Layout Options
The
Expand each group label to show the available options. A label in boldface indicates that the options in the group have been changed from the default setting.
The options shown in this dialog depend on the X windowing system you are using. Not all the following options might be listed on your system, and not all the options shown might work on your system.
Adding the EuroSign to certain keys
Use these options to add the Euro currency symbol  to a key as a third-level character. To access this symbol, you must assign a
Alt/Win key behavior
This group of options allows you to assign the behaviour of Unix modifier keys Super, Meta, and Hyper to the
CapsLock key behavior
This group has several options for the
Compose key position
The Compose key allows you to combine two keypresses to make a single character. This is used to create an accented character that might not be on your keyboard layout. For example, press the Compose key, then
Control key position
Use this group of options to set the location of the
Group Shift/Lock behavior
Select keys or key combinations to switch your keyboard layout when pressed.
Miscellaneous compatibility options
Shift with numpad keys works as in MS Windows.
With this option selected, using
With this option unselected, use
Special keys (Ctrl+Alt+lt;keygt;) handled in a server.
Select this option to have certain keyboard shortcuts passed to the X windowing system instead of being handled by GNOME.
Third level choosers
A
Use this group to select a key you want to act as a third level modifier key.
Pressing the third-level key and
The third and fourth level characters for your keyboard layout are shown in the
Use keyboard LED to show alternative group.
Use this option to specify that one of the light indicators on your keyboard should indicate when an alternative keyboard layout is in use.
The selected keyboard light will no longer indicate its standard function. For example, the Caps Lock light will not react to the
Keyboard Accessibility Preferences
AccessX
preference tools, Keyboard Accessibility
configuring accessibility options
configuring keyboard
Keyboard Accessibility
The
This section describes each of the preferences you can set. For a more task-oriented description of keyboard accessibility, see the

Accessibility Preferences
Accessibility features can be toggled with keyboard shortcuts
Select this option to show an icon in the notification area that offers quick access to accessibility features.
Simulate simultaneous keypresses
sticky keys
Select this option to perform multiple simultaneous keypress operations by pressing the keys in sequence. Alternatively, to enable the sticky keys feature, press
Disable sticky keys if two keys are pressed together
Select this option to specify that when you press two keys simultaneously, you can no longer press keys in sequence to perform multiple simultaneous keypresses.
Only accept long keypresses
slow keys
Select this option to control the period of time that you must press-and-hold a key before acceptance. Alternatively, to enable the slow keys feature, press-and-hold
Use the slider to specify the period of time that you must press-and-hold a key before acceptance.
Ignore fast duplicate keypresses
bounce keys
Select this option to accept a key input and to control the key repeat characteristics of the keyboard.
Use the slider to specify the interval to wait after the first keypress before the automatic repeat of a pressed key.
To configure audio feedback for keyboard accessibility features, click the
Keyboard Accessibility Audio Feedback
Configure audio feedback for keyboard accessibility features.

Audio Feedback Preferences
Beep when accessibility features are turned on or off
Select this option for an audible indication when a feature such as sticky keys or slow keys is activated, or deactivated.
Beep when a toggle key is pressed
toggle keys
Select this option for an audible indication of a toggle keypress. You hear one beep when a toggle key is turned on. You hear two beeps when a toggle key is turned off.
Beep when a modifier key is pressed
Select this option for an audible indication when you press a modifier key.
Beep when a key is pressed
Select this option for an audible indication when a key is pressed.
Beep when a key is accepted
Select this option for an audible indication when a key is accepted.
Beep when a key is rejected
Select this option for an audible indication when a key is rejected.
Mouse Keys Preferences
The options in the

Typing Break Preferences
Pointer can be controlled using the keypad
mouse keys
Select this option to make the numeric keypad emulate mouse actions. The list of keys and their equivalences is in the
Acceleration
Use the slider to specify how long it takes the pointer to accelerate to maximum speed.
Use the slider to specify the maximum speed that the pointer moves across the screen.
Use the slider to specify the period of time that must pass after a keypress before the pointer moves.
Configure the Typing Break Preferences to make GNOME remind you to rest after you have been using the keyboard and mouse for a long time. During a Typing Break, the screen will be locked.

Lock screen to enforce typing break
Select this option to lock the screen when you are due a typing break.
Work interval lasts
Use the spin box to specify how long you can work before a typing break occurs.
Break interval lasts
Use the spin box to specify the length of your typing breaks.
Allow postponing of breaks
Select this option if you want to be able to postpone typing breaks.
If you stop using the keyboard and mouse for a length of time equal to the
Mouse Preferences
Mouse
mouse
With the
configure your mouse for right-hand use or for left-hand use,
specify the speed and sensitivity of mouse movement,
configure mouse accessibility features.
General Mouse Preferences
Use the

Mouse Button Preferences
Right-handed
Select this option to configure your mouse for right-hand use. When you configure your mouse for right-hand use, the left mouse button is the primary button and the right mouse button is the secondary button.
Left-handed
Select this option to configure your mouse for left-hand use. When you configure your mouse for left-hand use, the functions of the left mouse button and the right mouse button are swapped.
Show position of pointer when the Control key is pressed
Select this option to enable a mouse pointer animation when you press and release the Control key. This feature can assist you to locate the mouse pointer.
The position of the Control key on the keyboard can be modified in the Keyboard Layout Options dialog, see
Use the slider to specify the speed at which your mouse pointer moves on your screen when you move your mouse.
Sensitivity
Use the slider to specify how sensitive your mouse pointer is to movements of your mouse.
Threshold
Use the slider to specify the distance that you must move an item before the move action is interpreted as a drag-and-drop action.
Timeout
Use the slider to specify the amount of time that can pass between clicks when you double-click. If the interval between the first and second clicks exceeds the time that is specified here, the action is not interpreted as a double-click.
Use the light bulb icon to check double-click sensitivity: the light will light up briefly for a click, but stay lit for a double-click.
Mouse Accessibility Preferences
Use the
Open a contextual menu by clicking and holding the primary mouse button; this is useful for users that can manipulate only one button.
Single click
A single click of the primary mouse button
Double click
A double click of the primary mouse button
Drag click
A click that begins a drag operation
Secondary click
A single click of the secondary mouse button
Perform different types of mouse button click by software; this useful for users that are not able to manipulate any buttons. The types of click that can be performed are:

Mouse Motion Preferences
Trigger secondary click by holding down the primary button
Select this option to enable simulated secondary clicks by pressing the primary mouse button for an extended time.

Use the slider to specify how long the primary button must be pressed to simulate a secondary click.
Initiate click when stopping pointer movement
Select this option to enable automatic clicks when the mouse stops. Use the additional preferences in the

Use the slider to specify how long the pointer must remain at rest before an automatic click will be triggered.

Use the slider to specify how much the pointer may move to still be considered at rest.
Choose type of click beforehand
Select this option to pick the type of click to perform from a window or panel applet.
Show click type window
When this option is enabled, the different types of click (single click, double click, drag click or secondary click) can be selected in a window.
The
Choose type of click with mouse gestures
Select this option to pick the type of click by moving the mouse in a certain direction. The four combo boxes below this option allow to assign directions to the different types of click. Note that each direction can be used only for one type of click.
Choose the direction to trigger a single click.
Dpuble click
Choose the direction to trigger a double click.
Choose the direction to trigger a drag click.
Choose the direction to trigger a secondary click.
Display
Use the
On most laptop keyboards, you can use the key combination
You can drag and move the graphical representations of the monitors in the upper part of the window to arrange how they are connected to form your desktop area. Note that the application displays small 'stickers' in the top left corner of each monitor to help you identify which rectangle corresponds to which monitor.
In contrast to most other preference tools, changes you make in the

Mirror Screens
Select this option to have all monitors show the whole desktop.
Detect Monitors
Use this button to make your desktop notice newly plugged in or unplugged monitors. This is necessary, since it would cost too much energy to constantly check for these changes.
Resolution
Select the resolution to use for the currently selected monitor from the drop-down list.
Refresh rate
Select the refresh rate to use for the currently selected monitor from the drop-down list. The
Rotation
Select the rotation for the currently selected monitor. This option may not be supported on all graphics cards.
Show displays in panel
Select this option to show an icon in the notification area that allows you to quickly change the rotation.
Sound Preferences
sound
associating events with sounds
events, associating sounds with
volume
The
You can customize the settings for the
Sound Events
Input
Output
You can change the overall output volume using the
Sound Effects Preferences
A sound theme is collection of sound effects that are associated to various events, such as opening a dialog, clicking a button or selecting an item in a menu. One of the most prominent event sounds is the


Use the
The
Sound Theme
Use this combobox to select a different sound theme.
Choose

Choose an alternative sound for the System Bell from this list.
Selecting a list element plays the sound.

Uncheck this option if you don't want to hear sounds for window-related events (such as a dialog or a menu appearing) and button clicks.
Sound Input Preferences
Use the


Use the input volume slider to control the input level.
The
Input level
The

Choose the device that you want to receive sound input from.
Note that the input volume can also be controlled with the microphone icon that is shown in the notification area of the panel when an application is listening for sound input.
Sound Output Preferences
Use the


Use the output volume slider to control the overall output volume.
The
Note that the

Choose the device that you want to hear sound output from.

Use the
Note that the output volume can also be controlled with the speaker icon that is shown in the notification area of the panel.
Application Sound Preferences
Use the
Each application that is currently playing sound is identified by its name and icon.
System
Multimedia Systems Selector
See the
Sessions Preferences
startup applications
The
You can customize the settings for sessions and startup applications in the following functional areas:
Session Options
Startup Programs
Setting Session Preferences
setting options
Use the

Automatically remember running applications when logging out
session-managed
Select this option if you want the session manager to save the state of your session when logging out. The session manager saves the session-managed applications that are open, and the settings associated with the session-managed applications when you log out. The next time that you start a session, the applications start automatically, with the saved settings.
Remember currently running applications
Select this option if you want the session manager to save the current state of your session. The session manager saves the session-managed applications that are open, and the settings associated with the session-managed applications. The next time that you start a session, the applications start automatically, with the saved settings.
Configuring Startup Applications
non-session-managed
Use the
You can also start session-managed applications automatically. For more information, see

Startup Programs Preferences
Additional startup programs
Use this table to manage non-session-managed startup applications as follows:
To add a startup application, click on the
To edit a startup application, select the startup application, then click on the
To delete a startup application, select the startup application, then click on the
@@image: 'figures/normal_pointer.png'; md5=47960823c1883b50400d4fb7be857c72
@@image: 'figures/busy_pointer.png'; md5=99db6994613731ca7687bd700c471b2d
@@image: 'figures/resize_pointer.png'; md5=43e8186584e1879ba078caedf0a9f33f
@@image: 'figures/hyperlink_pointer.png'; md5=41030ede726c6f3d9f1bd1f05456f3f6
@@image: 'figures/ibeam_pointer.png'; md5=77aa93e74d640173c96801747bf564d1
@@image: 'figures/not_available_pointer.png'; md5=19601aaf360da25b8a0d1d18b45ed99e
@@image: 'figures/move_panel_object_pointer.png'; md5=e4244fb77b0df2b0c451328dce6fa175
@@image: 'figures/movewindow_pointer.png'; md5=8496a1d62cbfbe5272f8f5fa6f173c4c
Basic Skills
This chapter introduces you to the basic skills that you need to work with the GNOME Desktop.
Mouse Skills
basic skills
mouse skills
This section describes what the mouse buttons do, and what the different pointers mean.
A mouse is a pointing device that lets you move the mouse pointer on the screen. The mouse pointer is usually a small arrow with which you point to objects on your screen. Pressing a mouse button will perform a particular action on the object over which your mouse pointer is situated, depending on which button you press.
Mouse Button Conventions
button conventions
The instructions in this manual are for three buttoned, right handed mouse devices, the most common type. If you use another type of mouse or pointing device, you should take care to locate the corresponding buttons on your mouse. If you use a left-handed mouse see the paragraph on setting mouse orientation below.
If you set your mouse device to be left handed, you should reverse the mouse button conventions used in this manual. This is normally also implied in most documentation and in many applications.
Some mice lack a middle button. If you have a two-button mouse device, then your system may be configured to use
The mouse button conventions used in this manual are as follows:
Left mouse button
The button on the left side of a mouse device. This is the main mouse button, used for selecting, activating, pressing buttons etc... When you are told to "click" it is implied that you should click with the left button, unless specifically stated.
Middle mouse button
The middle button of a mouse device. On many mice with a scroll wheel, the scroll wheel can be pushed down for a middle mouse button click.
Right mouse button
The button on the right side of a mouse device. Often, this button displays a context menu for the object under the pointer.
Use
Mouse Actions
Actions
action conventions
action terminology
The following conventions are used in this manual to describe actions that you take with the mouse:
Definition
Click
Press and release the left mouse button, without moving the mouse.
Same as
Press and release the middle mouse button, without moving the mouse.
Press and release the right mouse button, without moving the mouse.
Double-click
Press and release the left mouse button twice in rapid succession without moving the mouse. You can configure the sensitivity to double-clicks by changing the
Click-and-drag
Press and do not release the left mouse button, and then move the mouse with the button still held down, and finally release the button.
Dragging with the mouse is used in many different contexts. This moves an object around the screen with the mouse. The object is
For example, you can change the position of a window by dragging on its title bar, or move a file by dragging its icon from one window and dropping it on another.
The left mouse buttons is usually used to perform drag actions, although the middle mouse button is sometimes used for an alternate drag action.
Click-and-hold
Press and do not release the left mouse button.
actions
You can perform the following actions with the mouse:
Select text.
Select items.
Drag items.
Activate items.
Paste text.
Move items.
Move windows to the back.
Use the right mouse button to open a context menu for an item, if a menu applies. For most items, you can also use the
For example, when viewing files in the file manager, you select a file by clicking with the left mouse button and open a file by double-clicking with the left mouse button. Clicking with the right mouse button will bring up a context menu for that file.
In most applications, you can select text with your left mouse button and paste it in another application using the middle mouse button. This is called primary selection paste, and works separately from your normal clipboard operations.
To select more than one item, you can hold the
Mouse Pointers
Pointers
pointers
mouse pointers
As you use the mouse, the appearance of the mouse pointer can change. The appearance of the pointer provides feedback about a particular operation, location, or state.
The following mouse pointers are shown as your mouse passes over different elements of the screen:
Your mouse pointers will differ from those shown here if you are using a different
Normal pointer.

This pointer appears during normal use of the mouse.
Busy pointer.

This pointer appears over a window that is busy performing a task. You cannot use the mouse to give this window any input, but you can move to another window and work with that.
Resize pointer.

This pointer indicates that you can grab the control to resize parts of the interface. This appears over the borders of windows and over resize handles between panes in a window. The direction of the arrows indicates in which direction you can resize.
Hand pointer

This pointer appears when you hover over a
I-beam pointer

This pointer is shown when the mouse is over text that you can select or edit. Click to place the cursor where you want to type text, or drag to select text.
The following mouse pointers are shown when dragging an item such as a file, or a piece of text. They indicate the result of releasing the mouse button to drop the object being moved.

This pointer indicates that when you drop the object, the object is moved from the old location to the new location.

This pointer indicates that when you drop the object, a copy of the object is created where you drop it.

This pointer indicates that when you drop the object, a

This pointer indicates that when you drop the object, you will be given a choice of what to do. A menu will open to allow you to choose which operation you would like to perform. For instance, you may be able to move, copy, or create a symbolic link.
Not available pointer.

This pointer indicates that you cannot drop the object at the current location. Releasing the mouse button now will have no effect: the dragged object will be returned to its starting location.
Move panel object pointer.

This pointer appears when you drag a panel or a panel object with the middle mouse button. See
Move window pointer.

This pointer appears when you drag a window to move it. See
Keyboard Skills
keyboard skills
For almost every task that you can perform with the mouse, you can use the keyboard to perform the same task.
You can use shortcut keys to perform general GNOME Desktop tasks and to work with interface items such as panels and windows. You can also use shortcut keys in applications. To customize your shortcut keys, use the
Many PC keyboards come with two special keys for the Windows operating system: a key with a Microsoft Windows logo and a key for accessing context menus.
In GNOME, the Windows key is often configured to act as an additional modifier key, called the
You can also modify the GNOME Desktop preferences to use keyboard accessibility features. See
The following sections describe the shortcut keys that you can use throughout the desktop and applications.
Global Shortcut Keys
global
Global shortcut keys enable you to use the keyboard to perform tasks related to your desktop, rather than tasks on the currently selected window or application. The following table lists some global shortcut keys:
Shortcut Key
F1
Open the
F2
Display the
Take a screenshot of the entire desktop. See
Take a screenshot of the currently focused window.
Ctrl
Arrow keys
Switch to the workspace to the specified direction of the current workspace. See
D
Minimize all windows and give focus to the desktop.
Tab
Switch between windows. A list of windows that you can select is displayed. Release the keys to select a window. You can press the
Switch the focus between the panels and the desktop. A list of items that you can select is displayed. Release the keys to select an item. You can press the
Window Shortcut Keys
window
Window shortcut keys allow you to use the keyboard to perform tasks on the currently focused window. The following table lists some window shortcut keys:
F4
Close the currently focused window.
F5
Unmaximize the current window, if it is maximized.
F7
Move the currently focused window. After pressing this shortcut, you can move the window using either the mouse or the arrow keys. To finish the move, click the mouse or press any key on the keyboard.
F8
Resize the currently focused window. After pressing this shortcut, you can resize the window using either the mouse or the arrow keys. To finish the resize, click the mouse or press any key on the keyboard.
F9
Minimize the current window.
F10
Maximize the current window.
spacebar
Open the window menu for the currently selected window. The window menu allows you to perform actions on the window, such as minimizing, moving between workspaces, and closing.
Shift
Move the current window to another workspace in the specified direction. See
Application Keys
application
Application shortcut keys enable you to perform application tasks. You can use shortcut keys to perform application tasks more quickly than if you use a mouse. The following table lists some common application shortcut keys:
N
Create a new document or window.
X
Cut the selected text or region and place it on the clipboard.
C
Copy the selected text or region onto the clipboard.
V
Paste the contents of the clipboard.
Z
Undo the last action.
S
Save the current document to disk.
Load the online help document for the application.
In addition to these shortcut keys, all applications support a set of keys to navigate and work with the user interface. These keys allow you to perform operations that you might normally perform with a mouse. The following table describes some interface control keys:
Keys
Arrow keys or
Move between controls in the interface or items in a list.

Activate or choose the selected item.
Activate the left-most menu of the application window.
Activate the context menu for the selected item.
Esc
Close a menu without selecting a menu item, or cancel a drag operation.
Access Keys
access keys
A
To open a menu, hold the
For example, to open a new window in the
You can also use access keys to access elements in a dialog. In a dialog, one letter in most dialog elements is underlined. To access a particular dialog element, hold
Desktop User Guide
The GNOME User Guide is a collection of documentation which details general use of the GNOME Desktop environment. Topics covered include sessions, panels, menus, file management, and preferences.
2005
Shaun McCance
2004
Sun Microsystems
2003
GNOME Documentation Project
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. You can find a copy of the GFDL at this
This manual is part of a collection of GNOME manuals distributed under the GFDL. If you want to distribute this manual separately from the collection, you can do so by adding a copy of the license to the manual, as described in section 6 of the license.
Many of the names used by companies to distinguish their products and services are claimed as trademarks. Where those names appear in any GNOME documentation, and the members of the GNOME Documentation Project are made aware of those trademarks, then the names are in capital letters or initial capital letters.
DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES THAT THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS FREE OF DEFECTS MERCHANTABLE, FIT FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGING. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY, ACCURACY, AND PERFORMANCE OF THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS WITH YOU. SHOULD ANY DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION PROVE DEFECTIVE IN ANY RESPECT, YOU (NOT THE INITIAL WRITER, AUTHOR OR ANY CONTRIBUTOR) ASSUME THE COST OF ANY NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. THIS DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY CONSTITUTES AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THIS LICENSE. NO USE OF ANY DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS AUTHORIZED HEREUNDER EXCEPT UNDER THIS DISCLAIMER; AND
UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES AND UNDER NO LEGAL THEORY, WHETHER IN TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE), CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, SHALL THE AUTHOR, INITIAL WRITER, ANY CONTRIBUTOR, OR ANY DISTRIBUTOR OF THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT, OR ANY SUPPLIER OF ANY OF SUCH PARTIES, BE LIABLE TO ANY PERSON FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY CHARACTER INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF GOODWILL, WORK STOPPAGE, COMPUTER FAILURE OR MALFUNCTION, OR ANY AND ALL OTHER DAMAGES OR LOSSES ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO USE OF THE DOCUMENT AND MODIFIED VERSIONS OF THE DOCUMENT, EVEN IF SUCH PARTY SHALL HAVE BEEN INFORMED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
DOCUMENT AND MODIFIED VERSIONS OF THE DOCUMENT ARE PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THE GNU FREE DOCUMENTATION LICENSE WITH THE FURTHER UNDERSTANDING THAT:
Sun
GNOME Documentation Team
Shaun
McCance
shaunm@gnome.org
Karderio
karderio at gmail dot com
Joachim
Noreiko
jnoreiko at yahoo dot com
Daniel
Espinosa Ortiz
esodan at gmail dot com
Brent
Smith
gnome at nextreality dot net
Tim
Littlemore
tim at tjl2 dot com
John
Stowers
john dot stowers at gmail dot com
Nigel
Tao
nigel dot tao at myrealbox dot com
Matthew
East
Ubuntu Documentation Project
mdke at ubuntu dot com
Carlos
Garnacho Parro
GNOME Project
carlosg@gnome.org
2.14
2006-02-03
2.10
2005-03-08
GNOME 2.8 Desktop User Guide V2.8
September 2004
GNOME 2.4 Desktop User Guide V2.7
September 2003
GNOME 2.4 Desktop User Guide V2.6
August 2003
GNOME 2.2.1 Desktop User Guide V2.5
March 2003
GNOME 2.2 Desktop User Guide V2.4
January 2003
GNOME 2.0 Desktop User Guide V2.3
October 2002
GNOME 2.0 Desktop User Guide V2.2
August 2002
GNOME 2.0 Desktop User Guide V2.1
GNOME 2.0 Desktop User Guide V1.0
May 2002
This manual describes version 2.14 of the GNOME desktop.
To report a bug or make a suggestion regarding the GNOME desktop or this manual, follow the directions in the
translator-credits