# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	GNOME
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-GNOME/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

@@image: 'images/dialogs/undo-history-dialog.png'; md5=10c4c37fd61c5cb043f13ef2fe5b1144
Undo History Dialog
Dialogs
Undo History
The Undo History dialog
This dialog shows you a list of the actions you have most recently performed on an image, with a small sketch that attempts to illustrate the changes produced by each. You can revert the image to any point in its Undo History simply by clicking on the right entry in the list. For more information on GIMP's Undo mechanism and how it works, see the section on
Activating the dialog
The
You can access it:
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
Using the Undo History dialog
The most basic thing you can do is to select a point in the Undo History by clicking on it in the list. You can go back and forth between states in this way as much as you please, without losing any information or consuming any resources. In most cases, the changes are very fast.

At the bottom of the dialog are three buttons:
Undo
This button has the same effect as choosing
Redo
This button has the same effect as choosing
Clear Undo History
This button removes all contents from the undo history except the current state. If you press it, you are asked to confirm that you really want to do this. The only reason for doing it would be if you are very constrained for memory.
In a tab, this dialog is represented by
You can set the number of undo levels in
@@image: 'images/dialogs/tool-presets-dialog.png'; md5=b00e2cc89846d70b5a24b523bf86bd8f
@@image: 'images/dialogs/tool-preset-editor.png'; md5=3a04838307eac483d4410c9dcbd72d5c
@@image: 'images/menus/presets-dialog-context-menu.png'; md5=4c0c0616da3aaaeecae030d499511348
Tool Presets Dialog
Presets
Presets Dialog
In
The Tool Presets Dialog
Activating the Dialog
The
from an image menu:
or, as a tab in Toolbox window, through
You can access it:
Using the Tool Presets Dialog
This dialog comes with a list of predefined presets. Each of them has an icon representing the tool presets will be applied to and a name.
Presets can be tagged so that you can arrange presets display as you want. Please see
Double-clicking on a preset icon opens the Tool Preset Editor.
Double-clicking on preset name allows you to edit this name.




With
At the bottom of the dialog appear four buttons:
The Tool Presets Dialog Context Menu


Right-clicking on the Presets Dialog opens a context menu where you find some commands already described with buttons: Edit tool preset, New tool preset, Refresh tool presets. You also find two new commands:
Tool Preset Editor
The Tool Preset Editor
a click on the
a double-click on a preset icon in the Tool Presets Dialog.
a right-click on a preset in the Tool Presets Dialog to open a context menu and then click on the
You can access this dialog through:
Using the Tool Preset Editor
You can edit presets you have created only; all options of predefined presets are grayed out and disabled.



In this dialog you can:
@@image: 'images/dialogs/templates-dialog.png'; md5=a19cd4f4d8dd24e2b1ec46ee05164229
Templates Dialog
Templates
The Templates dialog
Templates are templates for an image format to be created. GIMP offers you a lot of templates and you can create your owns. When you create a New image, you can access to the list of existing templates but you can't manage them. The
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
Using the Templates dialog
You select a template by clicking on its icon. Right clicking reveals a local menu that offers the same functions as buttons.
Grid/List modes
In the Tab menu for the
In this Tab menu, the

Buttons at the bottom
The buttons at the bottom of the dialog allow you to operate on templates in several ways:
Create a new image from the selected template
Clicking on this button opens the dialog
Create a new template
Clicking on this button opens the
Duplicate the selected template
Clicking on this button opens the Edit Template dialog that we are going to study now.
Edit the selected template
Clicking on this button opens the
Delete the selected template
Guess what?
Every template is stored in a
@@image: 'images/using/tagging.png'; md5=62c0d0639a0373896a9419f91803575f
@@image: 'images/using/tagging2.png'; md5=06a58c290ab5580ad2ad41846cc34d68
Tagging
Tags
In Brushes, Gradients, Patterns and Palettes dialogs and some other dockable dialogs, you can define tags and then, you can reorganize items according to chosen tags only.


You have two input fields:
Example
In this example, we defined a
To give several brushes the same tag at once, display brushes in List Mode, and use
You can delete tags: select a brush, then select a tag in the
@@image: 'images/using/save-message.png'; md5=50bdc783b38746ab4d42cfa93cfc383e
@@image: 'images/using/save-image-dialog.png'; md5=a7292ed267fe34c8750323158d0e3a2b
@@image: 'images/using/save-select-file-type.png'; md5=052b52f2c4f4eae50068d0b3e2389753
Save File
Image
Save image
Save
The
If you have already saved the image, the previous image file is overwritten with the current version. If you have not already saved the image, the
If you quit without having saved your image,
Save Image Dialog
Activate the Dialog
You can access this command in the image menu bar through
or from the keyboard by using the shortcut
Use
The Save Image Dialog
With this file browser, you can edit filename directly in name box (default is
Select File Type
If you develop this option, you can select a compressed format for your XCF file:
@@image: 'images/dialogs/stock-menu-left-12.png'; md5=bb67d499c4560430d82231784a8d5049
@@image: 'images/using/pointer-reticle.png'; md5=b8fd47dd468d1c1df933d537d37d1390
@@image: 'images/dialogs/sample-points-menu.png'; md5=0efc1654e0e0a963df145dd5db754a9c
@@image: 'images/dialogs/sample-points-dialog.png'; md5=365b9c53f487c848bf000d150436d67e
Sample Points Dialog
Dialog
Sample Points
While the
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
Using sample points
To create a sample point,
The reticle you get Ctrl + click-and-dragging from a rule.
By default, this sample point comes with a round mark and an order number. You can cancel these marks by unchecking the
The
You can delete a sample point, as you do with guides, by click-and-dragging it up to a rule. Order numbers are automatically re-arranged in the dialog window; the most recent are moved one rank up.
By default, sampling is performed on all layers. If you want to sample on the active layer only, uncheck the
The

Sample points dialog
The information about four sample points is displayed in this window. You can create more, which will be existing and not shown. To show them, you have to delete displayed points.
The color of the sampled point is displayed in a swatch box.
In the drop-down list, you can choose between:
Pixel
This choice displays the
RGB
This choice displays the
HSV
This choice displays the
CMYK
This choice displays the
Data are supplied for every channel in the chosen color model. The Alpha is present only if the image holds an Alpha channel.

@@image: 'images/dialogs/channel-quickmask.png'; md5=339a3364ffa87f2e59a161718089e00e
@@image: 'images/dialogs/channel-masks-gradient.png'; md5=1ce1859635ef54ad6aaefc980538ac3e
Quick Mask
Dialog Quick Mask
A
The QuickMask can be activated in different ways:
From the image menu:
By clicking the left-bottom button showed in red on the screenshot.
By using the
Creating a Quick Mask
To initialize a
From the channel dialog you can double click on the name or the thumbnail to edit the
The mask is coded in gray tones, so you must use white or gray to decrease the area limited by the mask and black to increase it. The area painted in light or dark gray will be transition areas for the selection like feathering. When your mask is ready, click again on the bottom-left button in the image window and the quick mask will be removed from the channel list and converted to a selection.
Quick mask's purpose is to paint a selection and its transitions with the paint tools without worrying about managing selection masks. It's a good way to isolate a subject in a picture because once the selection is made you only have to remove its content (or inverse if the subject is in the selection).
Using Quick Mask with a gradient
Description
Screenshot of the image window with activated QuickMask. As long as the Quickmask is activated, all operations are done on it. A gradient from black (left) to white (right) has been applied to the mask.
The QuickMask is now disabled. The selection occupies the right half part of the image (marching ants) because the limit of the selection is at the middle of the gradient.
A stroke is now added during the enabled selection. Weird! The gradient, although not visible, remains active all over the image, in selected and non selected areas!
After the QuickMask Button is pressed, the command generates a temporary 8-bit (0-255) channel, on which the progressive selection work is stored. If a selection is already present the mask is initialized with the content of the selection. Once QuickMask has been activated, the image is covered by a red semi-transparent veil. This one represents the non-selected pixels. Any
To save in a channel the selection done with the Quickmask select in the image menu
Usage

Activate the Quickmask using the left-bottom button in the image window. If a selection is present the mask is initialized with the content of the selection.
Choose a
Deactivate the Quickmask using the left-bottom button in the image window.
@@image: 'images/dialogs/pointer-dialog.png'; md5=14041d93b7163d2d95e67b43051773d1
Pointer Dialog
Pointer
Pointer dialog
This dialog offers you, in a same window, in real time, the position of the mouse pointer, and the channel values of the pointed pixel, in the chosen color model.
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on

Pixels
Shows the position of the pointed pixel, in X (horizontal) and Y (vertical) coordinates, stated in pixels from the origin (the upper left corner of the canvas).
Units
Shows the distance from the origin, in inches.
Pointer Bounding Box
This information is active when a selection exists. X and Y are the coordinates of the upper left corner of the rectangular frame that bounds rectangular and ellipse selections. H and W are the height and width of this box.
This information also exits for the other selections, but they are of less interest and the bounding box is not visible.
This information concerning the selection remains unchanged when you use another tool, while pointer coordinates vary.
Channel values
The channel values for the selected
The
The
The
The
Sample Merged
If this option is checked (default), sampling is performed on all layers. If it is unchecked, sampling is performed on the active layer only.
@@image: 'images/dialogs/patterns-dialog-list.png'; md5=1b50de83584f28a601952106f33c1144
@@image: 'images/dialogs/patterns-dialog.png'; md5=44b8adb56e4ac14962abbcf56033a347
@@image: 'images/dialogs/patterns-dialog-clipboard.png'; md5=9d45f2fc9b893827fe2d3b2932f94335
Patterns Dialog
Patterns
In
You can use them with the
The
The
From the Toolbox, by clicking on the pattern symbol in the Brush/Pattern/Gradient area.
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
From the Tool Options dialog of the
Using the pattern dialog
In the Tab menu, you can choose between
Independent of the real size of a pattern all patterns are shown the same size in the dialog. So for larger patterns this means that you see only a small portion of the pattern in the dialog at all - no matter whether you view the dialog in the list or the grid view. To see the full pattern you simply click on the pattern
In the Tab menu, the option
The Patterns dialog
List view
Grid mode
Using the Patterns dialog (Grid mode)
At the top appears the name of the currently selected patterns, and its dimensions in pixels.
In the center appears a grid view of all available patterns, with the currently selected one outlined. Clicking on one of them sets it as GIMP's current pattern, and causes it to appear in the Brush/Pattern/Gradient area of the Toolbox.
Using the Patterns dialog (List view)
In this view, instead of a grid, you see a list of patterns, each labeled with its name and size. Clicking on a row in the list sets that pattern as GIMP's current pattern, just as it does in the grid view.
If you
Everything else in the List view works the same way as it does in the Grid view.
Delete Pattern
Pressing this button removes the pattern from the list and causes the file representing it to be deleted from disk. Note that you cannot remove any of the patterns that are supplied with GIMP and installed in the system
Refresh Patterns
Pressing this button causes
Open pattern as image
If you click on this button, the current pattern is opened in a new image window. So, you can edit it. But if you try to save it with the
You can use tags to reorganize the patterns display. See
The Pattern context menu
You get it by right-clicking on the
The Clipboard pattern
Clipboard pattern
When you use the Copy or Cut command, a copy appears as a new pattern in the upper left corner of the Patterns dialog. This brush will persist until you use the Copy (or Cut) command again. It will disappear when you close GIMP.
A new
You can save this clipboard pattern by using the
@@image: 'images/dialogs/paths-dialog.png'; md5=f1a145b1a47e6d25f0a675cb40233dc1
@@image: 'images/dialogs/path-list-entry.png'; md5=a18ca5c8cceb1f2b0bd349bf066203aa
@@image: 'images/dialogs/paths-menu.png'; md5=b34d6c26fc717efd1226ad174309f250
Paths Dialog
Paths
Please see
The
The
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
In the
Using the Paths dialog
Each path belongs to one image: paths are components of images just like layers. The Paths dialog shows you a list of all paths belonging to the currently active image: switching images causes the dialog to show a different list of paths. If the Paths dialog is embedded in a
If you are familiar with the Layers dialog, you have a head start, because the Paths dialog is in several ways similar. It shows a list of all paths that exist in the image, with four items for each path:
Path visibility
An
Chain paths
A
Preview image
A small preview-icon showing a sketch of the path. If you click on the icon and drag it into an image, this will create a copy of the path in that image.
Path Name
The name of the path, which must be unique within the image. Double-clicking on the name will allow you to edit it. If the name you create already exists, a number will be appended (e.g.,
If the list is non-empty, at any given moment one of the members is the image's
Right-clicking on any entry in the list brings up the
Buttons
The buttons at the bottom of the Paths dialog all correspond to entries in the Paths menu (accessed by right-clicking on a path list entry), but some of them have extra options obtainable by holding down modifier keys while you press the button.
New Path
See
Raise Path
See
Lower Path
See
Duplicate Path
See
Path to Selection
Converts the path into a selection; see
Modifiers
Action
None
Replace existing selection
Shift
Add to selection
Ctrl
Subtract from selection
Intersect with selection.
Selection to Path
Holding down the
Paint along the path
See
Delete Path

The
The Paths menu can be brought up by right-clicking on a path entry in the list in the Paths dialog, or by choosing the top entry ("Paths Menu") from the Paths dialog Tab menu. This menu gives you access to most of the operations that affect paths.
Path Tool

Edit Path Attributes





Merge Visible Paths

Path to Selection; Add to Selection; Subtract from Selection; Intersect with Selection
These commands all convert the active path into a selection, and then combine it with the existing selection in the specified ways. (
This operation can be accessed in several ways:
From an image menubar, as
From the Paths dialog menu, as
From the

Converting a two-dimensional selection mask into a one-dimensional path involves some rather tricky algorithms: you can alter the way it is done using the
Stroke Path
From an image menubar, as
From the Paths dialog menu, as
From the
From the

Copy Path

You can also copy and paste a path by dragging its icon from the Paths dialog into the target image's display.
When you copy a path to an image, it is not visible. You have to make it visible in the Path dialog.
Paste Path

Import Path

Export Path

@@image: 'images/dialogs/palettes-grid-dialog.png'; md5=078e83b874976e5f142915d786b2beea
@@image: 'images/dialogs/palettes-dialog.png'; md5=f96ee8ecd86d1f85ef47297720bde03e
@@image: 'images/dialogs/palettes-popmenu.png'; md5=3d3564e24bda5406f73ee07534955642
@@image: 'images/dialogs/palette-import-dialog.png'; md5=339f7fcce57ccce9171e02e49a4e5dff
@@image: 'images/dialogs/palettes-offset-options.png'; md5=3e84ea676a409a88baad273886cb1845
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/palettes-offset.png'; md5=1f0be94be450fa788998fc5b06680801
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/palettes-repeat-gradient.png'; md5=47d531e4dedec269ba1aca8ca0a32ab1
@@image: 'images/dialogs/palettes-sort.png'; md5=5377b10af81c32803b20174ee6a1b73d
@@image: 'images/dialogs/palette-editor-dialog.png'; md5=9dd5b857bc647e9a9fe6f8703f71d058
@@image: 'images/dialogs/palette-editor-context-menu.png'; md5=b82025a9e2b599583ab0f89ca8e345ce
Palettes Dialog
Palettes
Palette
Color
A
The
The
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
Using the Palettes dialog
Clicking on a palette in the dialog selects this palette and brings up the
Double-clicking on a palette
The
Grid View
List View
In the Tab menu, you can choose between
The option
You can use tags to reorganize the palettes display. See
The buttons of the Palettes Dialog
Below the palettes view, at the bottom of the dialog window, there are several buttons:
Edit Palette
This button brings up the
New Palette
New palette
For more information on this button please refer to
Duplicate Palette
Duplicate
For more information on this button please refer to
Delete Palette
Delete
For more information on this button please refer to
Refresh Palettes
Refresh
For more information on this button please refer to
The
Menu
The
Some of the listed pop-menu entries are installation dependend and need the


Import Palette
Import
The Import Palette dialog

Former versions of GIMP had a
Select Source
You can import a palette either from any of GIMP's gradients (choosing one from the adjoining menu), or from any of the currently open images (chosen from the adjoining menu). Since GIMP 2.2, you can also import a RIFF palette file (with extension
Two options concerning image as source, available for RGB images only:


Palette name
You can give a name to the new palette here. If the name you choose is already used by an existing palette, a unique name will be formed by appending a number (e. g., "#1").
Number of colors
Here you specify the number of colors in the palette. The default is 256, chosen for three reasons: (1) every gradient contains 256 distinct colors; (2) GIF files can use a maximum of 256 colors; (3) GIMP indexed images can contain a maximum of 256 distinct colors. You can use any number you like here, though: GIMP will try to create a palette by spacing the specified number of colors even across the color range of the gradient or image.
Columns
Here you specify the number of columns for the palette. This only affects the way the palette is displayed, and has no effect on the way the palette is used.
Interval
Even setting
The imported palette will be added to the Palettes dialog, and automatically saved in your personal
Duplicate Palette creates a new palette by copying the palette that is currently selected, and brings up a Palette Editor so that you can alter the palette. The result will automatically be saved in your personal
Merge Palettes
Currently this operation is not implemented, and the menu entry will always be insensitive.
Copy Palette Location
This command allows you to copy the palette file location to clipboard. You can then paste it in a text editor.
Delete Palette removes the palette from the
Refresh Palettes rescans all of the folders in your palette search path, and adds any newly discovered palettes to the list in the Palettes dialog. This may be useful if you obtain palette files from some external source, copy them into one of your palettes folders, and want to make them available during the current session.
Offset Palette...
This command opens a dialog window:
The
This command takes the last color of the palette and puts it at the first place. The
With negative

From top to bottom: original palette, Offset = 1, Offset = 2.
Palette to gradient
Gradient
From palette
With this command, all the colors of the palette are used to form the current gradient which is saved in the Gradient Dialog. The created gradient is build with segments just as much as the number of colors on the given palette.
Palette to Repeating Gradient
This command creates a repeating gradient, using all the colors of the palette. This gradient appears in the Gradient Dialog and becomes the current gradient. The gradient is created with segments one more than the number of colors on the given palette. The left side color at the leftmost segment will be the same color on the right side at the rightmost segment.

Top: palette. Bottom: the gradient created with the command.
Sort Palette...
This command opens a dialog window which allows you to sort the colors of the palette according to certain criterions:
The



Palette Editor
Editor
The Palette Editor
The Palette Editor is used mainly for two purposes: first, for setting GIMP's foreground or background colors (as shown in the Color Area of the Toolbox) to selected colors from the palette; second, for modifying the palette. You can activate the Palette Editor for any palette in the Palettes dialog, but you can only modify palettes that you have created yourself, not the palettes that are supplied when you install GIMP. (You can, however, duplicate any palette and then edit the newly created copy.) If you modify a palette, the results of your work will automatically be saved when you exit from GIMP.
How to Activate the Palette Editor
The Palette Editor is only accessible from the Palettes dialog: you can activate it by double-clicking on a palette, or by pressing the
The Palette Editor is a dockable dialog; see the section on
Using the Palette Editor
If you click on a color box in the palette display, GIMP's foreground color will be set to the selected color: you can see this in the Color Area of the Toolbox. If you hold down the
If the palette is a custom palette, double-clicking on a color not only sets the foreground, it also brings up a color editor that allows you to modify the selected palette entry.
Right-clicking in the palette display area brings up the Palette Editor menu. It's functions are mainly the same as those of the buttons at the bottom of the dialog.
Below the palette display area, at the left, appears a text entry area that shows the name of the selected color (or
To the right of the name entry is a spinbutton that allows you to set the number of columns used to display the palette. This only affects the display, not how the palette works. If the value is set to 0, a default will be used.
At the bottom of the dialog are a set of buttons, which mostly match the entries in the Palette Editor menu, accessible by right-clicking in the palette display area. Here are the buttons:
This button causes the palette to be saved in your personal
Revert
This operation has not yet been implemented.
Edit Color
Pops up a color editor allowing you to alter the color. If the palette is one you aren't allowed to alter, this button will be insensitive. See
New Color from FG
For more information on this button please refer to
Delete Color
For more information on this button please refer to
Zoom Out
For more information on this button please refer to
Zoom In
For more information on this button please refer to
Zoom All
For more information on this button please refer to
The Palette Editor pop-menu
The Palette Editor Menu can be accessed by right-clicking on the palette display in the Palette Editor, or by choosing the top entry from the dialog Tab menu. The operations in it can also be executed using the buttons at the bottom of the Palette Editor dialog.

New Color from FG; New Color from BG
These commands each create a new palette entry, using either GIMP's current foreground color (as shown in the Color Area of the Toolbox), or the current background color.




Edit Active Palette
When this option is checked (default), you can edit another palette by clicking on it in the
@@image: 'images/dialogs/navigation.png'; md5=dc993294cb087c2419d0ee1cd4758745
@@image: 'images/dialogs/icon-navigation.png'; md5=59a3ed5d4b20665276c36c1292b11a6f
Navigation Dialog
Navigation
The Navigation dialog is designed to offer easy movement around the active image if the zoom is set higher than what the image window can display. If this is the case, there is an inversely colored rectangle that shows the location of the current view area in respect to the image.
Click and drag the rectangular area.
Use
To change the viewing region:
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
from the image-menu:
You can access more quickly to it (but without the zoom functions) by clicking on the icon at the right bottom corner of the image window:
Using the Navigation Dialog
The slider
It allows easy zoom level control, more precise than with the
The buttons

Adjust the zoom ratio so that the image becomes fully visible
The zoom ratio is adjusted so that the whole image becomes visible in the window as it is.
Adjust the zoom ratio so that the window is used optimally
The image size and the zoom are adjusted so that the image is fully displayed with the lesser zoom.
Reduce the image window to the size of the image display
Restore the image window to the size which allows the image to be fully displayed with the zoom unchanged. This command is also as menu entry available. See
@@image: 'images/dialogs/layer-mask-add.png'; md5=d36f79002d05972c9171aebd11b2ee66
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/layer-mask-1.png'; md5=519babf7d7e5b3a9fe5b069c075b0621
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/layer-mask-2.png'; md5=be71be06f30e9e691aedfc46ed7412ef
Layer masks
Layer mask
Masks

Overview
A transparency mask can be added to each layer, it's called Layer mask. A layer mask has the same size and same number of pixels as the layer to which it is attached. Every pixel of the mask can then be coupled with a pixel at the same location in the layer. The mask is a set of pixels in gray-tone on a value scale from 0 to 255. The pixels with a value 0 are black and give a full transparency to the coupled pixel in the layer. The pixels with a value 255 are white and give a full opacity to the coupled pixel in the layer.
To create a layer mask start with a right click on the layer to call the context menu and select








When the mask is created it appears as a thumbnail right to the layer thumbnail. By clicking alternatively on the layer and mask thumbnail you can enable one or other. The active item has a white border (which is not well visible around a white mask). That's an important point. Always keep the Layers Dialog prominently when working with masks, because you can't see, looking at the canvas, which of the layer or the mask is active.
Pressing
Layer Mask example
A layer with layer mask
This image has a background layer with a flower and another blue one, fully opaque. A white layer mask has been added to the blue layer. In the image window, the blue layer remains visible because a white mask makes layer pixels visible.
Painting the layer mask
The layer mask is active. You paint with black color, which makes the layer transparent: the underlying layer becomes visible.
@@image: 'images/dialogs/layer-dialog.png'; md5=5c0d56a13a6e076d92c1f5f1766eefd1
@@image: 'images/dialogs/layers_overview.png'; md5=cefd0cd52b7eadcc36aeabc98d5710b8
@@image: 'images/dialogs/layers_example.png'; md5=854b75800e7991d8d68cda14e25d02a4
@@image: 'images/dialogs/layer-list-entry.png'; md5=eab6486f11c5bf59dfd8b26273a3508b
@@image: 'images/dialogs/stock-eye-20.png'; md5=c18c92f7336693c8962da99cd9405df5
@@image: 'images/dialogs/stock-vchain-24.png'; md5=7c1f223b72d0d77f316a2ee9b96a08fb
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/layer-lock-1.png'; md5=1f597d56bcab8f7e39fb83f4ab2cdc25
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/layer-lock-2.png'; md5=fc2efdd5d67a7514373e4751948eedba
@@image: 'images/dialogs/dialogs-icon-new.png'; md5=fb97eb8259664a2215409aaebd765812
@@image: 'images/dialogs/dialogs-icon-raise.png'; md5=5c3649aa0136509029dcb889c60d1804
@@image: 'images/dialogs/dialogs-icon-lower.png'; md5=431df263675b1525299bf7d110198e2a
@@image: 'images/dialogs/stock-duplicate-16.png'; md5=af407d854b5185703e53da2a0250fabe
@@image: 'images/dialogs/stock-anchor-16.png'; md5=d6fc3d211df4207d449366502013d0fa
@@image: 'images/dialogs/stock-floating-selection-16.png'; md5=85b640ea0acb390ec945dcd460575295
@@image: 'images/dialogs/dialogs-icon-delete.png'; md5=75d3af3a7d407a9194c50bc85e1a99aa
Layers Dialog
Layers
Layer
The
An image with layers
Layers of the image
Resulting image
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
from the (default) shortcut:
In the
Using the Layer dialog
Every layer appears in the dialog in the form of a thumbnail. When an image has multiple layers as components, they appear as a list. The upper layer in the list is the first one visible, and the lowest layer the last visible, the background. Above the list one can find characteristics related individually to each layer. Under the list one can find management buttons for the layer list. A right-click in a layer thumbnail opens the Layer
Layer attributes
Visible layer
Linked layers
Every layer is shown in the list along with its attributes:
Layer visibility
In front of the thumbnail is an icon showing an eye. By clicking on the eye, you toggle whether the layer is visible or not. (
Chain layers
Another icon, showing a chain, allows you to group layers for operations on more than one layer at a time (for example with the Move tool).
Layer thumbnail
The layer content is represented in a thumbnail. Maintaining left-click for a second on this thumbnail makes it larger. When the layer is active, the thumbnail has a white border. The border is black if the layer is inactive. When the layer has a mask, the inactive element takes a black border.
Layer name
The main attribute is the name of the layer. You can edit this by a double-click on the name of the layer. You can also use the
In the case of an animation layer (GIF or MNG), the name of the layer can be used to specify certain parameters : Layer_name (delay in ms) (combination mode), for example Frame-1 (100 ms) (replace). The
Layers characteristics
Above the layer list, it is possible to specify some properties for the active layer. The active layer is the one highlighted in blue. The properties are:
Mode
The layer mode determines how the layer interacts with the other layers. From the combo box you can access all the modes provided by GIMP. The layer modes are fully detailed in
Opacity
Transparency
Layer opacity
Layers dialog
By moving the slider you give more or less opacity to the layer. With a 0 opacity value, the layer is transparent and completely invisible. Don't confuse this with a Layer Mask, which sets the transparency pixel by pixel.
Lock
Lock alpha channel
Keep Layer Transparency
Lock Alpha channel
Lock pixels
You have two possibilities:


Example for Locking Alpha Channel
The active layer has three horizontal, opaque, green stripes on a transparent background. We paint a vertical red stripe.

If a layer name in the Layer Dialog is in bold, then this layer has no Alpha channel.
Layer management
Under the layer list a set of buttons allows you to perform some basic operations on the layer list.
New layer
Here you can create a new layer. A dialog is opened where you can enter the
Raise layer
Here you can move the layer up a level in the list. Press the
Lower layer
Here you can move the layer down a level in the list. Press the
To move a layer at the bottom of the list, it may first be necessary to add a transparency channel (also called Alpha channel) to the Background layer. To do this, right click on the Background layer and select
Duplicate layer
Here you can create a copy of the active layer. Name of new layer is suffixed with a number.
Anchor layer
When the active layer is a temporary layer (also called floating selection) shown by this icon
Delete layer
Here you can delete the active layer.
More layer functions
Other functions about
You will find
Clicking-and-dragging layers
Click and hold on layer thumbnail: it enlarges and you can move it by dragging the mouse.
So you can put this layer down
You can also
Finally, you can
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/cosmos-6.png'; md5=746397292355e7564a640b86e0b3aa5a
@@image: 'images/dialogs/colormap-dialog.png'; md5=4baad04bc5ae20490663a3ea138281ce
@@image: 'images/dialogs/colormap-contextmenu.png'; md5=06aeea544d13667a4cd8d96c99b4f934
Colormap Dialog
Colormap
An indexed image with 6 colors and its Colormap dialog
The Colormap (Indexed Palette is a better name) dialog allows you to edit the colormap of an indexed image. (If the mode of the active image is RGB or Grayscale instead of Indexed, the dialog is empty and unusable.) This is a dockable dialog; see the section on
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
In the
Colormaps and Indexed Images
In an Indexed image, instead of being assigned a color directly (as happens in RGB and Grayscale images), colors are assigned to pixels by an indirect method, using a look-up table called a
To determine the color that should be shown for that pixel, GIMP looks up the index in the image's colormap. Each indexed image has its own private colormap. In GIMP, the maximum number of entries in a colormap is 256. For a maximum-sized colormap, each index from 0 to 255 is assigned an arbitrary RGB color. There are no rules restricting the colors that can be assigned to an index or the order they appear in: any index can be assigned any color.
It is important to realize that the colors in the colormap are the
The Colormap dialog allows you to alter the colormap for an image, either by creating new entries, or by changing the colors for the existing entries. If you change the color associated with a given index, you will see the changes reflected throughout the image, as a color shift for all pixels that are assigned that index. The entries are numbered with 0 in the upper left corner, 1 to its right, etc.
Using the Colormap dialog
Here are the operations you can perform using this dialog:
Click on a color entry
This sets GIMP's foreground color to the color you click on, as shown in the Toolbox color area. As a result, this color will be used for the next painting operation you do.

This sets
Double-click on a color entry
This sets GIMP's foreground color to the color you click on, and also brings up a Color Editor that allows you to change that colormap entry to a new color.
Color index
You can select a different colormap entry by typing its index here, or clicking the spinbutton to the right.
HTML-Notation
This area shows a hex-code representation (such as is used in HTML) for the color assigned to the currently selected colormap entry. You can edit the color here, instead of using a Color Editor, if you want to. See
Edit color
This button (in the lower left corner of the dialog) brings up a Color Editor that allows you to change the color for the currently selected colormap entry. The effect is similar to double-clicking on the entry, except that it does not set GIMP's foreground color.
Add color
This button (in the lower right corner of the dialog) allows you to add new colors to the colormap. If you click on the button, the current foreground color, as shown in the Toolbox, will be tacked on to the end of the colormap. If instead you hold down
If you make a mistake, you can undo it by focusing the pointer in the image whose colormap you have changed, and then pressing
This dialog provides the most commonly used methods for altering the colormap for an indexed image. The color tools, such as Brightness/Contrast, Hue/Saturation, etc, do not operate on indexed images. There are a few plug-ins that do so, including the
If you paint an indexed image with a color which is not in the Colormap, GIMP will use the most similar color of the Colormap.
The Colormap context menu
Right-clicking on a color in the Colormap selects this color and opens a pop-up submenu:
This command opens a color selector which allows you to modify the color.
Add Color from FG
This command is enabled only if the indexed palette contains less than 256 colors. The background color of the Toolbox is appended to the color map.
Add Color from BG
This command is enabled only if the indexed palette contains less than 256 colors. The background color of the Toolbox is appended to the color list.
Rearrange Colormap
Rearrange Colormap: This command is described in
@@image: 'images/dialogs/images-dialog.png'; md5=d1bae13cf88bae509b4f270cbfe263f2
Images Dialog
Images
The Images dialog
The
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
In the
Using the Images dialog
In multi-window mode, at the top of the dialog, a drop-list of open images appears if the
At center, open images appear, as a list or a grid, according to the selected mode. The current image is highlighted in list mode, outlined in grid mode. With a double click on an image name, you raise this image to the foreground of your screen. With a simple click you select this image so that the buttons of the dialog can act on it.
Grid and List modes, preview size
In the Tab menu for the
You can change the size of the image previews in the dialog using the
Three buttons at the bottom of the dialog allow you to operate on the selected image. These buttons are present if the
Raise this image displays
The selected image appears at the foreground of your screen. If this image has another view, this view also is raised but remains behind the original. The same option in the pop-up menu, that you get by right-clicking, is called
Create a new display for this image
Duplicates the image window (not the image) of the selected image.
This command works only on a image which is loaded without any window. Though images can be opened by the New Window command, if the image has been already loaded without window by a primitive procedure command (such as
@@image: 'images/dialogs/histogram-basic-dialog.png'; md5=07f83f91b08fd625e93bfb6efad5194c
@@image: 'images/dialogs/histogram-drop-down-menu.png'; md5=a5a5e8016fdadaed1d61cdf6823ec37a
@@image: 'images/dialogs/histogram-rgb.png'; md5=1164739bd115613788d7ed343ebc491d
@@image: 'images/dialogs/histogram-log.png'; md5=3b370dec59c1afb060d59fb215de6e9f
@@image: 'images/dialogs/histogram-range.png'; md5=5d813eb8e0851b385f49312b3b3b725d
Histogram dialog
Histogram
The Histogram dialog
The Histogram dialog shows you information about the statistical distribution of color values in the active layer or selection. This information is often useful when you are trying to
The
from the image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
from the image menu:
In the
About Histograms
In GIMP, each layer of an image can be decomposed into one or more color channels: for an RGB image, into R, G, and B channels; for a grayscale image, into a single Value channel. Layers that support transparency have an additional channel, the alpha channel. Each channel supports a range of intensity levels from 0 to 255 (integer valued). Thus, a black pixel is encoded by 0 on all color channels; a white pixel by 255 on all color channels. A transparent pixel is encoded by 0 on the alpha channel; an opaque pixel by 255.
For RGB images, it is convenient to define a Value
For more information on channels, please consult the
Using the Histogram dialog
The active layer name is shown at the top of the dialog.
Channel
Channel options for an RGB layer with alpha channel
This allows you to select which channel to use. The possibilities depend on the layer type of the active layer. Here are the entries you might see, and what they mean:
Value
For RGB and Grayscale images, this shows the distribution of brightness values across the layer. For a grayscale image, these are read directly from the image data. For an RGB image, they are taken from the Value pseudochannel.
For an indexed image, the
Red, Green, Blue
These only appear for layers from RGB images. They show the distribution of intensity levels for the Red, Green, or Blue channels respectively.
Alpha
This shows the distribution of opacity levels. If the layer is completely transparent (alphanbsp;=nbsp;0) or completely opaque (alphanbsp;=nbsp;255), the histogram will consist of a single bar on the left or right edge.
Combined histograms of R, G, and B channels.
This entry, only available for RGB layers, shows the R, G, and B histograms superimposed, so that you can see all of the color distribution information in a single view.
Linear
The histogram shown at the top, changed to logarithmic mode.
These buttons determine whether the histogram will be displayed using a linear or logarithmic Y axis. For images taken from photographs, the linear mode is most commonly useful. For images that contain substantial areas of constant color, though, a linear histogram will often be dominated by a single bar, and a logarithmic histogram will often be more useful.
Range Setting
Dialog aspect after range fixing.
You can restrict the analysis, for the statistics shown at the bottom of the dialog, to a limited range of values if you wish. You can set the range in one of three ways:
Click and drag the pointer across the histogram display area, from the lowest level to the highest level of the range you want.
Click and drag the black or white triangles on the slider below the histogram.
Use the spinbutton entries below the slider (left entry: bottom of range; right entry: top of range).
Statistics
At the bottom of the dialog some basic statistics are shown describing the distribution of channel values, restricted to the selected range:






@@image: 'images/dialogs/gradient-editor-dialog.png'; md5=24917bba5d6cce3a3866624a16aea813
@@image: 'images/dialogs/gradient-editor-popup-menu.png'; md5=226375ddf2b404c7869c7c7e589c7136
@@image: 'images/dialogs/gradient-editor-colortype-submenu.png'; md5=fff86e0f31cbe9b4405f9db69cf8a87f
@@image: 'images/dialogs/gradient-editor-colorfrom.png'; md5=e1d47f3cb690b6bea586b8dfcc5d55cf
@@image: 'images/dialogs/gradient-editor-blend.png'; md5=41bc455a12f4d7fb615b213c2dc543e5
@@image: 'images/dialogs/gradient-editor-color.png'; md5=52ffeffc712de04d7132d142fa2240a0
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/new-gradient-1.png'; md5=0d91f635a1a6f0544bdd66aa542b81c8
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/new-gradient-2.png'; md5=fb7435a1a153e61551d357797257f0e1
@@image: 'images/dialogs/examples/new-gradient-3.png'; md5=e0ee25a980f77c5eb7adbfe7f170d6af
The Gradient Editor
The gradient editor
The Gradient Editor allows you to edit the colors in a gradient. It can only be used on gradients you have created yourself (or on a copy of a system gradient), not on system gradients that come pre-installed with GIMP. This is a sophisticated tool that may take a bit of effort to understand. The concept behind it is that a gradient can be decomposed into a series of adjoining
How to Activate the Gradient Editor
You can activate the Gradient Editor in several ways:
by double-clicking on the gradient stripe in the Gradient dialog,
from the context menu you get by right clicking on the selected gradient name,
by clicking on the
from the Gradient Menu you get by clicking on
Display
Name
In the name area, you have the tab menu button (the small triangle).
The Gradient Preview Window
Below the name, you see the current result of your work if the
If you simply move the mouse pointer on this display, it works somewhat as a color-picker. Values of the pointed pixel are displayed in a rather odd way.
If you click-n-drag on display, then only position and RGB data are displayed. But they are passed on to the Foreground color in the Toolbox and to the four first gradients of the list (by pressing the
Range Selection/Control Sliders
Below the gradient display, you see a set of black and white triangles lined up in row which allow you to adjust endpoints and midpoints in the gradient preview. A
You can move sliders, segments and selections. If you simply
Scrollbar
Below the sliders is a scrollbar. This only comes into play if you zoom in using the buttons at the bottom.
Feedback Area
Below, a color swatch shows the color pointed by the mouse cursor. Informations about this color and helpful hints or feedback messages may appear here.
At the bottom of the dialog appear five buttons:
Clicking this button causes the gradient, in its current state, to be saved in your personal
Clicking this button undoes all of your editing. (However, at the time this is being written, this function is not yet implemented.)
Clicking this button shrinks the gradient display horizontally.
Clicking this button expands the gradient display horizontally. You can then use the scrollbar to pan the display left or right.
Clicking this button resizes the display horizontally so that it fits precisely into the window.
The Gradient Editor pop-up Menu
The Gradient Editor pop-up menu
You can access the Gradient Editor menu either by right-clicking on the gradient display, or by choosing the top item in the dialog's tab menu. The menu allows you to edit endpoint's color (set the left and right edge colors for each segment), blend colors, select a color model and edit segments. This editor works only with custom gradients or a copy of a system gradient.
The following commands can be found in the menu:
Editing endpoint's color
Left/Right color type
This command opens a submenu:
The Left/Right color type sub-menu
This submenu allows you to select the endpoint color from the toolbox foreground and background colors. Whenever you change the foreground or background color, this endpoint color may be changed as well. The alternative is to select a
Left [Right] Endpoint's Color
These options allow you to choose a color for the respective endpoint using a Color Editor.
This command is related to the previous one and becomes inactive if you have selected any other value than
Load Left [Right] Color From
The
These options give you a number of alternative ways of assigning colors to the endpoints. From the submenu you can choose (assuming we're dealing with the left endpoint):
Left Neighbor's Right Endpoint
This choice will cause the color of the right endpoint of the segment neighboring on the left to be assigned to the left endpoint of the selected range.
Right Endpoint
This choice will cause the color of the right endpoint of the selected range to be assigned to the left endpoint.
FG/BG color
This choice causes GIMP's current foreground or background color, as shown in the Toolbox, to be assigned to the endpoint. Note that changing foreground or background color later will not change the endpoint's color.
RGBA slots
At the bottom of the menu are 10
Save Left [Right] Color To
These options cause the color of the endpoint in question to be assigned to the
Click and drag colors
to an endpoint (a black triangle), to set left [right] colors,
to the gradient display area, to add a new endpoint with this color on both sides.
You can also click and drag a color from the toolbox FG-BG colors or from a palette
Blending and coloring functions for segment
Blending Function for Segment
The Blending Function submenu
This option determines the course of the transition from one endpoint of the range (segment or selection) to the other, by fitting the specified type of function to the endpoints and midpoint of the range:
Linear
Default option. Color varies linearly from one endpoint of the range to the other.
Curved
Gradient varies more quickly on ends of the range than on its middle.
Sinusoidal
The opposite of the curved type. Gradients varies more quickly on center of the range than on its ends.
Spherical (increasing)
Gradient varies more quickly on the left of the range than on its right.
Spherical (decreasing)
Gradient varies more quickly on the right than on the left.
Coloring Type for Segment
The Coloring Type submenu
This option gives you additional control of the type of transition from one endpoint to the other: as a line either in RGB space or in HSV space.
Modifying segments
Flip Segment
This option does a right-to-left flip of the selected range (segment or selection), flipping all colors and endpoint locations.
Replicate Segment
This option splits the selected range (segment or selection) into two parts, each of which is a perfect compressed copy of the original range.
Split Segment at Midpoint
This option splits each segment in the selected range in into two segments, splitting at the location of the white triangle.
Split Segment Uniformly
This option is similar to the previous one, but it splits each segment halfway between the endpoints, instead of at the white triangle.
Delete Segment
This option deletes all segments in the selected range, (segment or selection) replacing them with a single black triangle at the center, and enlarging the segments on both sides to fill the void.
Re-center Segment's midpoint
This option moves the white triangle for each segment in the selected range to a point halfway between the neighboring black triangles.
Re-distribute Handles in Segment
This option causes the black and white triangles in the selected range to be shifted so that the distances from one to the next are all equal.
Blending colors
These options are available only if more than one segment are selected.
Blend Endpoints' Colors
This option causes the colors at interior endpoints in the range to be averaged, so that the transition from each segment to the next is smooth.
Blend Endpoints' Opacity
This option does the same thing as the previous option, but with opacity instead of color.
There is no
Using example for the Gradient Editor
Tutorials
New gradient
All these options can seem somewhat boring. Here is an example to clear ideas:
Open the Gradient Dialog. Click the
Right click in this new gradient and click the
Gradient with three segments
Every segment is limited with two black triangular sliders. Click a segment to activate it. By pressing the
In the context menu you get by right-clicking in the gradient, set
First segment colored
Red has been chosen for left endpoint and yellow for the right enpoint.
Go on the same way for other segments. Then use the
@@image: 'images/dialogs/gradient-dialog.png'; md5=fd97d81a8a764a6828b64f495b9b30e5
@@image: 'images/dialogs/gradient-menu.png'; md5=acd5e08cac1e0335f83edd6acb6078e0
Gradients Dialog
Gradient Dialog
The screenshot illustrates the Gradients dialog
The
The first five gradients are particular: they reproduce the gradient between Foreground and background colors of toolbox in different ways.




The
from an image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
from the Toolbox, by clicking on the current gradient in the Brush/Pattern/Gradient area,
From the image by using the
In the
Using the
The most basic, and most commonly used, operation with the dialog is simply to click on one of the gradients in the scrollable list, in order to make it GIMP's current gradient, which will then be used by any operation that involves a gradient.
If you
In the Tab menu, you can choose between
In the Tab menu, the option
The buttons at the bottom of the dialog allow you to operate on gradients in several ways:
Edit Gradient
This button activates the
New Gradient
This creates a new gradient, initialized as a simple grayscale, and activates the Gradient Editor so that you can alter it. Gradients that you create are automatically saved in the
Duplicate Gradient
This creates a copy of the currently selected gradient. You will be able to edit the copy even if you cannot edit the original.
Delete Gradient
This removes all traces of the gradient, if you have permission to do so. It asks for confirmation before doing anything.
Refresh Gradients
If you add gradients to your personal
The functions performed by these buttons can also be accessed from the dialog pop-up menu, activated by right-clicking anywhere in the gradient list, or via
The Gradients Menu
The gradient menu also gives you some additional functions:
Save as POV-Ray...
This allows you to save the gradient in the format used by the
Copy Gradient Location
This command allows you to copy the gradient file location to the clipboard. You can then use it in a text editor.
Custom Gradient...
This command creates a sample image filled with the selected gradient. You can select width and height of the image as well as the gradient direction in the dialog window.
Save as CSS
Gradient CSS code snippet
The CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) language is used to format the display of HTML and XML files, for instance background color, font size... and background gradient. The "CSS Save" plugin is a CSS3 linear gradient generator that allows you to save a CSS3 code snippet, containing the gradient data for a given GIMP gradient. This code snippet is a text file: you can copy-paste it to the stylesheet related to your HTML file, to get a gradient background on opening the HTML file in Firefox, Chrome or Safari web navigators. This CSS3 code snippet can also be used as a gradient in SVG files.
Here is an example of code snippet, got using the Blue Green gradient:
A CSS snippet created with Save as CSS
background-image: linear-gradient(top, rgb(0,123,255) 0%, rgb(72,226,255) 56%,
 rgb(0,255,161) 100%);
background-image: -moz-linear-gradient(center top, rgb(0,123,255) 0%,rgb(72,
 226,255) 56%,rgb(0,255,
 161) 100%);
background-image: -webkit-gradient(linear, left top, left bottom,
 color-stop(0.000, rgb(0,123,255)),color-stop(0.566, rgb(72,226,255)),
 color-stop(1.000, rgb(0,255,161)));
You can use tags to reorganize the gradients display. See
@@image: 'images/dialogs/fonts-dialog.png'; md5=1344dc7f197501314d60a1ba4ac9b813
@@image: 'images/dialogs/fonts-grid-dialog.png'; md5=ba4041cea3849d63f79cde3958c7314f
Fonts Dialog
Fonts
The Fonts dialog
The
The
from an image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
from the Tool Options for the Text tool. If you click on the
In the
Using the Fonts dialog
The most basic thing you can do is to select a font by clicking on it: this font will then be used by the Text tool. If instead of clicking and releasing, you hold down the left mouse button with the pointer positioned over the font example (
Dialog in Grid View
Dialog in List View
In the Tab menu for the Fonts dialog, you can choose between
Refresh font list
Pressing this button at the bottom of the dialog causes the system font list to be rescanned. This may be useful if you add new fonts while GIMP is running, and want to make them accessible for the Text tool. You can also cause the font list to be rescanned by right-clicking in the font display, and selecting
You can change the size of the font previews in the dialog using the
@@image: 'images/using/export-image-dialog.png'; md5=6aca937c44153f7aec97b1cb86cbaf3d
@@image: 'images/using/export-select-file-type.png'; md5=dd236bd2e77177b631ea3a1455a52f00
@@image: 'images/using/overwriting-file.png'; md5=d402796983c4b18db822e817af2b2a90
@@image: 'images/using/export-to.png'; md5=cd4c7036de08e92c4745a0ded386e71e
Export File
With
You can access to this command through
Export Image Dialog
The Export Image Dialog
With this file browser, you can edit filename and extension directly in name box (default is
If you develop this option, you can select an extension in the drop-down list for your file:
File formats dialogs are described in
Exporting
When file name and destination are set, click on
If you have loaded a non-XCF file, a new item appears in File menu, allowing you to to export file in the same format, overwriting the original file.
If you modify an image that you already have exported, the
@@image: 'images/dialogs/error-console.png'; md5=149cdfc221fce88d0a1ceb55ea7b87fc
@@image: 'images/dialogs/error-console-record.png'; md5=c7827c2e9c7f2db5c3dbce429b01d1c2
Error Console
Error console
The
The
from an image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
The

Clear errors
This button lets you delete all errors in the log.
You can't
Save all errors
This button lets you save the whole log. You can also select a part of the log (by click-and-dragging the mouse pointer or by using the
A dialog window

You will as well find these button actions in the dialog tab menu by clicking on
@@image: 'images/dialogs/dialogs-templates-edit.png'; md5=d6186700e544fe61a797da1c8ea5ed42
@@image: 'images/dialogs/dialogs-templates-edit-advanced.png'; md5=1db57d3174093a66d2d590141b1089ef
Edit Template
Template
Edit
The Edit Template dialog
The dialog allows you to set the specifications of the selected template.
You can access this editor by clicking on the
Options
In this text box, you can modify the displayed template name.
Icon
By clicking on this icon, you open a list of icons. You can choose one of them to illustrate the selected template name.
Image size
Here you set the width and height of the new image. The default units are pixels, but you can switch to some other unit if you prefer, using the adjoining menu. If you do, note that the resulting pixel size will be determined by the X and Y resolution (which you can change in the Advanced Options), and by the setting of
Please keep in mind, that every Pixel of an image is stored in the memory. If you're creating large files with a high density of pixels,
Portrait/Landscape buttons
These buttons toggle between Portrait and Landscape mode. Concretely, their effect is to exchange the values for Width and Height. If the X and Y resolutions are different (in Advanced Options), then these values are exchanged also. On the right, image size, image resolution and color space are displayed.
Advanced Options
The
These are options that will mainly be of interest to more advanced users.
X and Y resolution
These values come into play mainly in relation to printing: they do not affect the size of the image in pixels, but they determine its size on paper when printed. They can also affect the way the image is displayed on the monitor: if
Colorspace
You can create the new image as either an RGB image or a grayscale image. You cannot create an indexed image directly in this way, but of course nothing prevents you from converting the image to indexed mode after it has been created.
Fill
You have four choices for the solid color that will fill the new image's background layer:




Comment
You can write a descriptive comment here. The text will be attached to the image as a
@@image: 'images/dialogs/history.png'; md5=41c0ae5d745c7bcccc6dda4f9dc813a8
Document History Dialog
Document History
Document History dialog
The History Dialog displays the list of the documents you have opened in previous sessions. It is more complete than the list you get with the
The
From an image menu:
From the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
From the image Menu bar through:
Using the Document History dialog
The scroll bar allows you to browse all images you have opened before.
In the Tab menu for the
Use the
Use the
Use the
Use the
Dialog Introduction
Introduction
Dialogs are the most common means of setting options and controls in the
Image Structure Related Dialogs
The following dialogs let you control and manipulate image structures, such as
Misc. Dialogs
Image Management Related Dialogs
Image-content Related Dialogs
@@image: 'images/dialogs/device-status.png'; md5=dcceef90f19bb9a5ef185ac7c7cd0d58
Device Status Dialog
Device Status
The
This window gathers together the current options of Toolbox, for each of your input devices: the mouse (named
The
The device status dialog is a dockable dialog; see the section
From an image menu:
From the Tab menu in any dialog:
@@image: 'images/dialogs/color-dialog.png'; md5=e612841ab5e008375cbb11cba0e57462
@@image: 'images/dialogs/color-CMYK.png'; md5=7d40e900ffe71665c72c8ecc1a2bf5c8
@@image: 'images/dialogs/color-triangle.png'; md5=ff1aa542f408b24288cfd8fb29c234a5
@@image: 'images/dialogs/color-watercolor.png'; md5=087324e1a6ac91f1c926a61ba18e5ff8
@@image: 'images/dialogs/color-palette.png'; md5=456c248b563d0ae326eafece809371cb
@@image: 'images/dialogs/color-scale.png'; md5=ee0db374cdbc8f9584b6d0b69be73bfb
@@image: 'images/dialogs/css-keywords.png'; md5=a4ceed36f19b9e67a39f379f4ae02815
@@image: 'images/dialogs/html_notation-menu.png'; md5=d4bfc39d8952808143fbadfc49c0477c
FG/BG Color Dialog
Color Selector
The FG/BG Color dialog
The Color dialog lets you manage and pick up new colors. You can use it into five different modes: GIMP, CMYK, Triangle, Watercolor and Scales. It has an interesting eyedropper to pick up a color anywhere on your screen.
the sliders are permanently visible instead of selected from the scale menu,
twelve buttons show the last used colors. You may choose a color by clicking on one of these buttons or add the current FG or BG color to this history list.
The dialog called from the FG/BG area in the toolbox is a bit different compared to the one called from the image menu:
This dialog works either on the foreground or the background color.
The
from an image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
from the toolbox: click on the current Foreground or Background color.
In the
Using the
GIMP Selector
With the GIMP Color Selector, you select a color by clicking on a one-dimensional strip located at the right edge, and then in a two-dimensional area located on the left. The one-dimensional strip can encode any of the color parameters H, S, V, R, G, or B, as determined by which of the adjoining buttons is pressed. The two-dimensional area then encodes the two complementary color parameters.
You get to this selector by clicking on the printer icon. The CMYK view gives you the possibility to manage colors from the
Triangle
Triangle Color Selector
The triangle selector
This selector uses the
Watercolor
Watercolor Color Selector
This color selector is symbolized by a brush. The function mode of this selector is a little different from that of models presented so far. The principle consists in changing the current foreground color by clicking in the rectangular palette. If the current foreground color is for example white, then it turns to reddish by clicking in the red color area. Repeated clicking strengthens the effect. With the slider, which is right apart from the color palette, you can set the color quantity per every mouse click. The higher the sliding control is, the more color is taken up per click.
Palette Color Selector
This color selector brings up a list of the colors of the current palette in the
Scales
The Scales selector
This selector displays a global view of R, G, B channels and H, S, V values, placed in sliders.
Color picker
The color picker has a completely different behavior, than the
HTML Notation
CSS Keywords
See
CSS keywords example
Right-clicking in the HTML Notation text box opens a context menu that allows you to edit your notation, particularly to paste a complex notation you have copied elsewhere. This menu leads to various
The HTML Notation context menu
Right up you find a symbol, consisting of two arrows, with which you can exchange the foreground and background color. At the bottom left of the dialog, just below the foreground color block, you find a switching surface with two small, one black and the other white, partially overlapping squares. If you click on these, the front and background color are put back to black and white respectively.
@@image: 'images/dialogs/channel-masks-example.png'; md5=ba2f5fb0878d0ae0653e6948cd204806
@@image: 'images/dialogs/stock-selection-16.png'; md5=7f9f92720f665c48096c29c9ca307df8
Selection masks
Selection mask
Selection
Channel mask
Quick mask
A selection composed out of channels.
Channels can be used to save and restore your selections. In the channel dialog you can see a thumbnail representing the selection. Selection Masks are a graphical way to build selections into a gray level channel where white pixels are selected and black pixels are not selected. Therefore gray pixels are partially selected. You can think of them as feathering the selection, a smooth transition between selected and not selected. This is important to avoid the ugly pixelization effect when you fill the selection or when you erase its content after isolating a subject from background.
Creating Selection Masks
From the image window menu
In the image window the bottom-left button creates a
From the channel dialog, when you click on the
There are several ways to initialize a selection mask.
Using Selection Masks
Once the channel is initialized, selected (highlighted in blue), visible (eye-icon in the dialog), and displayed as you want (color and opacity attributes), you can start to work with all the paint tools. The colors used are important. If you paint with some color other than white, grey, or black, the color Value (luminosity) will be used to define a gray (medium, light, or dark). When your mask is painted, you can transform it to a selection by clicking on the
You can work in selection masks not only with the paint tool but also with other tools. For instance, you can use the selection tools to fill areas uniformly with gradients or patterns. By adding many selection masks in your list you can easily compose very complex selections. One can say that a selection mask is to a selection as a layer is to an image.
As long as a selection mask is activated you are working in the mask and not in the image. To work in the image you have to deactivate all selection masks. Don't forget also to stop displaying masks in the image by removing the eye icon. Check also that all RGB and Alpha channels are activated and displayed in the image.
@@image: 'images/dialogs/channels-context-menu.png'; md5=eb03fd53b912b45c225a5b33382d9660
Channels Context Menu
Channels
Channel Context Menu
You can get the channel context menu by right clicking on a channel thumbnail. This menu gives the same operations on channels as those available from dialog buttons. The only difference concerns transformation to selection operations, each of them having its own entry in the menu.
Edit Channel Attributes
New Channel
Raise Channel
Lower Channel
Duplicate Channel
Delete Channel
See
Channel to Selection
Selection derived from channel replaces any previous active selection.
Add to Selection
Selection derived from channel is added to previous active selection. Final selection is merging of both.
Subtract from Selection
Final selection is subtraction of selection derived from a channel from previous active selection.
Intersect with Selection
Final selection is intersection of selection derived from a channel with the previous active selection. Only common parts are kept.
@@image: 'images/dialogs/channels-dialog.png'; md5=c870d83f3a5e4473bd9babfeb071f35b
@@image: 'images/dialogs/wilber-channels-red.png'; md5=06757160d5b8ec5228bf80f2374b685b
@@image: 'images/dialogs/wilber-channels-green.png'; md5=9cb0a78a7d3db6fc0e14138bbbd8ff69
@@image: 'images/dialogs/wilber-channels-blue.png'; md5=3a04441a2721eab40f0eda1a22803cd6
@@image: 'images/dialogs/wilber-channels-alpha.png'; md5=4408a37d5cda31f94508d16d42671725
@@image: 'images/dialogs/wilber-channels-combined.png'; md5=8eabd21a9f0cf299dfc3670ec5fb4a74
@@image: 'images/dialogs/channel-list-entry.png'; md5=e7ea820d383a52823c1ff7131b2e91ff
@@image: 'images/dialogs/stock-edit-16.png'; md5=57d8c3592f66b56853cdaf26b8f575c0
Channels Dialog
The Channels dialog
The Channels dialog is the main interface to edit, modify and manage your channels. Channels have a double usage. This is why the dialog is divided into two parts: the first part for color channels and the second part for

GIMP doesn't support CMYK or YUV color models.
Representation of an image with channels
Red channel
Green channel
Blue channel
Alpha channel
All channels
The right image is decomposed in three color channels (red, green, and blue) and the Alpha channel for transparency. On the right image the transparency is displayed as a gray checkerboard. In the color channel white is always white because all the colors are present and black is black. The red hat is visible in the red channel but quite invisible in the other channels. This is the same for plain green and blue which are visible only in their own channels and invisible in others.
The
from an image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
In the
Using the Channel dialog
The top channels are the color channels and the optional Alpha channel. They are always organized in the same order and they cannot be erased. Selection masks are described below and displayed as a list in the dialog. Every channel appears in the list with its attributes, including a thumbnail and its name. A right-click in a channel list entry opens the
Channel attributes
Every channel is shown in the list with its own attributes, which are very similar to the
Channel visibility
By default every channel and thus every color value is visible. This is indicated by an
Chain channels
The channels representing selection masks (the new channels in the lower part of the channel list) may be grouped using the button with the
Primary color channels (the default channels in the upper part of the channel list) may be grouped too. By default, all color channels (and the alpha channel) are selected, their list entries are highlighted. Operations will be performed on all channels. By clicking on a channel list entry you can deactivate this channel. Operations like
Thumbnail
A small preview-icon represents the effect of the channel. On a selection mask, this preview can be enlarged by holding click down on it.
Channel name
The name of the channel, which must be unique within the image. Double-clicking on the name of a selection mask channel will allow you to edit it. The names of the primary channels (Red, Green, Blue, Alpha) can not be changed.
Activated channels appear highlighted (generally) in blue in the dialog. If you click on a channel in the list you toggle activation of the corresponding channel. Disabling a color channel red, blue, or green has severe consequences. For instance if you disable the blue channel, all pixels from now on added to the image will not have blue component, and so a white pixel will have the yellow complementary color.
Managing channels
Create a New Channel Mask
Move Channel Mask
Duplicate Channel Mask
Delete Channel Mask
Under the channel list is a set of buttons allowing you to perform some basic operations on channel list.
Only available for selection masks. Here you can change the
You can create here a new channel. The displayed dialog lets you set
Only available for selection masks: you can here put the channel up a level in the list. Press
You can here put the channel down a level in the list. Press the
You can create here a copy of the active channel. Name of new channel is suffixed with a number.
You can also duplicate a color channel or the Alpha channel. It's an easy way to keep a copy of them and to use them later as a selection in an image.
Here you can transform the channel to become a selection. By default the selection derived from a channel replaces any previous active selection. It's possible to change this by clicking on control keys.



Only available for selection masks: you can here delete the active channel.
@@image: 'images/dialogs/buffers-dialog.png'; md5=3fc07f93ddd5e217af903f4be7075729
@@image: 'images/dialogs/buffers-dialog-grid.png'; md5=5188c06c32bda32e437d504f1be1a6f4
@@image: 'images/dialogs/buffers-context-menu.png'; md5=52c598a2cf4997b177d0421cb053192f
Buffers Dialog
Buffers
Cut named
Copy named
Paste named
Cut Named
Copy Named
Paste Named
The Buffers dialog (as a list)
Buffers are temporary repositories for image data, created when you cut or copy part of a drawable (a layer, layer mask, etc.). You can save a document in this buffer in two ways:
The
Named buffers are not saved across sessions. The only way to save their contents is to paste them into images.
This dialog is a dockable dialog; see the section
from an image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
In the
Using the Buffers dialog
The Buffers Menu
Clicking on a buffer in the display area makes it the active buffer, i. e., the one that will be used for paste commands executed with the Buffers Menu or the buttons at the bottom of the dialog. Double-clicking on a buffer causes its contents to be pasted to the active image as a floating selection; this is a quick way of executing the
At the bottom of the dialog are four buttons. The operations they perform can also be accessed from the Buffers Menu that you get by right clicking on the active buffer.
The Buffers dialog (Grid View)
In the Tab menu for the
You can change the size of the buffer previews in the dialog using the
At the bottom of the dialog you find a couple of buttons:
Paste Buffer
This command pastes the contents of the selected buffer into the active image, as a floating selection. The only difference between this and the ordinary
Paste Buffer Into
This command pastes the contents of the selected buffer into the active image's selection, as a floating selection. The only difference between this and the ordinary
Paste Buffer as New
This command creates a new single-layer image out of the contents of the selected buffer. The only difference between this and the ordinary
Delete Buffer
This command deletes the selected named buffer, no questions asked. You cannot delete the Global Buffer.
Context menu
The
These commands are explained above with Buttons.
@@image: 'images/dialogs/brushes-dialog.png'; md5=a4c3fca3dd9806d49d67ae706f7708e2
@@image: 'images/dialogs/brushes-dialog-simple.png'; md5=21fed9f079962fc62e25b298d716d2c6
@@image: 'images/dialogs/brushes-grid-view.png'; md5=ea848e8fea0bbe92e8946e276e10e170
@@image: 'images/dialogs/brushes-list-view.png'; md5=d437fdc00346a1090844a41d51ef04be
@@image: 'images/dialogs/brushes-buttons.png'; md5=bed9da90fbef9d67952f66935518d847
@@image: 'images/dialogs/brushes-context-menu.png'; md5=4febdaa73fcecac66e9ed9b6ab159008
@@image: 'images/dialogs/brushes-editor-dialog.png'; md5=f24a74f38e9af97c98234dc7da782fba
@@image: 'images/dialogs/brushes-dialog-clipboard.png'; md5=d02447a2d4809de31119fdd75696a5c5
Brushes Dialog
Brushes
The Brushes dialog
The
The
from the Toolbox, by clicking on the brush symbol in Brush/Pattern/Gradient area.
From an image menu:
from the Tab menu in any dockable dialog by clicking on
from the Tool Options dialog for any of the paint tools, by clicking on the Brush icon button, you get a popup with similar functionality that permits you to quickly choose a brush from the list; if you click on the button present on the right bottom of the popup, you open the real brush dialog.
The simplified
This window has five buttons, clearly explained by help pop-ups:
Smaller previews
Larger previews
View as list
View as Grid
Open the brush selection dialog
Note that, depending on your Preferences, a brush selected with the popup may only apply to the currently active tool, not to other paint tools. See the
Using the
Grid/List mode
In the Tab menu, you can choose between
In the Tab menu, the option
Grid/List view
View as List
At the top of the dialog appears the name of the currently selected brush, and its size in pixels.
In the center a grid view of all available brushes appears, with the currently selected one outlined.
List mode
For the most part, the dialog works the same way in List mode as in Grid mode, with one exception:
If you double-click on the
Brush previews
The
When you click on a brush preview, it becomes the current brush and it gets selected in the brush area of Toolbox and the Brush option of painting tools. When you double-click on a brush preview, you will activate the
Meaning of the small symbols at the bottom right corner of every brush preview:
A blue corner is for brushes in normal size. You can duplicate them.
A small cross means that the brush preview is in a reduced size. You can get it in normal size by maintaining left click on it.
A red corner is for animated brushes. If you maintain left click on the thumbnail, the animation is played.
You can use tags to reorganize the brushes display. See
At the bottom of the dialog you find a slider and some buttons:
Spacing
This slider lets you set the distance between consecutive brush marks when you trace out a brushstroke with the mouse pointer. Spacing is a percentage of the brush width.
Edit Brush
This activates the
New Brush
This creates a new parametric brush, initializes it with a small fuzzy round shape, and opens the Brush Editor so that you can modify it. The new brush is automatically saved in your personal
Duplicate Brush
This button is only enabled if the currently selected brush is a parametric brush. If so, the brush is duplicated, and the Brush Editor is opened so that you can modify the copy. The result is automatically saved in your personal
Delete Brush
This option is active for parametric brushes only. This removes all traces of the brush, both from the dialog and the folder where its file is stored, if you have permission to do so. It asks for confirmation before doing anything.
Refresh Brushes
If you add brushes to your personal
The functions performed by these buttons can also be accessed from the dialog pop-up menu, activated by right-clicking anywhere in the brush grid/list, or by choosing the top item,
The
Right clicking on a brush preview opens a context menu. This menu has now some options which let you create elliptical and rectangular brushes. These brushes can be feathered, but they are not parametric brushes.
The other commands of this submenu are described with the Buttons, except for
Brush Editor
The
The Brush Editor, activated for a new brush.
The Brush Editor allows you to view the brush parameters of a brush supplied by GIMP, and you can't change them. You can also create a custom brush: click on the




Shape
A circle, a square and a diamond are available. You will modify them by using the following options:
Radius
Distance between brush center and edge, in the width direction. A square with a 10 pixels radius will have a 20 pixels side. A diamond with a 5 pixels radius will have a 10 pixels width.
Spikes
This parameter is useful only for square and diamond. With a square, increasing spikes results in a polygon. With a diamond, you get a star.
Hardness
This parameter controls the feathering of the brush border. Value = 1.00 gives a brush with a sharp border (0.00-1.00).
Aspect ratio
This parameter controls the brush Width/Height ratio. A diamond with a 5 pixels radius and an Aspect Ratio = 2, will be flattened with a 10 pixels width and a 5 pixels height (1.0-20.0).
Angle
This angle is the angle between the brush width direction, which is normally horizontal, and the horizontal direction, counter-clock-wise. When this value increases, the brush width turns counter-clock-wise (0 to 180).
When the brush draws a line, it actually stamps the brush icon repeatedly. If brush stamps are very close, you get the impression of a solid line: you get that with Spacing = 1. (1.00 to 200.0).
The Clipboard Brush
Clipboard Brush
Clipboard brush
When you use the Copy or Cut command on an image or a selection of it, a copy appears as a new brush in the upper left corner of the
A new
You can save this clipboard brush by using the
translator-credits
It allows easy zoom level control, more precise than with the