# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	EMEA
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-EMEA/v3/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/EMEA.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

ANNEX I
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS
1 1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
alli 60 mg hard capsules
2.
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each hard capsule contains 60 mg orlistat.
For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1.
3.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
Hard capsule
The capsule has a dark blue centre band, and a turquoise cap and body bearing the imprint of “ alli”.
4.
CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 Therapeutic indications
alli is indicated for weight loss in adults who are overweight (body mass index, BMI, ≥ 28 kg/ m2) and should be taken in conjunction with a mildly hypocaloric, lower-fat diet.
4.2 Posology and method of administration
Adults
The recommended dose of alli is one 60 mg capsule to be taken three times daily.
The capsule should be taken with water immediately before, during or up to 1 hour after each main meal.
If a meal is missed or contains no fat, the dose of orlistat should be omitted.
No more than three 60 mg capsules should be taken in 24 hours.
Treatment should not exceed 6 months.
If patients have been unable to lose weight after 12 weeks of treatment with alli, they should consult their doctor or a pharmacist.
It may be necessary to discontinue treatment.
Diet and exercise are important parts of a weight loss programme.
It is recommended that a diet and exercise programme is started before beginning treatment with alli.
While taking orlistat, the patient should be on a nutritionally balanced, mildly hypocaloric diet that contains approximately 30% of calories from fat (e. g. in a 2,000 kcal/ day diet, this equates to < 67 g of fat).
The daily intake of fat, carbohydrate and protein should be distributed over three main meals.
The diet and exercise programme should continue to be followed when treatment with alli is stopped.
Special populations
alli should not be used in children and adolescents below 18 years of age due to insufficient data on safety and efficacy.
There are limited data on the use of orlistat in the elderly.
The effect of orlistat in individuals with hepatic and/ or renal impairment has not been studied.
2 However, as orlistat is minimally absorbed, no dosage adjustment is necessary in elderly and in individuals with hepatic and/ or renal impairment.
4.3 Contraindications
• Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients • Concurrent treatment with ciclosporin (see section 4.5) • Chronic malabsorption syndrome • Cholestasis • Pregnancy (see section 4.6) • Breast-feeding (see section 4.6) • Concurrent treatment with warfarin or other oral anticoagulants (see sections 4.5 and 4.8)
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use
Patients should be advised to adhere to the dietary recommendations they are given (see section 4.2).
The possibility of experiencing gastrointestinal symptoms (see section 4.8) may increase when orlistat is taken with an individual meal or a diet high in fat.
Treatment with orlistat may potentially impair the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K) (see section 4.5).
For this reason, a multivitamin supplement should be taken at bedtime.
As weight loss may be accompanied by improved metabolic control in diabetes, patients who are taking a medicinal product for diabetes should consult a doctor or pharmacist before starting treatment with alli, in case it is necessary to adjust the dose of the antidiabetic medicinal product.
Weight loss may be accompanied by an improvement in blood pressure and cholesterol levels.
Patients who are taking a medicinal product for hypertension or hypercholesterolaemia should consult a doctor or pharmacist when taking alli, in case it is necessary to adjust the dose of these medicinal products.
Patients who are taking amiodarone should consult a doctor or pharmacist before starting treatment with alli (see section 4.5).
Cases of rectal bleeding have been reported in patients taking orlistat.
If this occurs, the patient should consult a doctor.
The use of an additional contraceptive method is recommended to prevent possible failure of oral contraception that could occur in case of severe diarrhoea (see section 4.5).
4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction
Ciclosporin
A decrease in ciclosporin plasma levels has been observed in a drug-drug interaction study and also reported in several cases, when orlistat was administered concomitantly.
This could potentially lead to a decrease of immunosuppressive efficacy.
Concurrent use of alli and ciclosporin is contraindicated (see section 4.3).
Oral anticoagulants
When warfarin or other oral anticoagulants are given in combination with orlistat, international normalised ratio (INR) values could be affected (see section 4.8).
Concurrent use of alli and warfarin or other oral anticoagulants is contraindicated (see section 4.3).
Oral contraceptives
3 The absence of an interaction between oral contraceptives and orlistat has been demonstrated in specific drug-drug interaction studies.
However, orlistat may indirectly reduce the availability of oral contraceptives and lead to unexpected pregnancies in some individual cases.
An additional contraceptive method is recommended in case of severe diarrhoea (see section 4.4).
Fat soluble vitamins
Treatment with orlistat may potentially impair the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K).
The vast majority of subjects receiving up to 4 full years of treatment with orlistat in clinical studies had vitamin A, D, E and K and beta-carotene levels that stayed within normal range.
However, patients should be advised to use a multivitamin supplement at bedtime to help ensure adequate vitamin intake (see section 4.4).
Acarbose
In the absence of pharmacokinetic interaction studies, alli is not recommended to be used by patients receiving acarbose.
Amiodarone
A decrease in plasma levels of amiodarone, when given as a single dose, has been observed in a limited number of healthy volunteers who received orlistat concomitantly.
The clinical relevance of this effect in patients receiving amiodarone treatment remains unknown.
Patients who are taking amiodarone should consult a doctor or pharmacist before starting treatment with alli.
The dose of amiodarone may need to be adjusted during treatment with alli.
4.6 Pregnancy and lactation
For orlistat, no clinical data on exposed pregnancies are available.
Animal studies do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects with respect to pregnancy, embryonal/ foetal development, parturition or postnatal development (see section 5.3).
alli is contraindicated in pregnancy (see section 4.3).
As it is not known whether orlistat is secreted into human milk, alli is contraindicated during breast- feeding (see section 4.3).
4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines
Orlistat has no influence on the ability to drive and use machines.
4.8 Undesirable effects
Adverse reactions to orlistat are largely gastrointestinal in nature and related to the pharmacologic effect of the medicinal product on preventing the absorption of ingested fat.
The gastrointestinal adverse reactions identified from clinical trials with orlistat 60 mg of 18 months to 2 years duration were generally mild and transient.
They generally occurred early in treatment (within 3 months) and most patients experienced only one episode.
Consumption of a diet low in fat will decrease the likelihood of experiencing adverse gastrointestinal reactions (see section 4.4).
Adverse reactions are listed below by system organ class and frequency.
Frequencies are defined as: very common (≥ 1/ 10), common (≥ 1/ 100 to < 1/ 10), uncommon (≥ 1/ 1,000 to < 1/ 100), rare (≥ 1/ 10,000 to < 1/ 1,000) and very rare (< 1/ 10,000), not known (cannot be estimated from the available data).
4 The frequencies of adverse reactions identified during post-marketing use of orlistat are not known as these reactions were reported voluntarily from a population of uncertain size.
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness.
System Organ Class and Frequency Blood and the lymphatic system disorders
Adverse Reaction/ Event
Not known:
Immune system disorders
Decreased prothrombin and increased INR (see sections 4.3 and 4.5)
Not known:
Psychiatric disorders
Hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis, bronchospasm, angioedema, pruritus, rash, and urticaria
Common:
Gastrointestinal disorders
Anxiety†
Very common:
Oily spotting Flatus with discharge Faecal urgency Fatty oily stool Oily evacuation Flatulence Soft stools
Common:
Abdominal pain Faecal incontinence Liquid stools Increased defaecation
Not known:
Hepato-biliary disorders
Diverticulitis Mild rectal bleeding (see section 4.4)
Not known:
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders
Hepatitis Cholelithiasis Increase in transaminases and in alkaline phosphatase
Not known:
Bullous eruption
† It is plausible that treatment with orlistat can lead to anxiety in anticipation of or secondary to gastrointestinal adverse reactions.
4.9 Overdose
Single doses of 800 mg orlistat and multiple doses of up to 400 mg three times daily for 15 days have been studied in normal weight and obese subjects without significant clinical findings.
In addition, doses of 240 mg three times daily have been administered to obese patients for 6 months.
The majority of orlistat overdose cases received during post-marketing reported either no adverse reactions or adverse reactions that are similar to those reported with recommended doses of orlistat.
5 In the event of an overdose, medical advice should be sought.
Should a significant overdose of orlistat occur, it is recommended that the patient be observed for 24 hours.
Based on human and animal studies, any systemic effects attributable to the lipase-inhibiting properties of orlistat should be rapidly reversible.
5.
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties
Pharmaco-therapeutic group:
Peripherally acting anti obesity products, ATC code A08AB01.
Orlistat is a potent, specific and long-acting inhibitor of gastrointestinal lipases.
It exerts its therapeutic activity in the lumen of the stomach and small intestine by forming a covalent bond with the active serine site of the gastric and pancreatic lipases.
The inactivated enzyme is thus unavailable to hydrolyse dietary fat, in the form of triglycerides, into absorbable free fatty acids and monoglycerides.
From clinical studies, it has been estimated that orlistat 60 mg taken three times daily blocks the absorption of approximately 25% of dietary fat.
The effect of orlistat results in an increase in faecal fat as early as 24 to 48 hours after dosing.
Upon discontinuation of therapy, faecal fat content returns to pre-treatment levels, usually within 48 to 72 hours.
Two double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled studies in adults with a BMI ≥ 28 kg/ m2 support the efficacy of orlistat 60 mg taken three times daily in conjunction with a hypocaloric, lower-fat diet.
The primary parameter, change in body weight from baseline (time of randomisation), was assessed for body weight over time (Table 1) and the percentage of subjects who lost ≥ 5% or ≥ 10% of body weight (Table 2).
Although weight loss was assessed during 12 months of treatment in both studies, most weight loss occurred within the first 6 months.
Table 1:
Effect of 6 months treatment on body weight measured at baseline
Treatment group
N
Relative
mean change (%)
Mean
change (kg)
Study 1
Placebo
204
-3.24
-3.11
Orlistat 60 mg
216
-5.55
-5.20 a
Study 2
Placebo Orlistat 60 mg
183 191
-1.17 -3.66
-1.05 -3.59 a
Pooled data
Placebo
387
-2.20
-2.09
a
Orlistat 60 mg
407
-4.60
-4.40 a
p < 0.001 versus placebo
Table 2:
Responder analysis at 6 months
Lost ≥ 5% of baseline body weight (%) Placebo Orlistat 60 mg a
Lost ≥ 10% of baseline body weight (%) Placebo Orlistat 60 mg
Study 1 Study 2 Pooled data
30.9 54.6 21.3 37.7 a 26.4 46.7 a
10.3 21.3 b 2.2 10.5 b 6.5 16.2 a
Comparison versus placebo: a p < 0.001; b p < 0.01
The weight loss induced by orlistat 60 mg conferred other important health benefits after 6 months of treatment in addition to weight loss.
The mean relative change in total cholesterol was -2.4% for orlistat 60 mg (baseline 5.20 mmol/ l) and +2.8% for placebo (baseline 5.26 mmol/ l).
The mean relative change in LDL cholesterol was -3.5% for orlistat 60 mg (baseline 3.30 mmol/ l) and +3.8% for
6 placebo (baseline 3.41 mmol/ l).
For waist circumference, the mean change was -4.5 cm for orlistat 60 mg (baseline 103.7 cm) and -3.6 cm for placebo (baseline 103.5 cm).
All comparisons against placebo were statistically significant.
5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties
Absorption
Studies in normal weight and obese volunteers have shown that the extent of absorption of orlistat was minimal.
Plasma concentrations of intact orlistat were non-measurable (< 5 ng/ ml) 8 hours following oral administration of orlistat 360 mg.
In general, at therapeutic doses, detection of intact orlistat in plasma was sporadic and concentrations were extremely low (< 10 ng/ ml or 0.02 µmol), with no evidence of accumulation, which is consistent with minimal absorption.
Distribution
The volume of distribution cannot be determined because the active substance is minimally absorbed and has no defined systemic pharmacokinetics.
In vitro, orlistat is > 99% bound to plasma proteins (lipoproteins and albumin were the major binding proteins).
Orlistat minimally partitions into erythrocytes.
Metabolism
Based on animal data, it is likely that the metabolism of orlistat occurs mainly within the gastrointestinal wall.
Based on a study in obese patients, of the minimal fraction of the dose that was absorbed systemically, two major metabolites, M1 (4-member lactone ring hydrolysed) and M3 (M1 with N-formyl leucine moiety cleaved), accounted for approximately 42% of the total plasma concentration.
M1 and M3 have an open beta-lactone ring and extremely weak lipase inhibitory activity (1,000- and 2,500-fold less than orlistat, respectively).
In view of this low inhibitory activity and the low plasma levels at therapeutic doses (average of 26 ng/ ml and 108 ng/ ml, respectively), these metabolites are considered to be pharmacologically inconsequential.
Elimination
Studies in normal weight and obese subjects have shown that faecal excretion of the unabsorbed active substance was the major route of elimination.
Approximately 97% of the administered dose was excreted in faeces and 83% of that as unchanged orlistat.
The cumulative renal excretion of total orlistat-related materials was < 2% of the given dose.
The time to reach complete excretion (faecal plus urinary) was 3 to 5 days.
The disposition of orlistat appeared to be similar between normal weight and obese volunteers.
Orlistat, M1 and M3 are all subject to biliary excretion.
5.3 Preclinical safety data
Nonclinical data reveal no special hazard for humans based on conventional studies of safety pharmacology, repeated dose toxicity, genotoxicity, carcinogenic potential, and toxicity to reproduction.
7 6.
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 List of excipients
Capsule filling Microcrystalline cellulose (E460) Sodium starch glycolate Povidone (E1201) Sodium laurilsulfate Talc
Capsule shell Gelatin Indigo carmine (E132) Titanium dioxide (E171) Sodium laurilsulfate Sorbitan monolaurate
Capsule printing ink Shellac Iron oxide black (E172) Propylene glycol
Band Gelatin Polysorbate 80 Indigo carmine (E132)
6.2 Incompatibilities
Not applicable.
6.3 Shelf life
2 years.
Discard any capsules stored in the carry case for more than one month.
6.4 Special precautions for storage
Do not store above 25°C.
Keep the container tightly closed in order to protect from moisture.
6.5 Nature and contents of container
HDPE bottle with child resistant closure containing 42, 60, 84 or 90 hard capsules.
The bottle also contains two sealed canisters containing silica gel desiccant.
Not all pack sizes may be marketed.
A polystyrene resin / polyurethane carry case (Shuttle) which holds 3 capsules is included in each pack.
6.6 Special precautions for disposal
No special requirements.
8 7.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Limited Glaxo Wellcome House Berkeley Avenue Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
8.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBERS
EU/ 1/ 07/ 401/ 007-0010
9.
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/ RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION
Date of first authorisation:
23 July 2007 Renewal of the authorisation:
10.
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) website: http: / /www. emea. europa. eu/
9 ANNEX II
A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
10 A.
MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDERS RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE
Name and address of the manufacturers responsible for batch release
alli 60 mg hard capsules:
Famar S. A., 49 KM Athens-Lamia, 190 11 Avlona, Greece
Catalent UK Packaging Limited, Sedge Close, Headway, Great Oakley, Corby, Northamptonshire NN18 8HS, UK.
The printed package leaflet of the medicinal product must state the name and address of the manufacturer responsible for the release of the concerned batch.
B.
CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
alli 60 mg hard capsules:
Medicinal product not subject to medical prescription.
• CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
Not applicable.
• OTHER CONDITIONS
Pharmacovigilance system The MAH must ensure that the system of pharmacovigilance, as described in the July 2007 version presented in Module 1.8.1. of the Marketing Authorisation Application, is in place and functioning before and whilst the product is on the market.
Risk Management Plan The MAH commits to performing the studies and additional pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan, as agreed in the October 2008 version of the Risk Management Plan (RMP) presented in Module 1.8.2. of the Marketing Authorisation Application and any subsequent updates of the RMP agreed by the CHMP.
As per the CHMP Guideline on Risk Management Systems for medicinal products for human use, the updated RMP should be submitted at the same time as the next Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR).
In addition, an updated RMP should be submitted • When new information is received that may impact on the current Safety Specification, Pharmacovigilance Plan or risk minimisation activities • Within 60 days of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached • At the request of the EMEA
PSURs The Marketing Authorisation Holder will submit 6 monthly PSURs for one year after the Commission Decision on the extension application for alli 60 mg hard capsules then yearly for 2 years and every three years thereafter.
11 ANNEX III
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET
12 A.
LABELLING
13 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
OUTER CARTON SLEEVE, 42, 60, 84 or 90 CAPSULES
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
alli 60 mg hard capsules Orlistat
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each hard capsule contains 60 mg orlistat.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
This pack includes:
Bottle containing 42 hard capsules Bottle containing 60 hard capsules Bottle containing 84 hard capsules Bottle containing 90 hard capsules
Carry case
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
Oral use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 25°C.
14 Keep the container tightly closed in order to protect from moisture.
10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Limited Glaxo Wellcome House Berkeley Avenue Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 401/ 007-0010
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product not subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
Weight loss aid
Can help you lose more weight than dieting alone.
alli is used for weight loss alongside reduced calorie, lower-fat meals in overweight adults, aged 18 or over.
alli is clinically proven to help you lose more weight than dieting alone.
The capsules work only in your digestive system to stop about a quarter of the fat in your meals from being absorbed.
This fat passes out of your body and may cause changes to your bowel movements.
Eat lower-fat meals to help manage these effects.
To see if alli is right for you, find your height on the chart.
If you weigh less than the weight shown for your height, do not use alli.
15
Height
Weight Height
Weight
1.50m 1.55m 1.60m 1.65m 1.70m 1.75m 1.80m 1.85m 1.90m
63kg 67.25kg 71.75kg 76.25kg 81kg 85.75kg 90.75kg 95.75kg 101kg
4 '10' '5' 0 '' 5 '2' '5' 4 '' 5 '6' '5' 8 '' 5 '10' '6' 0 '' 6 '2' '
9st 8lbs 10st 3lbs 10st 13lbs 11st 9lbs 12st 5lbs 13st 2lbs 13st 13lbs 14st 10lbs 15st 8lbs
Being overweight increases your risk of developing several serious health problems such as diabetes and heart disease.
You should see your doctor for a check-up.
Do not use
• if you are under 18. • if you are pregnant or breast-feeding. • if you are taking ciclosporin. • if you are taking warfarin or any other medicines used to thin the blood. • if you are allergic to orlistat or any of the ingredients. • if you have cholestasis (condition where the flow of bile from the liver is blocked). • if you have problems absorbing food (chronic malabsorption syndrome).
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before taking alli
• if you are taking amiodarone for heart rhythm problems. • if you are taking a medicine for diabetes.
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist when taking alli
• if you are taking a medicine for high blood pressure. • if you are taking a medicine for high cholesterol.
How to use
• take one capsule whole with water, three times a day with each main meal containing fat. • do not take more than three capsules a day. • you should take a multivitamin (containing vitamins A, D, E and K) once a day, at bedtime. • you should not take alli for more than six months.
< www.xxx.xxx >
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
alli 60 mg
16 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING
INNER CARTON SLEEVE, 42, 60, 84 or 90 CAPSULES
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
alli 60 mg hard capsules Orlistat
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each hard capsule contains 60 mg orlistat.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
This pack includes:
Bottle containing 42 hard capsules Bottle containing 60 hard capsules Bottle containing 84 hard capsules Bottle containing 90 hard capsules
Carry case
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
Oral use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 25°C.
Keep the container tightly closed in order to protect from moisture.
17 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Limited Glaxo Wellcome House Berkeley Avenue Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 401/ 007-0010
13.
BATCH NUMBER
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product not subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
Weight loss aid Can help you lose more weight than dieting alone.
alli is used for weight loss alongside reduced calorie, lower-fat meals in overweight adults, aged 18 or over.
alli is clinically proven to help you lose more weight than dieting alone.
The capsules work only in your digestive system to stop about a quarter of the fat in your meals from being absorbed.
This fat passes out of your body and may cause changes to your bowel movements.
Eat lower-fat meals to help manage these effects.
How to use
• take one capsule whole with water, three times a day with each main meal containing fat. • do not take more than three capsules a day. • you should take a multivitamin (containing vitamins A, D, E and K) once a day, at bedtime. • you should not take alli for more than six months.
For further information about the alli weight loss programme visit< www.xxx.xxx >.
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
18 PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE IMMEDIATE PACKAGING
BOTTLE LABEL, 42, 60, 84 or 90 CAPSULES
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT
alli 60 mg hard capsules Orlistat
2.
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)
Each hard capsule contains 60 mg orlistat.
3.
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
4.
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS
42 hard capsules 60 hard capsules 84 hard capsules 90 hard capsules
5.
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
Read the package leaflet before use.
Oral use.
6.
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN
Keep out of the reach and sight of children.
7.
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY
8.
EXPIRY DATE
EXP
9.
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS
Do not store above 25°C.
Keep the container tightly closed in order to protect from moisture.
19 10.
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE
11.
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER
Glaxo Group Limited Glaxo Wellcome House Berkeley Avenue Greenford Middlesex UB6 0NN United Kingdom
12.
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)
EU/ 1/ 07/ 401/ 007-0010
13.
BATCH NUMBER
Lot
14.
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY
Medicinal product not subject to medical prescription.
15.
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE
Weight loss aid
Adults, aged 18 or over, who are overweight.
16.
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE
20 MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS
CARRY CASE (SHUTTLE)
1.
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION
alli 60 mg hard capsules Orlistat Oral use
2.
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
3.
EXPIRY DATE
4.
BATCH NUMBER
5.
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT
Holds 3 capsules.
6.
OTHER
Read the package leaflet before use.
Do not store above 25°C.
Discard any capsules stored in this case for more than one month.
21 B.
PACKAGE LEAFLET
22 PACKAGE LEAFLET:
INFORMATION FOR THE USER
alli 60 mg hard capsules Orlistat
Read all of this leaflet carefully because it contains important information for you.
This medicine is available without a prescription.
However, you still need to use it carefully to get the best results from it. • Keep this leaflet.
You may need to read it again. • Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you need more information or advice. • If you do not lose weight after taking alli for 12 weeks, see your doctor or pharmacist for advice.
You may need to stop taking alli. • If any of the side effects gets serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, tell your doctor or pharmacist.
In this leaflet:
1.
What alli is and what it is used for
• •
Risk of being overweight How alli works
2.
Before you take alli
• • • • • •
Do not take alli Take special care with alli Taking other medicines Taking alli with food and drink Pregnancy and breast-feeding Driving and using machines
3.
How to take alli
•
Preparing to lose weight o Choose your start date o Decide on your weight loss goal o Set your calorie and fat targets
•
Taking alli o Adults 18 and over o How long should I take alli for? o If you take too much alli o If you forget to take alli
4.
Possible side effects
• • • • •
Serious side effects Very common side effects Common side effects Effects seen in blood tests Learn to deal with diet-related treatment effects
5.
How to store alli 6.
Further information
• • • •
What alli contains What alli looks like and contents of the pack Marketing authorisation holder and manufacturer Further helpful information
1.
WHAT alli IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR
alli is used for weight loss in adults aged 18 and over who are overweight, and have a body mass index (BMI) of 28 or above. alli should be used along with a reduced calorie, lower-fat diet.
23 BMI is a way to find out if you have a healthy weight, or are overweight, for your height.
The chart below will help you find out whether you are overweight and whether alli is right for you.
Find your height on the chart.
If you weigh less than the weight shown for your height, do not take alli.
Height
Weight Height
Weight
1. 50 m
63 kg
4' 10''
9 st 8 lbs
1.55 m 1.60 m 1.65 m 1.70 m 1.75 m 1.80 m 1.85 m 1.90 m
67.25 kg 71.75 kg 76.25 kg 81 kg 85.75 kg 90.75 kg 95.75 kg 101 kg
5' 0'' 5' 2'' 5' 4'' 5' 6'' 5' 8'' 5' 10'' 6' 0'' 6' 2''
10 st 3 lbs 10 st 13 lbs 11 st 9 lbs 12 st 5 lbs 13 st 2 lbs 13 st 13 lbs 14 st 10 lbs 15 st 8 lbs
Risk of being overweight
Being overweight increases your risk of developing several serious health problems such as diabetes and heart disease.
These conditions may not cause you to feel unwell so you should see your doctor for a general health check.
How alli works
The active ingredient in alli is designed to target fat in your digestive system.
It stops about a quarter of the fat in your meals from being absorbed.
This fat will pass out of the body in your stools.
You may experience diet-related treatment effects (see Chapter 4).
It is therefore important that you commit to a lower-fat diet to manage these effects.
If you do, the action of the capsules will assist your efforts by helping you to lose more weight compared to dieting alone.
For every 2 kg (4 lb) you lose from dieting alone, alli can help you lose 1 kg (2 lb) more.
2.
BEFORE YOU TAKE alli
Do not take alli
• If you are under 18. • If you are pregnant or breast-feeding. • If you are taking ciclosporin, used after organ transplants, for severe rheumatoid arthritis and some severe skin conditions. • If you are taking warfarin or other medicines used to thin the blood. • If you are allergic (hypersensitive) to orlistat or any of the ingredients of alli: see Chapter 6 for further information. • If you have cholestasis (condition where the flow of bile from the liver is blocked). • If you have problems absorbing food (chronic malabsorption syndrome) diagnosed by a doctor.
Take special care with alli
If you have diabetes.
Tell your doctor who may need to adjust your anti-diabetic medicine.
24 Taking other medicines
alli may affect some medicines you have to take.
Please tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking or have recently taken any other medicines, including medicines obtained without a prescription.
Do not take alli with these medicines • Ciclosporin: ciclosporin is used after organ transplants, for severe rheumatoid arthritis and some severe skin conditions. • Warfarin or other medicines used to thin the blood.
The oral contraceptive pill and alli • The oral contraceptive pill may be less effective if you get severe diarrhoea.
Use an extra method of contraception if you get severe diarrhoea.
Multivitamins and alli • You should take a multivitamin, every day. alli can lower the levels of some vitamins absor bed by your body.
The multivitamin should contain vitamins A, D, E and K.
You should take the multivitamin at bedtime, when you will not be taking alli, to help ensure that the vitamins are absorbed.
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before taking alli if you are taking • amiodarone, used for heart rhythm problems. • acarbose, used for diabetes.
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist when taking alli • If you are taking a medicine for high blood pressure as it may be necessary to adjust your dose. • If you are taking a medicine for high cholesterol as it may be necessary to adjust your dose.
Taking alli with food and drink
alli should be used along with a reduced calorie, lower-fat diet.
Try to start this diet before beginning treatment.
For information on how to set your calorie and fat targets, see Further helpful information in the blue pages in Chapter 6.
Take alli at mealtimes.
This usually means one capsule at breakfast, lunch and dinner.
If you miss a meal, or your meal contains no fat, do not take a capsule. alli does not work unless there's some fat in the meal.
If you eat a high-fat meal, do not take more than the recommended dose.
Taking the capsule with a meal containing too much fat may increase your chance of getting diet-related treatment effects (see Chapter 4).
Make every effort to avoid any high-fat meals while taking alli.
Pregnancy and breast-feeding
Do not take alli if you are pregnant or breast-feeding.
Driving and using machines
No effect on ability to drive or use machines has been observed.
3.
HOW TO TAKE alli
Preparing to lose weight
1.
Choose your start date
25 Choose the day you will start taking the capsules ahead of time.
Before you start taking the capsules, begin your reduced calorie, lower-fat diet and give your body a few days to adjust to your new eating habits.
Keep a record of what you are eating in a food diary.
Food diaries are effective, because they make you aware of what you are eating, how much you eat, and give you the basis to make changes.
2.
Decide on your weight loss goal
Think about how much weight you want to lose and then set a target weight.
A realistic goal is to lose between 5% to 10% of your starting weight.
The amount of weight you lose may vary from week to week.
You should aim to lose weight at a gradual, steady pace of about 0.5 kg (1 lb) per week.
3.
Set your calorie and fat targets
To help you reach your weight-loss goal you need to set two daily targets, one for calories and one for fat.
For further advice see Further helpful information in the blue pages in Chapter 6.
Taking alli
Adults 18 and over • Take one capsule, three times a day. • Take alli at mealtimes.
This usually means one capsule at breakfast, lunch and dinner.
Make sure your three main meals are well balanced, reduced calorie, and lower-fat. • If you miss a meal, or your meal contains no fat, do not take a capsule. alli does not work unless there's some fat in the meal. • Take alli just before, during or up to one hour after meals. • Swallow the capsule whole with water. • Do not take more than 3 capsules a day. • You can keep your daily dose of alli in the blue carry case (Shuttle) included in this pack.
• Eat lower-fat meals to reduce the chance of diet-related treatment effects (see Chapter 4). • Try to be more physically active before you start taking the capsules.
Physical activity is an important part of a weight loss programme.
Remember to check with your doctor first if you have not exercised before. • Continue to be active while taking alli and after you stop taking it.
How long should I take alli for?
• alli should not be taken for more than six months. • If you do not lose weight after taking alli for 12 weeks, see your doctor or pharmacist for advice.
You may need to stop taking alli. • Successful weight loss is not just about eating differently for a short period of time before reverting to your old habits.
People who lose weight and maintain the loss make lifestyle changes, which include changes to what they eat and how active they are.
If you take too much alli
Do not take more than 3 capsules a day.
If you take too many capsules, contact a doctor as soon as possible.
If you forget to take alli
If you miss taking a capsule:
• If it is less than an hour since your last main meal, take the missed capsule. • If it is more than an hour since your last main meal, do not take the missed capsule.
Wait and take the next capsule around your next main meal as usual.
26 4.
POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS
Like all medicines, alli can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.
Most of the common side effects related to alli (for example, wind with or without oily spotting, sudden or more frequent bowel motions and soft stools) are caused by the way it works (see Chapter 1).
Eat lower-fat meals to help manage these diet-related treatment effects.
Serious side effects It is not known how frequently these side effects occur
Severe allergic reactions • Signs of a severe allergic reaction include: severe breathing difficulties, sweating, rash, itching, swollen face, rapid heart beat, collapse.
Stop taking the capsules.
Get medical help immediately.
Other serious side effects • Bleeding from the back passage (rectum) • Diverticulitis (inflammation of the large intestine).
Symptoms may include lower stomach (abdominal) pain, particularly on the left side, possibly with fever and constipation • Skin blistering (including blisters that burst) • Severe stomach pain caused by gallstones • Hepatitis (inflammation of the liver).
Symptoms can include yellow skin and eyes, itching, stomach pain and liver tenderness.
Stop taking the capsules.
Tell your doctor if you get any of these.
Very common side effects These may affect more than 1 in 10 people taking alli • Wind (flatulence), with or without oily spotting • Sudden bowel motions • Fatty or oily stools • Soft stools Tell your doctor or pharmacist if any of these side effects gets severe or troublesome.
Common side effects These may affect up to 1 in 10 people taking alli • Stomach (abdominal) pain • Incontinence (stools) • Runny/liquid stools • More frequent bowel motions • Anxiety Tell your doctor or pharmacist if any these side effects gets severe or troublesome.
Effects seen in blood tests It is not known how frequently these effects occur • Increases in the levels of some liver enzymes • Effects on blood clotting in people taking warfarin or other blood-thinning (anti-coagulant) medicines Tell your doctor that you are taking alli when you have a blood test.
If any of the side effects become serious, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet, tell your doctor or pharmacist.
27 Learn to deal with diet-related treatment effects
The most common side effects are caused by the way the capsules work and result from some of the fat being passed out of your body.
Such effects typically occur within the first few weeks of using the capsules, before you may have learnt to limit the amount of fat in your diet.
Such diet-related treatment effects may be a signal that you have eaten more fat than you should have done.
You can learn to minimise the impact of diet-related treatment effects by following these guidelines: • Start your lower-fat diet a few days, or even a week, before you begin taking the capsules. • Find out more about how much fat your favourite foods typically contain, and the size of your portions.
By familiarising yourself with portions you will be less likely to accidentally exceed your fat target. • Distribute your fat allowance evenly across your meals for the day.
Do not “save up” fat and calorie allowances and then splurge on a high-fat meal or dessert, as you may have done on other weight loss programmes. • Most users who experience these effects find that they can manage and control them by adjusting their diet.
Do not be concerned if you do not experience any of these problems.
This does not mean that the capsules aren’t working.
5.
HOW TO STORE alli
• Keep out of the reach and sight of children. • Do not use alli after the expiry date which is stated on the carton. • Do not store above 25°C. • Keep the container tightly closed to protect from moisture. • The bottle contains two sealed canisters containing silica gel to keep the capsules dry.
Keep the canisters in the bottle.
Do not swallow them. • You can also keep your daily dose of alli in the blue carry case (Shuttle) included in this pack.
Discard any capsules stored in the carry case for more than one month.
6.
FURTHER INFORMATION
What alli contains
The active substance is orlistat.
Each hard capsule contains 60 mg of orlistat.
The other ingredients are: • Capsule filling: microcrystalline cellulose (E460), sodium starch glycolate, povidone (E1201), sodium laurilsulfate, talc. • Capsule shell: gelatin, indigo carmine (E132), titanium dioxide (E171), sodium laurilsulfate, sorbitan monolaurate, black ink (shellac, iron oxide black (E172), propylene glycol). • Capsule band: gelatin, polysorbate 80, indigo carmine (E132).
What alli looks like and contents of the pack
alli capsules have a turquoise cap and body, with a dark blue band round the middle, imprinted with "alli".
alli is available in pack sizes of 42, 60, 84 and 90 capsules.
Not all pack sizes may be available in all countries.
A blue carry case (Shuttle) is included in this pack for carrying your daily dose of alli.
28 Marketing authorisation holder and manufacturer
Marketing authorisation holder:
Glaxo Group Limited, Glaxo Wellcome House, Berkeley Avenue, Greenford, Middlesex UB6 0NN, United Kingdom.
Manufacturer:
Famar, 190 11 Avlona, Greece Catalent UK Packaging Limited, Sedge Close, Headway, Great Oakley, Corby, Northamptonshire NN18 8HS, United Kingdom.
For any information about this medicinal product, contact the local representative of the Marketing Authorisation Holder:
You can also visit your country specific alli website for further information about the alli weight loss programme.
België/Belgique/Belgien GlaxoSmithKline s.a./n.v.
Tél/Tel: + 32 2656 2900 www.alli.be
Luxembourg/Luxemburg GlaxoSmithKline s.a./n.v.
Belgique/Belgien Tél/Tel: + 32 2656 2900 www.alli.be
България ГлаксоСмитКлайн Консюмър Хелткеър Teл.: + 359 2 953 10 34 www.alli.bg
Magyarország GlaxoSmithKline Kft.
Consumer Healthcare Tel.: + 36 1 225 5800 www .alliprogram.hu
Česká republika GlaxoSmithKline s.r.o.
Tel: + 420 222 001 111 gsk.czmail@gsk.com www.alli.cz
Malta GlaxoSmithKline (Malta) Limited Tel: + 356 21 238131 www.alli.com.mt
Danmark GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare A/S Tlf: + 45 44 86 86 00 dk.info@gsk.com
Nederland GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare BV Tel: + 31 (0)30 693 8780 info.nlch@gsk.com
www .alliplan.dk
www .alli.nl
Deutschland GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare GmbH & Co.
KG, Tel:
0049 (0) 180 3 63462554
Norge GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare Tlf: + 47 22 70 22 01 dk.info@gsk.com
www .alliprogramm.de
www.alliplan.no
Eesti Österreich GlaxoSmithKline Eesti OÜ Tel: + 372 6676 979 estonia@gsk.com www.alli.gsk.ee
GlaxoSmithKline Markenartikel GmbH Tel:
0043 (0) 512 / 390 11040 www.alliprogramm.at
29 Ελλάδα GlaxoSmithKline A.E.B.E.
Λ.
Κηφισίας 266, 152 32 Χαλάνδρι Κλάδος ΜΗ.ΣΥ.ΦΑ & Καταναλωτικών
Polska GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare Sp. z o.o.
Tel.: + 48 (0)22 576 96 00
Προϊόντων, Κόδρου 3, 152 32 Χαλάνδρι Τηλ: + 30 210 68 82 362
www.alli.pl
www. alli .gr
España GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, S.A.
Tel: + 34 902 014 400
Portugal GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare – Produtos para a Saúde e Higiene, Lda.
Tel:
800201343
www .alli.com.es
LIS.FI-CH@gsk.com
www.alli.pt
France GlaxoSmithKline Santé Grand Public Tél.: + 33 (0)1 39 17 80 00
România GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) S.R.L.
Tel: + 40 21 302 8 208
www.alliprogramme.fr
www.alli.ro
Ireland GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare (Ireland) Limited Tel: + 353 (0)1 495 5000 www.alli.ie
Slovenija GlaxoSmithKline d.o.o.
Tel: + 386 (0)1 280 25 66 www.alli.si
Ísland Icepharma hf.
Sími: + 354 540 8000
Slovenská republika GlaxoSmithKline Slovakia s. r. o.
Tel: + 421 (0)2 48 26 11 11 recepcia.sk@gsk.com
www .alli.sk
Italia GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare S.p.A.
Tel: + 39 02 38062020
Suomi/Finland GlaxoSmithKline Oy Consumer Healthcare Puh/Tel: +358 (0)10 30 30 625
www.alli.it
Finland.tuoteinfo@gsk.com
www. alliplan .fi
30 Κύπρος Χ.Α.Παπαέλληνας & Σία Λτδ, Τ.Θ.
24018, 1700 Λευκωσία Tηλ. +357 22 741 741
Sverige GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare Tel:
020 363 636 dk.info@gsk.com
www.alli.com.cy
www. alliplan .se
Latvija GlaxoSmithKline Latvia SIA Tel: + 371 67312687 lv-epasts@gsk.com
United Kingdom GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare Tel: + 44 (0)500 888 878 (Freephone) customer.relations@gsk.com
www.alli.com.lv
www.alli.co.uk
Lietuva GlaxoSmithKline Lietuva UAB Tel: + 370 5 264 90 00 info.lt@gsk.com
www.alli.lt
This leaflet was last approved in {MM/YYYY}.
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) web site: http://www.emea.europa.eu/.
FURTHER HELPFUL INFORMATION
Risk of being overweight
Being overweight will affect your health and increase your risk of developing serious health problems such as: • High blood pressure • Diabetes • Heart disease • Stroke • Certain forms of cancer • Osteoarthritis Talk to your doctor about your risk of developing these conditions.
Importance of losing weight
Losing weight and maintaining weight loss, for example by improving your diet and increasing your physical activity, can help reduce the risk of serious health problems and help improve your health.
Helpful tips on your diet and your calorie and fat targets while taking alli
alli should be used along with a reduced calorie, lower-fat diet.
The capsules work by preventing some of the fat you eat from being absorbed but you can still eat foods from all the main food groups.
Although you should focus on the calories and fat that you eat, it is important to eat a balanced diet.
You should choose meals which contain a range of different nutrients and learn to eat healthily for the long term.
Understanding the importance of calorie and fat targets
31 Calories are a measurement of the energy your body needs.
They are sometimes called kilocalories or kcal.
Energy may also be measured in kilojoules, which you may also see on food labels. • The calorie target is the maximum number of calories you’ll eat each day.
See the chart further on in this section. • Your fat gram target is the maximum number of grams of fat you’ll eat in each meal.
The fat gram target chart follows the information below on setting your calorie target. • Controlling your fat target is essential because of the way the capsules work.
Taking alli means your body will pass more fat through, and therefore may struggle to cope with eating as much fat as before.
So by meeting your fat target, you’ll maximise weight loss results while minimising the risk of diet-related treatment effects. • You should aim to lose weight gradually and steadily.
Losing around 0.5 kg (1 lb) per week is ideal.
How to set your calorie target
The following table has been worked out so that it gives you a calorie target that’s about 500 calories fewer per day than your body needs to maintain your current weight.
That adds up to 3500 fewer calories per week, about the number of calories in 0.5 kg (1 lb) of fat.
Your calorie target alone should allow you to lose weight at a gradual, steady pace of about 0.5 kg (1 lb) per week, without feeling frustrated or deprived.
Eating fewer than 1200 calories per day is not recommended.
You will need to know your activity level to set your calorie targets.
The more active you are, the higher your calorie target. • Low Activity means you do little or no walking, climbing stairs, gardening, or other physical activity on a daily basis. • Moderate Activity means you burn around 150 calories per day in physical activity, for example, walking three kilometres (2 miles), gardening for 30 to 45 minutes, or running two kilometres (1.25 miles) in 15 minutes.
Choose the level that most closely fits your daily routine.
If you’re unsure which level you are, choose Low Activity.
Women Low Activity
Below 68.1 kg 68.1 kg to 74.7 kg 74.8 kg to 83.9 kg 84.0 kg and over
Below 10 st 10 lb 10 st 10 lb to 11 st 11 lb 11 st 12 lb to 13 st 2 lb 13 st 3 lb and over
1200 calories 1400 calories 1600 calories 1800 calories
Moderate Activity
Below 61.2 kg 61.3 kg to 65.7 kg 65.8 kg and over
Below 9 st 9 lb 9 st 9 lb to 10 st 4 lb 10 st 5 lb and over
1400 calories 1600 calories 1800 calories
Men
Low Activity
Below 65.7 kg 65.8 kg to 70.2 kg 70.3 kg and over
Below 10 st 4 lb 10 st 5 lb to 11 st 11 st 1 lb and over
1400 calories 1600 calories 1800 calories
Moderate Activity
59.0 kg and over
9 st 4 lb and over
1800 calories
How to set your fat target
The following chart shows how to set your fat target based on the amount of calories you are allowed per day.
You should plan to have three meals per day.
If you have set a target of 1400 calories per day, for example, the maximum amount of fat allowed per meal would be 15 g.
To stay within your daily allowance for fat, snacks should contain no more than 3 g of fat.
32
Amount of calories you can eat per day
Maximum amount of fat allowed per meal
Maximum amount of fat allowed from snacks per day
1200 1400 1600 1800
12 g 15 g 17 g 19 g
3g 3g 3g 3g
Remember:
• Stick to realistic calorie and fat targets as this is a good way of maintaining your weight loss achievements in the long-term. • Write down what you eat in a food diary, including the calorie and fat content. • Try to be more physically active before you start taking the capsules.
Physical activity is an important part of a weight loss programme.
Remember to check with your doctor first if you have not exercised before. • Continue to be active while taking alli and after you stop taking it.
The alli weight loss programme combines the capsules with an eating plan and a wide range of resources to help you understand how to eat a reduced calorie, lower-fat diet and guidelines for becoming more active.
The alli website (please refer to your country specific website included in the list of local representatives above) provides you with a range of interactive tools, lower-fat recipes, physical activity tips and other useful information to help you lead a healthy life and to support you in meeting your weight loss goals, together with details of a weight loss programme which is individually tailored for you.
Visit < www.xxx.xxx >
33