# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

Track %1
Norwegian
& None
Turns off subtitle display
The'Subtitles -- None 'command turns off subtitle display.
Main Toolbar
Playlist
Progress
Volume
Contrast
Brightness
Hue
Saturation
The Main toolbar contains buttons for commonly used operations. Left clicking an icon will activate the corresponding action. Some of the buttons will pop up slider controls when clicked. The sliders let you change various player controls: sound volume, video contrast, brightness, hue and saturation. The video controls will only be available for video files.
The Playlist toolbar shows the multimedia title currently loaded or being played, offers commands to go to the next or previous items on the playlist, and also lets you see the entire playlist of items that are currently being played or have been played recently. If you select a different item from the list, KPlayer will load and start playing it. The toolbar also contains options to loop and shuffle the playlist.
The'Progress and Seeking 'toolbar is shown when the time length of a media file is known. It displays the playback progress and also allows seeking, that is, moving the playback point back and forth within the file. To seek to a specific position, drag the slider thumb to that position with the left mouse button, or simply click at that position with the middle mouse button. To move forward or backward in steps, left click the slider to the left or right of the thumb, or click the Forward and Backward buttons.
The Volume toolbar has a volume slider that shows the current sound volume and allows you to change it. This is the same slider that can be reached using the volume pop-up slider button on the main toolbar, but it will not disappear when you click elsewhere. You can show or hide the toolbar using the Show Volume Toolbar option on the Settings menu. Clicking the Volume button on this toolbar will also hide it. In addition the toolbar has a Mute button that can be used to toggle whether the sound is on or off.
The Contrast toolbar has a contrast slider that shows the current video contrast and allows you to change it. This is the same slider that can be reached using the contrast pop-up slider button on the main toolbar, but it will not disappear when you click elsewhere. You can show or hide the toolbar using the Show Contrast Toolbar option on the Settings menu. Clicking the Contrast button on this toolbar will also hide it.
The Brightness toolbar has a brightness slider that shows the current video brightness and allows you to change it. This is the same slider that can be reached using the brightness pop-up slider button on the main toolbar, but it will not disappear when you click elsewhere. You can show or hide the toolbar using the Show Brightness Toolbar option on the Settings menu. Clicking the Brightness button on this toolbar will also hide it.
The Hue toolbar has a hue slider that shows the current video hue and allows you to change it. This is the same slider that can be reached using the hue pop-up slider button on the main toolbar, but it will not disappear when you click elsewhere. You can show or hide the toolbar using the Show Hue Toolbar option on the Settings menu. Clicking the Hue button on this toolbar will also hide it.
The Saturation toolbar has a saturation slider that shows the current video saturation and allows you to change it. This is the same slider that can be reached using the saturation pop-up slider button on the main toolbar, but it will not disappear when you click elsewhere. You can show or hide the toolbar using the Show Saturation Toolbar option on the Settings menu. Clicking the Saturation button on this toolbar will also hide it.
The menu bar contains names of drop-down menus. Left click a name to alternately show and hide that menu, or use Alt + the underlined letter in the name as a hot key; for example, Alt+F shows the File menu.
The status bar shows general information about the player's status and progress.
Quits KPlayer
The'Quit 'command saves the playlist and all settings, stops playing and closes KPlayer.
Shows/ hides the menu bar
The'Show Menu Bar 'command shows or hides the menu bar.
Shows/ hides the status bar
The'Show Status Bar 'command shows or hides the status bar.
& Show Playlist
Shows/ hides the playlist
The'Show Playlist 'command shows or hides the playlist toolbar.
Show Library
Shows/ hides the multimedia library
The'Show Library 'command shows or hides the multimedia library.
Show Message & Log
Shows/ hides the message log
The'Show Message Log 'command shows or hides the message log.
Show Main & Toolbar
Shows/ hides the main toolbar
The'Show Main Toolbar 'command shows or hides the main toolbar.
Show & Progress Toolbar
Shows/ hides the progress toolbar
The'Show Progress Toolbar 'command shows or hides the progress toolbar. This command is available when the time length of the current file is known.
Show & Volume Toolbar
Shows/ hides the volume toolbar
The'Show Volume Toolbar 'command shows or hides the volume toolbar.
Show Contrast Toolbar
Shows/ hides the contrast toolbar
The'Show Contrast Toolbar 'command shows or hides the contrast toolbar. This command is available for video files.
Show & Brightness Toolbar
Shows/ hides the brightness toolbar
The'Show Brightness Toolbar 'command shows or hides the brightness toolbar. This command is available for video files.
Show Hue Toolbar
Shows/ hides the hue toolbar
The'Show Hue Toolbar 'command shows or hides the hue toolbar. This command is available for video files.
Show & Saturation Toolbar
Shows/ hides the saturation toolbar
The'Show Saturation Toolbar 'command shows or hides the saturation toolbar. This command is available for video files.
Opens the KPlayer key bindings dialog
The'Configure Shortcuts' command opens a dialog that allows you to see and change KPlayer's shortcut key bindings, or associations between actions and the corresponding keys or combinations of keys that activate them. If you change the bindings, make sure not to duplicate an existing shortcut and also not to use the Shift key for your new shortcuts, because the Shift key has a special function in KPlayer.
Opens the KPlayer toolbar configuration dialog
The'Configure Toolbars' command opens a dialog that allows you to see and change KPlayer's toolbars and controls assigned to them.
Opens the KPlayer configuration dialog
The'Configure KPlayer 'command opens a dialog that allows you to configure the program, modifying various aspects of its functionality, user interface and interaction with MPlayer. For more information see the Configuration dialog chapter and the Advanced configuration micro-HOWTO in the user manual.
Ready
Idle
Status area of the status bar tells you if there have been playback errors.
State area of the status bar displays the current player state.
Progress area of the status bar shows playback progress and the total length if known.
Running
Playing
Paused
Cache fill: %1%
Generating index: %1%
Transferring file: %1%
Error
& Properties...
Opens the File Properties dialog
Properties command opens the File Properties dialog that lets you choose many options specific to the currently loaded file. See the File properties micro-HOWTO for details.
& Play
Plays the currently loaded file
Play command starts playback of the current file. If the player has been paused, this command resumes playback. This command is available when a file is loaded.
Pause
Pauses the player
Pause command pauses or resumes playback of the current file. This command is available when the player is not idle.
& Stop
Stops the player
Stop command stops playback of the current file. This command is available when the player is not idle.
& Forward
Moves playback forward
Forward command moves playback forward by one percent of the time length of the current file. This command is available when playing a file.
Fast Forward
Moves playback forward fast
Fast Forward command moves playback forward by ten percent of the time length of the current file. This command is available when playing a file.
& Backward
Moves playback backward
Backward command moves playback backward by one percent of the time length of the current file. This command is available when playing a file.
Fast Backward
Moves playback backward fast
Fast Backward command moves playback backward by ten percent of the time length of the current file. This command is available when playing a file.
Back & to Start
Moves playback to the beginning
Back to Start command moves playback to the beginning of the current file. This command is available when playing a file.
& Increase Volume
Increases the volume
Increase Volume command increases the sound volume.
& Decrease Volume
Decreases the volume
Decrease Volume command decreases the sound volume.
& Mute
Turns the sound on/ off
Mute command turns the sound on or off.
Maintain & Aspect
Maintains the video aspect ratio
Maintain Aspect command toggles the option to maintain the video aspect ratio.
Shows player progress and allows seeking
Progress slider shows playback progress and allows seeking.
Changes volume level
Volume slider shows the current sound volume level and allows you to change it.
Shows the volume popup slider
Volume button displays a slider that shows the current sound volume level and allows you to change it.
& Load Subtitles...
Opens a subtitle file
The'Load Subtitles' command displays the standard Open File dialog and allows you to choose a subtitle file to use with the current file or URL. If you load subtitles when a video is playing, KPlayer will display the subtitles immediately. By default it will also remember the subtitles you choose in the current file's properties. This command is available for video files.
& Full Screen
Switches to full screen mode
The'Full Screen 'command switches between full screen video display and normal mode.
Enlarges the video
The'Zoom In 'command enlarges the video area by one half of the original video size of the current file.
Shrinks the video
The'Zoom Out 'command reduces the video area by one half of the original video size of the current file.
Zoom to 50%
Scales video to 50% of its original size
The'Zoom to 50% 'command resizes the video area to one half of the original video size of the current file.
Zoom to & 100%
Scales video to its original size
The'Zoom to 100% 'command resizes the video area to the original video size of the current file.
Zoom to 150%
Scales video to 150% of its original size
The'Zoom to 150% 'command resizes the video area to 150% of the original video size of the current file.
Zoom to & 200%
Scales video to 200% of its original size
The'Zoom to 200% 'command resizes the video area to twice the original video size of the current file.
Zoom & to 250%
Scales video to 250% of its original size
The'Zoom to 250% 'command resizes the video area to 250% of the original video size of the current file.
Zoom to & 300%
Scales video to 300% of its original size
The'Zoom to 300% 'command resizes the video area to three times the original video size of the current file.
Maintain Original & Aspect
Maintains the original video aspect ratio
The'Maintain Original Aspect 'command toggles the option to maintain the original video aspect ratio of the current file.
Maintain & Current Aspect
Maintains the current video aspect ratio
The'Maintain Current Aspect 'command toggles the option to maintain the current video aspect ratio.
Force & 4-to-3 Aspect
Sets a 4-to-3 video aspect ratio
The'Force 4-to-3 Aspect 'command toggles the option to maintain a four-to-three video aspect ratio.
Force 16-to-9 Aspect
Sets a 16-to-9 video aspect ratio
The'Force 16-to-9 Aspect 'command toggles the option to maintain a sixteen-to-nine video aspect ratio.
Increase Delay
Increases audio delay
The'Increase Delay 'command increases the delay of the sound relative to the video.
Decrease Delay
Decreases audio delay
The'Decrease Delay 'command decreases the delay of the sound relative to the video.
Decrease Contrast
Decreases video contrast
The'Decrease Contrast 'command decreases the video contrast.
Increase & Contrast
Increases video contrast
The'Increase Contrast 'command increases the video contrast.
Decrease Brightness
Decreases video brightness
The'Decrease Brightness' command decreases the video brightness.
Increase & Brightness
Increases video brightness
The'Increase Brightness' command increases the video brightness.
Decrease Hue
Decreases video hue
The'Decrease Hue 'command decreases the video hue.
Increase & Hue
Increases video hue
The'Increase Hue 'command increases the video hue.
Decrease Saturation
Decreases video saturation
The'Decrease Saturation 'command decreases the video saturation.
Increase & Saturation
Increases video saturation
The'Increase Saturation 'command increases the video saturation.
Changes contrast level
The Contrast slider shows the current video contrast level and allows you to change it.
Changes brightness level
The Brightness slider shows the current video brightness level and allows you to change it.
Changes hue level
The Hue slider shows the current video hue level and allows you to change it.
Changes saturation level
The Saturation slider shows the current video saturation level and allows you to change it.
Shows the contrast popup slider
The Contrast button displays a slider that shows the current video contrast level and allows you to change it.
Shows the brightness popup slider
The Brightness button displays a slider that shows the current video brightness level and allows you to change it.
Shows the hue popup slider
The Hue button displays a slider that shows the current video hue level and allows you to change it.
Shows the saturation popup slider
The Saturation button displays a slider that shows the current video saturation level and allows you to change it.
Soft Frame Dropping
Turns soft frame dropping on/ off
The'Soft Frame Dropping 'command toggles the soft frame dropping option. If your system is too slow to play a file, MPlayer can drop some frames so playback does not slow down. The soft option drops frames less aggressively than the hard one, and should not cause playback problems. The Frame drop option can also be set on the Advanced page either globally in KPlayer Settings or for a particular file in the File Properties.
& Hard Frame Dropping
Turns hard frame dropping on/ off
The'Hard Frame Dropping 'command toggles the hard frame dropping option. If your system is too slow to play a file, MPlayer can drop some frames so playback does not slow down. The hard option drops frames more aggressively than the soft one, and may sometimes break decoding. The Frame drop option can also be set on the Advanced page either globally in KPlayer Settings or for a particular file in the File Properties.
Move & Down
Moves subtitles down
The'Move Down 'command moves the subtitles down.
Move & Up
Moves subtitles up
The'Move Up 'command moves the subtitles up.
Decreases subtitle delay
The'Decrease Delay 'command decreases the delay of the subtitles relative to the video.
Increases subtitle delay
The'Increase Delay 'command increases the delay of the subtitles relative to the video.
Selects %1 video track
The'Video %1 'command switches to the selected video track.
Selects %1 audio track
The'Audio %1 'command switches to the selected audio track.
Selects %1 subtitle track
The'Subtitles %1 'command switches to the selected subtitle track.
*|All files *. avi *. AVI|AVI files *. mpg *. mpeg *. MPG *. MPEG|MPEG files *. ogg *. OGG|OGG files *. mp3 *. MP3|MP3 files
*|All files *. aqt *. AQT *. ass *. ASS *. js *. JS *. jss *. JSS *. rt *. RT *. smi *. SMI *. srt *. SRT *. ssa *. SSA *. sub *. SUB *. txt *. TXT *. utf *. UTF *. idx *. IDX *. ifo *. IFO|All subtitle files *. aqt *. AQT|AQT files *. ass *. ASS|ASS files *. js *. JS|JS files *. jss *. JSS|JSS files *. rt *. RT|RT files *. smi *. SMI|SMI files *. srt *. SRT|SRT files *. ssa *. SSA|SSA files *. sub *. SUB|SUB files *. txt *. TXT|TXT files *. utf *. UTF *. utf8 *. UTF8 *. utf-8 *. UTF-8|UTF files *. idx *. IDX *. ifo *. IFO|VobSub files
Load Subtitles
Messages
Message log is a window where KPlayer shows messages it receives from MPlayer. KPlayer can show it automatically when it detects an MPlayer error if that option is selected in KPlayer settings.
& Select All
Selects all messages in the message log
The'Select All 'command selects all messages in the message log.
& Copy
Copies the text selected in the message log to the clipboard
The'Copy 'command copies the text selected in the message log to the clipboard.
Clear
Clears all messages from the message log
The'Clear 'command removes all messages from the message log.
Play %1
& Load Disk
& Play Disk
& Play %1
Now Playing
Playlists
Collection
Devices
Recent
Searches
Root Directory
Home Directory
My Playlist
%1 in %2
%1 and %2
%1 and %2 more
DVD
CD
DVB
TV
%1 Device
%1 Device %2
Data DVD
Video CD
Audio CD
Data CD
Disk in %1
Data Disk
Add device
Add files
Add URL
Add playlist
Add folder
Playlist name
Folder name
The'Playlist name 'field allows you to enter a name for a new playlist. The OK button will be enabled when a unique and valid name has been entered.
The'Folder name 'field allows you to enter a name for a new folder. The OK button will be enabled when a unique and valid name has been entered.
Add to new playlist
& Device...
Adds a new device
The'Add device 'command allows you to add a new device. You will need to give the new device a unique name, and specify the device path and type.
& Playlist...
Adds a new playlist
The'Add playlist 'command allows you to add a new playlist. You will need to give the new playlist a unique name.
Folder...
Adds a new subfolder to the selected folder
The'Add folder 'command allows you to add a new subfolder to the selected folder. You will need to give the new subfolder a unique name.
Name
Plays the selected items
The'Play 'command plays the selected items.
Play & Next
Plays the selected items after the currently played item
The'Play Next 'command plays the selected items after the currently playing item has finished.
& Queue
Queues the selected items
The'Queue 'command queues the selected items for playing.
Queue Next
Queues the selected items for playing after the currently played item
The'Queue Next 'command queues the selected items for playing after the currently playing item has finished.
& Files...
Adds files to the selected folder
The'Add files' command displays the standard Open File dialog and allows you to choose a file (or several files) to add to the selected folder.
& URL...
Adds a URL to the selected folder
The'Add URL 'command displays the standard Open URL dialog and allows you to type or paste in a URL to add to the selected folder.
& New Playlist...
Adds selected items to a new playlist
The'Add to New Playlist 'command prompts for a new playlist name and adds the selected items to the new playlist.
& Playlists
Adds selected items to the root playlist
The'Add to Playlists' command adds the selected items to the root playlist.
%1
Adds selected items to %1 playlist
The'Add to %1 'command adds the selected items to the %1 playlist.
& Collection
Adds selected items to the collection
The'Add to Collection 'command adds the selected items to the multimedia collection.
& Rename
Allows you to rename the selected item
The'Rename 'command starts edit mode for the current item in the multimedia library so you can change the item name.
Properties...
Opens the Properties dialog for the selected item
The'Properties' command opens the File Properties dialog for the current item in the multimedia library. See the File properties micro-HOWTO for details.
Selects all items in the current folder
The'Select All 'command selects all items in the current folder of the multimedia library.
Moves the selected items up in the playlist
The'Move Up 'command moves the selected items up in the playlist. You can also move items around by clicking and dragging them with the left mouse button.
Moves the selected items down in the playlist
The'Move Down 'command moves the selected items down in the playlist. You can also move items around by clicking and dragging them with the left mouse button.
Remove
Removes the selected items from the multimedia library
The'Remove 'command removes the selected items from the multimedia library.
Opens %1 in the library window
The'Go to %1 'command opens the corresponding folder in the library window.
& Back
Opens the previous folder
The'Go Back 'command opens the previous folder from the history.
Opens the next folder
The'Go Forward 'command opens the next folder from the history.
& Up
Opens the parent folder
The'Go Up 'command opens the parent folder of the current folder.
& Down
Opens the selected folder
The'Go Down 'command opens the selected folder.
& To Origin
Opens the origin of the current folder
The'Go To Origin 'command opens the origin folder of the current folder.
& Edit
Opens the playlist in the multimedia library
The'Edit 'command opens the playlist in the multimedia library and allows you to edit it.
Hide %1
Show %1
Hides %1 column
Shows %1 column
The'Hide %1 'command hides the column.
The'Show %1 'command shows the column.
Starts edit mode for %1 field
'Edit %1 'starts edit mode for this field of the current item.
Multimedia Library
The Multimedia library is a window where you can organize your files, streams and devices; manage your playlists; and choose items for playing. It shows various pieces of information about your media files, and allows you to search and group them, as well as change their properties.
KPlayerPart, an embeddable KDE media player
This program is distributed under the terms of the GPL version 3 or later.
KPlayerPart
(C) 2002-2008, kiriuja
kiriuja
Start & KPlayer
Stops playback and starts KPlayer with the current URL
The'Start KPlayer 'command stops playback, opens the full KPlayer, puts the multimedia file or URL on the playlist and starts playing it. It is always recommended that you choose this command, since it will give you a better interface and more options when playing the file.
& Play...
Plays an existing file
The'Play 'command displays the standard Open File dialog and allows you to choose a file (or several files) to put on the playlist and start playing.
Play & URL...
Plays a URL
The'Play URL 'command displays the standard URL dialog and allows you to type or paste in a URL to put on the playlist and start playing. The URL can be a remote network location, a local file path, or a KDE I/ O Slave URL.
Plays the %1 list
Play List %1 starts playing the list.
Plays %1
Play Recent %1 starts playing the recently played item.
Shows commands and options available for %1
Submenu that shows commands and options available for %1.
& Next
Plays the next item on the playlist
The'Next 'command starts playing the next item on the current playlist.
Previous
Plays the previous item on the playlist
The'Previous' command starts playing the previous item on the current playlist.
Shows playlist items and allows you to select an item to play
The Playlist combo box, when closed, displays the current playlist item. You can drop down the combo box to see the entire list, and select a different item to load and play.
& Loop
Turns the option to loop through the list on/ off
The'Loop 'command toggles the option to start playing items from the beginning of the playlist after playing the last item on the playlist.
Shuffle
Turns the option to play items in random order on or off
The'Shuffle 'command toggles the option to play items in a random order.
Adds files to the playlist
The'Add Files' command displays the standard Open File dialog and allows you to choose a file (or several files) to add to the playlist.
Adds a URL to the playlist
The'Add URL 'command displays the standard Open URL dialog and allows you to type or paste in a URL to add to the playlist.
& Playlists...
Saves the playlist under a new name
The'Add to New Playlist 'command prompts for a new playlist name and saves the playlist under the new name.
Adds playlist items to %1 playlist
The'Add to %1 'command adds the playlist items to the %1 playlist.
& Collection...
Saves the playlist in the collection
The'Add to Collection 'command prompts for a new folder name and saves the playlist under the new name in the multimedia collection.
Play files
Play URL
Add to playlists
Add to collection
Could not start MPlayer
yes
no
size %1
aspect %1
AVI Video
Path
Demuxer
Video codec
Audio codec
Type
Frequency
Length
Resolution
Video size
Video bit rate
Frame rate
Audio bit rate
Sample rate
Channels
Track
External Subtitles
Title
Album
Artist
Year
Genre
US broadcast
US cable
US cable HRC
Japan broadcast
Japan cable
Western Europe
Eastern Europe
Italy
New Zealand
Australia
Ireland
France
China
South Africa
Argentina
Russia
Title %1
Channel %1
File Properties
General
General Properties
Size
Size Properties
Video
Video Properties
Audio
Audio Properties
Subtitles
Subtitle Properties
Advanced
Advanced Properties
All file properties will be reset. Are you sure?
Unicode
Central and Eastern Europe
Southern Europe
Northern Europe
Cyrillic
Arabic
Greek
Hebrew
Turkish
Nordic
Thai
Baltic
Celtic
South-Eastern Europe
Armenian
Georgian
Russian
Ukrainian
Tajik
Lao
Kazakh
Vietnamese
Japanese
Simplified Chinese
Traditional Chinese
Hong Kong
Korean
default
%1 (%2)
auto
KPlayer Preferences
General Settings
Controls
Control Settings
Video Settings
Audio Settings
Subtitle Settings
Advanced Settings
Progress Control Settings
Volume Control Settings
Contrast Control Settings
Brightness Control Settings
Hue Control Settings
Saturation Control Settings
Sliders
Slider Control Settings
All configuration settings will be reset. Are you sure?
%1: %2
file
unknown
Video area is the central part of KPlayer. When playing a file that has video, it will display the video and optionally subtitles. Normally it will be hidden when playing an audio only file.
KPlayer, a KDE media player
KPlayer
Play the files immediately (default)
Queue the files for playing
Play the files after the currently playing file has finished
Queue the files for playing after the currently playing file
Add the files to a new playlist
Add the files to the list of playlists
Add the files to the multimedia collection
File(s), directory/ ies, or URL(s)
& Player
Volume Toolbar
Progress Toolbar
Additional command & line arguments
Additional options to be passed to MPlayer
Additional options that will be passed to MPlayer on the command line. See mplayer(1) manpage for a complete list of possible options.
Choose how to combine your options with the defaults
Choose how to combine the options you specify here with the defaults set in KPlayer Settings. Default uses options from KPlayer Settings, Set To replaces them with the options set here, and Append adds these options to the defaults.
set to
append
& Demuxer
Demultiplexer used for the file or stream
Property that shows and allows you to change the demultiplexer used for the file or stream. If the chosen demuxer fails, another one may be used.
& Frame drop
Choose whether and how MPlayer should drop frames
If your system is too slow to play this file, MPlayer can drop some frames so playback does not slow down. Default uses the default from KPlayer Settings, None disables dropping, Soft drops fewer frames, and Hard drops more frames and may sometimes break decoding. If you select a frame dropping option from Player menu while holding Shift key, KPlayer will remember that choice in this property for the currently loaded file.
none
soft
hard
Cache
Choose whether to use cache and set its size
Option to choose whether to use cache and set its size. Default uses the option set in KPlayer Settings, Auto lets MPlayer use the its own configuration, None tells MPlayer to use no cache, and Set Size lets you set a specific size.
set size
kilobytes
& Build new index
Choose whether to build new index for seeking
Option to choose whether to build new index for seeking. Default uses the option from KPlayer Settings, Yes builds an index if the file does not have it, No tells MPlayer not to build index, and Force makes it always build an index.
force
Use & KIOSlave
Choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play this file
Option to choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play this file. Auto decides it automatically using options set in KPlayer Settings.
Use & temporary file
Choose whether to use a temporary file for playing from KDE I/ O Slave
Option to choose whether to use a temporary file for playing from KDE I/ O Slave. Default uses the option from KPlayer Settings. This option has no effect for URLs passed directly to MPlayer.
Hardware & compression
Choose whether to use hardware compression and set image size and quality
Option to choose whether to use hardware compression and set image size and quality.
full size
medium size
small size
& quality
& Track
Audio track to play
Option to choose the audio track to play.
set ID
& Volume
Sound volume level for this file
Option to adjust sound volume level for this file. Default uses the same volume as for other files, Set To adjusts volume to the given level, Add and Subtract turn volume up and down respectively by the given amount. It is easier to set this option by moving volume slider while having Shift key pressed.
add
subtract
Delay
Delay of audio relative to video
Option to set delay of sound relative to video for this file. By default sound is played without delay. An easier way to set this option is by using keyboard shortcuts for Audio Delay commands on Player/ Audio menu. In the default configuration KPlayer will automatically store those changes in this property.
Audio delay for this file
seconds
Codec
Audio codec to use for this file
Option that lists available codecs and lets you choose the one to be used for this file. Default uses the option from KPlayer Settings, Auto lets MPlayer decide which codec to use automatically.
& Bitrate
Audio bitrate of this file
Property that shows audio bitrate of this file.
kbps
& Sample rate
Audio sample rate of this file
Property that shows audio sample rate of this file.
Hz
& Mode
Audio mode to request from the device
Option to choose the audio mode to request from the device.
mono
stereo
language 1
language 2
& Input
Audio card input ID
Option to specify the audio card input ID to use for capturing audio.
immediate mode
Choose whether audio comes through a sound card connected to the TV card
Option to choose specify where audio comes from. Select this option if your TV card is connected with a cable to a sound card. When this option is not selected, audio comes along with video from the TV card.
& Capture
Audio capture system and device
Option to specify the audio capture system and device.
ALSA
OSS
& device
Device & name
Descriptive name for the device
Option to give a descriptive name for the device. The name will be displayed in the multimedia library and on the menu.
& Path to device node
Path to the device node
Option to specify the path to the device node.
Device & type
Type of the device
Option that lets you choose the type of the device.
Channel & list
List of available channels
Option to choose the available channels according to your location.
& Driver
Driver to use for input
Option to choose the input driver.
BSD Bt848
Video4Linux
Video4Linux 2
& Channel file
Path to the file containing the list of available channels
Option to specify the path to the file containing the list of available channels.
& Name
Name of the file or stream
Property that shows and allows you to change the name that KPlayer will display for this file or stream.
Path or & URL
Remote URL or local file path
Property that shows remote URL or local file path of this file or stream.
& Type
Property that shows the type of the device.
& Frequency
Frequency of the channel
Property that shows and allows you to change the frequency used to tune in to the channel.
MHz
& Length
Time length of the file or stream
Property that shows the time length of the file or stream.
& Playlist
Choose whether this is a playlist file or not
Option to choose whether this is a playlist file or not. Auto determines that automatically based on extension. If autodetection gets it wrong, MPlayer will fail to play the file, and you will then have to set this option correctly.
& Channels
& Resolution
Video resolution in pixels
Property that shows the video resolution in pixels.
by
Original size
Original video size in pixels
Property that shows the original video size in pixels.
Current size
Current video size in pixels
Property that shows the current video size in pixels.
Display & size
Initial video display size or aspect
Option to set initial video display size or aspect. Auto will choose the initial display size based on the Minimum Initial Video Width option in KPlayer Settings. Set Size allows you to set a specific size, and Set Aspect lets you set a specific aspect. It is easier to set this property by resizing KPlayer window or choosing a size or aspect option from View menu while holding the Shift key down.
set aspect
& by
& Full screen
Initial full screen window state
Option to choose whether to start playing this file in a full screen window. Default does not change the window state for this file. It is easier to set this property by switching to full screen or restoring KPlayer window while holding the Shift key down.
& Maximized
Initial maximized window state
Option to choose whether to start playing this file in a maximized or normal window. Default does not change the window state for this file. If the full screen option is also set, it will take precedence. It is easier to set this property by maximizing or restoring the KPlayer window while holding the Shift key down.
Maintain aspect
Maintain video aspect when resizing window
Option to maintain video aspect when resizing the KPlayer window. Default leaves the maintain aspect option unchanged for this file. It is easier to set this property by clicking the Maintain Aspect button on the main KPlayer toolbar while holding the Shift key down.
Subtitle track to play
Option to choose the subtitle track to play.
external
& External path
Path to external subtitles
Property that shows and allows you to change the path to external subtitle file. KPlayer will store subtitles you load with Load Subtitles command on File menu in this property.
External type
Type of external subtitles
Option to specify the type of the external subtitle file. Usually you can let KPlayer determine the type automatically. One exception is when you specify a VobSub. sub file in the external path field. In that case you have to select the VobSub option here.
vobsub
normal
& Encoding
Encoding of the subtitle file
Option to specify the encoding of the subtitle file.
& Framerate
Frame rate of the subtitle file
Option to specify the frame rate of the subtitle file.
Autoload
Automatically load subtitles for this file
Option to automatically load subtitles for this file. Default uses options from Subtitles page in KPlayer Settings.
& Position
Vertical position of subtitles
Option to set vertical position of subtitles. Default will use the same subtitle position as for other files. An easy way to set this property is by using keyboard shortcuts for subtitle position commands on Player/ Subtitles menu while holding Shift down.
& Delay
Delay of subtitles relative to video
Option to set delay of subtitles relative to video. By default subtitles are played without delay. An easier way to set this option is by using keyboard shortcuts for subtitle delay commands on Player/ Subtitles menu. In the default configuration KPlayer will automatically store those changes in this property.
Closed caption
Display closed caption subtitles if they are available
Option to display closed caption subtitles if they are available.
Video track to play
Option to choose the video track to play.
& Contrast
Video contrast level for this file
Option to adjust video contrast level for this file. Default uses the same contrast as for other files, Set To adjusts contrast to the given level, Add and Subtract turn contrast up and down respectively by the given amount. It is easier to set this option by moving contrast slider while holding Shift key down.
Brightness
Video brightness level for this file
Option to adjust video brightness level for this file. Default uses the same brightness as for other files, Set To adjusts brightness to the given level, Add and Subtract turn brightness up and down respectively by the given amount. It is easier to set this option by moving brightness slider while holding Shift key down.
& Hue
Video hue for this file
Option to adjust video hue for this file. Default uses the same hue as for other files, Set To adjusts hue to the given level, Add and Subtract turn hue up and down respectively by the given amount. It is easier to set this option by moving hue slider while holding Shift key down.
Saturation
Video saturation level for this file
Option to adjust video saturation level for this file. Default uses the same saturation as for other files, Set To adjusts saturation to the given level, Add and Subtract turn saturation up and down respectively by the given amount. It is easier to set this option by moving saturation slider while holding Shift key down.
Video codec to use for this file
Video bitrate of this file
Property that shows video bitrate of this file.
Video frame rate of this file
Property that shows video frame rate of this file.
fps
Video card input ID
Option to specify the video card input ID to use for capturing video.
Format
Output format to request from the device
Option to specify the output format to request from the device.
411p
422p
444p
abgr
argb
bg4b
bgr1
bgr15
bgr16
bgr24
bgr32
bgr4
bgr8
bgra
clpl
hm12
i420
if09
iyuv
nv12
nv21
rg4b
rgb1
rgb15
rgb16
rgb24
rgb32
rgb4
rgb8
rgba
uyvy
y8
y800
yuy2
yv12
yvu9
Norm
Video norm to request from the device
Option to specify the video norm to request from the device.
NTSC
NTSC-JP
PAL
PAL-60
PAL-BG
PAL-DK
PAL-I
PAL-M
PAL-N
PAL-NC
SECAM
& Executable path
Path to MPlayer executable
Path to MPlayer executable, either absolute path or a name to look for in the current environment path.
Additional options that will be passed to MPlayer on the command line. See mplayer(1) manpage for a complete list of possible options. You can also choose this option for individual file or URL in File Properties.
Preferred & demuxer
Preferred demultiplexer for handling file formats
Property that shows and allows you to change the demultiplexer that should be used to handle file formats. If the chosen demuxer fails on a particular file, another one may be used.
If your system is too slow to play a file, MPlayer can drop some frames so playback does not slow down. None disables dropping, Soft drops less frames, and Hard drops more frames and may sometimes break decoding. You can also choose this option for individual file or URL in File Properties.
Option to choose whether to use cache and set its size. Auto lets MPlayer use the its own configuration, None tells MPlayer to use no cache, and Set Size lets you set a specific size. You can also choose this option for individual file or URL in File Properties.
Option to choose whether to build new index for seeking. Yes builds an index if the file does not have it, No tells MPlayer not to build index, and Force makes it always build an index. You can also choose this option for individual file or URL in File Properties.
& Use temporary file for playing from KIOSlave
Option to choose whether to use a temporary file for playing from KDE I/ O Slave. This option has no effect for URLs passed directly to MPlayer. You can also choose it for individual file or URL in File Properties.
Use KIOSlave for
Choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play selected URL types
Option to choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play selected URL types. You can also choose this option for individual file or stream in File Properties.
HTTP
Choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play HTTP URLs
Option to choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play HTTP URLs. You can also choose this option for individual file or stream in File Properties.
FTP
Choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play FTP URLs
Option to choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play FTP URLs. You can also choose this option for individual file in File Properties.
& SMB
Choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play Samba URLs
Option to choose whether to use a KDE I/ O Slave to play Samba URLs. You can also choose this option for individual file in File Properties.
OSD level
Choose what to display inside the video area
Option to choose what to include in On Screen Display inside the video area. Since KPlayer can display almost everything outside the video area, the recommended choice is Subtitles Only.
subtitles only
subtitles, volume and seek
subtitles, volume, seek, timer and percentage
subtitles, volume, seek, timer, percentage and total time
Output driver
Audio output to use for playing sound
Option that lists available audio outputs and lets you choose the one to use for playing sound. Recommended choices are OSS (the default) and ALSA (recommended when available). ARTS and SDL are not recommended. Auto will let MPlayer choose an audio output according to its own configuration. If you need to specify more than one output separated by comma, set this option to Auto and put them in Additional Command Line Arguments on Advanced page.
Output device
Audio device to use for the chosen output
Option to specify audio device to use for the chosen audio output. Leave blank to use the default device.
Control & volume independently of other programs
Choose whether to control volume in software independently of other programs
Option to choose whether to control volume in software independently of other programs.
Maximum volume
Maximum volume as a percentage of the normal level
Option to specify the maximum sound volume as a percentage of the normal volume level.
percent
Mixer device
Mixer device to be used to control volume
Option to specify the mixer device to be used to control audio output volume. Leave blank to use the default device.
Mixer channel
Mixer channel to be used to control volume
Option to specify the mixer channel to be used to control audio output volume. Leave blank to use the default channel.
Codec to use for decoding audio (Auto is recommended)
Option that lists available codecs and lets you choose the one to be used for decoding audio. Auto is the recommended choice, it lets MPlayer decide which codec to use automatically. If you need to tell MPlayer to use a particular codec for a given file or stream, set this option in File Properties.
Delay adjustment amount
Amount of adjustment to audio delay when using Increase/ Decrease commands
Option to specify the amount in seconds by which to change audio delay when using Increase/ Decrease Delay commands on Player/ Audio menu or the corresponding keyboard shortcuts.
Minimum
Lower limit on the video brightness
Option to specify a lower limit on the video brightness setting.
Maximum
Upper limit on the video brightness
Option to specify an upper limit on the video brightness setting.
Adjustment amount
Amount of adjustment to video brightness when using Increase/ Decrease commands
Option to specify the amount by which to change video brightness when using Increase/ Decrease Brightness commands on Player/ Video menu or the corresponding keyboard shortcuts.
& Reset
Reset brightness to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session
Option to reset video brightness to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session.
& to
for & every
session
Lower limit on the video contrast
Option to specify a lower limit on the video contrast setting.
Upper limit on the video contrast
Option to specify an upper limit on the video contrast setting.
Amount of adjustment to video contrast when using Increase/ Decrease commands
Option to specify the amount by which to change video contrast when using Increase/ Decrease Contrast commands on Player/ Video menu or the corresponding keyboard shortcuts.
Reset contrast to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session
Option to reset video contrast to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session.
& Remember for current file any changes made with Shift
Remember changes made while holding the Shift key down in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember any changes and adjustments made while holding the Shift key down in the file properties for the currently loaded file. This is particularly useful with volume, contrast, brightness and aspect settings, but also works with other options listed (but not checked) below.
Always remember the following settings for each file
Always remember any changes made to the settings selected below in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember any changes and adjustments made to the settings you select below in the file properties for the currently loaded file. The selected settings will be stored even if you do not hold Shift. This is most useful for settings that are almost always file specific, like subtitle URL, subtitle delay, and audio delay.
Display size
Remember the display size you choose by resizing KPlayer window in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember the video display size you choose by resizing the KPlayer window in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember the display size by holding down Shift key before and while you resize the window.
Display aspect
Remember the chosen video aspect in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember the video aspect you choose by using commands on View menu in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember the video aspect in the current file's properties, then automatically reset it to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember the video aspect by holding down the Shift key when choosing an aspect command.
Remember the full screen display option in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember the setting for the full screen option you choose on the View menu in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember the full screen option in the current file's properties, then automatically reset it to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember the full screen option by holding down the Shift key when choosing it.
Maximized
Remember maximized window state in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember whether the window is maximized in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember the maximized state in the current file's properties, then automatically reset it to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember the maximized state by holding down the Shift key when maximizing the KPlayer window.
& Maintain aspect
Remember the maintain aspect option in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember the setting for the maintain aspect option in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember the maintain aspect option in the current file's properties, then automatically reset it to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember the maintain aspect option by holding down the Shift key when clicking the maintain aspect toolbar button or choosing an aspect option from View menu.
Remember volume adjustments in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember volume adjustments in file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember volume adjustments in the current file's properties, then automatically reset the volume to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember volume adjustments by holding down the Shift key when making them.
Audio delay
Remember audio delay setting in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember the audio delay setting in file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember the audio delay in the current file's properties, then automatically reset the audio delay when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember the audio delay by holding down the Shift key when changing it.
Contrast
Remember contrast adjustments in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember contrast adjustments in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember contrast adjustments in the current file's properties, then automatically reset contrast to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember contrast adjustments by holding down the Shift key when making them.
& Brightness
Remember brightness adjustments in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember brightness adjustments in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember brightness adjustments in the current file's properties, then automatically reset brightness to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember brightness adjustments by holding down the Shift key when making them.
Remember hue adjustments in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember hue adjustments in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember hue adjustments in the current file's properties, then automatically reset hue to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember hue adjustments by holding down the Shift key when making them.
Saturation
Remember saturation adjustments in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember saturation adjustments in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember saturation adjustments in the current file's properties, then automatically reset saturation to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember saturation adjustments by holding down the Shift key when making them.
Subtitle position
Remember subtitles' vertical position in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember the subtitles' vertical position in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember the subtitles' position in the current file's properties, then automatically reset the subtitles' position when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember the subtitles' position by holding down the Shift key when changing it.
Subtitle delay
Remember the subtitle delay in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember the subtitle delay in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember the subtitle delay in the current file's properties, then automatically reset the subtitle delay when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember the subtitle delay by holding down the Shift key when changing it.
Frame drop
Remember frame dropping option in the file properties for the current file
Option to choose whether to automatically remember the frame dropping option in the file properties for the currently loaded file. If this option is selected, KPlayer will remember the frame dropping option in the current file's properties, then automatically reset frame dropping to the previous setting when another file is loaded. If this option is not selected, you can still make KPlayer remember frame dropping option by holding down the Shift key when choosing it from the Player menu.
Resize main window automatically
Resize main window automatically to make video area the correct size
Option to choose whether to automatically resize main KPlayer window so that the video area is of the desired size.
Maximum entries on playlist menus
Maximum number of entries on Play List and Add To Playlist menus
Option to specify the maximum number of entries on Play List and Add To Playlist menus.
Maximum entries on & Play Recent menu
Maximum number of entries on the Play Recent menu
Option to specify the maximum number of entries on the Play Recent menu. If this number is exceeded, the oldest entries will be removed.
Maximum & Recent entries in the library
Maximum number of entries on the Recent list in the multimedia library
Option to specify the maximum number of entries on the Recent list in the multimedia library. If this number is exceeded, the oldest entries will be removed.
Meta information cache size & limit
Maximum number of entries for which KPlayer remembers properties
Option that shows and allows you to change the maximum number of entries for which KPlayer remembers properties, even if they are no longer on playlist. If the limit is exceeded, the oldest existing entries are removed from cache.
Allow duplicate entries on playlists
Allow multiple entries with the same URL on playlists
Option to choose whether to allow multiple entries having the exact same URL on playlist. Duplicate entries will have the same set of file properties. If this option is not selected, and you put a new entry with the same URL as an existing one on a playlist, the old entry will be removed.
& Show messages if a file fails to play
Show message log if KPlayer encounters an error when trying to play a file
Option to choose whether to show message log if KPlayer encounters an error when trying to play a file, so you can look at the end of the log to see what the error was.
Lower limit on the video hue
Option to specify a lower limit on the video hue setting.
Upper limit on the video hue
Option to specify an upper limit on the video hue setting.
Amount of adjustment to video hue when using Increase/ Decrease commands
Option to specify the amount by which to change video hue when using Increase/ Decrease Hue commands on Player/ Video menu or the corresponding keyboard shortcuts.
Reset hue to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session
Option to reset video hue to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session.
& Normal seek amount
Amount by which to move playback when using Forward/ Backward commands
Option to specify the amount by which playback will be moved forward or backward when using Forward/ Backward commands on Player menu, either in seconds or in percents of time length of the file if it is known.
& Fast seek amount
Amount by which to move playback when using Fast Forward/ Backward commands
Option to specify the amount by which playback will be moved forward or backward when using Fast Forward/ Backward commands on Player menu, either in seconds or in percents of time length of the file if it is known.
Lower limit on the video saturation
Option to specify a lower limit on the video saturation setting.
Upper limit on the video saturation
Option to specify an upper limit on the video saturation setting.
Amount of adjustment to video saturation when using Increase/ Decrease commands
Option to specify the amount by which to change video saturation when using Increase/ Decrease Saturation commands on Player/ Video menu or the corresponding keyboard shortcuts.
Reset saturation to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session
Option to reset video saturation to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session.
& Minimum slider length
Minimum length of slider control
Option that shows and allows you to change minimum length of slider control. It affects sliders embedded in toolbars.
pixels
& Preferred slider length
Preferred length of slider control
Option that shows and allows you to change preferred length of slider control. It affects both popup sliders and sliders embedded in toolbars.
& Show tick marks on sliders
Show tick marks on slider controls
Option to show slider marks on slider controls.
Distance between slider & marks
Distance between slider tick marks as a percentage
Option to specify the distance between slider tick marks, as a percentage of the slider length.
Font & name
Name of the font for displaying subtitles and other OSD text
Option to specify the name of the font for displaying subtitles and other OSD text.
& Bold
Bold font for displaying subtitles and other OSD text
Option to choose bold font for displaying subtitles and other OSD text.
& Italic
Italic font for displaying subtitles and other OSD text
Option to choose italic font for displaying subtitles and other OSD text.
Text & size
Size of subtitle text
Option to specify the size of subtitle text.
& Auto scale
Automatically scale subtitles and other OSD elements
Option to automatically scale subtitles and other OSD elements.
& Outline
Outline of the font for displaying subtitles and other OSD text
Option to specify the outline of the font for displaying subtitles and other OSD text.
Width of the subtitle area, as a percentage of the video width
Option to specify the width of the subtitle area, as a percentage of the video width.
& Width
Position adjustment amount
Amount of adjustment to subtitle vertical position when using Move Up/ Down commands
Option to specify the amount in percents of video height by which to move subtitles when using Move Up/ Down commands on Player/ Subtitles menu or the corresponding keyboard shortcuts.
Amount of adjustment to subtitle delay when using Increase/ Decrease commands
Option to specify the amount in seconds by which to change subtitle delay when using Increase/ Decrease Delay commands on Player/ Subtitles menu or the corresponding keyboard shortcuts.
& Display closed caption subtitles
Auto & expand video area to aspect ratio
Automatically expand the video area to fit subtitles
Option to automatically expand the video area to fit subtitles below the video.
Aspect ratio of the expanded video area
Option to specify the aspect ratio of the expanded video area. The video will only be expanded if it has a higher aspect ratio than the one you choose.
1:1
4:3
16:9
Autoload subtitles
Automatically load subtitle types selected below
Option to automatically load subtitle types selected below by looking for subtitle files with the same name as the currently loaded file and the corresponding subtitle extension.
& Extensions
List of extensions to use for automatically loading subtitles
Option that lets you give a list of extensions that will be used to automatically load subtitles. If you enter multiple extensions, separate them by commas, semicolons, colons, periods or spaces. Extensions you give will be converted to lower and upper case when looking for files. Subtitles with mixed case extensions cannot be autoloaded at this time.
Driver
Video output to use for playing video
Option that lists available video outputs and lets you choose the one to use for playing video. Recommended choice depends on the video card you have. For Matrox card try XMGA, for other cards either XVidix (if supported) or XVideo provide the best quality. With NVidia drivers you can also try XVMC output. If after trying hard you cannot make any of these work, you can use X11 output as the last resort. Video outputs that open a separate window instead of using KPlayer video area are not recommended. Auto will let MPlayer choose a video output according to its own configuration. If you need to specify more than one output separated by comma, set this option to Auto and put them in Additional Command Line Arguments on Advanced page.
Device
Video device to use for the chosen output
Option to specify video device to use for the chosen video output. Leave blank to use the default device.
Codec to use for decoding video (Auto is recommended)
Option that lists available codecs and lets you choose the one to be used for decoding video. Auto is the recommended choice, it lets MPlayer decide which codec to use automatically. If you need to tell MPlayer to use a particular codec for a given file or stream, set this option in File Properties.
& Scaler
Video scaler to use when doing software scaling
Option to specify the video scaler to be used when doing software scaling. Software scaling consumes considerable amount of system resources, so unless you have plenty of them and software scaling gives you better image quality, you should choose a video output above that uses hardware scaling.
fast bilinear
bilinear
bicubic (good quality)
experimental
nearest neighbour (bad quality)
area
luma bicubic / chroma bilinear
gauss
sincR
lanczos
bicubic spline
Enable double buffering
Enable double buffering for video output
Option to choose whether double buffering should be used for video output. This option is recommended, it gives smoother display in many cases.
Enable direct rendering
Enable direct rendering for video output
Option to choose whether direct rendering should be used for video output. This option may give performance improvement, but may also cause video display problems, for example when used along with double buffering option or when playing with subtitles.
Lower limit on the sound volume
Option to specify a lower limit on the sound volume setting.
Upper limit on the sound volume
Option to specify an upper limit on the sound volume setting.
Amount of adjustment to sound volume when using Increase/ Decrease commands
Option to specify the amount by which to change sound volume when using Increase/ Decrease Volume commands on Player/ Audio menu or the corresponding keyboard shortcuts.
Reset volume to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session
Option to reset sound volume to a specific setting for each new file or KPlayer session.
& File
Play & List
Play & Recent
& View
Position
& Audio
& Video
Subtitles
Advanced
& Library
Add & to
& Add
& Columns
& Go
& Settings
Playlist Toolbar
Contrast Toolbar
Brightness Toolbar
Hue Toolbar
Saturation Toolbar
Your names
Your emails