# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	KDE4
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-KDE4/v2/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/KDE4.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

Your names
Your emails
& Editor
& Themes
Edit Toolbar
Curse of the Mummy
Drawing on Western movie icons about mummies and Egypt, this set of levels is best run under the Treasure of Egypt theme. To polish your Egyptology, you will find factual tidbits related to each level in the hints, where the facts are drawn from Wikipedia rather than Hollywood. This Championship game was composed by Steve Mann, with a few Egyptian ideas and the Red Sea level contributed by Ian Wadham.
The Giza Plateau
The Giza Plateau on the outskirts of Cairo is the site of the Giza Necropolis, which consists of the Pyramid of Khufu (The Great Pyramid), the Pyramid of Khafre, the Pyramid of Menkaure, along with the Great Sphinx and a number of other smaller edifices. As you make your way under the plateau, try to avoid killing the mummies: if too many reappear on the right, it becomes difficult to escape at the end. To get started, you will need to use the technique of digging while falling.
The Pyramid of Djoser
The Pyramid of Djoser (Zoser), or step pyramid (kbhw-ntrw in Egyptian) is an archeological remain in the Saqqara necropolis, Egypt, northwest of the city of Memphis. To complete this level, it is important to proceed in steps: first free the mummy on the left side of the second level (from the bottom), allowing it to drop into and fill the hidden pit on the ground level. Now enter the right side of the second level and move across the pole, over the mummy, and get the piece of treasure in the middle, being sure to dig out the brick to the left of the middle. The mummy on the third level is a bit problematic because it will take a piece of treasure and carry it. You may get lucky and find that it abandons its treasure at some point, but you can also trap him in the one diggable brick on the right with careful timing. Finally, before getting the last piece of treasure, be sure to open the bottom right of the step pyramid to allow the mummies on the right to enter the pyramid - if there is more than one mummy on the bottom right before the escape ladder appears, you will be unable to reach the exit.
Pharaoh's Barge
The Khufu ship is an intact full-size vessel from Ancient Egypt that was sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza around 2,500 BC. The ship was almost certainly built for Khufu (King Cheops). It is one of the oldest, largest, and best-preserved vessels from antiquity, and measures 43.6 m overall. Despite its age, it could sail today if put into water. This is almost a simple level: good treasure and not too many mummies. But your task is to wrest the treasure they carry.
Pyramid Puzzles
The Great Pyramid was the tallest man-made structure in the world for over 3,800 years. Going up and down all the time must have been a chore for ancient Egyptians, much as you are likely to find it a chore going up and down this pyramid. To get the second treasure from the left, you have to use the brick that blocks the ladder at the bottom as a bridge to escape. To get the fourth treasure from the left, clear the three brick above and to the right of the left most mummy; if dug in the correct order, this will give you just enough time to grab the treasure and escape. Some of the mummies must be released to get some of the treasure. However, get the first, second, and fourth treasures (from the left) before releasing any of the mummies. Be careful not to kill any mummies; if they appear to the right of the pyramid, you will be unable to finish the level. Also it is possible to release the mummies and trap them in one of the other chambers.
Crocodile
Crocodiles can live to be over 100 years of age, with the largest species reaching 4.85 meters in length. Various species have been observed attacking and killing sharks. Sobek was the deification of crocodiles. Egyptians who worked or travelled on the Nile hoped that if they prayed to Sobek, the crocodile god, he would protect them from being attacked by crocodiles. In this level, it is not the crocodile you need to fear. Still, a prayer to Sobek might help you escape the mummies while you gather the treasure.
Three Pyramids
The Giza Necropolis has been a popular tourist destination since antiquity, and was popularized in Hellenistic times when the Great Pyramid was listed by Antipater of Sidon as one of the Seven Wonders of the World. Today it is the only one of those wonders still in existence. You may find it easiest to navigate this wonder if you get two mummies in the far right pyramid before going over there.
Tura Caves
Tura was Egypt's primary quarry for limestone, and was used on the Great Pyramid of Khufu. The mining of this limestone left behind caverns that were later used by the British Army as a secret depot during World War II, and which you can now explore. To the left of the bottom of the long shaft, there are two hidden pits. Free the mummy to the right of the long shaft to fill one of them and free the mummy in the large chamber to fill the other. Be sure to ride the first of the two mummies down to get the piece of treasure in the nook near the bottom of the shaft. When leaving this nook, dig to your right several times to open up your escape route. Get all the treasure on the left of the board, then move to the right. Make sure to dig free the mummy at the top so that you can get its treasure later. You will also need its help to escape back to the left at the end of the level. The treasure on the right is easier to get than it looks: strategically placed false bricks make this the easy half of the level. Note: If you feel like some variety, you can do all of the right first and then the left.
Pyramid Crawl
There are over 100 pyramids in Egypt, with the oldest being built around 2600 BC. In this pyramid level (built around AD 2008), avoid (by luring away or killing) getting the two mummies in the middle of the bottom section.
The Great Sphinx
The Great Sphinx is a guardian of the Giza Plateau, where it faces the rising sun. Standing 73 meters long and 20 meters high, it is the largest monolith statue in the world and is a mere 4500 years young. As you grab the treasure inside the sphinx, try to solve The Riddle of the Sphinx: how do you get past the horde of mummies on the right?
Ladder Pyramid
Most accepted theories on the construction of the pyramids are based on the idea that it was built by moving huge stones from a quarry and dragging and lifting them into place. The disagreements center on the method by which the stones were conveyed and placed. Regardless, there were likely many ladders involved in its construction, such as on this level. This level is mostly a run around. Picking up the treasure while avoiding mummies is not so hard - but getting treasure away from the mummies is a much harder task. The three-wide stone platform is a useful killing field, although you'll have to run around a bit to get the mummies carrying treasure to line up properly. Note also that the middle block of this platform is a fall-through block. And once you've gotten all the treasure, you'll need to cross over to the escape ladder. One way to do this is to kill a mummy and cross over on its back when the mummy crosses from the escape ladder to the main pyramid.
Ankh
The Ankh was the Egyptian hieroglyphic symbol that read'life ', and as a sun symbol, was almost always crafted in gold. To keep your life on this level, be careful of the false bricks in the main Ankh and figure out which of them are useful.
Pharaoh's Tomb
Researchers estimate that 2.3 million blocks were used to build the Great Pyramid, with an average weight of about 2.5 metric tons per block. The pyramid of this level was built from fewer than 100 blocks. In the beginning, manuever to get inside the pyramid and then stand on one of the ladders on the second layer nearest the outer wall of the left side of the pyramid. Wait for the mummies to group on the other side of the outer wall. Then climb to the top of the ladders on the small pyramid and wait for the mummies to climb the tall ladder and drop off the pole. Once the last one has dropped (or slightly before), run up the tall ladder, across the pole and dig to get back inside the big pyramid and to the tomb. Repeat this trick to exit after grabbing the lone piece of treasure, only this time you need to get out on the right side of the pyramid.
Cat
A revered, important animal to Egyptian society and religion, the cat was afforded the same mummification after death as humans were. When finishing this catty level, do not be fooled by the cat's tail that appears once you pick up the last treasure. The only exit is on the left. So you need to let the mummies bring you the treasure that is to the right of the cat's head, since you cannot pick up every piece and run back in time. To get the mummies to bring you the treasure, you must dig out the five bricks on the bottom and allow them to pass (or get trapped and killed).
Pyramid Power
Imhotep designed the Step Pyramid of Djoser to serve as a gigantic stairway by which the soul of the deceased pharaoh could ascend to the heavens. Such was the importance of Imhotep's achievement that he was deified by later Egyptians. Before you can ascend to the top of this pyramid level, you must make your way to the bottom. To get the top piece of treasure, move left off the apex, dig the next block and step onto the mummy below, continuing to move right (try placing your mouse pointer on the apex). After getting the last piece of treasure, exit to the right and run up and down the ladders. The lower left is the only difficult part: just run under the mummies on the ladder above you and maneuver... and hope!
Eye of Horus
The Eye of Horus is an ancient Egyptian symbol of protection and royal power from deities. On this level, there is some protection inside the eye, but not much. Repeated trips from the top to the bottom are required to get all the treasure. Eventually, there will be two mummies on the bottom left. To get by them, climb to the top of the short ladder four from the left, dig left, climb down and dig left again. One of the mummies will fall in the lower pit. Climb up the ladder. The second mummy will climb the other ladder and fall in the top pit. Move across the two trapped mummies and climb to the top.
Inverted Pyramid
Probably not a traditional Egyptian design. You have to zig-zag back and forth along the poles to get all the treasure. To get past the lone chaser mummy, wait for him on one pole and just before he reaches you, drop to the pole below and move directly under him. Since the design is non-traditional, considering playing the level non-traditionally: the drop-and-move-under move is easier to do with the keyboard (easier, but still hard). Once you get the last piece of treasure above the bricks inside the pyramid, pause the game and switch back to mouse mode.
Anubis
Anubis, or Inpu, was an Egyptian god of the afterlife. To get the treasure between Anubis' ears, dig out the two columns to the left of the mummy and stand on top of the mummy. Move left off the mummy while digging right. The mummy should fall into the hole in the right most column. Now dig out the left two columns until you connect to the ladder-eye. Move down from the right most ladder of the eye and you will fall to the pole below. To get the treasure inside the right ear, dig out the higher of the two-block columns, falling onto the right two-block column. Move to the left and dig the second two-block column. Now move to the right and dig out the one-block column, freeing the mummy. Move one more to the right and dig out three blocks so that you have a two block wide ledge to stand on. Move left and dig out the square to your right. Wait for the mummy to fall, get his treasure, and race up the ladder to confront five mummies blocking the exit.
Pyramid of Treasure
Nubia was a major source of gold in Egypt. King Tushratta of the Mitanni claimed gold was'more plentiful than dirt 'in Egypt. In this pyramid, treasure is even in the air! Lots of treasure, only three mummies - it ca n't be that hard, can it?
Sarcophagus
A sarcophagus is a funeral receptacle for a corpse, most commonly carved or cut from stone. In Ancient Egypt, a sarcophagus formed the external layer of protection for a royal mummy, with several layers of coffins nested within, and was often carved out of alabaster. If you do not want this level to be your sarcophagus, get the piece of treasure under the left edge of the sarcophagus at the start - otherwise, there is no way to get it.
The Parting of the Red Sea
The Bible tells us that Moses parted the sea to escape the Pharaoh's men. After you have looted the pyramids of his ancestors, it should come as no surprise that the Pharaoh has sent his men after you, too. Fortunately, the sea can be parted just by falling onto the last treasure. To escape the Pharaoh's men is not so easy. First, make your hero go down as far as he can, then wait for his moment. Then move up the wall of water to the right, cross the pole to the middle and wait for the mummies to reach the top of the water before dropping down a second time. This time, immediately run up the wall of water to your left, crossing under the chasing mummies. Await near the top left where the mummies to your right cannot get you. Once the mummies to your left reach the top, drop to the sea bed a third time (even Moses did not have it this rough). The trick to getting past the mummies on this last trip to the top is to pass under and to the left of them while they are falling as a column down one of the long ladder drops. Note: It is possible to move up the wall of water to your left initially, but it is much harder.
Count
This game is based on counting, from 0 to 16 (or 0 to 10 in hexadecimal). The first level has no gold and no enemies: the problem is to find a way out and up to the next level. After that, the number of enemies and pieces of gold increases by 1 at each level. The name of each level corresponds to the number of enemies, the pieces of gold and the digits that appear in the layout. These elegant and rather tricky Championship levels were composed by Steve Mann.
Zero
The only challenge is getting inside the 0, which is the only path to the exit. Getting inside the 0 requires climbing to the top of the zigzag ladder, digging away five bricks on the left edge of the 0, racing back to the top of the zigzag ladder, over the pole, falling through your recently dug bricks and immediately moving right to get into the 0. The timing is fairly tight.
One
Getting the gold requires multiple digs in the right places. However, see the next paragraph. To get out, you have to get the enemy to go over the top of the 1 and fill the pit at the bottom. There are three ways to do this. The first and most sensible is to wait on the pole above the top right edge of the 1 until the enemy is almost upon you and then move to the right, digging to your right as you reach the bottom of the 1. The second way involves timing your digging for the gold (or where the gold was); moving onto the gold at the right time will cause the enemy to fall into the pit on the right of the 1. The third way is to destroy the enemy and hope he reappears over the right side of the 1.
Two
To get the leftmost gold drop down on it from above, stepping one square to either side as you fall. Immediately dig the square that was just below the gold and step in. The false floor will drop you to the bottom.
Three
After getting all the gold, the only escape is up the highest ladder on the left, but it is not connected to anything. To reach it, you will need to entice an enemy to follow you, then step across the enemy to reach the ladder.
Four
At the start, you need to race to the floor to the right. You will need to trap some enemies (with luck, you will get a piece of gold in the process), but you should easily be able to go up the ladders shaped like a 4, on the right. When getting the gold from the 4, wait until the enemies have reached the top of the ladders shaped like a 4. This will allow you enough time to reach the ladders before the enemies cut you off.
Five
In the beginning, climb down the first set of ladders and wait on the lowest section until the enemies have settled in their positions. Then drop to the floor and aim for the big ladder at the right with the fork at the bottom. The fork is what enables you to get past the enemies above: wait at the floor level of the left rung (not below the floor level!) until the enemy on the long ladder drops next to you. Then climb up and to the right to get up the big ladder.
Six
The first trick for this level is to time when you go through the bottom of the 6 with the enemy climbing up the ladder to the left of the 6. Once you get on the ladder, the enemies will climb up the ladder away from you, so you just need to wait until there are no enemies low on the ladder before digging through the bottom of the 6. The second trick is figuring how to get all the enemies off the ladder on the left of the screen. One way is to sit on top of the big 6 in the middle and wait for them to come over the poles. Then drop to the floor and cross to the ladder.
Seven
The gold on top of the 7 is the main challenge. In the beginning, climb to the left most square of the top of the 7 and wait there until enemies fill the holes on top of the 7.
Eight
With careful moves and timing, you can tempt two enemies over to the leftmost ladder and leave them there while you retrieve the five highest gold pieces. The three lowest pieces must be collected all in one pass, but you may need to force enemies towards the right of the 8 first, to avoid trouble when the ladders appear and you land on the floor. You can clear your final escape ladder by hitting the floor again, on the far right.
Nine
In the beginning, drop as fast as you can to get to the floor. Dig several pits on the bottom to delay the enemies from coming up the ladder. Then grab the two pieces of gold off the left side of the 9 while there are no enemies around, digging to enter the 9 after grabbing the higher of these two pieces. To get the gold from the bottom of the 9, stand on the left enemy, dig left and move right. The two enemies will start to move left, fall, and climb the ladder. When the first one gets stuck where you just dug, jump in the lowest part of the 9 and dig to the left. The next enemy will carry the gold down. Grab it, dig to the right, drop down to the pole and escape as quickly as you can.
Ten
You can trap several enemies in the pits at the bottom left and right, but they will get loose when the hidden ladders appear. Dropping to the floor during your escape can help clear your path to the top right.
Eleven
Get the piece of gold below the left side of the poles shaped like an 11 first, then grab the piece on the base of the left 1 of the central 11. Now drop to the floor just to the left of the double high wall. The enemies will drop into different sections. You now want to do three things: get the gold in the left and center sections, take gold from the enemies to the right of you when on the floor and lure as many enemies as you can into the section to the left of the 11. The first two tasks are relatively easy: the last task can be accomplished in several ways. If you run up the center ladder and move over the left, you can wait above the right hand side of the poles (possibly dropping onto the poles) and lure a few enemies at a time from the center section to the left section. You can also pick up a piece of gold or two while doing this. Once you have all the gold (except the pieces to the right of the 11), run to the top right of the H of ladders in the middle. This will cause all the enemies not in the far right section to move into the left section.
Twelve
This is a slow level with lots of waiting for enemies to move where you want them. At the start, fall onto the nearest enemy as it falls and move onto the right hand poles to get the piece of gold just below them. Be sure to wait for an opening in the enemies below before dropping onto this gold piece. The grid of 12 boxes on the right is useful. If you are on this grid but below the top of it, enemies climbing the ladder just left of the grid will not drop onto the grid and chase you. You can wait near the bottom of the grid until the enemies move above the pits of brick and concrete at the bottom left, then you can fall to the floor. This will cause the enemies to fall into the pits and become trapped. Another useful trick is to wait at the top of the ladder on the far left (where you start the level). Any enemies far enough away will run over the top of the grid of boxes and drop into the trapped area on the right. To get the gold on the leftmost floor area, you need to fill the second section of floor with enemies and dig out the squares that block the enemies in the leftmost region. You may want to lose that gold (i. e. have the enemy carrying the gold enter a dug square and be destroyed there), although it is possible to get this piece of gold if you really want it. If you leave the leftmost suspended gold until last, then it is easy to escape to the top. Alternatively, if you leave the gold inside the 2 for last, you should be able to escape without much difficultly. Otherwise, the enemies trapped on the far left will cut off your escape route.
Thirteen
In the beginning, wait on the top of the left (or better, right) branch of the leftmost ladders until the enemies in the middle climb to the middle of the center ladder. Then drop to the horizontal ladder, move all the way to the right and drop to the floor, thus trapping several enemies. You have to release most of the enemies from where they are trapped, to get the gold from various places. In particular, you have to release the enemies trapped on the left half of the floor to get at least one piece of gold. Once you pick up the last piece of gold, the enemies will swarm the center ladder, so you will have to decide which piece of gold to pick up last. A reasonable choice is the one held by the three enemies in the lowest leg of the 3, as is the one in the center arm of the 3.
Fourteen
Four tricks: first, do not dig out the enemies trapped in the 4s on the left until towards the end (likewise if one gets trapped in the middle 4) - this leaves fewer enemies to deal with. Second, you will need to ride down on top of an enemy to get the trapped gold in the 4s on the left and the floating piece of gold in the center. Third, when you release the enemies on the 4s along the right (and possibly the two in the 4s on the left), you may find it easier to double dig and lose those pieces of gold. Finally, it is easiest to escape at the end if you leave until last a piece of gold in or near the floating 14 at middle right. Then you can run up the ladder that appears there.
Fifteen
Two hints: if you wait on one of the left two ladders one rung below the piece of gold suspended between the two ladders, the enemies in the middle will jump into the base of the 5. This should allow you to easily get the gold between the 1 and the 5. Second, if you wait on the base of the 1 to the right of the one, the enemies on the right of the two ladders to the left of the 1 will jump off the pole onto the other half of the base of the 1. If you wait high up between the 1 and the 5, then jump to the base of the 1, while the enemies are falling toward the base of the 1 you will be able to rush up the ladder to the left of the 1 and get the gold to the left of the 1.
Sixteen
The column to the left of the 1 requires a quick run down and back up, with careful dodging both ways to avoid the enemies. To get the gold in the middle of the 6, drop down on the top of the'O 'part of the 6, move right/ dig left and immediately move left and dig left to delay the enemy who otherwise is likely to catch you. However, you may wish to leave this piece of gold to the end so as not to free two additional enemies earlier; it is possible to get two enemies to retrap themselves in that section, though. To get the gold held by enemies in the bottom right, dig out the blocking square to their left, run up the ladder, dig off the right side of the 6, drop in, run left and dig off a square on the left side of the 6 and drop to the floor. The timing is tight - only one or two enemies in the bottom right section will be able to move to the next section to the left. You will still need to dig out the bottom of the 6 to get their gold, but that is straightforward albeit a bit hectic because of the enemies lingering to the left of the 6. Once you have gotten all the gold, you may find it easiest to exit by passing through the middle false floor on the 1 and exiting via the ladders on the left of the 1.
TRANSLATORS: Please see the notes in the translation comment.
KGoldrunner
These levels were composed by Marco Krüger, the original author of the KGoldrunner program, and some of his friends and contributors. They use KGoldrunner rules. The enemies run fast and have an aggressive search strategy. Enjoy!
Mazes
Mazes, mazes, mazes. Some with enemies, some without. While occasionally you will need to kill an enemy, as a general rule it is best not to kill them, because they reappear at the top and block your exit. Another great set of Championship levels from Steve Mann. The levels are named after dwarves in myths and stories (with a few named after elves), beginning with the seven dwarves from Disney's version of Snow White.
Dopey
Fairly simple, just avoid falling off the ladders. There are several ways to get past the two enemies at the end. One of the quickest is to wait on a tall vertical ladder, just below the second highest horizontal ladder, until the path to the exit is clear.
Sleepy
A lot of backtracking, but nothing too difficult here.
Doc
A few tricks to figure out how to get the gold, but nothing too hard.
Grumpy
Visually confusing, but otherwise a simple maze.
Sneezy
Mostly straightforward, the only trick here is how to draw off the enemies so as to get past them. In the beginning, try to lure the top two enemies into the top-center pit. This gives you enough time to slip past them. The enemy on the bottom is relatively easy to avoid (twice). To get past the top two enemies on your way back, lure the first one deep into the maze until you find a way back past him, then lure the second one to the section with the pole near the top.
Bashful
To reach the two pieces of gold stacked one above the other, you have to drop through a trap below one of the ladders above that section. Leave the piece of gold at the upper left until the very last.
Happy
There are two tricks to this level. First, if you want gold that is high, move low to draw the enemies down, then move up to get the gold - and vice-versa. Second, at times you will need to use the ladder trick: if you are on a vertical ladder with an enemy above you, sometimes the enemy will run away from you.
Glorfindel
To get the piece of gold at mid-left, you will need to lure the enemy across the pole and run across him as he gets to the end of the pole. The same trick will be needed to get back, unless he follows you back across the pole; then you will need to find another place to dodge past him.
Hreidmar
Be careful not to let the enemies get the gold - it is hard to get it away from them! Otherwise, by moving into the middle section, you can get most of the enemies to move up and to the right. This allows you to get the gold on the bottom level. Some of the bricks on the bottom level are traps. When an enemy gets close, you can drop into the trap, step to the side and move over the enemy. But it is better to maneuver the enemies so that they stay away from the bottom section while you are down there getting the gold.
Ori
A straightforward maze: the false brick underneath the ladder near the bottom center may prove useful.
Nori
The hardest part is when two enemies get in the center of the maze and you need to pass them. Try to move down and to their left, lure one down, trap it and then go up to trap the other. Otherwise, clever digging should deal with them.
Dori
The only trick to this level is using the hidden passages and enticing the enemies to use them.
Bombur
There are several ways to get past an enemy who is in the ladder-trap loop. One is to wait next to the trap and when the enemy is half-way up the ladder, step into the trap and move immediately to the left and down. However, at the start, you might get three enemies in the ladder-trap loop. Avoid this. One of the three can break out of the loop, but the other two remain trapped, leaving you no way to get past them.
Luthien
After dodging the first enemy you come to, try not to jump off and grab the floating piece of gold in the center too soon. If you do, the enemy you just dodged will drop to the lower level, grab a piece of gold and head for the floor where you can not get the gold away from him.
Bofur
If you have two or more enemies between you and where you want to go, you may find the diggable columns useful. Dig two layers, wait one from the top to trap the first enemy and then move to the top to trap the second enemy.
Bifur
Lots of gold, only one enemy and he is trapped! It should be a cake walk! The first part just involves digging (at most) to collect the gold. But then there is no obvious way to get the gold on the bottom and on the left. Look for a trap under the bottom of a ladder to get to it. The only other trick is to get all the other gold and leave the enemy and its piece of gold to the last. And watch out - since there is only one enemy, it is pretty fast!
Gloin
The pit in the upper right is tricky. To leave the maze, you need an enemy in the pit. But you would rather not have him there before you have taken the gold out. And if two enemies get in the pit before you get the gold, forget it.
Oin
Look for false floors to get to places that are otherwise inaccessible. You have to dig to find a couple of them.
Kili
Get the gold in the middle and on the top before getting the gold on the bottom or lower left. That way, if you have to kill an enemy (the one at the left is just asking for it) then they only block your way to the exit rather than make it impossible to gather the remaining gold.
Fili
Lots of false bricks to trap you, or give you access to different parts of the maze. Test below the ladders and other places. The four high trap in the middle is a show stopper: you can only get back past it once you have gathered all the gold. So stay out of the lower right until you have cleared the rest of the gold. Then drop through the trap below the top right ladder - there is no other way to get the piece of gold below it. Once you are down here, there is no getting back to the top right until you have cleared all the gold. After getting the piece of gold at center right, dig down to get the left of the two adjacent pieces. The escape from the lower right comes when all the gold is gathered and a small section of ladder appears in the center.
Dwalin
A maze, but you can not see the path out. You have to use the false floors. Trial and error is your only hope - try mapping it on paper if you are having trouble.
Durin
This diagonal maze is not too hard, except there is the occasional pit to get trapped in and that lone enemy is fast. Try to lure the enemy down and into one of the pits. Then the rest is almost a cake walk.
Dain
There are too many enemies to fight up on the top level (there are not many bricks there for a reason). Instead, wait on the level below and let them come to you. Dig to escape and get the gold at bottom left. On the way back, stand on the top level and use the same trick to draw the enemies up there. Dig a brick leading down and head for the exit. The only tricky parts come when two enemies end up in the lower left, in the center (on your way back) or at the upper right. Except for the last case, you should be able to complete the level without intentionally trapping any enemies, but some may inadvertently fall into your two pits.
Duergar
A maze without walls or enemies - how hard can it be? But the traps act as walls, and the enemies would just fill the traps, so perhaps this is another one where you will want to draw a map. Note that you can probe for traps by digging, but that can lead to a rather slow game while you wait for the bricks you dig to refill.
Balin
To get through the center, you will have to clear it of enemies, but there is only one diggable brick. Use it to drop through, race to the right and go up to the row above the dug brick. There is just enough time to entice the enemy into the closing hole. Repeat as necessary. To leave the maze, you need to find a way through the long diagonal barrier of ladders. Beneath one of them is a false floor to use for your escape route.
Gimli
The enemies are paper tigers, although you need a trick to get past the first one. Stand on top of the ladder to the left of the false brick. When the enemy moves over the ladder to the right of the false brick, move down your ladder, enticing the enemy to move down into the false brick. Quickly move up and over the enemy's head. Otherwise, it is just a matter of maneuvering the enemies to a place where you can trap them or pass by them. The only real problem occurs if an enemy grabs a piece of gold and gets stuck somewhere and you can not dig him out. Oh, well, sometimes you lose. To get out of the center section, search for the double trap on the left.
Brokkr
Leave the piece of gold just down and to your right until last. To get back to this section of the maze, you will need to dig through the wall a bit further down and to the right. The easiest way to handle most of the enemies is to lure them along until they fall into a pit. But beware, the pits fill with ladders once you have all the gold, allowing the trapped enemies to escape.
Thrain
Mostly straightforward, but beware of a couple of one-way gates, in particular in the section at the top, right of center. Be sure to clear out all the gold before freeing the trapped enemy at top right, who has a piece of gold. You will also need to use the false floor on the far right at the top.
Thorin
In the beginning, rush to the top of the pyramid-like structure, dig off the top, go down and get two pieces of gold. Then lure the enemies into the area under the pyramid and move down and to the left. This can cause an enemy to be trapped and others to move into areas where they are harmless. If any enemies follow you, escape to the bottom left, collecting some gold on the way. To get the piece of gold in the upper left, you first have to lure the one enemy out of that section. After collecting the gold, you may find yourself threatened by enemies to your right. If so, go to the lowest level of the section that you can reach without digging. The enemies will go into a side corridor, giving you enough time to run up over the bar and reach the top of the pyramid just ahead of them. The rest is just hard work.
Telchar
False floors are the key to this level. The way into a section is often not the way out. Many of the enemies will get trapped if you move low enough. Save the middle bottom gold for last: you can not get out of this section until a hidden ladder appears.
Dvergar
When you collect the gold at top left, you may have trouble leaving the section. The obvious way out (at the foot of the ladder) does not work because of a false brick. Instead, you need to plan ahead when you dig into this section. Dig out the piece of wall that blocks your exit to the right, then quickly go up and grab the gold, then back down and out through the missing wall before it reappears. There is a false brick here, so be sure to dig as you fall into it. After getting the last piece of gold, you can exit through the center, where a new piece of ladder allows you to dig and re-enter the left of the maze.
Thingol
There is one piece of gold that must be grabbed at the start. When you go to the lower part of the maze, the enemies will go down and stay there. This makes it easy to get the gold up high, but it becomes hard to collect the gold in the lower left. Try to get one or two pieces on your first trip down. By moving up and down on the bottom right ladder you can persuade the enemies to group on the left or right. Grouping them to the left makes it easy to get the piece of gold just down and to the right of center. Getting one enemy on the left and two on the right gives you a chance to get the remaining gold on the lower left, but consider getting it last after grouping all three enemies on the right, because you will then have more choice of ladders when dodging enemies on your way to the top.
Dvalin
There are two problems. First, in the early part you want to get the enemy just to the right of middle trapped in the bottom of that section. This requires getting the gold on the left and passing through the trap doors at the right time, as well as racing to get the gold on the bottom left. The gold on the bottom right is no big trick: just a small amount of timing and passing through the traps. The second problem is that at least one enemy will pick up a piece of gold. Getting him to let go of that piece of gold is tough. You need to lure that enemy into the top right section or the section down and to the left of that. Draw the enemy to the ladder with a gap above it, in the middle of the section. Wait two over to either side of this vacant square, leaving a brick between you and the vacant square. The enemy will move up and down the ladder, in and out of the vacant square. Eventually he will drop the gold on top of the ladder, at which point you have to move down to prevent him from moving back up the ladder and retaking the gold. The timing is tight - good luck! Alternatively, you can run around and trust to luck - the enemy will drop the piece of gold eventually!
Lots of false floors to use and avoid.
Rumpelstiltskin
The main trick for this level is luring the enemies so that you can get around them, or in one case, so that you can walk over an enemy to collect a piece of gold. The luring is not so hard, but the distances you have to lure them are long. Maneuvering the enemy so that you can walk over him to get the piece of gold has timing that is a bit tight, but not too bad. When you reach the section above your starting point, there are two ways out: one is a false brick under the short ladder. But if you dig the other square and drop down, there is a a path through a false floor that avoids retracing all the early part of the maze.
Thror
The two gold in the lower left are cut off from the rest of the maze. On the right of this section, there is an empty square where you can dig a brick. To visit the isolated section, dig out the brick and move left and down through a false brick. You have to race to get one piece of gold and return through another false brick, just in time to cross the dug brick before it closes. The enemy is a bit of a pain. Try luring him to the bottom of the maze, dropping to the floor where you have a ladder to climb back up, but with the enemy above a square without a ladder, thus trapping him.
The maze is sparser and harder. The enemies are trickier. The traps are more wicked. The maze changes. May you walk through interesting mazes. To get the last few gold pieces, you have to enter a section of maze at the left and lower left that is walled off from the rest. This section is shaped like a large letter'L '. Dig two bricks on the right edge of the L (at left of center) and jump in - there is a false brick that lets you through. After you have gathered all the gold, the maze changes. You have to drop down to somewhere near the beginning and make your way back through. At the upper right the exit seems to be blocked. Dig down two bricks and fall for a while, then you will find the way out.
Initiation
These 100 levels make an excellent introductory game, as well as a good opportunity for experts to build up high scores. They were composed by Peter Wadham and use traditional playing rules. The last few levels are very hard, but if you are looking for even more of a challenge, have a go at'Vengeance of Peter W '...
Do n't Panic
The cover of'The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy 'by Douglas Adams said so, in large friendly letters, so there is no need to panic. The enemies are behind a wall and can not reach you.
Lust for Gold
When you kill the enemies you can trap them permanently in the pit at top right.
Ladders? Trust me!
Drop In and Say Hello
The Mask
Check for Traps
Take It Easy!
Fall on a Fortune
The Lattice
Shower of Gold
The Foundry
Soft Landings
Unlucky for Some
The Balance
Gold Bars
Hard Row to Hoe
Golden Maze
Delayed Trap
Nowhere to Hide
Watch the Centre
Where to Dig?
Easy Stages
Gold Mesh
Acrobat
Mongolian Horde
Rocky Terrain
Down the Chimney
Space Invader
Winding Road
Light My Fire
Cockroach
The Runaround
Speedy
Dig Deep
Zig Zag
Free Fall
Forgotten Gold
Two of Diamonds
Suicide Jump
Easy Access
Gold Braid
Cat's Eyes
Keep Them Coming
The Funnel
Lattice Maze
Hard Work for Poor Pay
Forked Ladders
Snowing Gold
Left or Right?
Houndstooth
Five Levels
Pitfalls
Get IN There!
A Steady Climb
Fall-through Lattice
Get me OUT of Here!
Empty Cellar
The Rose
Lotus Puzzle
Long Drop
Party On!
Cross-stitch
Cannot Get Up There
They Are Everywhere!
Rooftops
Tricky Traps
Make Them Work for You
Get Going!
Three Chimneys
The Archway
Starwave
Amazing Finish
Overcrowding
Pillars
Hopeful Descent
The Rack
Twists and Turns
The Saucer
The Dotted Line
Do Not Look Down (1)
Getting Started
Digging Hassle
Easy Middle
Do Not Look Down (2)
Which Way?
Do Not Look Down (3)
Drop?
Help!
Yorick's Skull
No Mercy
Gold Sandwich
Golden Curtain
Are you spider or fly?
Funny?
Hard Landings
Golden Tower
This level is named after the famous German submarine war film'Das Boot 'and dedicated to Marco Krüger of Berlin, the original author of KGoldrunner. Just one small hint... if you stand on the right hand end of the boat you can get the enemy to fall towards you... the rest is up to you!
Quick! RUN!
Surprise Ending
Diagonal Disaster
Vengeance of Peter W
Gooood luck! Mwarrhh hwwarrrr haarrrr!
Impossible?
No, it is not impossible. There is a trick in how you dig the bricks next to the gold nuggets.
Go up the left side to the top and across. Drop down left of the bricks. There is more than one route from these bars to the gold. When starting, wait on a short ladder while the enemy above falls past you on the left.
Short Cut?
Yes, you just have time to zip across the bottom, dodging all the enemies to get to the gold.
Sky Walker
To get the gold in the cave, dig two bricks, wait till they start to re-appear, then quickly dig the third brick (your escape route). Run back up, dig and drop onto the gold. You can JUST get past the fourth enemy if you wait on the bottom ladder as he falls to the floor next to you. Finally, take a wandering route through the sky and emerge at the top left.
The Vault
You can trap enemies in the bottom vault by waiting at the bottom of the long ladder. To kill them, come out, dig one brick, then go back and wait again.
Patchwork Quilt
To get the gold in the top middle section, dig three bricks next to the trapped enemy, wait till they start to re-appear, dig once more, then run up and right to fall back to where the enemy was. Now you can dig and get onto the ladders before he gets back to you.
Do You Need Him?
You can leave the enemy where he is. Go nearly to the gold at the bottom right. Do not pick it up yet, but go up and get the two nuggets at the top left. Then you can come back down to where you were and complete the level.
Stuck in Storage
First clean out the cave by digging three bricks at the right. Later you can kill enemies on the bottom bricks and trap them in the cave. At the right, get the vertical row of gold first, then go across and get the gold on the horizontal platforms. Stay right, dig through the last platform, then dig and get the right hand nugget in the cave. Finally pick up the left hand nugget.
So Far for So Little
At the start, go down and dig. At the finish, approach the gold from below.
Finish by collecting the two nuggets either side of a ladder on the left, then the four at the very bottom of the tomb. You need to get an enemy to fall onto the hanging nugget in the left side of the pyramid. You need another to fill the pit at bottom left. The rest is several digging puzzles, often with limited time to get out before your escape route closes. Enjoy!
Entangled
Drop from the bar at top left and you will get to the gold. Exit right and up, on the ladders that appear. Go across the top until you are seven or eight spaces from the right, then go down. As you head diagonally down to the left, there are two false bricks. Drop into the second one, stay inside it and dig right. Now fall into a string of ladders that leads down and to the left...
Flying Tower
Well you just have to be fast and accurate on this one and that is all we can say...
Pot Hole
Well, the old MG was pretty fast and agile in its day and you have to be too. You can try digging three bricks left and one centre to kill one of the enemies right at the start, but chances are he will fall into the pot hole on the right and you will have no chance of collecting the last lot of gold.
Sticky Ladders
Start by going about three quarters the way up the ladder. The enemies run right. Run to the top in time to get one to fall through a false brick while the others run towards you. Go left, dig two holes to trap them, then run right, dig and fall to the bottom of the first small ladder on the right. The enemies should come down the long ladder and fill up the two false bricks at its foot. Dig and catch the third enemy on top of the thick brick area, then run to the second space from the bottom of the long ladder, next to a row of bricks. The enemy should run into the pits on the left.
The Laboratory
You have to go up the leftmost ladder to get to every nugget and then exit to the next level. Come across from the right to collect the top centre nugget. Get past enemies on the'bunsen burner 'by killing them on the right of it, by dropping through the middle of it when they are nearly touching you and will fall after you OR by jumping left over their heads before they get to the top of the burner.
Pete likes Ladders
Keep going between the top and bottom to dodge the enemy. Pick up nuggets when you can. If the enemy gets one he can only drop it in one of the empty spaces. So keep him running through them and wait patiently...
Where is the Roof?
First clear up all the gold at the left and top, then dig out the cave and collect the gold on the ladders between the two low walls of false brick. If there is an enemy in that section, kill him by hiding in the bottom of a false wall and digging one hole next to it. He will die as he attempts to get you. This will not work if there is gold on the brick you want to dig...
Ninja Style
After collecting all the gold on the left, stay over there, go up high, get the enemy to follow you, then drop to the floor. If an enemy falls near the middle ladder on the right, quickly climb to a point higher than that ladder. After a few tries, you should get all three enemies at the right onto the long rightmost ladder. Now it is easy to clear out the first two areas of gold on the right. Attract three or maybe only two enemies onto the middle ladder at the right. Go up near the hole in the concrete, drop, run right, go up the long ladder, drop left and collect the gold. If you get only two enemies onto the middle ladder, make sure the third one is dropping off the right ladder before you run across. You will then have to go all the way up the long ladder and wait till it is safe to drop left and collect the gold. If the enemies are still carrying gold, keep them chasing you around on the middle ladder and falling to the concrete until they release it.
Cooperation?
It looks as though you should trap two enemies in the two pits at the bottom. Try it, but it is very hard to get one into the right hand pit and you are apt to get an enemy with gold in the left hand pit. Four false bricks further left prevent you running over from the left and digging. It is best to pick up the bottom row of gold last, dropping in via the hanging nugget at the right and escaping via the ladder that appears. The key to clearing up the left hand section is the line of ladders embedded in the bricks. Exit via the three places that have false bricks beneath them. It is suicide to drop onto the middle of the T-shaped bricks. Start by collecting the gold on the right of the T: then you can get an enemy to run into the U-shaped pit. Watch out for the false brick in the middle of the platform at the lower left. You have to collect the gold in separate trips from the left and the right.
Triple Trap
Trap the first enemy immediately. Go up and right and hang on the ladder to the right of a short bar. As the enemy arrives, climb up quickly. As he reaches you again, go left, drop and go up the left hand ladder to the top. The enemy should head right, over the concrete, and fall. Now go down to the bottom left corner. The enemy should drop into a false brick next to the gold. Collect all gold at the top, then dig and drop to the next enemy. Stand on him, dig left and move right. The enemy will drop into the pit. Move to the right and collect more gold as you fall. Climb to the top, drop onto the trapped enemy via a false brick under a bar and collect five more nuggets. Now dig and go down the short ladder at the right of the bricks, to kill the enemy in the pit (who has more gold). He should reappear above you and fall through a false brick back into the pit. Dig three bricks between the two enemies and go down the short ladder until the enemies bunch up. Dig two more bricks to release them. Go up the ladder, over the concrete and, just before the enemies get up to the concrete, drop down to the floor and run to the bottom of the short ladder. The enemies should come down and run into the double pit on the right. Quickly run out to the right, over the enemies. Drop onto the last piece of gold, over on the right and the hidden ladders appear. Phew! P. S. Another way to trap the left hand enemy in the false brick is to get him to follow you up the leftmost ladder while you run across the top and dig to drop onto the second enemy. Timing is VERY tight. You must dig and drop before the enemy climbs over the top left and runs right. Later, climb the right hand ladders to the top, wait on the left hand bar over a false brick till the leftmost enemy starts to run towards you, then drop. Wait again till he starts to drop, then dig two bricks at the right of a short ladder, go right and drop, then run left to the bottom of a short ladder. The enemy should drop through a false brick and a ladder into the false brick beneath. P. P. S. There is no room for error or hesitation in this method! Not much in the first method either!
State Of Terror
Just when you thought it was safe... fifteen levels of pure terror, using those quirky-yet-fast KGoldrunner rules. Composed by Stuart Popejoy - spopejoy@panix. com
Easy Gold
Proceed downward from platform to platform to the third from lowest. Wait at the rightmost point to get the enemies to fall to the bottom. Fall onto the lowest platform, dig above the gold and then dig right, while falling, and escape back to the top of the platform. Head upward as quickly as you can.
Fear of Heights
For each side of the terrace structure, run up the outside ladder from the bottom and fall onto the lowest platform. Run up the center ladder and wait at a gap for enemies from the outside ladders to fall. Fall after them to get to the gold. After collecting the gold, run right, across the top with enemies in tow, and fall to the right of the outside ladder. As the enemies fall after you, run back up the ladder and fall on top of the enemies to get to the pole.
The Spiral
Work your way out of the spiral, digging to trap enemies just before you emerge from the tunnels. Proceed up to the top left. As you run right, drop into the zig-zag area before the enemy does, so as to get to the top side at the right. After collecting the gold, dig to trap enemies at the bottom, then exit at the top left.
Crags of Fire
Generally, dig down and go through to get the gold, then move right and up to the next crag. The top-mid crag, however, needs to be done before the second-from-left crag. Leave one piece of gold in the middle area for last. Then get out quick!
The Heist
The safest way to enter the building is to go down the top-left ladder and wait on top of the short ladder to the right. As an enemy approaches, run over him to the pole. Now go right and fall onto the balcony, then dig out and fall. Run into the lobby and up the ladder sculpture to get gold. Fall off to the left onto the concrete block and wait for the enemies to bunch up. Fall left and run back outside to the concrete outcropping with the enemies following. Use the same ladder and pole to get back in. Run to the very top of the building up the rightmost ladders. Stand at the leftmost point of the roof. Wait for an enemy to fall below you, then step back, dig and fall after him to the balcony, where you can collect three gold pieces. If you wait long enough on the roof before falling you can persuade several enemies to follow and become trapped on the balcony. Use the ladders on the right to collect the remaining gold and exit.
Endless Enemies (1)
Collect the gold by working from top to bottom. Before the last gold, dig to the right of it and left of the enemy. Run up as fast as you can.
Torture Chamber
Fall off the ledge, digging left to go left up the ladder. Continue left from the pole, then fall while digging left and collect some gold. Go right, fall through the false brick below the ladder, continue right and fall through a brick tunnel to the pole below. Head right and fall through another brick tunnel while digging right. Dig and trap the enemy, next to the ladder, run up and left then dig and fall to collect the gold. Dig to trap the enemy again. When the first hole fills, run up to the top of the section with the enemy following. Dig at the left to collect gold and fall back onto the pole. Now head left and fall through a brick tunnel, digging left to trap the next enemy. Go to the upper left of the section, then fall and dig left and jump left to reach the platform at the bottom left. You can now navigate the spiral of ladders and brick tunnels to pick up four more gold pieces. After that, go back out to the right, fall and walk over the enemy trapped at the bottom, to return to the right hand half of the play area. Head up the ladders to the upper right, then fall, digging right twice, to gather the last piece of gold. Repeat falling in the brick tunnel to the right and digging right to trap the enemy. Finally, escape via the right hand side of the play area.
Endless Cascade
Quickly go right and down the staircase, with the enemy following. Dig once, about halfway down. After the last gold piece, dig and go up on the underladder. Wait under the next brick down from where the enemy is trapped. The enemy will climb out and descend, Run through the opening where he was, before it closes. You can then use him to move over to the next underladder to the right. Run to the top of the underladder, over and down the staircase. Dig left while standing on the enemy and then dig right, underneath the enemy, when you are next him. Run over him, to collect any gold he has, and then down a few steps. Dig and go up the underladder, to wait for him to be reborn and come down your staircase, so that you can use him to move across to the next underladder. Repeat for the remaining staircases to the right until you can get to the top pole. Go across to the far left and fall to the top brick of the bottom left section. Collect all the gold, leaving the piece on the far left of the second staircase for last, otherwise you will fall and be trapped. Evade the enemies by running up ladders and luring them onto steps. Run all the way to the right and up the last ladder. Dig as necessary to outwit the enemies, proceeding through the remaining cascades and up the ladders on the far right to end the level.
Infiltration
Run fast and dig well... At the innermost chamber, stand on the leftmost or rightmost brick on top and dig the next brick in towards the center. Fall onto the enemy and run right or left, then dig to trap him. You will have to be quick!
Endless Enemies (2)
Go left and fall on the gold, then go right to collect the next two pieces. Wait, high up on a pole at the far right of the play area, for the enemies to collect at the bottom right. Now go left and down and fall on the leftmost, bottom gold. Ignore the last gold for now, but go right and up along three poles and up three ladders. Step left off the third ladder while digging left, to prepare a trap for the enemy in the box on the left. Quickly go back down, fall on the last gold and prepare to move up and left in a hurry as a short hidden ladder appears below and to your left. The enemies swarm after you, but keep going till you get back to where you set the trap. The enemy should be in it now. Continue up and left over a short ladder, then down and left over long poles and ladders to the next short ladder. Go up and left again, then up and right over more long ladders and poles to the top of the screen.
Tunnels (1) - The Monster
The monster is made almost completely of false bricks. Analyze the concrete parts of his body, to determine where to fall and where not to fall. All four enemies will have to be trapped above particular concrete pieces, to enable you to reach certain gold pieces. Trap the enemies by using KGoldrunner rules to your advantage. Wait on the top pole at the point where you want the enemy to fall. As he approaches you, fall onto a lower pole and move left or right to avoid the enemy's fate. This is how he falls into danger while you fall to safety.
Breaking and Entering
Break into the bottom left room, then proceed to the top right. Head left, grab the gold and escape by digging down to the middle floor. Continue all the way down to the bottom right. Before collecting the second gold piece, hang from the top pole in the center room of the bottom floor and dig one brick from the two-brick wall at the right. Run left over the enemies' heads, grab the gold and escape back through the dug brick. Run up to the top right room, then to the lower left area via the center. Dodge the enemies any way you can and climb up to the top left room. To get out of the building, dig rapidly while falling next to the left wall.
Tunnels (2) - The Honeycomb
Go to the top of the central ladder and work on the left side first. Fall onto ledge with gold. Outwit enemy to run through fake brick below ladder. While falling, dig left; run up ladder to gap and wait for enemy to fall in, escape, and fall in again to your dug brick; run up and left on pole, fall onto ledge while digging left, fall left, get gold, go right and fall into chamber while enemy spawns; get gold. You can dig into bottom chamber if you wish here. The other chambers are all accessible by dropping through fake brick tunnels. Dodge the enemies or fall on them to get the gold. To reach the right hand side, fall down the fake brick tunnel next to the central ladder and run fast to the right, digging behind you to trap the enemies. Collect the gold by going to the top and dropping through fake brick tunnels to the right of each piece.
Four Chambers Suspended
First Chamber. Dig down to collect the top left piece of gold. Fall onto the enemies to get the gold on the right. Dodge them to pick up the rest. Trap the enemies high on the right while you dig out through the bottom of the chamber. As you emerge, you must drop straight onto the ladder next to the concrete. Climb down that ladder, under the concrete to the right and then up to the top of the next chamber. Second Chamber. Proceed left to right with the shafts, using your digging skills to get the gold. On the rightmost shaft, dig left while falling, then fall left while digging both left and right. In the three-brick platform now remaining, dig the left brick, then the right and the center while falling right. Pick up the gold on the right and fall onto the last gold piece while digging left. Dig left again, fall onto the ladder next to the concrete, as before, and go on up to the next chamber. Third Chamber. Dig right, fall on the left gold piece and immediately dig right to trap the enemy, then dig and exit left. Repeat, one brick over, for the gold piece on the right. Now go back to the top and fall into the lower section, on top of the enemy. Take the short pole left and step across the falling enemy to grab the long pole going left. Fall on the gold, dig to trap the enemy, dig again and exit left. Repeat for the other hanging gold piece. This time dig down and out, onto the ladder next to the concrete, and so to the last chamber. Fourth Chamber. Trap the enemy, run to the top, dig through to the concrete on the left, wait for the enemy and fall on him to get at more gold on the left. When all the gold in this chamber is gone, run to the bottom and fall through to the floor. Now pick up the rest of the gold and get out quick.
Ruins
Fall on the enemy, dig below the gap on the right, then quickly go right, over his head. Pick up the gold, fall through a false brick, run up the ladder to the right and go to the right along the lower pole. Dig to the right (which traps the second enemy), get the gold, fall, dig left, fall, collect two gold pieces and go up two ladders. Move to the left via a false brick - the second enemy should still be trapped below. Go left to the ladder, down, then left and down through a false brick. Collect one gold, dig on the right, get three gold, dig and go up all the ladders on the right. Go left on the pole again, but this time climb upwards. Get one gold and dig right to trap another enemy. Move up to the top, go right, fall and continue to the concrete area at top center. Outwit the enemy in the concrete area, then exit by falling on him and moving to the gap on the left and down through two false bricks. Hold onto the pole at center screen, go right and back on up to the top. Move left on the pole and wait for the other enemy to enter the concrete area. Pick up the top gold, fall and exit left again, leaving two enemies trapped in the concrete. Go back up to the top again, but this time continue left towards the top-left corner of the screen. When you get up there, dig, fall through onto some gold and dig left twice while falling further. Now fall down the leftmost shaft and dig the brick that blocks the shaft. Wait for the enemy below to step into the shaft, then fall on him in order to collect the gold encased in concrete. Drop onto the remaining gold and fall to the bottom-left corner. Run right and up, right again, fall on three gold pieces and move on to the mid-bottom section. Outwit the enemy, go to the topmost ladder on the right, dig twice and fall through one gold and three bricks while digging right. Exit right to get more gold, then climb the ladder, dig and fall to collect another two gold pieces. Climb the ladder again, take the pole left, go up and then right to claim four gold pieces. Dig at the right-hand end and fall through three false bricks. Fall into the chamber, going right and digging left. Dig on the lower left to get out, then go back up to the pole and fall to onto the gold in this chamber. Exit right this time, collect some gold and climb up, up, up. Outwit the enemies in the upper-right area. It is possible to lure them into the chamber below by running ahead of them up the ladders. Collect the rightmost mid-level gold second to last and the gold at the bottom right last of all. Get out quick!
Advanced Tutorial
This tutorial is preparation for some of the things you might find in the middle levels of the'Initiation 'game. Enjoy...
Bars and Ladders
There is nowhere to dig, so you must dodge the enemies and avoid falling to the concrete at the wrong time. Try to keep the enemies together. If an enemy has gold coloring, he is holding a nugget. He might drop it as he runs over the concrete or maybe at the top of a ladder... patience, patience!
To kill...
You cannot get up to the gold, so you must get the enemies to bring it down to you. But how do you get them to keep going back? If you are feeling stressed, you can hit the Pause key (default P or Esc) and take a break. Also, you can use the Settings menu to slow down the action.
... Or not to kill?
It is best not to kill the enemy. Try it and you will find out why... Heh, heh, heh! If you do kill him unintentionally, before you have collected the gold at the top left, you can still finish the level by digging away the side of the pit he is in.
Traps
Some of the bricks here are not what they seem. They are known as false bricks, fall-through bricks or traps. If you try to walk on them, you fall through. If the enemies walk on them, they can descend on you without warning. Sometimes you have to fall through a brick to get some gold. At the start, jump into the concrete pit, dig and drop through. That will get one enemy tied up for a while...
Bye...
This is just a nice easy level to finish up with. Have fun with the other games in KGoldrunner. Note that there is a game Editor in which you and your friends can make up levels and challenge each other. And if you like action, the KGoldrunner rules used in some of the games are fast and furious. There is also a KGoldrunner Handbook in the Help Menu, which contains more detail than this Tutorial. It has been a pleasure showing you around. Bye!
Tutorial
This tutorial is a collection of easy levels that teaches you the rules of KGoldrunner and helps you develop the skills you need to get started. It uses the Traditional set of rules, similar to those used on early home-computers. Each level has a brief explanation, then you play... When you move on to play more advanced levels, you will find that KGoldrunner combines action, strategy and puzzle solving --- all in one game.
Hi!
Hi! Welcome to KGoldrunner! The idea of the game is to pick up all the gold nuggets, then climb to the top of the playing area and move up to the next level. A hidden ladder will appear as you collect the last nugget. The hero, at the top left, is your deputy. To collect the nuggets, just point the mouse where you want him to go. At first gravity takes over and he falls...
Navigation
This is an exercise in moving around. Follow the track of gold nuggets until the ladder pops up at the right. The hero can only follow the mouse along simple paths (like _ | L or U), so be careful not to get too far ahead of him. DANGER: Try not to fall off the ladder or bar into the concrete pit at the bottom right. If you do get trapped there, the only way out is to kill the hero (press key Q for quit) and start the level again.
Digging
Now you have to dig to get the gold! Just use the left and right mouse buttons to dig left or right of the hero's position. The hero can then jump into and through the hole he has dug. He can also dig several holes in a row and run sideways through the dug holes. Be careful though. After a while the holes close up and you can get trapped and killed. In the third box down, you have to dig two holes, jump in and quickly dig one more, to get through two layers. On the right, you have to dig three, then two then one to get through. There are also two little puzzles to work out along the way. Good luck! By the way, you can dig through brick, but not concrete.
You Have ENEMIES!
Well, it has been nice and easy up to now, but the game would be no fun without enemies. They are after the gold too: worse still they are after you! You die if they catch you, but maybe you will have a few lives left and can start again. You can handle enemies by running away, digging a hole or luring them into part of the playing area where they get stranded. If an enemy falls into a hole, he gives up any gold he is carrying, then gets stuck in the hole for a time and climbs out. If the hole closes while he is in it, he dies and reappears somewhere else on the screen. You can deliberately kill enemies by digging several holes in a row. More importantly, you can run over an enemy's head. You should do that right at the start of this level. Dig a hole, trap the enemy, wait for him to fall all the way in, then run over him, with the other enemy in hot pursuit... If you are feeling stressed, you can hit the Pause key at any time (default P or Esc) and take a break. Hit it again when you wish to continue.
Bars
You can move horizontally along bars (or poles), but if you move down you will let go and fall... Also, note that you can collect gold by falling onto it.
False Bricks
Some of the bricks in this level are not what they seem. If you walk onto them you fall through. The enemies fall through them too.
Challenge
These tricky little levels were composed by Peter, Simon, Genevieve and their father Ian Wadham. They use traditional playing rules. Enjoy!
Easy Start
Drop through the false brick under the bar.
Mobile Bricks
Just run over the enemies' heads.
The Big Haul
Advance to the right and trap the oncoming enemies. Now retreat under the enemies who are falling behind you, then dig, dig, dig and kill all the enemies. Now go right and clear out all the brick and ladder structures in right-to-left order.
Quick Off The Mark
Move very quickly to the left to start. Keep digging until the enemies have brought down all the gold. Retreat to higher ground and dig there, if necessary.
Who Needs Enemies?
Keep digging rows of three bricks next to the ladder.
Asymmetrical
Leave the bottom left nugget till last. False bricks give you access to most of the nuggets, but they are not symmetrically placed.
Goldrunner Prophecy
Peter W. composed this in 1985. Do you see the prophetic letters GR? Spooky! When you collect the row of gold at bottom left, wait there and the first enemy will obligingly fall into the pit above you. When you move over to the right side, collect all nuggets except the three hanging under a ladder. Leave them till last. To get the gold above the trapped enemy, climb the ladder, dig down four bricks, wait till they start to re-appear, then dig one more, climb back up, re-dig the first two and the way will be clear to fall in, collect the gold and escape over the enemy's head. When you release the enemy, retreat quickly to where you can trap and kill him. After one or two tries he will re-appear harmlessly over on the left.
The Rosette
Try to get all the enemies together, by going to the middle then down. Now trap them in the trough at the bottom, ignoring the gold there for now. Stand on one side just above the trough, then drop down one square as the enemies get above the trough. Collect all the gold not in the trough, then release the enemies and lead them around over the tops of ladders, until they drop their gold.
He Has The Gold
The right hand enemy gets trapped holding some gold. You can kill him and destroy the gold by digging to the left of the small ladder. You may need to kill the other enemy and trap him in there too.
Towers of Gold
Before you kill any enemies, you must collect all the gold in the tops of the towers and above the bars. One place to get started is just under the second tower from the left. Dig once to trap the first enemy that comes towards you, run right to clear some gold, step back and trap the second enemy just to the left of the third tower. Now run right, with three enemies in hot pursuit and very much alive!
The Box
Dig the two bricks next to a ladder, then look for fall-through bricks.
Delayed Drop
The enemy on the left falls before you can get past the one on the right. So stay up there with him, repeatedly digging one hole and trapping him, until the second enemy gets back up the ladders and well clear of the concrete.
Maze of Ladders
Move to left of centre and go high, then you can drop and move left or right to get all the gold. Leave the nugget in the U-shaped space till last. Ignore the enemy. Let him stay trapped.
Ride Them Down
Quickly get the first two enemies into the double pit to the left of the gold. First get both of them into the little box, then release them left. Now fall onto them and collect the gold, then ride the third enemy down and use him to get across to the ladder.
Hair's Breadth Timing
At top centre dig two bricks. As they re-appear, dig two more, run across the top and dig next to the short ladder. Drop in and collect the gold. You have no time to spare! Clear the bottom left last. To go right, fall into a false brick under a short ladder, then climb along just under the concrete. In the middle of the right hand side, stand under the right hand bar next to the hole, dig left, drop into a false brick, then dig twice more, moving down and left. Lastly, stand on the short ladder, dig your escape brick on the right, run like mad round to the hole, drop in, collect the gold, fall through some bricks and dig again to escape.
The Three Musketeers
You have to kill all three Musketeers, so that they fill the false bricks under the gap in the bars at the top. Ignore d'Artagnan at the bottom right. You only walk over him to get a nugget. Collect the gold left to right across the bottom of the play area, then right to left across the top. Be sure to leave the nugget left of centre on the concrete. Collect that one last. Before you do so, dig away a row of three bricks above and to the left of it, then exit to the next level along roughly the same route as you used earlier.
Rat Trap
Move ultra-quickly to trap the two enemies and run over them. If you wait till they are almost touching you, they may both survive, then you can run up and around to the bottom right, descend the ladder to the concrete and trap them permanently in the nearby pit. If one gets stuck in the tower structure, use the same trick. There are false bricks in the bottom of the tower. If one is trapped and still has some gold, dig one hole at the right hand end of the pit, go back down the ladder and lead the enemy to his death, whereupon the gold will be destroyed.
Head Case
This is a warmup for a later level. To get the gold at the right, descend onto the enemy's head, release him to the left, move left after him and, as you ride down on his head, dig right. You can then run in, get the gold and exit before the brick closes. If you move to the bottom right corner, you can get the enemy to fall into the hole containing gold.
Under the Stairs
Start by killing the enemies. When they fall into the space at the right, move down and to the left to get them to drop further in and stop them getting the gold. If they go more than one third of the way in, they will be permanently trapped. Now tackle the three dig-and-run puzzles. You may have to make several trips to empty an area. Finally, collect the rightmost nugget.
Bertie Beetle
The top of this one is similar to the Head Case level (13). Trap the enemy to the right near the top of the ladder. Run down the ladder part way and get him to fall into the first of the pits. You will need to repeat this a few times. Now you must get the enemy into the pit at the far bottom left, so that you can run over him as you get the gold from inside the beetle. Trap the enemy at the end of the row of bricks under the beetle's antennae. Stand on his head, dig right and drop down. Step right, dig left and trap him again as he runs in after you. Run down to the left, dig the brick to the right of the pit and trap him again. Collect the nugget, dig left and escape left onto the concrete. As the enemy climbs out he will fall into the pit.
Short Circuit
Go anti-clockwise around the circuit and take an enemy with you, trapping him in the pits at bottom left, lower right and upper right. Then you can run across the concrete and collect the gold up there. Next, clear out all of the left side except for one nugget above a ladder. To get this one, release the second enemy and take him all the way around the circuit. Follow him up the long ladder, staying on it till he runs over to the left and falls. Now go to the left end of the concrete as he circulates around the left side of the play area. As he falls past your feet, run over to the small ladder and get the gold. To get past the lower left pit, stand on the enemy and dig left. When you fall, dig right and escape, but stay low until the bricks close, then you can use the short ladder to lead the enemy up, across, down and out. To operate the lower right pit, go and get the gold in the centre of the circuit, then dig each side of the short ladder there. Fall to the left as the enemy is caught on the right. When the enemy emerges, he will go right and drop into the pit. Stand on his head and dig left to release him. You can push the enemy up the right hand ladder and to the left by standing a little way from the bottom of the ladder. You will need careful timing and digging to get him into the top right pit. Once there, you can run over him. If he still has gold, stand to the left of the pit and dig repeatedly until he drops the gold somewhere on his rounds.
Synchronised Running
Yes, you must run on the enemy's head --- all the way across! All it takes is a steady hand.
& New Game...
Play Next Level
Play next level.
Try the next level in the game you are playing.
& Load Saved Game...
& Save Game...
& Show A Solution
Show how to win this level.
Play a recording of how to win this level, if there is one available.
& Instant Replay
Instant replay.
Show a recording of the level you are currently playing.
Replay & Last Level
Replay last level.
Show a recording of the last level you played and finished, regardless of whether you won or lost.
& Replay Any Level
Replay any level.
Show a recording of any level you have played so far.
& Kill Hero
Kill Hero.
Kill the hero, in case he finds himself in a situation from which he cannot escape.
& Create Level
Create level.
Create a completely new level.
Create
& Edit Level...
Edit level...
Edit any level...
Edit
& Save Edits...
Save edits...
Save your level after editing...
Save
& Move Level...
Move level...
Change a level's number or move it to another game...
& Delete Level...
Delete level...
Delete a level...
Create & Game...
Create game...
Create a completely new game...
Edit Game & Info...
Edit game info...
Change the name, rules or description of a game...
& Play Sounds
Play sound effects.
Play sound effects during the game.
& Demo At Start
Run a demo when the game starts.
& Mouse Controls Hero
Mouse controls hero.
Use the mouse to control the hero's moves.
& Keyboard Controls Hero
Keyboard controls hero.
Use the keyboard to control the hero's moves.
& Hybrid Control (Laptop)
Pointer controls hero; dig using keyboard.
Use the laptop's pointer device to control the hero's moves, and use the keyboard to dig left and right.
Normal Speed
Set normal speed.
Set normal game speed (12 units).
Beginner Speed
Set beginners' speed.
Set beginners' game speed (6 units).
Champion Speed
Set champions' speed.
Set champions' game speed (18 units).
Increase Speed
Increase speed.
Increase the game speed by one unit.
Decrease Speed
Decrease speed.
Decrease the game speed by one unit.
Stop
Move Right
Move Left
Move Up
Move Down
Dig Right
Dig Left
Do a Step
Test Bug Fix
Show Positions
Start Logging
Show Hero
Show Object
Show Enemy
Missing Name
Lives:
Score:
Level:
Press "%1" to RESUME
Press "%1" or "%2" to RESUME
Press "%1" to PAUSE
Press "%1" or "%2" to PAUSE
Has hint
No hint
Theme Not Loaded
Cannot load the theme you selected. It is not in the required graphics format (SVG).
Get Folders
Cannot find documentation sub-folder'en/ %1/ 'in area '%2' of the KDE folder ($KDEDIRS).
Cannot find system games sub-folder '%1/ system/ 'in area '%2' of the KDE folder ($KDEDIRS).
Cannot find or create user games sub-folder '%1/ user/ 'in area '%2' of the KDE user area ($KDEHOME).
Cannot find or create'levels/ 'folder in sub-folder '%1/ user/' in the KDE user area ($KDEHOME).
Edit Name/ Hint
Edit level name or hint
Edit text for the name or hint of a level
Name/ Hint
Erase
Space/ Erase
Paint empty squares or erase
Erase objects or paint empty squares
Hero
Move hero
Change the hero's starting position
Enemy
Paint enemies
Paint enemies at their starting positions
Brick
Paint bricks (can dig)
Paint bricks (diggable objects)
Concrete
Paint concrete (cannot dig)
Paint concrete objects (not diggable)
Trap
Trap/ False Brick
Paint traps or false bricks (can fall through)
Ladder
Paint ladders
Paint ladders (ways to go up or down)
H Ladder
Hidden Ladder
Paint hidden ladders
Paint hidden ladders, which appear when all the gold is gone
Bar
Bar/ Pole
Paint bars or poles
Paint bars or poles (can fall from these)
Gold
Gold/ Treasure
Paint gold (or other treasure)
Paint gold pieces (or other treasure)
Score:
Lives:
Edit Name & Hint
Name of level:
Hint for level:
Edit Game Info
Name of game:
File name prefix:
Traditional rules
KGoldrunner rules
About this game:
Create Game
Save Changes
0 levels
Save New
Select Saved Game
Game Level/ Lives/ Score Day Date Time
Create Level
You cannot create and save a level until you have created a game to hold it. Try menu item "Create Game".
Edit Level
You cannot edit and save a level until you have created a game and a level. Try menu item "Create Game".
It is OK to edit a system level, but you MUST save the level in one of your own games. You are not just taking a peek at the hidden ladders and fall-through bricks, are you?: -)
Save Level
Do you want to insert a level and move existing levels up by one?
& Insert Level
& Cancel
Cannot open file '%1 'for output.
Move Level
Game
Editor
You must first load a level to be moved. Use the "%1" or "%2" menu.
You cannot move a level until you have created a game and at least two levels. Try menu item "Create Game".
Sorry, you cannot move a system level.
You must change the level or the game or both.
Delete Level
You cannot delete a level until you have created a game and a level. Try menu item "Create Game".
Do you want to delete a level and move higher levels down by one?
& Delete Level
Cannot find file '%1 'to be deleted.
Save Game Info
You must enter a name for the game.
You must enter a filename prefix for the game.
The filename prefix should not be more than 5 characters.
The filename prefix should be all alphabetic characters.
The filename prefix '%1 'is already in use.
You have not saved your work. Do you want to save it now?
& Save
& Do Not Save
& Go on editing
You can only modify user games.
New Level
%1 - %2
%1 - %2 - %3
Play Next Level
There are no more levels in this game.
Inappropriate action: you are not editing a level.
Game Paused
The replay has stopped and the game is pausing while you prepare to go on playing. Please press the Pause key (default P or Esc) when you are ready.
Replay Last Level
ERROR: Could not find and replay a recording of the last level you played.
There is no last level to replay. You need to play a level to completion, win or lose, before you can use the Replay Last Level action.
Quick Start
& PLAY
Start playing this level
Set up to start playing the game and level being shown, as soon as you click, move the mouse or press a key
& Quit
Close KGoldrunner
Start a different game or level
Use the Select Game dialog box to choose a different game or level and start playing it
& Use Menu
Use the menus to choose other actions
Before playing, use the menus to choose other actions, such as loading a saved game or changing the theme
The game is halted. You will need to press the Pause key (default P or Esc) when you are ready to play.
Show A Solution
Sorry, although all levels of KGoldrunner can be solved, no solution has been recorded yet for the level you selected.
Replay Any Level
Sorry, you do not seem to have played and recorded the selected level before.
GAME OVER!!! Would you like to try this level again?
Game Over
& Try Again
& Finish
CONGRATULATIONS!!!! You have conquered the last level in the "%1" game!!
Hint
Sorry, there is no hint for this level.
T H E E N D
You have pressed a key that can be used to control the Hero. Do you want to switch automatically to keyboard control? Pointer control is easier to use in the long term - like riding a bike rather than walking!
Switch to Keyboard Mode
Switch to & Keyboard Mode
Stay in & Mouse Mode
Keyboard Mode
Save Game
Sorry, you cannot save your game play while you are editing. Please try menu item "%1".
Cannot open file '%1 'for read-only.
Please note: for reasons of simplicity, your saved game position and score will be as they were at the start of this level, not as they are now.
Error: Failed to save your game.
Load Game
Sorry, there are no saved games.
Cannot find the game with prefix '%1 '.
Unknown
Check for High Score
Congratulations!!! You have achieved a high score in this game. Please enter your name so that it may be enshrined in the KGoldrunner Hall of Fame.
Save High Score
Error: Failed to save your high score.
Show High Scores
Sorry, we do not keep high scores for tutorial games.
Sorry, there are no high scores for the "%1" game yet.
KGoldrunner Hall of Fame "%1" Game
Rank
Name
Level
Score
Date
High Scores
Load Game Info
Cannot find game info file '%1 '.
Reached end of file '%1 'before finding end of game-data.
Read Level Data
Cannot find file '%1 '.
Reached end of file '%1 'without finding level data.
Rename File
Cannot delete previous version of file '%1 '.
Cannot rename file '%1 'to '%2'.
Select Level
Sorry, you can only save or move into one of your own games.
Sorry, you can only delete a level from one of your own games.
Sorry, you can only edit the game information on your own games.
There is no level %1 in "%2", so you cannot play or edit it.
Select Game
Please select a game:
Name of Game
Rules
Levels
Skill
Level 1 of the selected game is:
Select Game/ Level
Please select a level:
Level number:
Edit Level Name & & Hint
Start Game
Play Level
Replay Level
Show Solution
Save Change
Move To...
Traditional
Normal
Championship
Sorry, there is no further information about this game.
This level number is not valid. It can not be used.
The main button at the bottom echoes the menu action you selected. Click it after choosing a game and level - or use "Cancel".
If this is your first time in KGoldrunner, select the tutorial game, which gives you hints as you go. Otherwise, just click on the name of a game in the table, then, to start at level 001, click on the main button at the bottom. Play begins when you move the mouse or press a key.
You can select System levels for editing (or copying), but you must save the result in a game you have created. Use the left mouse-button as a paintbrush and the editor toolbar buttons as a palette. Use the'Erase 'button or the right mouse-button to erase. You can drag the mouse with a button held down and paint or erase multiple squares.
You can add a name and hint to your new level here, but you must save the level you have created into one of your own games. By default your new level will go at the end of your game, but you can also select a level number and save into the middle of your game.
You can create or edit a name and hint here, before saving. If you change the game or level, you can do a copy or "Save As", but you must always save into one of your own games. If you save a level into the middle of a series, the other levels are automatically re-numbered.
You can only delete levels from one of your own games. If you delete a level from the middle of a series, the other levels are automatically re-numbered.
To move (re-number) a level, you must first select it by using "Edit Any Level...", then you can use "Move Level..." to move it to a new number or even a different game. Other levels are automatically re-numbered as required. You can only move levels within your own games.
When editing game info you only need to choose a game, then you can go to a dialog where you edit the details of the game.
Click on the table to choose a game. In the table and below it you can see more information about the selected game, including how many levels there are, how difficult the game is and what rules the enemies follow (see the KGoldrunner Handbook). You select a level number by typing it or using the spin box or scroll bar. As you vary the game or level, the thumbnail area shows a preview of your choice.
Help: Select Game & Level
KGoldrunner is a game of action and puzzle solving
(C) 2003 Ian Wadham and Marco Krüger
Ian Wadham
Current author
Marco Krüger
Original author
Mauricio Piacentini
Port to KDE4, Qt4 and KGameCanvas classes
Maurizio Monge
KGameCanvas classes for KDE4
Artwork for runners and default theme
Johann Ollivier Lapeyre
Artwork for bars and ladders
Eugene Trounev
Artwork for background of Geek City theme
Luciano Montanaro
Nostalgia themes, improvements to runners, multiple-backgrounds feature, fade-in/ fade-out feature and several other ideas
Artwork for the Treasure of Egypt theme
Your game has been saved.
Start Tutorial
Cannot find the tutorial game (file-prefix '%1 ') in the '%2' files.
Kill hero
& Traditional Rules
Set Traditional rules for this game
KGoldrunner Rules
Set KGoldrunner rules for this game
Use Menu
GAME OVER!!!
Retry Level?
Check Games & Levels
There are no files '%1/ %2???. grl 'for the %3 game.
File '%1 'is beyond the highest level for the %2 game and cannot be played.
File '%1 'is before the lowest level for the %2 game and cannot be played.
Cannot find file '%1 'for the %2 game.