# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	technical
# genre_narrow:	NA
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	GNOME
# source:	https://object.pouta.csc.fi/OPUS-GNOME/v1/raw/en.zip
# copyright_short:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php
# copyright_long:	http://opus.nlpl.eu/GNOME.php J. Tiedemann, 2012, Parallel Data, Tools and Interfaces in OPUS. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2012)
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

@@image: 'figures/move_object_before.png'; md5=db85522123cc18d15a87b71ed2856fd3
@@image: 'figures/move_object_arrows.png'; md5=14708f1edd48a84a861819b5fc16820b
@@image: 'figures/move_object_push.png'; md5=810dfbd14b4259ce732963a0b72b1ed9
@@image: 'figures/move_object_jump.png'; md5=424967c951eb27a96ebce26711e62cc2
@@image: 'figures/button.png'; md5=53cd1fd7b179068753b4c6d2eb4d3261
@@image: 'figures/radio_button.png'; md5=c0ba3100eedc9b36635032e1432bda0b
@@image: 'figures/check_box.png'; md5=4ee0fe6be90e8084499476dbe7d42eca
@@image: 'figures/text_box.png'; md5=7f69292d1ab4162d95791e37355244b4
@@image: 'figures/spin_box.png'; md5=a413f3913e3456411482c3663a1c3248
@@image: 'figures/dropdown_list_box.png'; md5=942d41fc508f23362d8c9c1a92988c45
@@image: 'figures/dropdown_combination_box.png'; md5=c28106adee3335e7c4c7daeaa0469c59
@@image: 'figures/slider.png'; md5=d0b6e9e5a9625576006828967a3813a9
@@image: 'figures/tabbed_section.png'; md5=c64b36d9e27b0cd69caaff98c24c1c4d
@@image: 'figures/tree.png'; md5=0bb1b6f07b3fab52dddfa4bab9f1e5d4
@@image: 'figures/General_Tab.png'; md5=08263eab0b7d8d55db446a8dba0190a3
@@image: 'figures/MainWindow.png'; md5=eeb0e30c4f36e4e67be503466684b4bf
@@image: 'figures/Speech_Tab.png'; md5=f03ff23d66be0b0b180c48659fb70320
@@image: 'figures/Braille_Tab.png'; md5=f081d26013e1cb82f12577c272c5e140
@@image: 'figures/KeyEcho_Tab.png'; md5=3f3c48f821872197310bc8cecdbf9e0b
@@image: 'figures/Magnifier_Tab.png'; md5=3e6a9ce37ef94c37349f18140005298b
@@image: 'figures/Magnifier_Advanced.png'; md5=a9ad53601a7d1258bc4720e665990892
@@image: 'figures/KeyBindings_Tab.png'; md5=045c3481ad0d6ea87c8f7eab5eef6c94
@@image: 'figures/KeyBindings_Tab_Unbound.png'; md5=e9432b533dcc0dc9795326fd8c85cb46
@@image: 'figures/Pronunciation_Tab.png'; md5=893878692efb3d533e5cca826e5927c0
@@image: 'figures/TextAttributes_Tab.png'; md5=ad6d90aa9731c6430d4524a560292407
GNOME Desktop Accessibility Guide
The GNOME Accessibility Guide is for users, system administrators, and anyone else who is interested in how the GNOME Desktop supports people with disabilities. This guide also addresses the requirements of Section 508 of the U.S. Rehabilitation Act.
2006
Don Scorgie
Brent Smith
2005
2004
2003
2002
Sun Microsystems, Inc.
GNOME Documentation Project
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License (GFDL), Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. You can find a copy of the GFDL
This manual is part of a collection of GNOME manuals distributed under the GFDL. If you want to distribute this manual separately from the collection, you can do so by adding a copy of the license to the manual, as described in Section 6 of the license.
Many of the names used by companies to distinguish their products and services are claimed as trademarks. Where those names appear in any GNOME documentation, and the members of the GNOME Documentation Project are made aware of those trademarks, then the names are in capital letters or initial capital letters.
DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES THAT THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS FREE OF DEFECTS MERCHANTABLE, FIT FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGING. THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY, ACCURACY, AND PERFORMANCE OF THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS WITH YOU. SHOULD ANY DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION PROVE DEFECTIVE IN ANY RESPECT, YOU (NOT THE INITIAL WRITER, AUTHOR OR ANY CONTRIBUTOR) ASSUME THE COST OF ANY NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION. THIS DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY CONSTITUTES AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THIS LICENSE. NO USE OF ANY DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT IS AUTHORIZED HEREUNDER EXCEPT UNDER THIS DISCLAIMER; AND
UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES AND UNDER NO LEGAL THEORY, WHETHER IN TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE), CONTRACT, OR OTHERWISE, SHALL THE AUTHOR, INITIAL WRITER, ANY CONTRIBUTOR, OR ANY DISTRIBUTOR OF THE DOCUMENT OR MODIFIED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT, OR ANY SUPPLIER OF ANY OF SUCH PARTIES, BE LIABLE TO ANY PERSON FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OF ANY CHARACTER INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF GOODWILL, WORK STOPPAGE, COMPUTER FAILURE OR MALFUNCTION, OR ANY AND ALL OTHER DAMAGES OR LOSSES ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO USE OF THE DOCUMENT AND MODIFIED VERSIONS OF THE DOCUMENT, EVEN IF SUCH PARTY SHALL HAVE BEEN INFORMED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
DOCUMENT AND MODIFIED VERSIONS OF THE DOCUMENT ARE PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THE GNU FREE DOCUMENTATION LICENSE WITH THE FURTHER UNDERSTANDING THAT:
Vincent
Alexander
Don
Scorgie
Brent
Smith
Sun
Java Desktop System Documentation Team
GNOME 2.24 Desktop Accessibility Guide V2.24.0
September 2008
GNOME 2.10 Desktop Accessibility Guide V2.10.1
July 2005
Sun Java Desktop System Documentation Team
GNOME 2.10 Desktop Accessibility Guide V2.10.0
March 2005
GNOME 2.8 Desktop Accessibility Guide V2.8.0
September 2004
GNOME 2.6 Desktop Accessibility Guide V2.6.0
March 2004
Sun Microsystems
GNOME 2.4 Desktop Accessibility Guide V2.4.0
October 2003
GNOME 2.2 Desktop Accessibility Guide V2.2.0
February 2003
GNOME 2.0 Desktop for the Solaris Operating Environment Accessibility Guide V2.1
January 2003
GNOME 2.0 Desktop for the Solaris Operating Environment Accessibility Guide V2.0
December 2002
This manual describes version 2.24 of the GNOME Desktop.
Feedback
To report a bug or make a suggestion regarding the GNOME Desktop or this manual, follow the directions in the
Introduction to Accessibility
Section 508
This chapter introduces you to accessibility in the GNOME Desktop.
All software products should incorporate accessibility features to enable people with disabilities to use the software easily and efficiently. Recent legislation such as Section 508 of the U.S. Rehabilitation Act heightens awareness of the need to provide accessible software.
The GNOME Desktop is easy to use and incorporates many accessibility features. Every supported application and utility in the GNOME Desktop is designed with accessibility and usability in mind. Users with physical disabilities such as low vision or impaired motor skills can use all of the functionality of the GNOME Desktop thanks to the customization tools that are available. These customization tools enable you to fine-tune the appearance and behavior of the desktop.
The ability to easily customize the GNOME Desktop contributes greatly to the accessibility of the desktop. This guide describes the various options available to meet your particular needs.
Quick Reference
To jump to a specific topic, follow these quick reference links:
To hear screen elements spoken to you, see the
If you need large print, read about
To have some or all of the screen magnified, see the
If you prefer a pointing device over the keyboard, you can configure an on-screen keyboard for point-and-click typing; see the
If you can only press one key at a time, see the Sticky Keys portion of the
If you tend to press keys for too long a time (normally causing inadvertant extra keys), see the Slow Keys portion of the
If you tend to press keys multiple times (normally causing inadvertant extra keys), see the Bounce Keys portion of the
For further mouse- or pointer-based accessibility support, see the
General Accessibility Tips
A number of technologies can be of assistance to people with different types of disabilities. These are covered in this section. In particular:



Essential Keyboard Commands
Before moving forward, be sure you are familiar with these essential GNOME commands:

For Solaris and Windows systems, this key is

For Solaris systems, this key is


Accessible Login
accessible login feature
The GNOME Desktop includes an Accessible Login feature, enabling users to:
Log in to the desktop even if the user cannot easily use the screen, mouse, or keyboard in the usual way.
Launch assistive technologies at login time by associating a user action with an assistive technology application. The user can perform the user action from the standard keyboard, or from a keyboard, pointing device, or switch device that is attached to the USB or PS/2 mouse port. These user actions are called
Change the visual appearance of the login dialog before the user logs in; for example, using a high-contrast theme for better visibility.
Accessible login features are presently 100% functioning for Solaris only.
Enabling Accessible Login
GDM
In order to use the accessibility support for GNOME, the accessibility infrastructure must be enabled. To enable GNOME accessibility features from the command line, type the following command and then log out:
gconftool-2 --set "/desktop/gnome/interface/accessibility" --type boolean "True"
To enable GNOME accessibility features from a GUI, run the
The next time you log in, assistive technology support will be enabled for the desktop.
To configure GDM by using the GUI (the preferred method), perform the following steps:
Log in as the
Run
To configure GDM if you cannot access the GUI environment, you will need to navigate the file system and modify files:
Open the file
Search the file for the following line:
#AddGtkModules=false
and replace the line with the following:
AddGtkModules=true
This step enables the GtkModules.
#GtkModulesList=gail:atk-bridge:dwellmouselistener:keymouselistener
and delete the
GtkModulesList=gail:atk-bridge:dwellmouselistener:keymouselistener
The above lines must be displayed as single lines in the
This step loads all of the GtkModules to enable assistive technologies such as
If you need to use the
If you need to use a pointing device without buttons or switches, include
If you use pointing devices with switches, alternative physical keyboards, or switch and button devices, include

For optimum accessibility, include
Save the
If you make any changes to the
gdm-restart
Edit the file
,gdm
This step ensures that speech works with GDM.
Restart your system.

To enable or disable
Section "Extensions"
 Option "Composite" "Enable"
 Option "other extensions" "Enable/Disable"
EndSection
Starting Assistive Technologies at Login
gestures
If you load the
/etc/X11/gdm/modules/AccessKeyMouseEvents
/etc/X11/gdm/modules/AccessDwellMouseEvents
If you modify these files, you must restart your system before the changes take effect.
The following sections contain examples of the gestures that you can add to the GDM configuration files.
The gestures must be contained in a single line in the
Starting the Screen Reader Using a Keyboard Shortcut
Edit the
&lt;Controlgt;s 1 1000 10000 /usr/bin/orca -n -d main-window
&lt;Controlgt;m 1 1000 10000 /usr/bin/orca -n -d main-window -e magnifier
Starting On-Screen Keyboard Using a Switch or Button Gesture
Edit the
If there is a tendency for a user to start an application unintentionally, you can associate the gestures with multiple switch presses or minimum durations. For example, the following line starts
&lt;Switch2gt;3 100 2000 gok --login --accessmethod=inversescanning --scan-action=switch1 --select-action=switch2
Users who use single switches may prefer to start
&lt;Switchgt;1 4000 5000 gok --login --accessmethod=automaticscanning --scan-action=switch1 --select-action=switch1
For information about the
Starting On-Screen Keyboard Using a Motion-Only Gesture
You can define gestures that involve only the motion of a pointing device such as a mouse, or an alternative pointing device, such as a head pointer or trackball. The syntax of the gesture does not change depending on whether you are using a mouse or an alternative pointing device. Edit the
If the
For example, the following line starts
TTLLBBRR O 10000 gok --login --access-method=dwellselection --input-device=MOUSE[3]
Note that the
Additional Requirements for Accessible Login
To enable the Accessible Login feature to use alternative pointing devices and switch devices such as sip-and-puff switches, wheelchair-mounted switches or trackballs, you might need to modify your X server system configuration to recognize these devices. You can use most devices that emulate mouse buttons with the Accessible Login feature and
You should not configure an alternative input device to control the primary on-screen pointer. This might result in undesirable behavior or cause situations from which the user of the alternate input device cannot recover without using the primary keyboard or mouse. To prevent this problem, remove any occurrences of the attributes
Keyboard Desktop Navigation
This section describes how to navigate the GNOME Desktop from the keyboard only. Users who have difficulty using a mouse or other pointing device can navigate and use the desktop from the keyboard.
Introduction to Keyboard Navigation
This section describes the essential keyboard shortcuts to enable you to navigate the desktop from the keyboard.
You can customize some of the keyboard shortcuts that are described in this chapter. The text indicates the shortcuts that you can customize. See
Essential Keyboard Shortcuts
keyboard shortcuts
essential
caret navigation mode
The following table lists the essential keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate the desktop. The keyboard shortcuts that you use to navigate specific elements and controls are described in the appropriate sections of this chapter.
Keys
Function
Tab
Give focus to the next element or control.
Shift
Reverse the navigation direction and give focus to the previous element or control. In general, the
Ctrl
Give focus to the next element or control if the
To give focus to the previous element or control, press
arrow keys
Navigate within an element or control.
spacebar
Activate the element or control that has focus. For example, if the current control is a button, this action is the equivalent of clicking on the button with a mouse.
Esc
Close a window, menu, or drawer.
F7
Switch to caret navigation mode. In computing, caret navigation is a kind of keyboard navigation where a caret (also known as "text cursor", "text insertion cursor", or "text selection cursor") is used to navigate and select text within a document. For more information about caret navigation mode, see
Global Keyboard Shortcuts
global
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use from any part of the GNOME Desktop.
Alt
F1
Open the
You can customize this keyboard shortcut.
For Solaris systems, this key is
F2
Open the
For Solaris systems, this key is
Print Screen
Start the screenshot application and take a screenshot of the entire screen.
Start the screenshot application and take a screenshot of the window that currently has focus.
If the focused element is an application window or dialog, this keyboard shortcut opens the Help for the application.
If the focused element is a panel or application window, this keyboard shortcut switches the display of tooltips for the window or panel objects on and off.
F10
Open a popup menu for the element that has focus (if a popup menu exists for that element).
Navigating the Desktop Background
for desktop background
The desktop background is the part of the GNOME Desktop where there are no interface items or applications, such as panels and windows. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate the desktop background and the desktop background objects. A desktop background object is an icon on the desktop background that you can use to open files, folders, or applications.
D
Temporarily hide all windows and give focus to the desktop background.
To restore the windows, press
For Solaris systems, this key is
Display a popup window with icons that represent the desktop background and the panels. Press and hold
Give focus to a neighboring desktop background object (if the desktop has focus).
A sequence of characters that matches the first
If the desktop background has focus, give focus to the desktop background object whose name starts with the specified sequence of characters.
Rename the desktop background object that has focus.
Open the popup menu for the desktop background object that has focus.
Open the
Navigating Panels
for panels
A panel is an area from which you can run special programs, applications, and panel applications. The most common panel is the panel that stretches the full width of the bottom edge of the desktop. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate panels and panel objects.
Give focus to a panel. This keyboard shortcut displays a popup window with icons that represent the desktop background, panels, and drawers. Press and hold
Give focus to the next object on the panel.
Open the
Activate a panel object; for example, open a menu or start a launcher (icon shortcut).
Open the panel object popup menu.
Open the panel popup menu.
Moving Panel Objects
to move a panel object
You can move a focused panel object to a different location on a panel or drawer, or you can move the object to the next panel. To move a panel object, perform the following steps:
Press
Press
Use the arrow keys to select the
Use the keyboard shortcuts that are listed in the following table to perform the move operation:
Move the object left/right on a horizontal panel, or up/down on a vertical panel.

Move the object with focus, swapping positions with any other objects encountered.

Move the object, swapping positions with any other objects that you encounter in the move.
Move the object to the next panel.
Complete the move operation.
The following examples demonstrate the effect of different move operations on the objects in a panel:
Illustration
Description
Geyes
Volume Control
Help
Portion of a panel with three objects displayed in the following order from left to right:
Show a panel with three panel objects before a move operation takes place.
Shows the effect of using the arrow keys to move the
Shows the effect of using
Shows the effect of using
Panel applications that are
Navigating Drawers
for drawers
A drawer is a collapsible extension of a panel. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate into and out of drawers. When you open a drawer, you can navigate the contents of the drawer in the same way as you navigate a panel. See
Open or close the drawer that has focus.
Navigate into the drawer that has focus.
Close the drawer and give focus to the drawer object on the panel.
Navigating Panel Menus
for menus on panels
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate menus on panels:
Open the menu that has focus.
Navigate the menu.
Select a menu item.
Open the popup menu associated with a menu item (if one exists).
Close a menu.
Navigating Panel Applications
for panel applications
A panel application is a small application that resides on a panel. You can navigate to all panel applications and open the panel application popup menu from the keyboard. However, if the panel application does not contain controls that you can give focus to, you cannot navigate the controls in the panel application. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate panel applications.
Activate the panel application control that has focus, if applicable. Not all panel applications contain controls that you can activate. If the panel application does not contain a control that you can activate, the
Navigate the controls on the panel application.
Open the panel application popup menu. To navigate the menu, use the standard keyboard shortcuts for navigating menus. See
Navigating Workspaces
for workspaces
A workspace is a discrete area in which you can work. You can have many workspaces on your desktop and you can switch from one workspace to another. Each workspace can contain different windows and processes. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate workspaces:

Give focus to the next or previous workspace. This keyboard shortcut displays a popup window with icons that represent the workspaces. Press and hold

Move the window that has focus to the next or previous workspace.
Navigating Windows
for windows
The following sections describe the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate windows. A window is a rectangular frame on your screen that displays an application.
You can customize all of the keyboard shortcuts that are associated with navigating windows. See
Giving Focus to Windows
to give focus to a window
Before you can use or modify a window, you must give focus to the window. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to give focus to a window:
Display a popup window with icons that represent each window. Press and hold
Raise each window in turn until you reach the window you want.
F6
Cycle between windows belonging to the current application (eg, a multiple document interface application like
Controlling Windows
to control a window
When a window has focus, you can perform various actions on the window. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to control the window that has focus:
Open the
F4
Close the window.
Solaris:
Open
Linux:
F9
Minimize the window.
Maximize the window.
F5
Restore a maximized window to its original size.
Moving Windows
to move a window
When a window has focus, you can move the window around the screen. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to move a window:
Start the move operation. The mouse pointer changes to a cross.
Move the window 10 pixels at a time in the direction of the arrow key.
Move the window one pixel at a time in the direction of the arrow key.
Move the window in the direction of the arrow key and align it with the edge of the nearest window, panel or screen edge.
Complete the move operation, leaving the window in the current position.
Cancel the move operation, restoring the window to its original position.
Resizing Windows
to resize a window
When a window has focus, you can increase or decrease the size of the window. The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to resize the window that has focus:
F8
Start the resize operation.
Resize the window in the direction of the arrow key.
Complete the resize operation, leaving the window at the current size.
Cancel the resize operation, restoring the window to its original size.
Navigating Paned Windows
for paned windows
A paned window is a window that is split into two or more panes.
The following table describes the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate paned/split windows:
Give focus to the next pane. The system gives focus to the control that last had focus in the pane.
Give focus to the first resize handle in the window. The resize handle is displayed between the panes and enables you to resize the panes. Press
When the resize handle has focus, you can use the keyboard shortcuts that are listed in the following table to modify the paned window:
Move the resize handle by a small amount.
Move the resize handle by a large amount.
Home
Contract the pane to the minimum size allowed.
For vertical panes, reduces the size of the pane to the left of the resize handle to the minimum size allowed.
For horizontal panes, reduces the size of the pane above the resize handle to the minimum size allowed.
End
Expand the pane to the maximum size allowed.
For vertical panes, increases the size of the pane to the left of the resize handle to the maximum size allowed.
For horizontal panes, increases the size of the pane above the resize handle to the maximum size allowed.
Set the position of the resize handle and return focus to the last control that had focus.
Reset the position of the resize handle to the original position and return focus to the last control that had focus.
Navigating Applications
for applications
An application is any program, utility, or other software package that you run on your desktop. Applications contain standard user interface components:
Windows
A window is a rectangular frame on your screen that displays an application. See
Dialogs
A dialog is a popup window which displays information or accepts input from the user. See
Controls
A control is any user-interactive screen element. Examples of controls include buttons, check boxes, menus, and text boxes. See
This section of the manual describes the essential keyboard shortcuts that you can use in applications and dialogs.
Essential Keyboard Shortcuts for Navigating Applications
Since there are so many applications that you can use in the GNOME Desktop, this manual does not describe all the custom keyboard shortcuts that you can use with each individual application. However, the basic keyboard shortcuts are common to many applications.
Access keys are another way to quickly navigate applications with the keyboard. An access key is identified by an underlined letter on a menu or control. In some cases, you must press
The following table lists the essential keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate applications:
Open the first menu on the application menubar.

Open the menu that is associated with the access key.
access keys
Select the menu item that is associated with the access key.

Switch focus between the menus on the menubar.

Move focus into a menu.
Close the open menu and give focus to the control that had focus before the menubar.
O
Open the file selector dialog.
S
Open the Save dialog.
L
Open a Location dialog, enabling you to type the name of a file that you want to open or save.
P
Open a Print dialog, if available.
C
Copy highlighted text to the global, application-spanning clipboard.
X
Cut highlighted text to the global, application-spanning clipboard.
V
Paste text from the global, application-spanning clipboard to the current cursor position.
Essential Keyboard Shortcuts for Navigating Dialogs
for dialogs
The following table lists the essential keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate dialogs:
access key
Activate or select a control.
Give focus to the next control.
Page Up
Move to the next page/tabbed section of the dialog.
Page Down
Move to the previous page/tabbed section of the dialog.
Cancel/dismiss the dialog. Some application-specific dialogs may retain dialog settings, but this practice is discouraged. These dialogs usually have a single
Return
Perform the default action for the dialog. The default action will usually apply any changes and close the dialog. A default button will have a bold outline and a selected button will have a slightly bolder outline than the default button.
Navigating the File Manager
for file manager
By default, the file manager operates in
For more information about different modes for the file manager, see
Navigating Folders
The following table describes the keyboard shortcuts that enable you to navigate folders in the file manager:
Select the next or previous file or folder in the direction of the arrow key.
Give focus to the next or previous file or folder but do not select the item. This allows multiple, non-contiguous blocks of files to be selected.
Open the focused file or folder.

Select the item that currently has focus.
A sequence of characters that matches the first
Select the first file or folder that starts with the specified sequence of characters.
Select the first file or folder within the current folder.
Select the last file or folder within the current folder.
backspace
Open the current folder's parent folder.
Shift-F10
Open a file or folder popup menu.
Ctrl-F10
Open the enclosing folder's popup menu (equivalent to right-clicking on the view pane background).
Navigating Browser Window Components
When operating in
Switch focus between the side pane and the view pane.
Open the side pane popup menu.
Caret Navigation Mode
The following table describes how to use caret navigation mode (eg, in supporting applications like
Switch to caret navigation mode [Yelp-only].
left arrow
Move one character to the left.
right arrow
Move one character to the right.
up arrow
Move up one line.
down arrow
Move down one line.

Move to the beginning of the previous word.

Move to the end of the next word.
Scroll up one page of content.
Scroll down one page of content.
Move to the beginning of the current line.
Move to the end of the current line.
Move from the current position to the destination position, selecting all text between the two positions.
Move focus to the next focusable control.
Move focus to the previous focusable control.
Enter
Activate a button, link or other control.
Navigating Standard Elements and Controls
The following sections describe how to navigate and use standard user interface elements and controls from the keyboard.
Navigating Menus
for menus
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate menus:
Give focus to the next or previous menu item on a menu.
If the menu item that has focus is a submenu, open the submenu and give focus to the first menu item on the submenu.
If the menu item that has focus is not a submenu, open the next menu on the menubar.
If the menu item that has focus is a submenu item, switch the focus back to the submenu.
If the menu item that has focus is not a submenu item, open the previous menu on the menubar.
Select the focused menu item and close the open menus.
Select the menu item that is associated with the access key and close the menu.
Select the focused menu item and close the menu except when the menu item is a check box or radio button.
Close the menu.
Navigating Buttons
for buttons
A button is a control that you use to start an action. Most buttons are rectangular and contain a text label.
Sample Button
Close button.
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate buttons:
Activate the button that has focus. This is the equivalent of clicking on the button.
Activate the button that has focus or, if no button has focus, perform the default action for the dialog.
Navigating Radio Buttons
for radio buttons
A radio button is a control that you use to select one of several mutually-exclusive options.
Sample Radio Button
Two sample radio buttons.
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate a set of radio buttons:
Select the next or previous radio button and deselect the other radio buttons in the group.
Navigating Check Boxes
for check boxes
A check box is a control that you use to select or deselect an option.
Sample Check Box
Sample check box.
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate a check box:
Select or deselect the check box.
Navigating Text Boxes
for text boxes
Text boxes are controls in which you type text.
Sample Single Line Text Box
Sample text box with one input line.
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate a single line text box:
Position the cursor one character to the left.
Position the cursor one character to the right.
Position the cursor at the start of the current word. Press and hold
Position the cursor at the end of the current word. Press and hold
Position the cursor at the start of the line.
Position the cursor at the end of the line.

Select one character at a time to the left or right of the cursor.

Select one word at a time to the left or right of the cursor.
Select all text to the left of the cursor.
Select all text to the right of the cursor.
A
Select all text in the text box.
In addition to the keyboard shortcuts listed in the previous table, use the keyboard shortcuts in the following table to navigate multi-line text boxes:
Position the cursor at the top of the current view. Press
Position the cursor at the end of the current view. Press
Position the cursor at the start of the current paragraph. Press and hold
Position the cursor at the end of the current paragraph. Press and hold
Position the cursor one view width to the left.
Position the cursor one view width to the right.
Position the cursor at the start of the text box.
Position the cursor at the end of the text box.
Give focus to the next control on the dialog.
Select the text to the start of the current view. Press and hold
Select the text to the end of the current view. Press and hold
Select the text to the start of the line.
Select the text to the end of the line.
Select the text to the start of the paragraph, then to the start of the previous paragraph.
Select the text to the end of the paragraph, then to the end of the next paragraph.
Select the text to the start of the text box.
Select the text to the end of the text box.
Navigating Spin Boxes
for spin boxes
A spin box is a control that allows you to type a numeric value or select a value from a list of all possible values.
Sample Spin Box
Sample spin box. Contains a text box and up and down arrows.
The keyboard shortcuts that you use to navigate the text box area of a spin box are listed in

Increase or decrease the value of the spin box by a small amount.

Increase or decrease the value of the spin box by a large amount.
Navigating Drop-Down Lists
for drop-down lists
A drop-down list is a control that you use to select one of several available items. The drop-down list contains a button that you use to display the available items.
Sample Drop-Down List
Sample drop-down list.
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate a drop-down list:
This key performs one of the following functions:
If the drop-down list is not open, this key opens the drop-down list.
If the drop-down list is open, this key accepts the current selection and closes the list.
Select the previous list item.
Select the next list item.
Close the list without changing the selection.
Navigating Drop-Down Combination Boxes
for drop-down combination boxes
A drop-down combination box is a text box with a drop-down list attached.
Sample Drop-Down Combination Box
Sample drop-down combination box. Contains a text box and an arrow button that you click to display the drop-down list.
When the text box has focus, use the keyboard shortcuts that are listed in
Select the previous item from the drop-down list without displaying the list.
Select the next item from the drop-down list without displaying the list.
Open the drop-down list.
When the drop-down list has focus, you can use the keyboard shortcuts that are listed in the following table to navigate the drop-down list:
Select the first item in the list.
Select the last item in the list.
Select the item at the top of the current list view.
Select the item at the bottom of the current list view.
Accept the current selection and close the drop-down list.
Scroll to the left of the list, if required.
Scroll to the right of the list, if required.
Navigating Sliders
for sliders
A slider is a control that you use to set a value in a continuous range of values.
Sample Slider
Sample slider. Displays a slider control that you can move left or right.
The following table describes the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate a slider:

Move the slider left or up by a small amount.

Move the slider right or down by a small amount.
Move the slider left or up by a large amount.
Move the slider right or down by a large amount.
Move the slider to the maximum value.
Move the slider to the minimum value.
Navigating Tabbed Sections
for tabbed sections
Sample Dialog with Tabbed Sections
Terminal
Editing profile dialog from the GNOME
Windows and dialogs are sometimes divided into logical sections that are displayed one section at a time on the window or dialog. The overall control is referred to as a notebook or tabbed panel. The divisions are called panels, pages, or tabs, and are sometimes collectively referred to as a tabstrip or notebook header. Each individual tab is identified by a text label.
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate the tabbed sections of a window or dialog when a tabstrip has focus:
Give focus to the previous tabbed section.
Give focus to the next tabbed section.

Give focus to the first control in the active section.
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate a window or dialog when a control within a section has focus:
Give focus to the previous section.
Give focus to the next section.
Give focus to the next control outside the sections.
Navigating Lists
for lists
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate multi-column lists when a column header has focus:

Give focus to the previous or next column header.
Activate the header. This action usually sorts the list by the column header.
Give focus to the list contents.
The following table lists the keyboard shortcuts that you can use to navigate lists when the list area has focus:
Select the next or previous row or column.
Select the top row of the list contents that are currently in view. Press
Select the bottom row of the list contents that are currently in view. Press
Select the first row in the list.
Select the last row in the list.
For lists that support multi-line selections, add the next or previous row or column to the current selection.
For lists that only allow single line selections, select the next or previous row or column.
Select all the rows between the current selection and the top row of the view.
Select all the rows between the current selection and the bottom row of the view.
Select all the rows between the current selection and the first row in the list.
Select all the rows between the current selection and the last row in the list.
Give focus to the next row or column without extending the selection. Further items can be selected by pressing
Give focus to the top row in the view without extending the selection.
Give focus to the bottom row in the view without extending the selection.
Give focus to the first row in the list without extending the selection.
Give focus to the last row in the list without extending the selection.
Activate the item(s).
Select all rows (for lists that support multi-line selections).
Give focus to the column header, if applicable.
Navigating Trees
A tree is a user interface control that contains sections that you can expand and collapse. A tree usually represents a hierarchical structure.
Sample Tree Structure
gedit
Categories tree from the
To navigate trees, you can use the same keyboard shortcuts that are listed in

Expand the focused item.

Collapse the focused item.
Select the parent item.
F
Display a search dialog, allowing you to type the name of the tree item that you want to find. Not all trees support searching.
Customizing Your Keyboard Shortcuts
customizing
Use the
To start the
Assigning and Clearing Keyboard Shortcuts
To assign a keyboard shortcut, perform the following steps:
Click on the action for which you want to customize the keyboard shortcut. The row is highlighted and the text
Press the keys that you want to associate with the action. The new keyboard shortcut is displayed in the
To disable a keyboard shortcut, perform the following steps:
Click on the action for which you want to disable the keyboard shortcut. The row is highlighted and the text
Press the
Low Vision or Blindness
From low vision to blindness, the range of visual limitations is broad. Symptoms of low vision include dimness, haziness, extreme far-/near-sightedness, color blindness, and tunnel vision, among others. People with these disabilities are concerned with being able to see text or images on a computer screen and being able to perform tasks that require eye-hand coordination, such as moving a computer mouse. Text size and color can make a big difference in legibility for people with low vision.
The technologies that can assist those with low vision or blindness are:



Desktop Appearance Enhancement
This chapter describes the methods you can use to change the appearance of the GNOME Desktop in order to enhance the accessibility of the desktop for users with visual impairments.
Customization Options
customizing the desktop appearance
There are several ways to customize the appearance of the GNOME Desktop to suit your specific needs:
Themes
Themes are the most effective way to change the appearance of the desktop in a consistent manner. See
Desktop and Application-Specific Configuration Settings
You can customize different components of the desktop to achieve the display settings that you require. You can configure the desktop and applications in addition to using themes or as an alternative to themes. See
The following table summarizes the changes that you can make to the GNOME Desktop and where you can make the changes. This guide does not provide detailed instructions about how to customize the desktop. For detailed instructions about how to use the customization tools that the desktop provides, refer to the Help for each tool or to the
Quick Reference to Customizing the Appearance of the Desktop
To change the...
Use...
Overall appearance of the desktop using high-contrast colors, low-contrast colors, or large print.
The
Appearance of the desktop background only.
The
Appearance of the mouse pointer.
The
Font displayed on the desktop background and in all desktop applications.
The
Default font settings of the
Normally these applications use the default application font that is specified in the
Using Themes to Customize the Desktop
This section describes how to use themes to customize the appearance of the GNOME Desktop.
Introduction to Themes
themes
A theme is a group of coordinated settings that specifies how a desktop component or a group of desktop components appears. You can use themes to modify and control the appearance of the desktop in a consistent manner. When you apply a theme, the system modifies many desktop components simultaneously to achieve the desired effect. For example, if you apply a theme that increases the font size across the desktop, the theme also modifies the size of panels and icons on the desktop for optimum compatibility with the font size. Some themes have suggested font settings that may optionally be auto-set; in addition, most colors within a theme can be customized.
A theme contains settings that affect different parts of the desktop:
The controls setting for a theme determines the visual appearance of all windows, applications, panels, and panel applications. The controls setting also determines the visual appearance of the GNOME-compliant interface items that appear on windows, applications, panels, and panel applications such as menus, icons, and buttons. Some of the control options that are available in the desktop are designed for special accessibility needs.
Window Border
The window frame setting determines the appearance of the border around windows only.
Icon
The icon setting determines the appearance of icons on panels and on the desktop background.
Choosing Themes
desktop
To choose a theme, perform the following steps:
Choose
Click on a theme in the list box to choose a new theme. The system automatically applies the theme to the desktop, and may also prompt whether to apply a suggested font for the theme.
There are several themes available that suit different accessibility needs, as described in the following table:
Themes Designed for Accessibility Requirements
Theme Name
High Contrast
Provides dark text on a light background using high-contrast colors.
High Contrast Inverse
Provides light text on a dark background using high-contrast colors.
Large Print
This theme suggests an increased font size of 18pt. The background and foreground colors are the same as those specified by the
High Contrast Large Print
This theme suggests an increased font size of 18pt using dark text on a light background. To apply the suggested font, click on the
High Contrast Large Print Inverse
This theme suggests an increased font size of 18pt using light text on a dark background. To apply the suggested font, click on the
In some GNOME distributions there are also prebuilt low-contrast/low-contrast-large-print themes to complement the high-contrast theme set.
To view the controls, window frame, and icon settings that are associated with a theme, select a theme in the
Modifying the Controls Setting for a Theme
To modify the controls setting that is associated with a theme, perform the following steps:
Within the
Click on the
Click on the
Select the controls option that you want to associate with the current theme from the list box, then click
Controls Options Designed for Accessibility Requirements
Control Option
HighContrast
HighContrastInverse
LargePrint
Increases the size of controls to accommodate larger fonts. To increase the font size, you must use the
HighContrastLargePrint
Provides dark text on a light background using high-contrast colors. Increases the size of controls to accommodate larger fonts. To increase the font size, you must use the
HighContrastLargePrintInverse
Provides light text on a dark background using high-contrast colors. Increases the size of controls to accommodate larger fonts. To increase the font size, you must use the
Modifying the Window Border Setting for a Theme
window border
To modify the window border setting that is associated with a theme, perform the following steps:
In the
Click on the
Select the window frame option that you want to associate with the current theme from the list box, then click
Modifying the Icon Setting for a Theme
icon
To modify the icon setting that is associated with a theme, perform the following steps:
In the
Click on the
Select the icon option that you want to associate with the theme from the list box, then click
Icon Options Designed for Accessibility Requirements
Icon Option
Provides dark-on-light icons using high-contrast colors.
Provides light-on-dark icons using high-contrast colors.
Creating Your Own Themes
creating own
For information about how to create your own themes, see the
Customizing Specific Components of the Desktop
This section describes how to customize specific components of the GNOME Desktop individually.
Customizing the Desktop Background
customizing desktop appearance
desktop background
The themes do not affect the desktop background. To set the desktop background, choose
Customizing Desktop Background Objects
desktop background objects
The size of the icons that are displayed on the desktop background is controlled by the
From the
Select the
In the
Customizing Fonts
fonts
This section describes how to customize the font settings for the desktop and frequently-used applications.
If you have difficulty with the default font type and font size that is used on the desktop and desktop background, you can customize the font settings to suit your needs.
You can specify individual font settings for the following desktop components and applications:
Entire desktop (excluding the desktop background)
Desktop background only
Text Editor
Web Browser
Customizing Desktop Fonts
desktop fonts
The
To start the
Application Font
Click on this button to select a default font to use for the text that is displayed on the desktop, including the text displayed on the windows and dialogs associated with GNOME-compliant applications and panel applications.
If you use a predefined theme and you click on the
Document Font
Click on this button to select a font to use for displaying documents.
Desktop Font
Click on this button to select a font to use for the text that is displayed on the desktop background only.
Window Title Font
Click on this button to select a font to use for the text that is displayed in the titlebar area of windows.
Fixed Width Font
Click on this button to select a font to use for editing documents.
Font Rendering
To specify how to render fonts on the desktop, select one of the following options:
Monochrome
Best Shapes
Best Contrast
Subpixel Smoothing
If you use large fonts, you may need to change the size of panes in some applications, such as the file manager and Help browser.
For more information about the
Customizing Application Fonts
custom desktop appearance
set choose individual font
By default, GNOME applications use the default font specified in the
Help Browser
Meeting Specific Accessibility Needs
The following sections summarize the steps you need to take to improve the accessibility of the desktop in a particular area.
Achieving a High- or Low-Contrast Desktop
high contrast desktop
low contrast desktop
To achieve a high- or low-contrast desktop, perform the following steps:
Use the
Use the
Set the
Set the
Select a background color that suits your needs.
In the
In the
Achieving a Large Print Desktop
large print desktop
To achieve a large-print desktop, perform the following steps:
Use the
Click on the
Use the
Increase the font size that is used to display the contents of the
If the
If you use applications that use panes, such as the file manager and help browser, you may need to change the size of panes to accommodate the large print. See the online help for the appropriate application for more information.
Orca: Screen Reader and Magnifier
Screen Reader and Magnifier
Orca
The
Screen Reader
The screen reader enables non-visual access to standard applications in the GNOME Desktop by using speech and braille output.
Magnifier
The magnifier provides automated focus tracking and full-screen magnification to aid low-vision users.
The following sections provide information about
Introduction to Orca
What is Orca?
Orca is a flexible, extensible, and powerful assistive technology for people with visual impairments. Using various combinations of speech synthesis, braille and magnification, Orca helps provide access to applications and toolkits that support the AT-SPI (e.g., the GNOME Desktop).
Why the name Orca?
One of the first DOS screen readers was Flipper, made by Omnichron Corporation in Berkeley, CA. It was named Flipper in part because the blind wife of the programmer envisioned computers as being programmed by flipping switches (an accurate image of a bygone era). Then came another DOS screen reader, this one from Henter-Joyce in Florida - "Jobs Access With Speech" (or JAWS). And so on....
Although no obvious connection exists between blindness and creatures from the sea, there is certainly a naming tradition for screen-reader software. Hence
What's the schedule?

How do I request a new feature?

Where is the discussion list?
You can get in touch with developers and other users by
Is braille supported?
Yes! Braille is supported via BrlTTY and it is tightly integrated with Orca. BrlTTY offers support for nearly every refreshable braille display known to man.
Is contracted braille supported?
Yes,
What voices are available?

What languages are supported?
The
Note: support for a language also depends on the speech synthesis engine also supporting the same language.
How well does magnification work?

Enabling Orca
For a text-only guided setup, open a Run dialog with
The first time
First you will be presented with a list of languages to choose from; there are currently about 45 languages supported. Most of this list will scroll off the screen, so you may have to use the terminal's scrollbar to view earlier parts of the list. Type in the number of your language choice (e.g., 7 for American English) and press
You are next asked to set
The next item is
Now select your desired keyboard layout; generally, you will want to choose the layout that matches your keyboard type - 1 for Desktop or 2 for Laptop. This choice will determine what key will act as the
Next, specify if you require braille output. This functionality assumes a BrlTTY-compatible device is available. Type
Lastly, indicate whether you want an on-screen braille output monitor. This is mostly for developers who need to verify BrlTTY output, but may also be useful in other situations, such as visually diagnosing or verifying braille output. Type
That's it!
After completing the first-time
If you plan to use the Magnifier portion of
Using Orca
Initial Setup
When you run
How do I run Orca?
Run
Quitting Orca
To quit
Run
Press
Orca Configuration GUI
The
The
General Page

The
Keyboard Layout
The keyboard layout section allows you to specify if you will be working on a laptop (small) or desktop (large, with a numeric keypad) keyboard. You select which layout you want by selecting one of the following options:


Show Orca main window

The
Quit Orca without Confirmation
Normally, when you press
Disable gksu keyboard grab
When running commands from the launch menu, many distributions use an application known as
By selecting the "Disable gksu keyboard grab" button, you will turn off the keyboard grab behavior, allowing
The keyboard grab is a security attempt by
Present tooltips
When checked, this option will tell
Speak object under mouse
When checked, this option will tell
Start Orca when you login
When checked, this option will tell the system to automatically launch
Speech Page

The speech page allows you to customize how
Enable speech
The first control of note on the speech page is the "enable speech" check box. This check box toggles whether or not
Speech System and Speech Synthesizer
The next two controls deal with selecting the speech system and synthesizer.
First, determine which speech system you would like to use - GNOME-speech works best at this time. After making your selection, tab to the speech synthesizer combo box and choose from the list of available synthesizers.
Voice Settings
If your synthesizer supports it,
Tab to the voice settings combo box, and down arrow until the upper case voice is selected.
Tab to the person combo box, and down arrow to choose the Betty voice.
The next three sliders in the tab order allow adjustment of the synthesizer's rate, pitch and volume, respectively.
Punctuation Level
The punctuation level radio button group is used to adjust the amount of punctuation spoken by the synthesizer. The available levels are None, Some, Most and All.
Verbosity
The verbosity setting determines the amount of information that will be spoken in certain situations. For example, if it is set to verbose, the synthesizer will speak shortcut keys for items in pull down menus. When it is set to brief, these shortcut keys are not announced.
Table Row Speech
The table row speech option determines the way in which
You can quickly toggle this behavior by pressing
Speak Blank Lines
Some users desire to hear "blank" when navigating to a blank line in a document. Other users do not. If the "speak blank lines" check box is selected,
Speak multicase strings as words
When working with code, one often comes across a "word" consisting of several words with alternating case, such as "MultiCaseString." Speech synthesizers do not always pronounce such multicase strings correctly. Checking the
Speak tutorial messages
When moving from component to component in an interface, this option will provide spoken tutorial messages for how to work with the component.
Speak object mnemonics
This option will cause
Break speech into chunks between pauses
Depending on the enabled speech settings,
Speak child position
Checking the
Speak Indentation and Justification
When working with code or editing other documents it is often desirable to be aware of justification and indentation. Selecting the
Speak Progress Bar Updates
If this setting is enabled,
Restrict progress bar updates to
This setting controls which progress bars should be spoken, assuming the
Say All By
This combo box allows you to specify whether the "say all" functionality of
Braille Page

The braille page allows you to customize various aspects about the use of braille.

Enable Braille Support
The first control on the braille page is the "Enable braille support" check box. This check box toggles whether or not
Enable Braille Monitor

Abbreviated Role Names
The "Abbreviated role names" check box determines the manner in which role names are displayed and can be used to help conserve real estate on the braille display. The "Abbreviated role names" option can be better understood if we consider the following example. Let us assume that a slider had focus, and that the abbreviated role names box was not checked. In this case, the word "slider" would be shown on the display, to reflect the fact that the current control was indeed a slider. If the abbreviated role names box were checked, the word "slider" would be abbreviated to "sldr".
Disable end of line symbol
When checked, this feature tells
Contracted Braille

The verbosity radio button group determines the amount of information that will be brailled in certain situations. For example, if it is set to verbose, keyboard shortcut and role name information is displayed. This information is not displayed in brief mode.
Selection Indicator
When you select text,
Hyperlink Indicator
When you encounter a hyperlink,
Key Echo Page

The key echo page allows you to specify the behavior of
Enable Key Echo
The first control on the key echo page is the "Enable key echo" check box. When this box is selected, seven additional check boxes become available. These are: "Enable alphanumeric and punctuation keys", "Enable modifier keys", "Enable locking keys", "Enable function keys", "Enable action keys", "Enable navigation keys", and "Enable non-spacing diacritical keys".
The alphanumeric and function key groups are relatively self explanatory.
Modifier keys are those such as
Locking keys include
The action keys group consists of keys that perform some logical action, such as
The navigation keys group include the four arrow keys as well as any key combination in which the Orca Modifier key is being held down. The latter is designed to prevent
Non-spacing diacritical keys are those "dead keys" used to generate accented letters.
Enable Echo by Character
The next toggle on the key echo page is the "Enable echo by character" check box, used to echo the character you just typed. While echo by character seems quite similar to the key echo of alphanumeric and punctuation keys, there are important differences, especially with respect to accented letters and other symbols for which there is no dedicated key. Key echo causes
Enable Echo by Word
The next toggle on the key echo page is the "Enable echo by word" check box, used to echo the word you just typed. The "Echo by word" control is always available, regardless of whether any of the key echo options are checked.
Enable Echo by Sentence
The last toggle on the key echo page is the "Enable echo by sentence" check box, used to echo the sentence you just typed. The echo by sentence control is always available, regardless of whether any of the key echo options are checked.
In summary, the key echo scheme can offer a great deal of flexibility. For example, one user might choose to enable all key echo options, while another might prefer to use word echo, but only have locking keys announced.
Magnifier Page

The magnifier page allows you to enable/disable magnification and specify how magnification is performed.
Enable Magnifier
The first control on the magnifier page is the "Enable magnifier" check box. This check box toggles whether or not
Zoomer Settings
Two zoomer GUI controls determine magnification characteristics:
"Scale factor", which sets magnification power from 1.0x to 16.0x (fractional values are supported).
"Position", which sets the location and size of the magnifier window: "Full Screen", "Left Half", "Right Half", "Top Half", "Bottom Half", and "Custom". The default position is "Full Screen". Choosing "Custom" causes four spin buttons to become available: "Top", "Left", "Right", and "Bottom". These spin buttons allow you to define the location of each edge of the zoom window. Units are in pixels.
Border Settings
These options are not available in "Full Screen" mode.
Enable border
This option determines if a window border is visible for the magnifier.
Border size
This value determines the size of the border in pixels.
Cursor Settings
These controls can be used to customize the size and color of the magnifier's cursor.
Enable cursor
If this check box is enabled then a cursor is visible and the size and color options become available.
Custom size
Enable this check box if you would like to make the mouse pointer larger than it normally is. The cursor size can be changed from the default value of 32 pixels.
Custom color
If the cursor is enabled, a custom color can also be applied.
Cross-hair Settings
This set of controls can be used to customize the magnifier's optional area-targeting cursor.
Enable cross-hair
If checked, you can additionally configure the clipping behavior, size and color of the cross-hair.
Enable cross-hair clip
If enabled, the cross-hair will be "clipped" (removed) in the area immediately surrounding the mouse pointer.
Cross-hair size
This control sets the thickness of the cross-hair in pixels.
Cross-hair color
This control allows a custom color to be used for the cross-hair.
Color Settings
This allows you to do some rough color adjustments of the magnified region.
Invert colors
Creates a reverse or negative-image effect.
Brightness
Ranges from -1 to 1 (-1 is black/no brightness; 1 is white/total brightness; 0 is "normal"/unchanged).
Contrast
Ranges from -1 to 1 (-1 is grey/no contrast; 1 is maximum contrast; 0 is "normal"/unchanged).
Tracking and Alignment Settings
These options control the tracking of the mouse cursor.
Mouse pointer
Choose from the following options:
Centered
Keeps the mouse pointer at the center of the screen whenever possible. This is the default.
Proportional
Positions the mouse pointer in the zoom window relative to its actual, unmagnified position. For instance, if the mouse pointer is 25% away from the left edge of the desktop,
Push
Moves the zoomer window the least amount necessary to keep the mouse pointer on the screen.
None
Moving the mouse pointer has no impact on what the zoomer window displays.
Pointer follows zoomer
This option is enabled by default. If the mouse pointer is not on the screen when you initially move the mouse, it will be moved into the zoomer so that you can continue to see what you were working on. If your preferred mouse tracking mode is centered, the pointer will be moved to the center; otherwise it will be moved to the item with focus.
Control and menu item
These options control additional behavior of the magnifier.
When navigating via keyboard, keep the focused dialog box control or menu item at the center of the screen whenever possible.
When navigating via keyboard, move the zoomer window the least amount necessary to display the focused dialog box control or menu item. This is the default.
Using the keyboard to navigate among dialog box controls and menu items will have no impact on what the zoomer window displays.
Pointer follows focus
If this option is enabled, the mouse pointer will follow you as you arrow through menu items and move among controls in dialog boxes. This option is disabled by default.
Text cursor
These options control how the text cursor behaves.
As the text cursor moves, keep it at the center of the screen whenever possible.
As the text cursor moves, move the zoomer window the least amount necessary to display it. This is the default.
Moving the text cursor will have no impact on what the zoomer window displays.
Edge margin
The edge margin is how close the caret should be allowed to get to the edge of the screen before it's time to "push" the zoomer window. The margin can range from 0 to 50%, with 50% being the equivalent of choosing centering. The default value is 0.
This option is only available if "Push" is your text cursor tracking mode.
Advanced Settings
If you press the Advanced Settings button located near the bottom of the Magnifier page, the following dialog will appear:

Smoothing
Bilinear or none.
Red, Green, Blue: Individual controls for choosing customized brightness levels. Choosing different brightness levels for each color allows you to create the color scheme that works best for you.
Red, Green, Blue: Individual controls for choosing customized contrast levels. While not as significant as changes to brightness, choosing different contrast levels for each color helps you to create the color scheme that works best for you.
Color Filtering
Allows you to pick one of the colorblind filters available through libcolorblind.
In order to take advantage of this feature you will need to install libcolorblind and then rebuild gnome-mag.
Multi-Monitor Settings - Source Display
X Window System DISPLAY of what should be magnified. Written in the form ":0.x" where x is the number of the screen whose contents should be magnified.
Multi-Monitor Settings - Target Display
X Window System DISPLAY of where to put the zoomer window. Written in the form ":0.y" where y is the number of the screen where the zoomer window should appear.
Key Bindings Page

The key bindings page allows you to examine and modify the key bindings for
Orca Modifier Key(s)
The first control on the key bindings page allows you to examine which key (or keys) acts as the "
You cannot modify the
Key Bindings Table
The key bindings table provides a list of
The "Function" column header is a description of the
The "Key Binding" header is the primary way to invoke the function from the keyboard. Note that the function description may include the word "Orca". This indicates that the
The "Alternate" header provides an alternate mechanism for invoking the function from the keyboard.
To modify either the "Key Binding" or the "Alternate" bindings, arrow to the cell and press
To undo a modified keybinding, merely arrow to the modified column, uncheck the checkbox, and press the "Apply" button
Beneath the list of

These are commands which we feel will be very useful for some users, but not needed by most users. Rather than "use up" a keystroke for such commands, we have left them unassigned. You can assign a keystroke to any of these unbound commands by following the procedure outlined above. In addition, you can unbind any bound command in a similar fashion: press
Pronunciation Page

Sometimes your speech synthesizer just doesn't say the right thing for a given string. You might prefer to hear "laughing out loud" rather than "LOL." Or there may be a name or a technical term which the synthesizer mispronounces. The pronunciation page is where you can add, edit, and delete
Add a new dictionary entry
Press the
Type the text of the new entry and press
Move to the Replacement String column and press
Type the text that you would like to have spoken instead and press
Edit an existing dictionary entry
Move to the cell you wish to edit and press
Make your changes and then press
Delete an existing dictionary entry
Move to the entry you wish to delete.
Press the Delete button or
Text Attributes Page


On this tab is a text attribute list, where each row consists of four columns:
The name of the text attribute.
A checkbox which the user can set to indicate whether this text attribute should be spoken or not.
A checkbox which the user can set to indicate whether this text attribute should be "underlined" on the braille display.
An editable "Present unless" string value. By default, not all text attributes will have this set. If present, what it means (assuming the user wants this text attribute presented) is that the value of the attribute will only be presented if it is
For example, by default the "underline" text attribute has a value of "none." If the user has this attribute checked and the user types
There is also a
When you initially display the text attribute pane, all your checked attributes are put at the top of the list. They are given in the order that they will be spoken and brailled.
If you decide to check others or adjust the order, there are four buttons to help you do this:




Beneath these push buttons is the Braille Indicator group of radio buttons. Here you can select the cell or cells to be used to indicate text which has at least one of the specified attributes. Your choices are:
None (the default)
Dot 7
Dot 8
Dots 7 and 8
Text attributes can also be set on an individual application basis. The text attribute pane is also part of the application-specific settings dialog that's started when you give a particular application focus and type
Orca Keyboard Commands
You can get a complete list of available keyboard commands by visiting the

The GNOME Desktop itself also has
WARNING: the MouseKeys functionality of AccessX can interfere with the
Desktop Layout
Following is a list of common
Flat review commands












The above commands apply when working with objects as well as when working with text. For example, if the flat review cursor were positioned on a menu bar, pressing the "read current line" command would speak the names of all visible menus. Similarly, pressing the "read next word" command would speak the object to the right of the flat review cursor on the same line, or move flat review to the next line if no more objects were found.
Bookmark commands





Miscellaneous functions









Commands for debugging

In order for the next three commands to be of use,



Laptop Layout
Following is a list of common


























In order for the next three commands to be of use,



Application-Specific Information
Accessible Applications

Making Application-Specific Settings
To customize the settings for a particular application, you will first need to run that application. Make sure the application has focus, then press
This brings up a tabbed dialog window very similar to the
There is no initial General pane.
The Speech System and Speech Synthesizer combo boxes on the Speech pane will be grayed out (made inactive).
Any existing application-specific key bindings will appear at the top of the list on the Key Bindings pane.
There may be a new application-specific settings pane at the end of the set of tabbed panes. Note that pressing the End key from the tab list will get you directly to the right-most tab.
Adjust your application-specific settings in the same way you set your general
When you have your application settings customized the way you want, press the
These files are automatically written by
If you want to have some extra application-specific settings or code that you don't want to lose, then you should put it in a file called
Note that this is an advanced feature that we don't expect many people to use. It's just there if you really want it.
There is currently one known bug (some people would call it a feature) that we are trying to track down and fix:
If you adjust one or more application-specific key bindings, the new values will not take effect until you've pressed the
Braille


Below are descriptions of the necessary tasks to install/setup BrlTTY in Ubuntu and Solaris. For both, you need to first obtain
BrlTTY 3.8 on Ubuntu
First, configure your build environment to build BrlTTY. Much of this setup is done for you automatically in the Ubuntu distribution with products such as G++ already present. In addition,
Then, when you build BrlTTY, avoid configuring the package with --prefix=/usr. Use the standard procedure instead, executing the following commands as
Run BrlTTY as
If you want, you can remove the existing
Troubleshooting
My desktop has stopped responding. What do I do?
Press
If you cannot get to a terminal window, try pressing
Mobility Impairments
Mobility impairments can be caused by arthritis, stroke, cerebral palsy, Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, and loss of limbs or digits, among others. Poor muscle control or weakness can make using standard keyboards and mouse devices difficult. For instance, some people are unable to type two keys simultaneously, while others tend to hit multiple keys or to bounce keys when pressing or releasing them. People who are able to use only one hand likewise have difficulties with some keyboard and mouse tasks.
The technologies which can assist those with mobility impairments are:


GNOME On-Screen Keyboard (gok)
On-Screen Keyboard
GOK
The
Composer Keyboards enable you to compose text. To type alphanumeric characters, you select the characters on the composer keyboard.
Dynamic Keyboards reflect the applications that are currently running on the desktop. For example,
You must enable the assistive technology services before you are able to use many of the accessibility tools available.
Choose
Select
Log back in. The assistive technology services will be started automatically.
Maximizing Application Windows for On-Screen Keyboard Users
maximizing Terminal On-Screen Keyboard
If you are an
To resize the window for use with the
Do not enable the Full-Screen mode in the application.
Give focus to the application window.
Press
Mouse and Keyboard Enhancements
This section describes how to configure the mouse and keyboard to make these devices accessible to more users.
Configuring the Mouse
Use the
Configuring Mouse Behavior
The following sections describe how to modify the behavior of the mouse to suit your needs.
Configuring the Mouse for Left-Handed Use
mouse
left hand
To configure the mouse for left-handed use, click on the
Configuring Double-Click Behavior
double-click behavior
If you have difficulty double-clicking, you can increase the period of time that the system allows to elapse between the first click and the second click of a double-click. For example, if the double-click timeout setting is 0.4 seconds, you must perform the second click of a double-click within 0.4 seconds of the first click. If the second click occurs more than 0.4 seconds after the first click, the system interprets the two clicks as two single clicks.
To configure the double-click timeout setting, perform the following steps:
Click on the
Use the
Double-click on the light bulb to the right of the slider to test the setting. If you perform the two clicks of the double-click within the timeout specified, the light bulb lights up fully to display a yellow glow around the bulb. If you do not double-click within the timeout specified, the light bulb does not light fully. You should increase the timeout setting and try again. When the light bulb lights, the timeout setting is suitable for your needs.
Changing Mouse Pointer Size
pointer size
pointer
size
To change the size of the mouse pointer that is displayed on the desktop, perform the following steps:
Click on the
This will display a list of pointer themes and sizes available.
By default, GNOME does not include mouse pointer themes. Information about installing and using pointer themes can be found in the
On some platforms you must log out and log in again for this setting to take effect.
Locating the Mouse Pointer
locating pointer
If you have difficulty locating the mouse pointer on the screen, you can enable an option to highlight the pointer when you press the
On some platforms, you must log out and log in again before this setting takes effect.
Configuring Mouse Speed and Sensitivity
speed and sensitivity
To configure the speed and sensitivity of the mouse, perform the following steps:
Click on the
Configure the following options:
Acceleration
Use the slider to specify the speed at which the mouse pointer moves around the screen when you move the mouse.
If you select a low setting, the mouse pointer moves at a speed similar to the speed at which you are physically moving the mouse. This means that you need to physically move the mouse larger distances to cover the screen area. If you select a high setting, the mouse pointer moves at a faster speed than the speed at which you physically move the mouse. This means that you need to physically move the mouse small distances to cover the screen area.
Sensitivity
Use the slider to specify how responsive the mouse pointer is to movements of the mouse. Moving the slider to the right will increase the sensitivity and moving it to the left will decrease the sensitivity.
Threshold
Use the slider to specify the distance that you must move an item before the system interprets the move action as a drag-and-drop action.
Configuring the Cursor
cursor
stop blinking
The following section describes how to modify the display characteristics of the cursor.
Stopping the Cursor from Blinking
To stop the cursor from blinking in text boxes and other areas, perform the following steps:
Choose
In the
Keyboard Mouse Emulation
If you have difficulty using a mouse, you can use the keyboard to emulate the mouse functions. See
Configuring an Accessible Keyboard
Use the
The





Configuring a Keyboard-Based Mouse
Use the




MouseTweaks

It allows users to perform a secondary click by doing a click-and-hold of the primary mouse button.
It offers a way to perform the various clicks without using any hardware button. In this context, the
It provides the
Most mouse-related accessibility options can be found by using
Simulated Secondary Click
A secondary or right-click can be issued by using the primary button and keeping it held down for a specified delay.
Dwell Click
A click can be issued by having the mouse pointer dwell in a given spot for a specified delay. In this mode, the click-type is determined by the
The
Pointer Capture
The mouse pointer can be locked into an area of the screen so the pointing device is free for other tasks. For example, this capability allows a powerchair user to control both the powerchair and the mouse pointer with a single powerchair joystick.
The
The
Preferences may be set by choosing
In the
In the
In the
Dasher
Dasher is an information-efficient text-entry interface, driven by natural continuous pointing gestures. Dasher is a competitive text-entry system wherever a full-size keyboard cannot be used - for example on a palmtop or wearable computer, or when operating any computer one-handed (by joystick, touchscreen or mouse) or zero-handed (eg, by head-mouse or eye-tracker).
Choose
Enter:
Enter:
Dasher may also be installed from the
Press
Choose
Press
translator-credits