# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2016
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Wilbur G. Zeigler, The Heart of the Alleghanies
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/50952/50952-h/50952-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Here we heard how a few years since a deer was hounded into the river,
and then in deep water was easily lassoed by a native, towed to shore,
and, rendered docile through fright, was led like a lamb through the
village street. This story heightened our ardor to be on the hunt; so,
leaving the village early on a foggy morning, we that day accomplished
thirty-five miles of travel and arrived at our destined quarters on the
height of the Smoky mountains.
The character of a river can not be known by a single view of its
waters. One must follow it for miles to know its peculiarities, and
wherein its picturesqueness differs from other streams. The mountain
rivers are admirably suited for investigations of this nature. The
levelest and oftentimes the only accessible way for a road is close
along the streams. The Little Tennessee is, through many of its
stretches, looked down upon from winding highways; but it is not until
the traveler leaves Charleston and strikes the banks some few miles
below, that the grandeur of its scenery is manifest. Here begins the
close companionship between river and road, that is not broken until by
the impetuous waters the heart of the Smoky mountains is cut asunder.
The scenery is similar to the French Broad, but the scale is
considerably enlarged. There is a greater volume of water, and a wider
reach between the banks; the mountains, whose wood-adorned fronts rise
from the sounding edge of the current, are loftier in height, and in
some places, like that before{145} the farm house of Albert Welsh, present a
distinctive feature in their steep, rocky faces. In the vicinity of the
mouth of the Tuckasege, some charming pictures are to be found. Take it
at the hour preceding an October sunset, when the shadows thrown by wall
and forest lie dark and heavy on the slopes and levels; when the
sunlight is strong, and an evening serenity pervades the scene: the
steep mountains flame with the gorgeous coloring of autumn, mingled with
the changeless green of the pines; crimson vines gleam in the sunlight
smiting the cliffs which they festoon; and, in shadow, at the feet of
the mountains, “like some grave, mighty thought threading a dream,”
glides the silent river.

ON THE LITTLE TENNESSEE.
Occasionally, the stream makes a long, straight sweep; then again,
abrupt bends throw it in zigzag course. A few flocks of teal and wood
ducks, apparently even wilder than when in marsh-water, rose
occasionally from placid faces of the river. They were out of gun-shot
at the start, and before settling, never failed to put the next lower
bend between them and their disturbers. The mountains so encroach on the
river that little arable land is afforded; houses are consequently far
apart, in some places miles of road being devoid of a clearing.
Eagle creek rises in Ecanetle gap. A narrow trail winds on the wild
banks along its waters. At its mouth we turned from the Little
Tennessee, and for ten miles pursued this trail without passing a house.
The forest was lifeless and unbroken throughout. Twilight came as we
traveled,{146} and just after it became dark enough to see a phosphorescent
log that glowed, like a bed of burning lime, across our path, through
the laurel appeared a vista of cleared land embosomed in a dark forest.
The starlight revealed it. In the center stood a double log house, with
a mud-daubed stone chimney at each low gable, above which flying sparks
made visible a column of smoke. The two doors were open, and through
these streamed the lights from the fire-places. No windows marred the
structure; but chinks, through which one might easily stick his rifle to
blaze away at a wild turkey in the corn field, or at a revenue officer
beyond the fence, made the exterior of the hut radiant with their
filtration of light. Several low outbuildings were in the enclosure.
As Sanford’s horse struck against an intact row of bars which closed the
trail, the savage yelping of a body of unseen dogs startled the quiet of
the scene. In an instant a bare-headed woman, with a pan in her hand,
appeared at one door, and at the other a bushy-headed man leaned
outward.
“How are you?” yelled Sanford. “Do Jake and Quil Rose live here?”
“Shet up, ye hounds, ye!” addressing his dogs; then to us, “I reckon
they do. Who be you uns?”
By that time both doors were crowded with young and old heads, and two
men came toward us. After a parley, in which we explained who we were,
and the object of our visit, the bars rattled down, our horses stepped
after each other into the clearing, and in succession we grasped the
hands of the Rose brothers.
“Ef yer hunters,” said one, “we’re only too glad to see ye; but at fust
we didn’t know whether ye war gentlemen or a sheriff’s posse, the
road-boss or revenue galoots. Now lite, go to the house, and take cheers
while we stable the nags.”
As directed, we entered one of the two rooms of the cabin,{147} leaving
behind us the night, the quieted dogs and the October chill that comes
with the darkness. A hot log fire, leaping in the chimney place, around
which were ranged four children and a woman preparing supper, threw on
the walls the fantastic shadows of the group, and enabled us to mark
every object of the interior. On the scoured puncheon floor furtherest
from the chimney, were three rough bed-steads, high with feather ticks
and torn blankets. Against the walls above the bed-steads were long
lines of dresses, petticoats and other clothing. No framed pictures
adorned the smoky logs, but plastered all over the end where rose the
chimney, was an assortment of startling illustrations cut from Harper’s
Weeklies, Police Gazettes, and almanacs, of dates (if judged by their
yellowness) before the war. A few cooking implements hung against the
chimney. Over half the room reached a loft, where one might imagine was
stored the copper boiler and other apparatus of a still, slowly
corroding through that season immediately preceding the hardening and
gathering in of the corn. A table, with clean spread on it, and set with
sweet potatoes, corn-dodger, butter and coffee, stood in the center of
the room. At this board, on the invitation of the brother known as Quil,
we seated ourselves to a repast, rude to be sure, but made delicious to
us from a long day’s travel. The wife of the mountaineer, as if out of
respect to her visitors, and following a singular custom, had donned her
bonnet on sight of us; and, keeping it on her head, poured out the
coffee in silence, and, although seated, partook of no food until we had
finished.
In the lines preceding these, and in those which immediately follow, the
writer has attempted to present to the reader a true picture of an
extreme type of mountain life,—that of a class of people, hidden in
mountain fastnesses, who, uneducated and unambitious, depend for scanty
subsistence upon the crops of cramped clearings and the profits of the
chase. Their state of{148} perfect contentment is not the singular, but
natural result of such an uncheckered existence.
The Rose brothers, are known as men good-natured, but of desperate
character when aroused. They have been blockaders. Living outside of
school districts, and seemingly of all State protection, they refuse to
pay any taxes; having only a trailway to their door, they pay no
attention to notices for working the county roads. Thus recognizing no
authority, they live in a pure state of natural liberty, depending for
its continuance upon their own strength and daring, the fears of county
officers, the seclusion of their home, and their proximity to the
Tennessee line. Only one and a half mile of mountain ascent is required
to place them beyond the pursuit of State authorities. One of them once
killed his man, in Swain county, and to this day he has escaped trial.
They are men of fine features and physique. Both wear full, dark beards;
long, black hair; slouch hats; blue hunting shirts, uncovered by coats
or vests, and belted with a strap holding their pantaloons in place.
High boots, with exposed tops, cover their feet and lower limbs. They
are tall and broad-shouldered. Thus featured, figured, and accoutered,
they appeared to our party.
All the children had been covered with feather beds, when we six men and
two women formed a wide circle before the fire that evening. Naturally,
our conversation was on hunting, and Kenswick opened the ball by
inquiring about the state of deer hunting.
“We allers spring a deer when we drive,” responded Jake.
“Do you never fail?”
“Never; but sometimes we miss killin’ ’im.”
“They must be thick around here,” remarked Sanford.
“Not so powerful. Why, just a few ye’r ago, Brit Mayner killed nine in
one day. He couldn’t do hit now.”
“Why?”{149}
“Gittin’ scurce; every man on the Smokies owns dogs, an’ they’re bein’
hounded to death.”
“How about bears?” asked Kenswick.
“Gittin’ scurce, too. We generally kill eight or ten now in the season
agin twenty a short time back.”
“When is the best season for bear,” began Kenswick, but Sanford, who had
stepped to the door, interrupted him.
“Oh,” said he, “let information about bears rest until we hunt for them,
and let me ask if that is a wolf I hear howling. Listen!”
“By George!” exclaimed Kenswick, “it does sound rather wolfish.”
“Hit’s one, shore enough,” returned Quil. “We hear ’em every winter
night from the door.”
“They must do damage to your sheep.”
“Reckon they do; but not much worser ’en dogs.”
“How do you destroy them?”
“Trap ’em, an’ shoot ’em.”
“Will they fight a pack of hounds well?”
“Prime fighters, you bet! But, dog my skin, I got the holt on one the
other day that he didn’t shake off!”
“Hold of one! How was that?” two of us asked together.
Jake threw a rich pine knot on the fire; Kenswick ceased puffing his
pipe for an instant; Sanford came from the door, and, leaning against
the chimney, stuck one of his feet toward the blaze; Mrs. Jake Rose with
her sister-in-law exchanged compliments in the shape of a tin snuff box,
in which the latter dipped a chewed birch stick and then rubbed her
teeth; and Quil began:
“This day war four weeks ago when I went down on Forney creek to see
Boodly about swoppin’ our brindled cow-brute fer his shoats, want hit?”
nodding to his wife.
She nodded.{150}
“Wal, I hed my rifle-gun an’ the dogs fer company, countin’ on gittin a
crack at some varmint along the way. On Bear creek, the dogs trottin’ by
my side got ter snuffin’ in the rocks an’ weeds, an’ all o’ a sudden,
barking like mad, broke hell-bent through the laurel and stopped right
squar’ at the branch. Thar was cliffs thar, and the water, arter slidin’
down shelvin’ rocks fer a piece, poured over a steep pitch. I clumpt hit
up an’ down the bank, lookin’ sharp fer deer-signs, but seed nuthin.
Then thinks me ter myself, I’ll cross the stream, an’ call the dogs
over. The nighest way to cross war across the shelvin’ rock above the
fall. I waded in thar. Do ye know, the blamed thing was so slick and
slimy that my feet slipped, an’ I cum down ker splash in the waters. I
tried to clutch the rocks, but couldn’t, an’ as quick as ye can bat yer
eyes, over the short fall I went, strikin’ bottom on sumthin’ soft an’
ha’ry.”
“A wolf?” some one asked.
“Yes, dog my skin! Hit was the dry nest of a master old varmint under
thet fall. He war as fat as a bar jist shufflin’ out o’ winter quarters,
an’ he only hed three legs. One gone at the knee. Chawed hit off, I
reckon, to get shet o’ a trap.”
“What, will they eat off the leg that is fastened to free themselves
from a trap?” asked Kenswick, excitedly.
“In course they will, an’ so’ll a bar,” continued Quil. “But I didn’t
find this all out until arterwards. Thar I war astraddle o’ thet
varmint’s back, an’ my fingers in the ha’r o’ his neck.”
“That’s a pretty stiff story, Quil,” remarked Sanford.
“Stiff or not, hits the truth, so help me Gineral Jackson!”
“Go on, go on!”
“Wal, the wolf snarled and struggled like mad, but I hed the holt on
’im. I didn’t dar’ to loose my holt ter git my knife, so I bent ’im down
with my weight, and, gittin’ his head in the water, I drowned ’im in a
few minutes. Then I toted and drugged ’im out to the dogs.”{151}
“Was it an old sheep-killer?” I asked.
“Thet’s jist what he war. He hed been livin’ nigh the settlement fer
months, till he war too fat ter fight well.”
Quil’s story was a true one, with the exception that in the narration he
had taken the place of the actual hunter. After it was finished,
conversation lagged, and hanging our coats for screens over the backs of
chairs, we jumped upon and sank from sight into the feather beds.
Early the following morning, some little time before daylight had sifted
through the chinks of the cabin, when all out-doors was wrapped in the
gloom of night, and but one premature cock-crow had sounded in my ears,
I heard the feet of the occupant of an adjoining bed strike flat on the
floor, followed by the noise of thrusting of legs into pantaloons. Then
there was a noise at the chimney-place, and soon a fire was in full
blaze, crackling and snapping in a spiteful way, as it warmed and filled
the room with its glow. As soon as this light became strong enough, and
I was sufficiently aroused to distinguish objects about me, I saw that
Quil Rose was up and stirring; and, a minute after, I perceived the
white, night-capped head of the lady of the house shoot, like a
jack-in-the-box, up above the bed-clothes. I thought of Pickwick and the
lady in curl-papers, so I laid quiet. It is curious in what a short
space of time a mountain woman will make her toilet; for that covered
head had not appeared above the bed more than one minute before Mrs.
Rose was in morning dress complete, even to her shoes; and quietly
rolling up her sleeves, was making active preparations for an early
breakfast.
Corn-meal, water, and salt were soon stirred up for the dodger; the
small, round skillet with cover (Dutch oven they call it) was set over a
bed of coals; the tea-kettle was singing on the fire, and some chunks of
venison boiling in the pot.
While Mrs. Rose was thus engaged, one by one we began{152} crawling out, but
not before Quil had come to my bed, stooped down at the head, thrust his
hand under, and lo! by the light of the snapping logs, we saw him draw
forth a gallon jug without a handle.
“I reckon we’ll have a dram afore breakfast,” said he, with a jolly
twinkle in his eye, and smack of his lips, as he poured out a glass of
liquor as clear as crystal, and handed it around.
“Hit costs us jist one dollar a gallon, an’ I’ll ’low hit’s as pure as
mounting dew,” remarked the head of the family, as he drained off a
four-finger drink.
By the time we were dressed, breakfast was ready, and we moved around
the neatly-spread table. Coffee and buttermilk were poured; the corn
dodger was broken by our fingers, and these, together with stewed-apples
and venison made up our morning’s repast.
“The sooner we’re off now, the better,” said Quil, as he took down his
rifle from the buck-prongs fastened in the cabin wall, and drew his
bullet-pouch and powder-horn over his head and arm.
We stepped from the cabin’s door into the gray light of the morning. The
peaks of the Smoky, through which winds Ecanetle gap, were black in
shade, while the jagged rim of mountains, toward the east, was tipped
with fire, and above was an azure sky without a speck of cloud upon its
face. Below us, as seen from the edge of the rail fence, looking far
down across red and yellow forests, the fogs of the lower valleys, lying
along the stream, appeared like great rivers of molten silver. This
effect was caused by the sunlight streaming through the gaps of the
mountains, upon the dense masses of vapor. The glory was beyond
description.
The best time to visit this country is in October. The tourist who,
after several months’ sojourn among the mountains, leaves for his
lowland home, loses, by only a few weeks, the most pleasant season of
the year. In this month is fully realized the truth of Shelley’s words:
The skies are intensely blue, seldom streaked with clouds, and the
rain-fall is the least of the year. The atmosphere is free from the
haze, that through a great part of the summer pervading the air, renders
the view less extended. In it one can distinguish tree-top from tree-top
on the heights thousands of feet above him; and the most distant
mountains are brought out in bold relief against the sky. The days are
mild and temperate.
Then it is that Autumn begins to tint the woodlands. Strange to say,
although the forests on the summits are the last to bud and leaf in the
spring, their foliage is the first scattered underfoot. Along the
extreme heights on the northern slopes, the foot-prints of Autumn are
first perceived. This is not because of stronger sunlight or deeper
shade, but is due to the difference of forest growth between the north
and south sides of the ranges. She earliest changes to a dull russet and
bright yellow the upland groves of buckeye and linn, above whose margin
the balsams remain darker and gloomier by the contrast; and touches into
scarlet flame the foliage of the sugar-maple scattered widely apart amid
the sturdier trees.
As the days go by, in the valleys the buckeye drops its leaves; the
black-gum, festooned by the old gold leaves of the wild grape, gleams
crimson against the still green poplars; the{154} hickory turns to a
brilliant yellow amid the red of the oaks; of a richer red appears the
sour-wood; the slender box elder, with yellow leaves and pods, shivers
above the streams; the chestnut burrs begin to open, and drop their
nuts; acorns are rattling down through the oak leaves, while on the
hill-sides from the top of his favorite log, the drum of the pheasant
resounds, as though a warning tattoo of coming frosts.
On the farms the scene is all animation. Although some corn-fields have
already been stripped of their blades, leaving the bare stalks standing
with their single ears, others are just ripe for work, and amid their
golden banners, are the laborers, pulling and bundling the fodder.
Stubble fields are being turned under and sown with grain for next
year’s wheat. The orchards are burdened with rosy fruit; and at the
farm-houses, the women are busy paring apples, and spreading them on
board stages for drying in the sun.
At this time the cattle, turned out in the spring to pasture on the bald
mountains, are in splendid condition, and no more tender and juicy
steaks ever graced a table than those cut from the hind quarters of one
of these steers. The sheep, just clipped of their wool (they shear sheep
twice a year in these mountains) afford the finest mutton in the world.
But let us return to the hunt.
There was a sharp tingle of frost in the atmosphere. Our breath made
itself visible in the clear air, and even Kenswick’s naturally pale face
grew rubicund.
“I’ll swear,” said he, blowing upon his fingers, “this is colder than I
bargained for. A man must keep moving to keep warm. No stand for me this
morning. I’m going in the drive. Why, I’d freeze to sit still for even
half an hour waiting for a deer.”
“Hit’s powerful keen, I’ll ’low,” returned Quil, “but hit’ll be warmer
directly the sun done gits up. You cudn’t stand{155} the drive no how, an’
yer chances wud be slim fer a shot. Ef ye want to keep yer breath, and
the starch in yer biled shirt, ye’d better mind a stan’. Yeh! Ring; Yeh!
Snap; Hi! boys.”
At the latter calls, three hounds came leaping around the corner of the
cabin, joining the four which were already at our heels. It was a
mongrel collection of half starved curs. Two of them, however, were full
blooded deer dogs. Their keen noses, clear eyes, shapely heads, and
lithe limbs, put us in high hopes of the successful result of the day’s
hunt. By tying ropes around the necks of the two old deer dogs, Quil
carried into execution his proposition to “yoke up” the leaders; and,
forthwith, explained that, at the instant of springing the first deer,
he would loosen one hound, whom three of the other dogs would follow.
The next plain scent he would reserve for the remaining leader and two
followers.
Some of the old hunters of the Smokies have reduced dog training to a
fine art. They keep from three to eight hounds, who in a drive, hold
themselves strictly to their master’s orders. None of them need to be
“yoked,” or leashed, and simply at his word, when a scent is sprung, one
hound so ordered will leave the pack and follow alone, and so on, giving
each hound a separate trail. This plan of training the hounds does not
prevail to as great an extent as it did a few years since when the game
was more plenty.
Brushing through the wet weeds and rusty, standing stalks of
blade-stripped corn, we climbed a rail fence and entered a faint trail
along the laureled bank of a trout stream. This stream we crossed by
leaping from rock to rock, while the hounds splashed through the cold
waters. The forest we were in was gorgeous under the wizard influence of
autumn; chestnut and beech burrs lay thick under foot, and the acorn
mast was being{156} fed upon by droves of fierce-looking, bristled hogs,
running at large on the mountain.
The long blast of a horn, and a loud barking, arrested our attention,
and soon after we were joined by a short, thick-set young man, whom Quil
introduced as Ben Lester. He was the picture of a back-woods hunter. The
rent in his homespun coat strapped around his waist, looked as though
done by the claws of a black bear. His legs were short, and just sinewy
enough to carry him up and down ridges for 40 miles per day. A
good-natured, honest, and determined face, bristling with a brown
moustache, and stubble beard, of a week’s growth, surmounted his broad
shoulders. His hands were locked over the stock of a rifle as long as
himself. The ram’s horn, that signaled us of his presence, hung at his
side, and three well-fed, long-eared hounds, were standing close by him;
one between his legs.
The plan for the hunt was as follows: Lester and the Rose brothers were
to do the driving, taking in a wild section, lying far above and north
of the Little Tennessee; we four city boys were to occupy drive-ways,
and watch for, halt, and slay every deer that passed. Lester volunteered
to show me to my proposed stand. He proved himself to be an intelligent
and educated fellow, but of taciturn disposition. I succeeded in
starting him, however, and it was this way he talked:
“November is the prime time for hunting deer, but this month is very
good. You see, the deer, owing to the thinness of hair, are red in the
summer. As the weather gets cooler, their hair grows longer, and their
color gets blue. If you shoot a deer in the deep water before the middle
of October, he’s liable to sink, and you lose him.”
“Why is that?”
“His hair is what buoys him up. He’d sink like a stone, in the summer or
early fall.”{157}
“Where are the most deer killed?”
“On the river. Sometimes they steer straight for the water. If the day
is hot, they’re sure to get there in a short time. On cool days, they’ll
sometimes race the hounds from morning till night; and then, as a last
hope, with the pack on their heels, they’ll break for the river.
“Do the hounds follow by the ground scent?”
“No. The best hounds leap along snuffing at the bushes that the deer has
brushed against.”
“When, where, and on what do they feed?”
“Here, I know, where the deer have become timid on account of so much
driving, they doze in the day-time, and feed at night. The heavy woods
along the upper streams afford excellent coverts for their day dreams.
In summer picking is plenty; in winter they brouse on the scanty grass,
the diminished mast, and the green but poisonous ivy.”
“Poisonous ivy?”
“Yes. It is singular, but it has no effect on them. It will kill
everything else. Why, one buck, killed here several winters since, had
been living on ivy, and every dog that fed on his entrails was taken
with the blind staggers and nearly died.”
“What’s a slink?”
“A year-old deer. When past a year old, the male deer is called a
spike-buck. It is said that, with every year, a prong is added to their
antlers, but it’s a mistake. I never saw one with more than six prongs;
and in these mountains there’s a certain deer, with short legs, known as
the ‘duck-legged buck,’ that has been seen for the last fifteen years,
and in some unaccountable manner, on every drive he has escaped. Now he
has only six prongs.”
“Have you ever seen him?”
“Yes; once five years ago, and again last fall.”
“Did you ever hear of a stone being found in a deer?”{158}
“Yes, the mad stone. People believe it will cure snake-bite and
hydrophobia. Here’s one. It was found in the paunch of a white deer that
I shot this fall was a year ago; and, mind you, the deer with a
mad-stone in him is twice as hard to kill as one of the ordinary kind.”
“A fact?”
“Yes. Five bullets were put in the buck that carried this.”
The stone he showed was smooth and red, as large as a man’s thumb, and
with one flat, white side. The peculiar properties attributed to it are,
in all probability, visionary. The idea of its being a life preserver
for the deer which carries it, savors of superstition.
“Now,” said Lester, coming to a halt on the ridge; “here’s your stand.
You must watch till you hear the dogs drop into that hollow, or cross
the ridge above you. In such case, the deer has taken another drive-way,
and it’s no use for you to wait any longer. Start on the minute, as fast
as you can go it, down this ridge a quarter of a mile to a big, blasted
chestnut; then turn sharp to the right, cross the hollow and follow
another leading ridge till you strike the river. You know where the Long
rock is?”
“Yes.”
“Well, make right for it, and stand there.”
He disappeared with his hounds, leaving me alone in a wooded, level
expanse. It was then full morning, and the ground was well checkered
with light and shadow. My seat was a mossy rock at the base of a beech
tree, and with breech-loading shot-gun, cocked, and lying across my
knees, I kept my eyes fixed on the depths of forest, and waited for the
bark which would announce the opening of the chase.
Soon it came,—a loud, deep baying, floating, as it seemed, from a long
distance, across steeps, over the trees, and gathering in volume. One of
the deep-mouthed hounds had evidently{159} snuffed something satisfactory in
the dewy grasses or on the undergrowth. His baying had been reinforced
by several pairs of lungs, and the drive was under full head-way. Now it
would be faint, telling of a ravine, rhododendrons, and trees with low
umbrageous branches; then would come a full burst of melody, as the
noses of the pack gained the summit of a ridge, or swept through an open
forest. But, all in all, it grew louder. It was still far above me, on
the spurs of the Smokies, and seemed bearing across the long ridge on
which I rested. Then again it turned, and, in all its glorious strength,
swept below me, through the deep hollow. My excitement reached its
climax just then, for suddenly there was a discord in the music, and
every hound was yelping like mad.
“Yip, yip, yip!” they rang out.
The quick barks told a new story,—the hounds had sighted the game, and,
for the moment, were close on its haunches. It was manifest that the
drive-way I was on was not to be taken. The guide’s instructions for
seeking the river were now to be followed. Starting on a quick pace
through the woods, I traveled as directed, and was soon on the leading
ridge. One rifle shot startled the forest as I ran; and, in the evening,
at Daniel Lester’s pleasant fireside, by the Little Tennessee, Kenswick
told the following story:
Jake Rose had selected for him an excellent stand; admonished him to
keep his eyes peeled, his gun cocked, and not take the “buck-ague” if a
deer shot by him. He heard the chorus, and watched and panted. Suddenly,
under the branches of the wood, appeared a big, blue buck, making long
leaps toward him. Just as he was about to pass within 20 steps, Kenswick
jumped out from behind his tree, and yelled like a Cherokee. The buck
stopped, as though turned to stone, in his tracks, and gazed in
amazement at the noisy Kenswick, who already had his gun at his
shoulder. He tried to draw a bead, but his{160} hands shook so, that he
could not cover the animal by a foot. The buck snuffed the air, made a
leap, and was away as Kenswick, in utter despair, pulled the trigger,
and sent a ball from his Remington whistling through the oak leaves.
“Why!” he exclaimed, in the excitement of telling it, “look at my arm.”
He held it out as steady as a man taking sight in a duel. “Isn’t that
steady? Now why the devil couldn’t I hold it that way then?”
“Buck ague,” answered Ben Lester, quietly; and then the old and young
hunters, around that fireside, laughed uproariously.
The barking of the hounds, like my pace, stopped for a moment at the
report of Kenswick’s gun. Ten minutes after, I was on the Long rock on
the bank of the Little Tennessee. This stand merits a description, for
from it probably more deer have been killed than at any other single
point in the mountains of Western North Carolina. It is at the Narrows.
Here, in the narrowest channel of its course, from below where it begins
to merit the name of a river, this stream, of an average width of 150
yards, pours the whole drainage of the counties of Swain, Jackson,
Macon, one-half of Graham and a small portion of Northern Georgia,
between banks eighty-five feet apart. The waters are those of the rivers
Tuckasege, Cullasaja, Nantihala, Ocona Lufta, and the large creeks Soco,
Scott’s, Caney Fork, Stecoah, Forney, and Hazel, heading in the
cross-chains of the Balsam, Cowee, Nantihala, and Valley River
mountains, and on the southern slope of the Great Smoky.
For 100 yards the stream shoots along like a mill-race. Brown boulders,
the size of horses, coaches and cabins, are piled at the edges of the
current. At the entrance to the Narrows, a line of rocks forms a broken
fall of several feet. Over it the waters are white, and the trees wet
with spray. Above its roar, no rifle shot, or hound’s bay can be heard a
few feet away.{161} Long rock is a dark boulder projecting into the river,
at its very narrowest point, 100 yards below, and in full sight of the
white rapids. The hunter leaves the road, jumps and clambers over a
succession of immense boulders, and at length seats himself on Long
rock. The water, close at its edge, is forty feet deep. A steep
mountain, following the river round every bend, showing square, mossed
rocks under the heavy autumn-tinted forests on its front, rises close
along the river’s opposite edge. A few sand-bars, below the stand, reach
out from the mountain’s foot. There is one narrow band of sandy bank
directly opposite the stand. Projecting boulders shield it from the rush
of waters. On this sandy bank the deer, if frightened when swimming down
mid-stream, will climb out, affording just the shot desired by the
hunter. If not frightened, they will pass on to the smooth-water
sand-bars below, and then, leaving the water, disappear up the mountain.
The drive-way, for which Long rock is a stand, comes down to the river a
few yards above the fall described. There are no rapids on the
Tennessee, but what can be swum by the deer. In many instances, to cool
his body and baffle the hounds, he keeps the center of the stream for a
mile or more, sometimes stopping in the water for hours before resuming
his course. The hounds, when the deer is in sight, follow him in the
water, and generally succeed in drowning him before he reaches the bank.
A deer in the water can be easily managed, but, as seen by the following
anecdote, there is considerable danger in venturing in after one. Still
living in the Smoky Mountain section of the Tennessee, is an old hunter,
by name, Brit Mayner. In the days when his limbs were more supple, he
was brave, even to foolhardiness, and, on one occasion, as told by a
participant in the hunt, he came near losing his life. A deer had been
run to the river, and in mid-stream was surrounded by the hounds.{162}
Through the great strength and endurance of the deer, the hounds were
kept in the water until Mayner, becoming impatient, decided to settle
the fight by his own hand. He divested and swam out. At his first pass
at the deer, the hounds took umbrage, and fiercely attacked him. It was
deer and dogs against man. All were in earnest, and it was only by his
expertness as a swimmer that Mayner escaped being drowned.
That morning I reached the river, and covered the stand. The sun’s rays,
striking the open water, were bright and warm. Only a slight breeze was
blowing, and the frostiness of the air had disappeared. There was no
shadow over the rock; and, sweating from my rapid run, to make myself
comfortable I threw off my coat, vest and shoes.
A position on the deer stand, when one must keep his eyes on the running
water, is most tiresome, even for a few hours. The hunter on Long rock
can, however, study his surroundings without much imperiling his
reputation as a sportsman; for, unless he turned his back entirely on
the upper stream, it would be impossible for a deer to reach his point
unnoticed. The white rapids, the mountains around the distant bend, the
rich-colored wooded slopes on both sides, the sound of waves dashing
against the banks, and the swash of water among the piles of rock, has,
in all, something to make him a dreamer, and pass the hours away
uncounted.
An hour passed, and then I noticed a dark object amid the white foam of
the rapids. A moment later it was in the smooth, swift-flowing waters,
and bearing down the center of the current. My blood jumped in my veins
as I saw plainly the outline of the object. There was the nose, the
eyes, the ears, and, above all, a pair of branching antlers, making up
the blue head of what was undoubtedly a magnificent buck.
When he was within 50 yards of Long rock, I jumped to my feet, hallooed
at the top of my voice, took off my hat and{163} waved it aloft. The buck
saw me. I dropped my hat and leveled my gun. He tried to turn and stem
the current, but it was too strong, and bore him to the sand-bank,
directly opposite my stand. What a shot he would have made in the water!
His feet touched bottom, and then his blue neck and shoulders appeared,
but not before the report of my gun rang out. True, my hand trembled,
but, with a fair bead on his head, I had made the shot. Through the
smoke, I saw him make several spasmodic efforts to draw his body out of
the water, and then, still struggling, he fell back with a splash.
As I stood there, in my stocking feet, and feeling a few inches taller,
I had no doubt that the deer was dead, but I was all at once startled by
the danger I was in of losing him. The current before the sand-bank kept
moving his body, and I saw plainly that in a few minutes it might drift
him into swifter waters, where he might sink. To lose the game, at any
hazard, was out of the question. In a twinkling, my pantaloons and shirt
were off, besides the clothes of which I had previously denuded myself,
and a second after, I had plunged head-first into the Tennessee.
The current bore me down stream like an arrow, but an accomplishment,
picked up in truant days, came in good stead, and with a few, strong
strokes, I reached and climbed out on a sand-bar, at some distance below
where I had made the plunge. As I rose to my feet, I was dumb-founded to
see an antlered head rise from behind the rocks where lay the supposed
slaughtered deer. Then the whole blue form of a buck appeared in view,
and leaped from sight, up the rocks, and under the trees on the
mountain’s steep front. The sight chilled me more than the waters of the
Tennessee. It was the very buck I had shot.
I hurried up the bank, clambered over the cold rocks, and reached the
sand-bar where my game had fallen. It was bare!{164} I could not convince
myself of its being a dream, for there were the imprints of the hoofs. I
picked up the shattered prong of an antler. It had been cut off by a
charge of buckshot. The mystery of the fall and subsequent disappearance
was explained. My shot had hit one of his antlers and simply stunned him
for a moment. Just then a voice rang from the rocks across the river:
“Are ye taking a swim?”
“No, just cooling off,” I answered.
It was Ben Lester who spoke, and with him was Sanford and the dogs.
“Where is the deer that came this way? What luck have you had? Why aint
you here watching?” yelled Sanford.
I did not stop to answer his volley of questions, but plunged into the
river, and reached the opposite bank. Then, dressing myself, I
explained.
“Well,” said Lester, as I finished, “no more could have been expected.”
“Why?” I asked rather indignantly; for, although I fully realized that I
had proved myself a miserable shot, I did not like being accused of it
in terms like these.
“No one could have done any better,” he answered.
“No better?”
“Not a bit. It was the duck-legged buck!”
“Are you sure?” I asked, feeling like a drowning man sighting a buoy;
for here lay the shadow of an excuse for my failure.
“Of course. I saw him leave you. I’ll bet my last dollar that he has
inside of him a mad-stone as big as your fist!” Then shaking his head,
and talking half aloud to himself; “Strange, strange, strange! Fifteen
years old, and still alive!”
I did not attempt to scatter his superstition by telling that in reality
I had hit the buck, and that it was wholly due to my poor marksmanship
that he escaped. Sanford then told how{165} he had topped a doe at his stand
and killed her,—the only game secured that day. In the afternoon the
Rose brothers brought it with our horses, as we had directed, to the
house of Daniel Lester.
Lester’s is an unpretentious, double log house, situated in the center
of a tract of cultivated hill-side land on the north or east bank of the
Little Tennessee, thirty-three miles from Charleston, North Carolina,
and three miles from the Tennessee state line. It is approached by a
good wagon-road from Charleston, or from Marysville, Tennessee, the head
of the nearest railroad. The view from the door-way is of exquisite
beauty, especially towards evening when the wine-red October sun is
sinking amid the clouds beyond the mountain summits at the far end of
the river, and pours a dying glory over the scene. Daniel Lester is a
man of prominence in the county. His is a North Carolinian hospitality,
and we will always hold in pleasant remembrance our short stay at his
humble dwelling.
The most pleasant time of the hunt is the evening of the hunt, when
darkness has fallen, all the party is within the same doors, a rousing
fire roars and leaps in the great, open chimney, and flings its light in
every face, the faucet of the cider-barrel is turned at intervals,
chestnuts are bursting on the hot hearth-stones, and after every man in
his turn has recounted his day’s experience, the oldest hunter of the
group tells his most thrilling “varmint” stories, till the flames die
down to glowing coals, and midnight proclaims the end of the day in
which we were after the antlers.
{166}
{167}
HAT clever humorist, Mark Twain, represents himself as
once patriotically telling the Secretary of the Treasury, that his
annual report was too dry, too statistical; that he ought to get some
jokes into it, wood cuts, at least; people read the almanac for the fun,
etc. The humorist’s idea is not new. It was unintentionally put into
practice by a much respected old geographer, who wrote the statistical
treatise on the earth’s surface, which occupied many long hours of our
pleasure loving youth, in obstinate efforts at memorizing. That
venerable book contained, with wood cuts and all, probably the most
successful joke in school literature. We remember this sentence: “The
staple productions of North Carolina are tar, pitch, resin, and
turpentine.” The picture represented a gloomy forest, a rude still, and
a group of dirty men. A crowd{168} of later writers of school geographies
have thought this canard on a great state, with varied industries, too
good to be lost, but remembering that every ounce of fiction, to be
palatable, must contain a drachm of truth, added lumber. It has now been
stereotyped, “pitch, tar, turpentine, and lumber.” If anyone has been
fooled by the books of his youth, six hours travel from the coast
westward, during which he will see broad fields of corn and plantations
of cotton and tobacco, will lead him to an appreciation of the “tar-heel
joke.” North Carolina does lead all the states in the production of
resin and turpentine, but that industry does not employ one-thirtieth of
her active capital, nor constitute one-fifteenth of her gross
production. Her lumber resources constitute a real and important source
of wealth and will receive some attention in this sketch.
The state of North Carolina could probably get along without the rest of
the world more comfortably than any territory of equal size in the
western hemisphere. With its eastern border dipping into the tropical
gulf stream and its western border projecting more than a mile skyward,
the state possesses a climate almost continental in its range. An old
poet describing the spread-eagle breadth of his country said that it
stretched
From a climatical and botanical point of view North Carolina is as large
as the country described by the poet’s couplet. But it is not the whole
state we propose to discuss. That subject is too long for the prescribed
brevity of our paper, which will permit us to do but partial justice to
the particular section included in the scope of this volume. We begin
with agriculture, the most varied of the three divisions of productive
industry.
The line of 800 feet altitude follows the general direction of the Blue
Ridge, and crosses the counties of Gaston, Lincoln,{169} Catawba, Iredell,
Davie, Forsyth, and Stokes. The best cotton lands of the State lie east
of this line, but cotton is successfully raised in all the counties we
have named. There was a time when planters chose cotton lands with the
greatest regard for soil and climate, but experience has greatly
increased the cotton producing area, which, by the aid of improved
fertilizers, may be still further enlarged. The crop, without the aid of
artificial stimulants, can not be profitably raised in North Carolina
above the line of 800 feet altitude. It has been cultivated for more
than home consumption only within the last few years. Most planters have
realized profitable returns, though the probabilities are that it is not
the most remunerative crop.
Present tendencies indicate that tobacco will become the chief staple
agricultural product of Western North Carolina. The value of a crop,
especially where transportation is high, does not depend so much on the
number of pounds as on the price of each pound. This is why North
Carolina has the advantage of all other tobacco producing states. It can
easily be shown that the piedmont and transmontane table lands have
advantages over the other sections of the state in which they are
included. While the crop of Ohio, which produces a heavy dark leaf,
weighs more than double the crop of North Carolina, yet where estimates
are made upon the basis of market value the latter state will be found
to stand first. The heavy leaves of dark soils contain a large
percentage of nitrogen and are charged with nicotine, rendering them
unpleasant to the taste and smell, and injurious to the health. Not only
is the bright yellow leaf of the Southern Alleghanies singularly free of
these unpleasant and unhealthful properties, but the golden beauty of
its color gives it a value far above any American tobacco. “It is an
undeniable fact,” says Colonel Cameron in his Sketch, “that North
Carolina is the producer of tobacco, unequalled even in Virginia; and
yet, owing to the course trade has{170} taken, she is deprived of her due
credit both in quality and quantity. Until within a few years, when she
has built up some interior markets, Virginia had absorbed her fame as
well as her products.”
It is the experience of planters, that a soil composed of sand mixed
with clay and gravel, is most favorable to the production of the gold
leaf. The conditions of climate are: cool nights, copious rainfall in
summer, and a dry September. These climatic conditions are more
perfectly filled in Western North Carolina than anywhere in the country.
So far as relates to soil, there are portions of every county, with the
possible exception of Watauga, which is too elevated, admirably adapted
to the crop. We will briefly speak of localities, beginning with the
piedmont belt, which consists of an irregular plain, sloping from the
foot of the Blue Ridge toward the southeast. The surface is undulating
and well drained, but even and easily cultivated; except where the South
mountain chain, and its projecting spurs, have made precipitous slopes.
The prevailing timber is yellow pine, post oak, and hickory, and in the
valleys and on the foot-hills, poplar, white oak, elm, and other
hardwoods abound. Large areas are yet in native forest, and smaller
tracts are covered with what is known as old field growth—scrub oak and
pines. There is too much of that desolation called “old field” to make
the landscape attractive to the tourist. Any who are interested in
agriculture, and those departments of business based upon it, should
survey with care the piedmont belt of counties.
The valleys of the Broad, Catawba, and Yadkin, offer for all kinds of
husbandry an inviting field. The soil is composed of a mixture of sand
and loam, with an impervious clay sub-soil. The climatic conditions are
equally auspicious. Abundance of rain, low humidity, cool nights,
temperate days, and equable seasons, contribute alike to the luxuriance
of plants and the{171} health of animals. The headwater valleys of the three
rivers we have named, resemble each other in all essential particulars.
The uplands, which constitute the water-sheds, have in their soil a
larger percentage of clay, and are consequently less desirable than the
bottoms, yet with care and intelligent cultivation, grasses could be
grown with profit. The yield of corn, wheat, and oats, will compare
favorably with any other locality in the South. It is by no means
extravagant to say that soil of the more favored localities has, for
cereals, double its present capacity. Though the region has been settled
for a century, no attempt, except on the part of a few individuals, has
been made to reduce agriculture to the basis of an economic science. The
native population has been tardy in taking hold of tobacco culture, the
most remunerative of all crops. It was indeed left to immigrants to
experiment, and prove the adaptability of the soil and climate to the
plant. The experimental period is now passed, and but a few years remain
till the surplus lands are purchased by progressive planters. Prices
have already increased. Farms which five years ago begged purchasers at
three to five dollars per acre, now sell readily at from eight to
twenty. The only danger to a further increase is the disposition, common
to the human race, to kill the goose which lays the golden egg. A great
many localities in Western North Carolina are already suffering from
this ruinous policy. Immigration is needed, both for the good of the
country and the advancement of values, but people are not disposed to
leave all the associations and security of home, without some strong
inducement. The many tempting inducements which Western North Carolina
offers, in various fields of enterprise, will quickly and surely be
destroyed by a sudden and radical advance of prices. This remark applies
to the timber and mineral tracts, as well as agricultural lands.
The growth of the new town of Hickory furnishes an illustration{172} of what
a little leaven of industry will do in one of these old and rather dead
communities. Prior to 1867 there had been nothing more than a country
tavern at the present site of the town. The completion to, and long rest
at, that point of the Western North Carolina railroad, brought into
existence a small hamlet, which was incorporated as “Hickory Tavern.”
But a little more than ten years ago, a new air began to blow, which set
things astir, and has been keeping them astir ever since. In 1870, the
township had a population of 1,591, the village existing only in a
scattered street and a name; in 1880, the enumeration showed a
population of 3,071, and the village, itself, has a population of not
less than 1,400. Its trade is larger than that of any town between
Salisbury and Asheville, commanding, by its location, several counties.
Tobacco, which can always be relied upon for a cash return, has been the
main instrument in stimulating general industry. Business being of a
productive character—that is, converting raw material into merchantable
goods—is upon a safe and substantial basis. There are two warehouses
for the sale of leaf tobacco, four tobacco factories, several saw-mills,
planing-and shingle-mills, etc., the Piedmont wagon factory, and an iron
foundry. The healthfulness of the climate attracts all the people during
summer which two hotels and a number of private boarding-houses can
accommodate. St. Joseph’s Academy of the Blue Ridge, a Catholic seminary
of some celebrity, is located in the village. There is also a
flourishing Protestant institution for women, known as Claremont
College; a third institution of learning, is Highland school; the three,
together with the public school, giving the place unusual educational
advantages. The railroad depot stands in the center of the spacious
public square, around which most of the mercantile business is done. The
railroad cannot be said to have been built through the town, the town
has been built around the railroad station. The business{173}

SILVER SPRINGS.
Property of Hon. J. L. Henry.
{174}
{175}
buildings are mostly of brick, and substantial, while the residences
show thrift and taste on the part of their owners.
Shelby is the second town in size in the piedmont belt, having a
population of 990 in 1880. It is pleasantly situated in the valley of
First Broad river, and is surrounded by good lands. An experienced
planter ranks Cleveland county, of which it is the capital town, first
in the belt in adaptation to the culture of tobacco. Shelby is likely to
be visited by all who review the historic field on Kings mountain. There
is near the town, one of the oldest health and pleasure resorts in the
state.
Rutherford and Polk counties, drained by the Broad river, on the west
and northwest, are elevated to the summit of the Blue Ridge, and are cut
by its projecting spurs, and by the straggling chain of the South
mountains. Their southern portions are level, and contain many acres of
good land.
The valley of the Catawba, in Burke and McDowell, is unexcelled in the
piedmont region for corn, wheat, oats, and vegetables. The soil is a
clay loam, mixed with sand. The sub-soil is an impervious clay, which
prevents the filtration of applied fertilizers. Better improvements than
are found in most localities bespeak thrift. The trade of the upper
Catawba, and its tributaries, goes to Morganton and Marion. Alexander,
Caldwell, and Wilkes, are fast taking high rank as tobacco producing
counties, though it is probable Catawba will maintain the lead in this
industry.
A few words to the intending immigrant may not be amiss. It is not wise
to select “old field land,” with a view to raising it to a good state of
cultivation. Most of those footprints of desolation are beyond recovery.
Those which are not, it will not pay to attempt to recover as long as
soils less worn remain purchasable at reasonable figures. A Philadelphia
colony made the experiment, against which we warn, in Burke county,
near{176} Morgantown, a few years since. Like most Northerners who come
south, they brought with them the ideas of northern farm life, and the
methods of northern agriculture. With characteristic egotism, they
never, for a moment, doubted their ability to build up what the native
had allowed to run down and abandon as worthless. They purchased, at a
round price, a large tract of old fields, built comfortable frame
houses, and furnished them expensively. But much use and abuse had
exhausted the clay of its substance, and, in spite of deep ploughing and
careful seeding, it yielded no harvest. Their furniture was sold at a
sacrifice, and they returned, to Pennsylvania, disheartened. If they had
selected the best lands, instead of the worst, and been content to live
economically, as poor people must live, the result might have been
different. The folly which has made old fields, makes trying to
resuscitate them none the less foolish, though buyers are frequently
made to believe the contrary. The question naturally comes up: why are
there so many of these ugly blots, marked by scrubby pines, upon the
face of an otherwise fair landscape? The answer is, indifferent farming,
resulting, in a great many cases, from the ownership of too much land.
There was no object in saving manures, and ploughing deep, when the next
tract lay in virgin soil, awaiting the axe, plough, and hoe. The writer
remarked to a farmer, in Burke county, that his corn looked yellow and
inquired the reason.
“Waal,” said he, “I gin hit up. I’ve worked that thar patch in corn now
nigh onto forty year, and hits gin worster and worster every year. I
reckon hits the seasons.”
To an intelligent planter in Catawba, I explained my inability to
understand how soil, originally good, could be made so absolutely
unproductive.
Evidently taking my question to imply some doubt as to the virginal
fertility of which he had been telling me, he pointed{177} significantly to
an adjoining field, where a woman was plowing, or, more properly
speaking, stirring the weeds with a little bull-tongue plow, drawn by a
fresh cow, while the calf, following after, with difficulty, kept in the
half made furrow. “You see what kind of work that is,” said my friend,
“but in spite of it, they will harvest 15 bushels of wheat to the acre.”
When, a little further along, I saw a wooden-toothed harrow in the fence
corner, I was ready to give nature considerable credit.
During the same ride, while crossing a sand ridge, we came where some
men were making a clearing. The prevailing growth, standing close
together, was a species of pine, uniformly about one foot stumpage, and
reaching, mast-like, to the altitude of sixty feet. Between these were
scrub oaks four to six inches in diameter, making the thicket so dense
that to ride a horse through it would have been difficult.
“It strikes me,” said I, “as rather a strange fact, that those pines are
all the same size. What species are they?”
“Those,” replied my friend, “are what we call old field pine. You asked
me back there how land could be so completely worn out; here we have an
example. That piece of land was cleared, may be, 100 years ago. It was
then worked in corn, corn, nothing but corn, for may be twenty years, or
more; not a drop of anything put on. It was then completely worked out,
and turned public to grow up in timber again. Now it has been shaded and
catching leaves for many a year, and has got some nutriment on top. They
will work it in corn or wheat till there’s no substance left. The bottom
was all taken out by the first working, and there will be nothing left
to make a growth of trees a second time. When they get it worked out
this time, it’s gone forever; over here on this side is a specimen. That
field was cleared a second time ten years ago; now you see it won’t
hardly raise Japan clover, and never will.”
“Don’t you try to sell these old fields, and old field forests,{178} to men
who come in here from abroad to make purchases?” I inquired.
“Well, it’s natural for us to get something out of this waste when we
get the chance. But you’ve traveled in these parts, and seen large
bodies of good land to be bought at low figures, and you may say that
anybody that comes here will be treated right.”
“Suppose,” said I, “that on these better tracts Yankee methods should be
adopted—after every few years of cultivation, seed the land down to
grass, which feed to stock in barns; feed your corn fodder steamed, and
use your wheat and oats straw for stable bedding. In that way almost all
the vegetation taken off the soil is returned in a decomposed and
enriched form.”
“Generally speaking,” said my companion, “I have little faith in Yankee
ways in the South. I used to have a plantation in the low country, and
have seen lots of those fellows come down with nickel-plated harness and
steel plows. Most of them would begin to cultivate our friendship by
telling us we didn’t know anything about our business. But we noticed
that they all had to come to our ways, or sell out. The idea of Northern
newspapers, that our plantations before the war were not worked
systemically, is a mistake. Still I think your idea of farming in this
elevated country is correct. You see here, with the exception of long,
rigid winters, the climate is essentially northern, owing to our
elevation. Every experiment at improved farming has been successful,
though very few have been made.”
We were reminded by this of a story told by General Clingman, of
Asheville, at the expense of an intelligent citizen of Buncombe county,
whose residence was on Beetree creek, a branch of the Swanannoa. “As the
surface of the stream was almost level with the surface of the ground,
my fellow-citizen,” says Clingman, “being of good intellect and general
reading, saw on reflection that he could with little trouble{179} utilize
its waters. He constructed his stable just as near to it as possible,
and then cut a slight ditch to the stream, and with the aid of a hastily
made gate of boards, he could at will let the water into his stable.
When, therefore, his stable became rather full of manure, he had only to
turn his horses on the pasture for a day, raise his little gate, and in
a few minutes the stream of water was carrying everything away, and left
the stable much cleaner than it would have been had he used a mattock
and spade. His neighbors all admired his ingenuity in being able to
devise such a labor-saving operation.”
Watauga is the highest county of the Appalachians. Few of its valleys
dip below 3,000 feet above tide level, while a few peaks of its boundary
chains lift to about 6,000. The spurs projecting into this highland
basin are neither high nor abrupt, and the ascent from the interior to
the crest of the great chains of the Blue Ridge, the Yellow mountain and
the Stone and Iron, is at places so gradual as to be imperceptible. The
bottoms along the Watagua river and its many branches, and along the New
river and its branches in Watauga and Ashe counties, are well adapted to
almost all the cereals, to vegetable roots, and to the hardier varieties
of fruits. Ashe county bears a general resemblance to Watagua, but is
about 1,000 feet lower, and consequently warmer. The climate of both
counties is almost identical with the famous butter and cheese districts
of central and western New York. Indeed, few sections of the eastern
part of the United States are more inviting for stock raising and
dairying. All the heavy mountain ranges of the southern Alleghanies
furnish a large amount of wild vegetation nutritive for almost all kinds
of domestic animals. The lofty tops are heavily sodded. Being cool and
well watered, they are unsurpassed as pastures during at least seven
months in the year. Stock in some localities has been known to subsist
upon them during the entire year, but no prudent ranger{180} will fail to
provide for his cattle and horses at least three months’ feed and two
months’ valley pasture. Sheep cannot with safety be turned out on the
distant mountain range, but in most localities they will find abundant
subsistance upon the nearer slopes. Almost anywhere on the luxurious
uplands a goat would think himself in a paradise. A gentleman of large
experience in the stock business in Ashe county informed the writer that
most failures result from an attempt to keep larger herds than the
valleys will sustain. Experience had taught him that it is never safe to
multiply the number of horses and cattle beyond the number of acres of
tillable valley land, while twice that number of sheep can be kept. The
mountain slopes, however, now almost a waste of woodland, are fertile,
and might be reduced, at small outlay, to valuable pastures, and thus
the capacity of the country increased tenfold. These slopes are not, as
in most mountain countries, rocky and broken by exposed ledges. To the
very top there is a heavy covering of earth, surfaced by a black
vegetable mold, which only needs the assistance of sunlight to bring
forth grass in profusion. By simply grubbing out the undergrowth and
deadening the large trees, the capacity for stock, of almost any
locality of the trans-Blue Ridge portion of North Carolina, could be
quadrupled. The price of valley land in Ashe, Alleghany and Watauga
counties ranges from ten to fifteen dollars per acre. The mountains are
purchasable at prices ranging from forty cents to three dollars per
acre, the average price for any large tract being about one dollar.
The writer knows of only two large ventures having been made in sheep
raising; one in Haywood county, and the other in Graham. They both
resulted in total failure, due, however, wholly to the inexperience of
the operators, or ignorance of the shepherds employed by them. In the
first instance, inadequate valley pasturage had been provided, upon
which to support{181} a flock of about 500 sheep during the few cold months
of the winter. The flock, through exposure and scanty feed, became so
reduced in number, before the opening of an early spring, that its owner
abandoned his project.
In Graham county, a northern gentleman having purchased the largest and
one of the finest farms in that locality, discovering that the
surrounding range was admirably adapted for sheep raising, on a large
scale, shipped in a flock of 800 merino sheep. They were ill attended by
ignorant shepherds, and all of them soon died.
Through care in the purchase of a valley farm, adjacent to fair upland,
and bald, mountain-summit pastures, and in the matter of selecting
competent hands, together with some personal attention to the business
on the part of the operator, there is no reason why large profits might
not flow from a venture in this line.
The remarks upon stock-raising in Watauga and Ashe counties, will apply
in general to every other county of the intermontane division of the
state, though, of course, some counties are more favored than others,
and the natural conditions vary in detail in each. Yancey and Mitchell
have large tracts adapted to this industry. The experiment of raising
tobacco has been found successful in the lower and more sandy portions
of Mitchell. This remunerative crop is no longer an experiment in
Yancey, the soil and climate in the western part being well adapted to
it.
The French Broad valley, from an agricultural point of view, is
deserving of special attention. The territory embraced is divided into
four counties—Madison, Buncombe, Henderson, and Transylvania.
I was riding with a friend one afternoon in September, through the cañon
of the French Broad. We were occupying the steps to the back platform of
the last car, feasting, for the twentieth{182}

THE FRENCH BROAD CAÑON.
time, upon the ever-changing display of beauty. “This,” said my friend,
interrupting the silence, “is all very impressive. No one, whose
feelings have any communion with nature, can escape the charm of these
bold precipices, robed with vines, and crowned with golden forest. These
curves are the materialization of beauty. That surging, dashing,
foaming, torrent, gradually eroding its channel deeper into the
adamantine granite, is a grand demonstration of the superiority of force
over matter. The great drawback to this valley is its poverty of useful
productions. Western North Carolina, it strikes me, may be compared to a
great picture or poem; we never fail to derive pleasure from it, yet
there is nothing in it to make money out of, or even to furnish a
respectable living. While the scenery here is all that can possibly be
desired, and the climate is almost perfect, this country can never be
anything more than it is now, except, perhaps, in the number and size of
its summer hotels. It hasn’t the resources.”{183}
“What is the extent of your knowledge of this country?” I inquired.
“Oh, merely what I’ve seen from the railroad line, but I suppose it’s
pretty much all alike.”
My friend was mistaken, in supposing that the wealth of the Southern
Alleghanies consists wholly in scenery and climate. He was also mistaken
in supposing that railroad views had afforded him any considerable
knowledge of the country.
Madison county, back of the river bluffs, is almost wholly a succession
of hills, coves and narrow valleys, nine-tenths of it timbered with a
heavy growth of hard and soft woods. The slopes are remarkable for
fertility, there being small particles of lime percolated through the
soil. The cultivated grasses grow rank, and the cereals yield
satisfactory harvests. But owing to the limited area of the valleys, and
the almost entire absence of level land, ordinary farming can never be
carried on in Madison with remunerative results. Too much labor is
required to cultivate an acre of the slopes for the ordinary return in
wheat or corn. It is in tobacco that the Madison county farmer has found
his Eldorado. I know of no industry which offers so much inducement to
the poor laborer as the cultivation of this crop. There is no staple
product which derives its value so exclusively from labor, or yields to
that labor a larger return. A few figures will serve to illustrate.
Uncleared land can be purchased at an average price of $3 per acre, in
small tracts. About one-third of the purchase will be found adapted to
tobacco, making the cost of tillable land $9 an acre. Basing our
estimates upon the production of the last three years, a yield of $200
from each acre planted may be expected. In addition to such other small
crops as are needed to yield food for his family, an industrious man and
two small boys can clear, prepare the soil, and cultivate four and
one-half acres a{184} year, which, if properly cured, will bring in the
market $900—money enough to pay for three hundred acres of land.
The sunny slopes are considered by planters best adapted to the crop.
Sand and gravel is the needed composition of soil, and a forest growth
of white pine indicates auspicious conditions. The east side of the
French Broad has been found to have more good tobacco land than the
west, but the ratio we have given is not too great for either side. The
crop leaves the soil in excellent condition for wheat and grass after
four years’ cultivation, though at the present prices of land, planters
would find it economical to sow in wheat and seed to grass after two
years’ cultivation in tobacco. The gross aggregate of the crop of 1882
in Madison county will probably be $250,000. W. W. Rollins, of Marshall,
is extensively engaged in the business, the number of his tenant
families being about sixty.
Up the river, into Buncombe county, the valleys widen, and the acreage
of comparatively level land increases; the settlement becomes denser,
and the proportion of cleared land to native forest, is greater than in
any county west of the Blue Ridge.
The valleys of Hominy creek, Swannanoa, and Upper French Broad, contain
several thousand acres which could be cultivated with improved
machinery. The soil is of average fertility—well adapted to the
cereals, grasses and tobacco—but in many localities its capacity has
been lowered by use and abuse. Some valleys, naturally fertile, are
almost wholly exhausted. There has been, however, marked improvement,
both in farming methods and farming machinery, within the last five
years.
Above Buncombe, in the French Broad valley, are Henderson and
Transylvania counties, embraced within high mountain chains, and formed
of a basin-like territory, which bears some evidence of having once been
a lake. It is a surprise, to most{185} people, to find, within a few miles
of the crest of the Blue Ridge, a marsh of such extent as exists in
Henderson county.
The French Broad changes its character at Asheville, below which place
it is a torrent, and above a placid, almost immobile stream, rising to
the slightly higher altitude of the upper valley, in terraces, rather
than by gradual ascent. Its shallow channel is bordered by alluvial
bottoms—deposits carried from the mountain slopes—varying in width
from a few rods to five miles, making, with a background of mountains
rising massively in the distance, a landscape of surpassing beauty. A
conservative estimate places the number of acres of first bottom land
along the upper valley of the French Broad and its tributaries at
20,000, and twice that number of acres could be cultivated with sulky
plows and harvested with self-binding reapers. Cane creek, followed by
the Henderson and Buncombe county line, drains considerable low land—at
places near its mouth almost marshy. On the opposite side of the French
Broad there is a wide expanse of alluvial land, cut by Mill’s river, and
extending for a distance of two miles up that stream, where the valley
becomes second bottom and slope.
Ochlawaha (Mud creek, locally named) emptying into the French Broad from
the east, like its Florida namesake, is a lazy, sluggish stream. Its
headsprings are in the crest of the Blue Ridge, all the way from the
high Pinnacle and Hebron range to Sugarloaf and Bearwallow. The
immediate basin of the stream from a short distance below Flat Rock, to
its mouth, bears a unique character, being the only marsh in Western
North Carolina. Its width varies from one fourth to two miles, and its
length may be estimated at ten miles. A rank growth of vegetation is
annually submerged. A soil of vegetable mold several feet in depth has
been formed. Recent surveys show that the decline is sufficient to admit
of perfect drainage, which{186} would make this one of the most valuable
agricultural and grazing tracts in the country.
The crest of the Blue Ridge, in Henderson county, is an undulating
plateau, which will not be recognized by the traveler in crossing. The
Saluda mountains, beyond Green river, are the boundary line of vision on
the south. The general surface features of the central part of this
pearl of counties will be best seen by a glance at the pictorial view
from Dun Cragin, near Hendersonville.
Above the mouth of Ochlawaha the bottoms of French Broad gradually
widen. The foot hills being the fartherest distance apart above the
mouth of Little river, Boylston creek, Cathey’s creek, Davidson’s river,
Little river and both forks of French Broad all have tempting valleys.
It should be remarked that a large percentage of the land in these fair
and fertile bottoms has been badly worn by much poor farming, but very
little is worn out, so that there is yet not only hope but certainty of
redemption by proper management. The expense of reinvigorating exhausted
tracts is materially lightened by the presence of limestone outcrops.
As a grazing district the upper French Broad has advantages over any
other section of equal extent, though there are elsewhere small
localities which surpass any portion of it. These advantages are, extent
of level tillable land for hay and grain, altitude which insures low
temperature and healthfulness, and third, proximity to the best wild
range in the Balsams and Blue Ridge. The scientific agriculturist will
be able to draw conclusions from the following recapitulations of
conditions: abundance of rain, perfect drainage, warm sun, cool breezes,
and an alluvial soil with occasional outcrops of lime rock.
All the good grains produce well. Vegetables grow to a large size.
Experiments in the culture of tobacco have been successful in the main,
and the industry may become an important{187} one. The population is more
intelligent than in most rural districts. The one great thing needed is
adequate and cheap transportation facilities. One railroad taps this
territory at Hendersonville, but more are needed. There remain large
tracts of unimproved lands which might be reduced to a state of
cultivation. What is locally known as the Pink Beds, in the northwestern
part of Transylvania, a dense forest plateau, is an absolute wilderness
in which a lost traveler might wander for days before finding his way to
a settlement. Among the spurs of the Balsam range and Blue Ridge, and in
the valley of Green river there are many thousand acres of forest.
The Pigeon river in North Carolina is exclusively the property of
Haywood county. Its water sheds are, on the west the main chain of the
Balsam range, and on the south and east the Balsams and New-found
mountains. The political division follows almost exactly this line. The
principal tributaries of the Pigeon, each draining fine valleys, are, on
the west Cataluche, Jonathan’s creek and Richland creek; on the east
Fines creek. The main channel is divided by Cold mountain into two
prongs. The valley of Pigeon throughout its whole length is wide and
undulating, except where it cuts its way through the Smoky mountains
into Tennessee. Below the junction of Richland creek the soil is a
mixture of sand and gravel. Farther up it partakes more of a clayey
character. The fertility of the mountains is evidenced by the great size
and variety of the forest growth. The ranges being high, the coves are
long, and give to the distant view from the valley a peculiarly pleasing
effect. Good crops of corn, wheat, oats, buckwheat, etc., can be raised
almost to the crest of the highest mountains. The Balsams furnish more
wild range than any other chain. Haywood has for many years had the
reputation of being the best wheat county in the transmontane portion of
the state, and with proper cultivation has the capacity to sustain that
reputation.{188} The culture of tobacco in the northern and lower portion
has been entirely successful, and will soon become an important element
of industry.
Across the Balsam range into Jackson and Swain counties we recognize
newer settlements. This fact partially accounts for sparcer population
and less extensive tracts under cultivation. But a better reason is
found in the more broken condition of the country and consequent
narrowness of the valleys. Of the fertility of the mountains in Jackson
there can be no doubt, for the trees are larger and of finer texture
than of any other locality. Swain county differs from Jackson in having
more river bottom land, a sandier soil, and a warmer climate. About
one-third of its territory is a wilderness, unpenetrated except by
hunters and herders. We refer to the great Smoky mountain chain and its
southward spurs. The valley of the Tuckasege is not wide but embraces
many valuable farms. There is nothing like a continuous stretch of
bottom along its affluents. The Little Tennessee is bordered at places
by wide and fertile alluvions. Swain county has the conditions of soil
and climate requisite to the production of the very best quality of gold
leaf tobacco. Having mild winters, the fertile slopes of the Cowee and
Smoky ranges might be reduced to valuable pastures.
The valley of the Tennessee and its branches placed Macon first of the
counties west of the Balsam range in population and wealth. With the
assistance of its valuable mineral deposits, it will probably be able to
maintain its position. Above Franklin wide bottoms stretch from both
sides of the Little Tennessee, exposing several thousand acres of level
surface, with a soil of gravel and vegetable loam, washed from the
neighboring slopes and higher altitudes of Northern Georgia. The ascent
of the Cullasaja to the crest of the Blue Ridge is very gradual until an
undulating plateau of several miles length and varying width is reached.
On this plateau is the village and settlement of Highlands.{189} If you
reach it from Franklin, and doubt that you are on the top of a mountain
range 3,700 feet high, express yourself to any resident and in fifteen
minutes he will have you looking over a precipice of 1,100 feet, while
far below you in the blue distance waves the upper plain of South
Carolina. The climate of the Macon highlands is cool and bracing. The
showers, which are at all seasons numerous, are, however, warm, the
clouds coming from the heated low lands farther south. Wheat and oats
produce well, and corn yields a fair harvest. But the most promising
hope of this section, agriculturally speaking, lies in dairying and
stock raising. Land is cheap, and both indigenous and cultivated grasses
grow luxuriantly.
At Franklin the traveler will certainly hear of the Ellijay, whose
valley is a competing candidate for admiration, with the princely peaks
which hide it in their evening shadows. There are some substantial
improvements in the valley of Burningtown creek. The best wild range, in
Macon county, is in the Nantihala mountains. I was shown a five-year-old
horse which was born in the mountains, and had “never received a
mouthful of grain or cured roughness.” Many farmers leave their cattle
out to range all winter. Sheep raising would be profitable, if carried
on extensively enough to afford the employment of a shepherd. It must
not be inferred, from what has been repeatedly said pf wild range,
grazing, and stock-raising, that the mountain slopes, which comprise
two-thirds of the surface of the intermontane country, are covered with
a sod of indigenous grasses. They are rather marked by the absence of
grasses, as all deep-shaded forests are. It is on the treeless tops that
cattle subsist and fatten, the tufts under the trees being only
occasional, except where a fallen tree or cliff has made an opening for
heat and light to enter. There are among{190} the trees, however, abundance
of herbs and shrubs upon which sheep and goats would subsist.
Of Clay, Graham, and Cherokee counties, little need be said. All the
trans-Balsam counties bear a general family likeness. The valley of the
Cheowah, near Robbinsville, is the most attractive part of Graham. The
valley of Hiawassee, with its tributaries, Nottelley and Valley river,
belongs to the sixth natural division of Western North Carolina. There
is, in both Cherokee and Clay counties, a large percentage of level
land. Speculators have invested largely in the former, mainly on account
of the iron and marble deposits which lie exposed.
Taken altogether, the best results, agriculturally, are to be obtained
from the cultivation of the grasses, vegetables, and tobacco. The
cereals can never be produced with profit beyond the narrow limit of
home demand.
The subject of horticulture is, in North Carolina, an important one.
Vegetables, grains, and grasses, of the same variety, flourish in a wide
range of territory, but fruits are tender darlings of climate. In regard
to temperature, the heart of the Alleghanies is a peninsula of the
northern north temperate zone projecting into the southern. While this
fact has been known, and its advantages appreciated for more than half a
century, there has been inexplicable tardiness in utilizing it. How much
longer will the great South continue to buy, in the markets of the
North, what can be produced more cheaply and of better quality in her
own highland valleys? The piedmont region is adapted to a great variety
of semi-temperate fruits. The persimmon, grape, plum, and thorned
berries, are found, wild, abundantly everywhere. We know of no instance
in which the cultivated varieties of these fruits have failed, when
properly planted and attended. The peaches raised in the shade of the
Blue Ridge are of unexcelled flavor. They will stand comparison with the
best Delaware productions. Apples{191} and pears may be classed among the
piedmont fruits, but the former are of better flavor on the higher
altitudes. Grapes grow large and mature thoroughly in the cool dry month
of September. The vines seem large and healthy.
It is only in the lower valleys that peaches of good size and flavor can
be raised. The plumb, that most difficult of all fruits to protect from
destruction by insects, grows on the slopes to full ripeness. Experiment
with cultivated grapes has been limited, but the luxuriance and variety
of the wild vines, indicate a soil and climate favorable to this
industry. The nativity of the Catawba is traced to this highland region,
and is still found, side by side with the fox and blue wine grape. There
is nothing more beautiful in rural scenery, than these luxuriant vines,
winding and entwining among the branches of a spreading tree, until they
have completely smothered it in their tendril grasp.
The apple finds a congenial home among these southern mountains. In
flavor, and perfection of development, this fruit will compare with the
choicest production of Michigan. The trees grow large and healthy; there
are fewer, than in most sections, of those destructive insects which
burrow the wood and sting the fruit. The winters are never cold enough
to freeze the buds, and frost need not be looked for after the
blossoming season, making the crop much more reliable than at the North.
Abundance of moisture gives the fruit full size, and the autumns being
cool and long, the ripening process is slow and natural. The whole
mountain country is adapted to apple orchards. At present, the upper
French Broad valley—Henderson and Transylvania—excel all other
sections, both in quality and quantity. Tons of apples are annually
wasted, which, if carried to the market at reasonable cost of
transportation, would furnish no inconsiderable revenue.
Horticulturists are just beginning to appreciate the advantages{192} of the
thermal or “no frost” zone. It was Silas McDowell, of Macon county, who
first called attention to the existence of certain belts along the
southern slope of the Blue Ridge and projecting spurs, wherein the fall
of frost was unknown, and the season more than a fortnight earlier in
spring, and later in fall than the adjacent slope on either side. So
marked is the effect that a green band, in early spring, seems to be
stretched across the side of the mountain. The line on both sides is
clearly defined, and does not vary more than a few feet from year to
year. The scientific bearings of this singular phenomenon are
intelligently discussed by Mr. McDowell, in a paper published in the
Smithsonian Reports in 1856. An explanation for the existence of such a
belt is derived from a theoretical knowledge of the directions and
commingling of air currents, determined by the conformation of the
slope.
Sections of this frostless zone are found on almost every spur of the
main chain of the Blue Ridge from Catawba county to Georgia, the largest
area in any unbroken tract being on the side of Tryon mountain in Polk
county. Its economic value for fruit and vegetable culture is
inestimable. Like conditions of climate exist nowhere on the continent.
The season is as long as in Southern Georgia and South Carolina, while,
on the other hand, the thermometer never ranges higher than in New York,
Ohio or Michigan. These conditions, for grapes, pears, peaches and
apples, are perfect. The climatic conditions with respect to moisture
are favorable, and in some respects superior to famous fruit growing
districts.
The forest growth of Western North Carolina is a subject in which there
is at present a wide and growing interest. Of the territory west of the
river Catawba, more than three-fourths is yet covered with the original
forest. Almost every variety of hard wood, indigenous to the eastern
part of the United States, is found on the piedmont plain, or on the
mountain slopes.{193} Within a day’s journey for an ox-team grow the
steel-like persimmon, the inelastic hemlock, and the impervious balsam
fir. The trees in most localities are so thick as to form an
impenetrable shade. Their size and quality depend mainly upon fertility
and altitude. While there are poplars six feet in diameter, at the
stump, and sixty feet to the first limb, cherries four feet stumpage,
and walnuts eight, these are the exceptions, and the ones that become
celebrated. The thousands upon which the operating lumberman must rely
for his returns, are of profitable size, but not giants, as the
uninitiated might infer from advertising circulars or occasional notices
in the local newspapers.
Yellow pine is found in the piedmont region in considerable size and
quantity. The quality is inferior to the best southern pines, but it
serves very well for most domestic purposes. White pine of superior
grade and large trees are found in many of the mountain valleys, but its
growth can not be said to be general. The regions likely to become
available, are in Madison county, Haywood and Swain. The largest white
pines in the state are in the latter county on the banks of Larkie
creek.
Oaks, of almost every variety, abound everywhere. It is the boast of the
state that nineteen of the twenty species of oak are found within her
territory; at least fourteen are found west of the Catawba river. The
common white oak, which is the most valuable, grows in every valley and
cove lower than 4,000 feet, and, in solidity and tenacity, is far
superior to the growth of lower altitudes. The same is true of ash and
hickory, which abound everywhere. The white hickory of the piedmont
plains is being already purchased, and manufactured into spokes and
handles. The white ash of the mountain valleys has a fine grain and firm
texture. The best growth may be looked for in the dark coves. North
Carolina hickory commands a ready market, large quantities being
consumed by the{194} export trade. The factory at Greensboro draws a large
percentage of its supplies from the western section.
Black walnut, here, as elsewhere, was the first wood hunted out by
speculators. But few trees remain within available reach of
transportation east of the Blue Ridge, and those in the western counties
which are yet standing, have been sold to speculators. More than twenty
million feet of walnut timber have changed ownership since 1880. As fast
as the railroad creeps through the valley toward its western terminus,
these princes of the forest are being reduced to lumber and shipped to
northeastern markets. In quality, southern mountain walnut takes high
rank; in size, it compares with the trees of the flat-lands of the
north. A tree was cut in Haywood county recently which measured over
eight feet across the stump, and forty-seven to the first limb. Four
feet stumpage is not an extraordinary size.
The predominant growth of the mountains, both in the piedmont and
trans-Blue Ridge sections, is chestnut. On some ridges it is almost the
exclusive growth, but occurs, in diminished numbers, though increased
size, in the dark coves. The great trees are of no value, except for
rails, fire-wood, and charcoal; the young and vigorous are of greater
value as a cabinet wood, and for house finishing. Tons of nuts fall to
the ground annually. The mountain farmer, in fact, relies upon the
chestnut as a staple food for his hogs. In addition to its uses, the
chestnut tree is a factor in giving character to the landscape. Its
creamy bloom blends beautifully with the mellow pink of the kalmia, and
brilliant scarlet of the rhododendron.
Next to the chestnut in the glory of its bloom, comes the locust. This
tree, as a scattered growth, may be found almost everywhere. It grows
tall and symmetrical, and ranges in diameter from six inches to two
feet. Locust is a valuable commercial{195} wood. It is little effected by
dampness or earth, and is consequently used for fence posts, and in
ship-building extensively. It is also used in the manufacture of heavy
wagons, for hubs.
Poplars in the Southern Alleghanies attain great size and in symmetry of
form excel all other trees. The use of its lumber are almost as varied
as oak, and being somewhat scarcer, it commands a higher price in the
market. It is found on almost every slope and in every valley. The
poplar blossom contains more sugar than the bloom of any other forest
tree. The bee keeper among the Alleghanies can always rely on well
filled honey combs.
Black birch is a wood just beginning to receive the attention of
manufacturers, and the day is not far distant when it will take a high
place among cabinet woods. The rapid consumption of walnut is warning
far-seeing lumbermen to cast about for a substitute. Black gum and black
birch seem to be the most available candidates. There are several
varieties of birch, but none equals the product of the Southern
Alleghanies in beauty of grain or richness of color. It is mainly a cove
growth, and attains to workable size. Black gum is found, but only as
isolated trees.
Cherry, which of American woods for ornamental purposes, is second only
to walnut, is found in some sections of the mountain regions in great
abundance. The Smoky range, together with its projecting spurs from the
Virginia line south, is noted for the size of its cherry forests. The
vicinity of Roan mountain and the headwaters of the Ocona Lufta excel
all other sections. The high coves of the Balsam range also contain
large and valuable trees.
Maple, linn, sycamore, cucumber, mulberry, sassafras, dogwood, sourwood,
gopher, and buckeye is a partial list of the remaining deciduous trees.{196}
Above all, enveloping the summits of the highest ranges in impenetrable
shade, silent and somber, stand forests of balsam fir. The general
character of these dense, dark thickets is described elsewhere. The wood
itself remains briefly to be spoken of. The fir of the North Carolina
Alleghanies differs from the species in the far north, both in the size
of the tree and in the smoothness and density of the wood. It may be
looked for in the three localities, each, however, embracing a large
area of territory—the culmination of the Balsams at the corners of
Haywood, Transylvania and Jackson; on the great Smoky chain, and within
the ellipse of the Blacks. The “female tree,” which is cone shaped and
has limbs to the grounds, is worthless except for the resin of the
blister drawn out by puncturing the bark at a certain season of the
year, and used as the base of medicinal preparation. The “male tree”
grows to a diameter of two feet, and has a straight, clear trunk to the
length of thirty to sixty feet. The wood is straight, fine grained,
firm, and unelastic. It is highly charged with acetic sap, which makes
the green lumber very heavy. When dried it becomes light—lighter than
white pine. In color it is as white as the paper on which this is
printed, and the density and firmness of the grain makes it susceptible
of high polish. The same structure renders it impervious to water. The
writer was shown a churn made of balsam staves which had been in use for
thirty years. The wood under the surface was not even stained. This wood
has received no attention from wood manufacturers, but it may some time
be valuable for ship-building, buckets, and for house-finishing. For the
latter purpose it will rival in color and surface the world-famed satin
wood of California.
The arborescent kalmia and rhododendron, which grow along almost every
mountain stream, have a practical use. The ivy and laurel, as they are
locally called, attain, in some of the fertile coves,{197} a diameter of
three inches, and the roots are even larger. Their graceful crooks and
turns and bulbous, burly roots, make them exceptionally fine timber for
all kinds of rustic devices—fences, flower urns, chairs, etc. The wood
can be worked only when green; dried, it becomes as hard as bone. Its
density, hardness, and mottled grain, make it a valuable wood for pipe
bowls and knobs, also for light tool handles and shuttles. No use is
made of these shrubs at present, except for rustic furniture.
At present, Hickory manufactures more lumber than any other town in the
state west of the Catawba. Highlands, on the Blue Ridge, probably
deserves the second place, though the industry is only in its infancy.
We have no hesitancy in saying that the forests in the western section
are intrinsically more valuable than in the middle belt of North
Carolina, or in any part of South Carolina. Five thousand square miles
of area are awaiting enterprising dealers and manufacturers in wood.
Capital, transportation inducements, and business capacity, aided by
mechanical skill, are needed—three requisites to the development of a
great industry, with which the region can be supplied only from abroad.
Thus far this sketch has been written mainly from personal observation.
We now come to a subject, however, in the treatment of which authorized
publications and the investigations of other individuals must be relied
upon. Our errors in what shall be said upon the subject of mineralogy
will be errors of omission. There has never been anything like a
systematic exploration of the Southern Alleghanies. This statement will
surprise no one familiar with the country, for such a task would involve
years of expensive labor, an investment which the state legislature has
never shown an enthusiastic willingness to make. We might quote a page
of axioms applicable to this subject. “What is worth doing, is worth
doing well,”{198} “The most economy is sometimes the greatest folly.” But we
forbear the repetition of platitudes. The state publications tell us,
with well-founded pride, that North Carolina was the first government in
America to order a geological survey. Can she, on that account, afford
to be the last state to publish a full exposition of her geological
structure and mineral resources? Private enterprise, however, is
annually adding to the stock of information, and gradually the general
character of mineral deposits is becoming known. We were told by many a
hostess during our rambles that she “had kep’ a powerful site of them
rock-hunters.” The mineral excitement was highest from 1872 to 1875. Mr.
King, in a paper published in Scribner’s Monthly, descriptive of a trip
through the mountains in 1874, says:
“Wherever we went we found the ‘rock hunters’ had been ahead of us,
and a halt by the wayside at noon would generally bring us to some
denizen of the neighborhood who would say ‘Good mornin’, gentlemen;
after rocks?’ And then would produce from his pockets some
specimens, which he was ‘mighty certain he did’nt know the name
of.’ Many a farmer had caught the then prevalent mica fever, and
some had really found deposits of that valuable mineral which were
worth thousands of dollars. There is no danger of over-estimating
the mineral wealth of this mountain country; it is unbounded. There
are stores of gold, silver, iron, copper, zinc, corundum, coal,
alum, copperas, barytes, and marl, which seem limitless. There are
fine marble and limestone quarries, whose value was unsuspected,
until the railroad pioneer unearthed it. The limestone belt of
Cherokee county contains stores of marble, iron, and gold; Jackson
county possesses a vast copper belt, and the iron beds of the
Yellow mountains are attracting much notice. The two most
remarkable gold regions are in Cherokee and Jackson counties. The
valley river sands have been made in former times to yield
handsomely, and now and then good washings have been found along
its tributaries. The gold is found in various and superficial
deposits in the same body of slates which carries limestone and
iron. Before the war liberal arrangements had been made for mining
in Cherokee, but since the struggle the works remain incomplete. It
is supposed that the gold belt continues southward across the
country, as other mines are found in the edge of Georgia. The gold
in Jackson county is obtained from washings along the southern
slopes of the Blue Ridge, near the mountains known as ‘Hogback’ and
‘Chimney Top,’ and Georgetown creek, one of the head streams of
Toxaway, yielded several thousand dollars a few years ago. In this
wild country, where the passes of the Blue Ridge rise precipitously
eight hundred and a thousand feet, there lie great stores of gold.
Overman, the metallurgist, unhesitatingly declares that he believes
a second California lies hidden in these rocky walls. The monarch
mountain ‘Whiteside’ is also said to be rich in gold.”
We are of the opinion that Mr. King overestimated the value{199} of the
mineral deposits to which he has here referred, having been somewhat
misled by the prevalent excitement of the time, though of course there
is no telling what may be concealed in the hidden fissures of these
mighty masses of uplifted granite. While it is not probable that a
second California or Colorado exists in this section of the Alleghanies,
there is sufficient evidence in the things seen, and the hope of things
unseen, to stimulate the zeal of explorers and excite the cupidity of
operators. The value of minerals, already taken out, has passed the
enumeration of thousands, and the surface of the jewel-field has not yet
been marked out. About 160 minerals, simple and compound, have been
found within the region of which this volume professes to treat. Many of
them are extremely rare, some of them of great economic value. What we
shall say in this connection, is for the information and interest of the
general reader. The scientist will derive his information from the
technical pages of special publications. But the explorer, who goes
ahead of him, will do better service by opening the great book of
nature, and exposing to the world its unknown treasures.
There is written evidence that the followers of DeSoto made an exploring
expedition into the Cherokee country, in search of gold. Whether or not
they reached the mountains of North Carolina, is unknown. They were
probably led to search for the metal in this locality, by the ornaments
worn by the Indians, or information derived from them. Late in the last
century, the Cherokees had preserved a tradition of a very valuable
silver mine, in the Smoky mountains. They also found stones “of various
colour and beautiful lustre, clear and very hard.”
About 1827, was the date of the gold excitement in Mecklenburg county,
from which it spread to, and both ways along, the Blue Ridge. The
discovery of this metal in Burke county, was an accident. In a little
valley at the foot of the South{200} mountains, about twelve miles from
Morganton, on the way to Rutherfordton, lived an old gentleman named
Brindle. A traveler stopped at his house one night, and told the story
of the discovery of gold in Mecklenburg, astonished the family,
particularly by his account of its great value, and the character of the
metal. Mrs. Brindle, who had, in the meantime, been an attentive
listener, finally interrupted: “I took a stone, powerful like that, from
a chicken’s crop yisterday. I ’lowed it was so curious, I laid it up.”
She thereupon produced a piece, the size of a pea, of pure gold. The
traveler, of course, was quick to see how the precious stone had got
into the chicken’s crop, and reasoned that there must be more where that
one came from.
The Brindletown mines, as the diggings in this locality have since been
known, have yielded many thousands of dollars, obtained merely by
washing the sand and gravel. Quartz, containing a very large percentage
of gold, has been found in these south mountain spurs and valleys. The
practical difficulty experienced by miners, is the incontinuity of
veins, for which even the richness of the gold deposit, where it is
found, does not compensate. Upon the whole, at Brindletown, the best
results have been obtained from washings of the drift deposits. Colonel
Mills is, at present, the largest operator. The region includes a tract
taking in the corners of McDowell, Burke, Rutherford, and Cleveland.
Gold is found in the washings of the First Broad below Shelby; in Polk,
at Sandy Plains, Morrill’s mills, Hungry river, Pacolet river, and other
places. Rutherford county is rich in gold. Along the John’s river, in
Burke, there are prospects which are favorable to an extensive mining
industry. The placers also follow Lower creek into Caldwell county. It
occurs in placers and veins in Catawba, and in placers in Watauga, Ashe,
and Alleghany. It must not be understood that mines are being operated
everywhere gold is found. In{201} fact, there are very few places where
anything is being done, and the work at other places is carried on in a
very primitive fashion.
In the French Broad valley gold exists in placers and veins near the
warm springs; on Cane creek, and elsewhere in Buncombe, and in placers
on Boylston creek, in Transylvania. Further exploration of the upper
French Broad valley will undoubtedly discover other localities. In the
valley of the Little Tennessee, gold has been found near the Ocona Lufta
river, and on Soco creek, in Swain county; at the head of the Tuckasege,
in Jackson; in the vicinity of Highlands, and on Briertown creek, in
Macon; and in Graham. Beyond the water-shed, in Jackson county, is a
region rich in gold. In the Horse cove, or Sequilla valley, a few years
ago, a hand could pan out two to five dollars per day. It has never been
found or even looked for except in placers. The zone runs across
Cashier’s valley into the Georgetown and Fairfield valleys. Its
existence, in quartz veins, near Chimney Top mountain, is well
established. The deposits in Georgetown valley have yielded more largely
than any other locality in this region. The zone seems to pass around
the southern base of Hogback mountain, thence across the Blue Ridge into
Transylvania, making its appearance, as has been noted, on Boylston
creek. We are indebted to the Rev. C. D. Smith, of Franklin, for the
following incident:
Several years ago, in Hogback mountain, deposits of gold were discovered
in a ravine, which were worked up to a spring pouring over the rocks. It
was noticed that gold came up in the sands from the spring. In order to
pan these daily deposits, a basin was formed, and rich yields resulted.
However, the miners became impatient; and, naturally inferring that the
source of the gold was a solid vein, they applied a heavy blast, which
scattered the rocks, and provided an outlet for the water, for the
spring with its gold ceased flowing. No vein was discovered.{202} They “had
killed the goose that laid the golden eggs.”
Mica has yielded more money to this mountain region than any other of
her store of minerals. The zone follows almost the direction of the Blue
Ridge. Productive mica veins are found only in granite dikes, and when
the mica zone is spoken of the zone of these dikes is meant. There are
exposures of mica outside the belt, but no productive mines have yet
been found. Neither can all dikes be relied upon, for they may be filled
with barren matter or the crystals may be too small for use. There seems
to be a law of size which holds good throughout the vein, and by which
proprietors are guided. Other dike deposits, again, are all that could
be desired in respect to size and quality but the mica is worthless,
either because of imperfect crystalization making it gnarled and gummy,
or it is spotted by magnetite, some of it in the form of very beautiful
clusters of vines and ferns. It is a remarkable fact that the mica veins
which have yielded the best returns bear evidences of ancient work. The
Clarissa Buchanan mine, in Mitchell; the Ray mine, in Yancey; and the
Bowers mine, in Macon, were operated by the much-speculated-about
prehistoric race of mound-builders. Other mines, in each of the
localities named, were operated. In some, as in the Ray mine, shafts
were sunk deep into the feld-spar, and in others tunnels were run in,
showing that the miners were men of some advancement in the arts. It is
proved, by an examination of the dump-piles, that mica was the object of
the search, and that only large and clear crystals were taken away. They
worked only in fieldspar, probably having no tools for removing anything
but soft rock. Their work always stops when a granite ledge interferes
with further progress. Little more is known of the use to which these
people put mica, than of the people themselves. Many of the mounds in
the North contain large sheets, over skeletons, from which it is
inferred that it was used to cover the bodies of illustrious{203} personages
after interment, and that use may account for the zeal with which it was
sought. It has been inferred by some archæologists that it was used for
mirrors and windows in their temples, which is not improbable, though
there is little evidence to sustain the theory.
Mica mining in Mitchell county has been attended with better results
than in any other locality. The Sinkhole mine near Bakersville was
nearly half a mile long, the crystals imbedded in kioline (decomposed
feldspar) and the rubbish easily removed. Tons of mica were taken out of
this mine. The Clarissa Buchanan mine has been worked to the depth of
more than 400 feet. In Yancey county the Ray mine, near Burnsville, has
yielded more mica than any other in that locality. The fissure takes a
zigzag course up the face of the mountain. The dike shows no signs of
exhaustion, though for more than a decade of years its annual yield has
been very large. There are deposits of mica in Buncombe county, but all
attempts to open profitable mines have thus far been failures. There are
several prospects in the south part of Haywood county. A promising mine
was opened on Lickstone mountain, from which a large quantity of
merchantable mica of fine quality has been taken. It is a granite dike
about 100 feet wide and 100 yards long. It yielded some crystals which
cut plates nine by twelve inches. It is owned jointly by W. F. Gleason
and the Love estate. No work has been done on this mine for some time
past, though practical miners still consider it a good property.
Dike fissures in Jackson have encouraged explorations in that county.
Several mines have been opened, and some good merchantable mica taken
out. Operations, however, were soon abandoned. This fact is not
conclusive evidence that even some of the openings might not make
profitable mines under the management of a skillful and experienced
operator. “There is nothing certain beneath this sod.”{204}
The zone passes from Jackson into Macon county, which is next to
Mitchell in its wealth of mica. The Brooks mine, at the head of Cowee
creek, was the first opened. It was energetically worked, and for a few
years yielded satisfactory returns. Work has been done on more than a
dozen openings in the county, and a merchantable product obtained from
most of them. As is always to be expected, a very large percentage of
these openings proved failures; others were made failures by incapable
management. Only one mine has stood a prolonged test of energetic
work—the Bowers mill, on Burningtown creek. The proprietor and
superintendent, Charles Bowers, is of the third generation, in direct
line, of mica miners, and consequently has the advantage not only of a
long personal experience, but also the communicated experience of his
father and grandfather in the mines of New Hampshire. Mr. Bowers has
been working on the same dike for about eight years. It is 200 yards
long and 12 feet wide, with a central granite vein about two feet thick.
It cuts an east and west spur of the ridge transversely, and dips at an
angle of ten degrees from a vertical line. It has been worked to the
depth of 250 feet, and a shaft sunk 50 feet deeper. The quantity of mica
and character of crystallization is unchanged at that depth. There are
several good prospects in Macon, which remain untouched, because the
owners, who know nothing about mining, are unwilling to offer
inducements, the prospect being held at a price as high as a workable
mine would command. An incident to the point is told of a Jackson county
man who had found a few crystals of glass, and imagined himself a rich
man. A miner one day examined his prospects, and found every indication
against the probability of it being a workable deposit. He made up his
mind, however, to have some fun for his pains and, very seriously,
without giving an opinion of the prospect, asked the proprietor of the
land, who was happy in the imageined{205} possession of a competency, what
he would sell the mine for. The miner’s manner and question raised the
owner’s confidence still higher. “I jist reckon,” he replied, “I don’t
want ter git shet of thet thar place. There’s a fortune thar fur me an’
my chil’ern arter me, an’ you furners haint goin’ to git hit.”
Corundum is a crystaline mineral of varying color, and next in hardness
to the diamond. It is, consequently, a valuable abrasive, and its use,
in the mechanical arts, for that purpose is increasing. It occurs,
usually, associated with chrysolite. There is a zone of chrysolite dikes
extending from Mitchell county to Union county, Georgia, in which, at
various places, corundum has been struck, but not generally in
sufficient quantity to pay for mining. Specimens have been found in
Mitchell, Yancey, Buncombe, Madison, and Haywood counties. In Jackson
there are several good prospects, but no mines have been opened. The
localities are Scott’s creek, Webster, and Hogback mountain. Macon is
the only county in which this mineral has been practically and
profitably mined. Specimens have been found at various places, but the
largest exposure, and the only mine of importance, is at what is known
as Corundum hill, near the Cullasaja river, about 10 miles from
Franklin. Here was the first discovery of the mineral west of the French
Broad. The mine, which is owned by Dr. Lucas, is not being worked at
present; it is said, on account of inconvenience of transportation. The
outcrop covers 25 acres. The chrysolite zone makes a bend in crossing
the Tennessee valley, and seems to disappear until the Nantihala
mountains have been reached, beyond which, on Buck creek, in Clay
county, it reappears, and forms the largest mass of chrysolite rock in
the United States, the area covered being over 1,400 acres, over all of
which corundum has been found, some masses weighing as much as 600
pounds. There are other outcrops in Clay, which are no doubt very rich
in corundum. Specimens have been obtained in the Hiawassee{206} valley. Some
garnets of very rich color have been found, associated with corundum; a
ruby is said to have been obtained in Madison county, and Mr. Smith
entertains the hope that sapphire may yet be discovered. Specimens of
corundum, associated with amethyst and garnet, have been found in
McDowell, Burke, and Rutherford counties.
Chrome ores are found in several of the counties west of the Blue Ridge
and in the piedmont belt. It probably exists in all of them.
There are large deposits of iron ores in several localities, which will,
when developed, be of great economic value. The prevailing varieties are
magnetite and hematite. The former is the technical name for magnetic
ore, gray ore, and black band; the latter for specular ore, red ore,
etc.
There is a vein of ore, of good quality, stretching from King’s
mountain, on the South Carolina line, to Anderson’s mountain, in Catawba
county. It consists of two parallel veins, of variable width; is of a
shaly character and mostly magnetic. It was reduced in forges and
bloomeries as early as the revolution, and during the late war, forges
were erected and tons of iron manufactured. Southwest of Newton, iron of
a superior quality is found, being remarkable for its malleability and
toughness. During the war it was wrought in bloomeries and manufactured
into spikes, cannon, and shafts for the iron-clads.
There are many valuable beds of limonite or brown ore, extending in a
zone from the northeastern foot-hills of the South mountains, into the
Brushy mountains. A bed near the town of Hickory is reported to be five
or six feet thick; ten miles west are pits from which ore was obtained
during the war, and six miles away ores were smelted thirty years ago.
These pits are now all filled up, but it is hoped that the growth of
manufacturing will stimulate industry in the iron business. There are
large quantities of ore in Caldwell county, and this zone{207} extends into
Alexander. There are several beds along the Yadkin river.
Beds of limonite exist in the Linville range, in workable quantities,
but it makes an inferior metal unless mixed with hematite or magnetite,
which is found not far away. There is an exposure of hematite one mile
west of Swanannoa gap, in Buncombe, which gives to Ore mountain its
name.
The Cranberry ore bank in Mitchell, is pronounced by Professor Kerr “one
of the most remarkable iron deposits in America.” Its location is on the
western slope of Iron mountain, in the northwest part of the county,
about three miles from the Tennessee line. It takes the name Cranberry
from the creek which flows near the outcrop at the foot of the mountain.
The surrounding and associated rocks are gneisses and gneissoids,
hornblende, slate, and syenite. The ore is a pure, massive, and coarse
granular magnetite. The steep slope of the mountain and ridges, which
the bed occupies, are covered with blocks of ore, some weighing hundreds
of pounds, and at places bare, vertical walls of massive ore, 10 to 15
feet thick, are exposed, and over several acres the solid ore is found
everywhere near the surface. The length of the outcrop is 1500 feet, and
the width, 200 to 800 feet. (State Geological Report).
This ore has been quarried and used in country forges for half a
century, which, alone, evidences remarkable purity. Several analyses
have been made by Dr. Genth, which show upwards of 90 per cent. of
magnetic oxide of iron, and about 65 per cent. of metallic iron. There
is not even a piece of sulphur, which is the dread of iron workers. The
completion of branch railroad has brought this ore into the market.
Professor Kerr affirms that it excels in quality the deposits in
Missouri and Michigan.
Outcrops of magnetic ore extend along the Iron mountains as far as Big
Rock creek, at the foot of the Roan. These deposits{208} are now attracting
more attention than ever before, and will, at an early date, become the
basis of a great industry.
There are ore deposits along the North fork of New river, which resemble
those of the Cranberry bank. There are other localities in Ashe, and
also in Watauga, which show outcrops of promise.
Magnetite is found on the head of Ivy, in Madison county. There are
several surface exposures of a good quality of ore. The extent of
present explorations does not justify any predictions with regard to
this deposit. There is also a bed of ore near the public road which
leads from Asheville to Burnsville. It is hard, black, and of resinous
luster. On Bear creek, near Marshall, and on Big Laurel are exposures of
magnetite. There is another exposure about three miles from Alexander’s
station. About five miles west of Asheville is a bed of limonite several
feet thick.
A bold outcrop of magnetic ore is found in the northeastern part of
Haywood county. Surface indications are flattering. The deposits of
Jackson and Macon counties are encouraging explorations, but have never
been developed.
Last, but greatest in importance, are the ores of Cherokee.
The region of the Valley river seems to be the culmination of the
mineral wealth of the Alleghanies. Gold, silver, marble, limestone, and
sandstone are associated with massive beds of brown ore, which yields an
iron already celebrated for its malleability and strength. The breadth
of the iron and marble range is from two to more than three miles, and
occupies the bottom of a trough which has been scooped out by the
streams. The direct valley range is about 24 miles in length, and there
is a branch more than six miles long, which follows Peach Tree and
Brasstown creeks, making the whole iron range upwards of 30 miles. The
ores were used in forges by the Indians, and{209} have always since been
used by the country blacksmiths in preference to the manufactured iron.
Little attention has been given to the copper deposits of Jackson and
Haywood counties since the war though there can be little doubt of the
existence of ores in workable quantities. The copper belt in Jackson
occupies the middle portion of the county, from the head-waters of
Tuckasege river northward to Scott’s creek and Savannah creek. Good
specimens have been found in a great many places, but mines have been
opened only on Waryhut, Cullowhee, and Savannah creeks. At each of these
several mines the vein is about eight feet thick. Its associated rocks
are syenitic. There is a belt running across the north part of Haywood
county with outcrops in the spurs of the Balsam range.
There is in Ashe and Alleghany a copper producing district of
importance. Elk knob and Ore knob, Peach bottom, Gap creek and other
localities contain stores of copper. The works at Ore knob are the
largest in the Alleghanies, and the deposit of ore in quantity and
quality is said to rival the Lake Superior region.
Lead, tin, and silver are found in various localities, but as no mines
have ever been opened, nor satisfactory results obtained from the meager
explorations which have been made up to this time, we leave the subject
without discussion.
The rarest of the rare gems is the diamond, a very few specimens of
which have been found. The first stone identified was discovered at
Brindletown, in Burke county, in 1843. It was an octohedron, valued at
one hundred dollars. A second was soon after found in the same
neighborhood. The third was discovered in Twitty’s mine, in Rutherford
county, in 1846, and was first identified by General Clingman, of
Asheville. Cottage Home, in Lincoln county, and Muddy creek, in
McDowell, have each furnished specimens.{210}
Garnet is found in the Southern Alleghanies, both as massive crystaline
rock and individual crystals, rich in color and brilliant. Some valuable
gems of a brownish red color have been taken from the mica and corundum
mines of Mitchell, Yancey, and Macon counties. On account of richness
and beautiful play of colors, the crystals of Burke, Caldwell, and
Catawba counties are excellent material from which to cut gems. The best
locality is about eight miles southeast of Morganton, where there are
blocks almost transparent, weighing 10 pounds. About four miles from
Marshall, in Madison county, is a locality rich in garnets. The writer
has seen beautiful specimens picked up from the ballasting of the
railroad. A few specimens of amethyst have been found associated with
garnet.
It will be impossible to discuss all the minerals of Western North
Carolina, or even all those of common commercial value. The interest of
10 years ago had in some measure died out on account of the apparent
failure of all the railroad projects. It matters little of how great
intrinsic value the resources of any section may be; their actual value
will be insignificant unless by rapid and cheap transit they can be made
a part of the great world. The flesh and rose colored marbles of
Cherokee and the Nantihala are worth no more now than common granite,
but carried to the great markets where art is cultivated and beauty
appreciated, they will command tempting prices. The prospect of an early
completion of through lines of railroad and the actual completion of the
greater portion of the Western North Carolina system, has given new
stimulus to the investigation of hidden resources, and is bringing in
the skill and capital necessary to their economical development.{211}

THE SWANNONOA HOTEL.
Asheville.
{212}
{213}
There is much in the race we spring from affecting both the
individual and the community. The physical and mental traits we
derive from our ancestors, are not more marked and important in
directing our destinies than are the prejudices, aspirations and
traditions we drink in from childhood. No profound observers of
human nature will ever estimate the conduct or capacities of a
people without first looking at their genealogical table and noting
the blood which flows in their veins.—[Senator Vance.
HIS observation is illustrated by the character of the
settlements of both the Carolinas. Most of the first immigrants to the
coast country of South Carolina were English capitalists, who purchased
large plantations. The coast country of the north State drew its
population from Virginia and from Barbadoes. The whole east line of
settlement was English. Large plantations and numerous slaves were
acquired, and the inhabitants after the second generation lived in
comparative ease and luxury. Those of the south were particularly
devoted to the cultivation of manners and mind, a degree of excellence
being eventually attained, which has never been equalled elsewhere on
the continent.
The emigrants to the plains beyond the line of terraces and hills were
of entirely different stock, character, and situation in{214} life. They
belonged to that sturdy race, now so widely distributed over the whole
country, which is known in history as Scotch-Irish. Their ancestors were
of pure Scotch blood, but lived in the north of Ireland, whence they
emigrated to America, landing at New York, Baltimore, and other northern
ports. The first arrivals found home near the eastern base of the
Alleghanies in Pennsylvania, but being annually joined by new immigrants
of their own blood and fatherland, the best lands were soon filled to
overflowing. The tide of immigration still continued, but an outlet was
found toward the south, through which it swept along the entire base of
the mountains into the inviting valleys of Carolina, and eventually
crossed them into Georgia. There is to the present day marked
homogeneity of character within this belt, from Pennsylvania to Virginia
southward. Scattered families of other nationalities followed into the
wilderness, but so largely did the Scotch-Irish prevail over all other
races that the amalgamation of blood which followed brought about no
perceptible change.
A long period elapsed from the time emigration from the north of Ireland
began until the Pennsylvania and Virginia plains had been filled; and
the Yadkin, in North Carolina, was reached near the middle of the last
century. So strong was the opposition, natural and human, encountered at
every point, that only dauntless courage and determined spirit was able
to overcome it. A wilderness had to be reduced in the face of a cruel
and cunning foe. Being poor, they purchased small farms, and the number
of their slaves was never large. Unlike the plantation lords of the
South State coast, they devoted themselves to rigorous labor, the number
being few who had time to devote to the cultivation of manners, or to
pleasure, and fewer still had the financial ability to educate their
children.
Between 1750, the date of the first settlement on the upper Yadkin, and
the Revolution, a period of 25 years, the best{215} lands were occupied to
the base of the Blue Ridge. Even that barrier was scaled, and the germs
of civilized industry planted along the Holston before 1770.
A character of the times, typical of a class of early settlers, was the
famous Daniel Boone, whose life is the inspiration and light of western
annals. Being but a lad, when his father removed from Pennsylvania, and
settled on the Yadkin in 1754, the wildness and beauty of his new home
made him a recluse of nature. In early youth he became a hunter, a
trapper, and fighter of Indians. When the country around him filled up,
he left his home and plunged again into the depths of the wilderness
beyond the mountains. After a period, crowded with blood-chilling
adventures in Kentucky, he returned to his old home, but the growth of
settlement had deprived it of its romance. He again crossed the Blue
Ridge and pitched his camp in the Watauga plateau. There is a curious
old church record in existence, which shows that he cursed “with profane
oaths” a fellow Baptist for building a cabin within ten miles of his.
His ideal of complete happiness was to be alone in a boundless
wilderness. He once said: “I am richer than the man mentioned in
Scripture who owned the cattle on a thousand hills. I own the wild
beasts in more than a thousand valleys.” He expired at a deer stand,
with rifle in hand, in the year 1818. It was of him that Byron wrote:
The class of settlers of which Boone is mentioned as a type, is not
large; but it was the class, to paraphrase a line of Scott, which dared
to face the Indian in his den. They were hunters of wild animals and
wild men. But there was a larger class, the equal in sturdiness of the
former, and though less romantic in conduct, entitled to recognition by
posterity. They were{216} the men who cleared farms and built up houses and
towns. In the valleys of the Yadkin and Catawba, is found a large
percentage of population of German descent, which is the source of the
German blood found in the western counties. Not far behind the
Scotch-Irish pioneers, by the same route, came the astute hard-working
ancestors of this class of citizens. Many were scattered through
Virginia, and some drifted even beyond the line of the old North State.
The least mixture of blood is found in the valley of the Catawba. It is
a mongrel German, known in the North as “Pennsylvania Dutch.” The
traveller from central Pennsylvania will frequently forget, while in the
Catawba valley, that he is away from home. Governor Vance, whose long
political career has familiarized him with all sections of the state,
declares that in agriculture, as a general rule, they have excelled all
other classes, especially in thrift economy and the art of preserving
their lands from sterility. “To this day there is less of that
desolation, known in the South as ‘old field,’ to be seen among the
lands of their descendants, than amongst any others of our people.... A
sturdier race of upright citizens is not to be found in this or any
other state. Their steady progress in wealth and education, is one of
their characteristics, and their enduring patience and unflinching
patriotism, tested by many severe trials, proclaim them worthy of the
great sires from whom they sprang.” Like their kin in Pennsylvania, and
scattered over other states, west and south, “they are Lutheran in
religion and Democratic in politics, and they are as steadfast as the
hills in each.”
The Scotch and Germans of the upper plains and valleys, from which the
trans-montane counties drew the bulk of their population, exist in the
rural districts unmixed. There has been, until very recently, little
immigration since the opening up of the great West soon after the
Revolution, the growth of population being almost wholly a natural
increase. It is further{217} a fact, to the disadvantage of this community,
as a similar condition of things is to all other old communities, that
many of the most enterprising children of each generation leave their
homes for fields of industry in new sections. Conservatism in the old
community is an inevitable result. The western section of North Carolina
is a conspicuous example. The same statesman, whom we have already
quoted, a native there, has said:
“A very marked conservatism pervades all classes of North
Carolinians. Attachment to old forms and institutions seems to be
deeply implanted in them, as a part of their religion. They almost
equal the conservatism of Sydney Smith’s man, who refused to look
at the new moon, so great was his regard for the old. . . . North
Carolina was, I believe, the last state in the Union to abolish
property representation and suffrage in her legislature. The name
of the lower branch, house of commons, was only changed in 1868.
John Doe and Richard Roe died a violent death and departed our
courts at the hands of the carpet-bag invasion the same year. This
horde, also, with the most extraordinary perversion of its possible
uses, unanimously deposed the whipping-post as a relic of
barbarism, to which our people had clung as the great conservator
of their goods and chattels.”
The present generation of Highlanders may be proud of the revolutionary
record of their ancestors, though there were among them numerous tories,
the proportion being one King George man to four revolutionists.
Representatives from the west are found among the signers of the
Mecklenburg declaration of independence in 1775, and by subsequent
conduct they proved their enthusiasm in the cause of liberty. Their
chief peril was to be apprehended from tory brigands and the Cherokees,
incited to blood and cruelty by British agents. The danger was greatest
in the summer of 1780, after Lord Cornwallis had made his victorious
raid through the South. The liberty men were disheartened, and not a few
went over to the tory militia, of which Colonel Patrick Moore appeared
as the commander in North Carolina. He published both inducements and
threats, as a means of increasing his forces, and was meeting with a
degree of success dangerous to the patriot cause, when three companies
of old Indian-fighters, under command{218} of Colonels Shelby, McDowell, and
Sevier, attacked him, with successful results. This was a small event in
itself, but it encouraged the liberty party, and showed the British
commander that there was a force in the scattered settlements of the
mountain foot-hills which he had reason to fear.
Colonel Ferguson, with a nucleus of 100 regulars, had collected a band
of 1,200 native Tories, from the foot of the mountains, in South
Carolina. His progress northward was “marked with blood, and lighted up
with conflagration.” For this reason he was selected to operate against
the western settlements of North Carolina.
The mountain men made one dashing and successful onslaught on his
advancing divisions, and then retired to the mountain fastnesses, for
consultation and organization. Ferguson pursued as far as Rutherfordton
(then Gilbert town), whence he dispatched a messenger to the patriots
with the threat that if they did not lay down their arms he would burn
their houses, lay waste their country, and hang their leaders.
This cruel threat aroused the settlers adjacent to the mountains, on
both sides, and north, into Virginia. More men were willing to go to the
field than it was prudent to have leave the settlements. Their fame as
“center shots,” with the rifle, was well known to the British regulars,
who feared to meet them; but the chivalric Ferguson was stimulated by
this fact to greater watchfulness and exertion.
Ramsey draws this picture of the Revolutionary forces.
“The sparse settlements of the frontier had never before seen
assembled a concourse of people so immense, and so evidently
agitated by great excitement. The large mass of the assembly were
volunteer riflemen, clad in the homespun of their wives and
sisters, and wearing the hunting shirt of the back-woods soldiery,
and not a few of them the moccasins of their own manufacture. A few
of the officers were better dressed, but all in citizen’s clothing.
The mien of Campbell was stern, authoritative, and dignified.
Shelby was stern, taciturn, and determined; Sevier, vivacious,
ardent, impulsive, and energetic; McDowell, moving about with the
ease and dignity of a colonial magistrate, inspiring veneration for
his virtues, and an indignant sympathy for the wrongs of himself{219}
and co-exiles. All were completely wrapt in the absorbing subject
of the Revolutionary struggle, then approaching its acme, and
threatening the homes and families of the mountaineers themselves.
Never did mountain recess contain within it a loftier or more
enlarged patriotism—never a cooler or more determined courage.”
Carrying their shot-pouches, powder-horns and blankets, they started
from the Watauga, over Yellow mountain, to the head of the Catawba.
Ferguson broke up his camp at Gilbert town (Rutherfordton), on the
approach of the patriots. This was the most westward point he reached,
in the execution of his threat to lay waste the country. The tories of
his command quailed on the approach of so large a body of riflemen, and
many of them deserted the royal standard. Ferguson dispatched for
reinforcement, and took his position on King’s mountain, from which he
declared “God Almighty could not drive him.”
After being in the saddle thirty hours, in a dashing rain the patriots,
on the afternoon of October 7, 1780, arrived at the foot of the
mountain. This, one of the most historic spots in the South, is located
on the North Carolina border in Cleveland county. The area of its summit
is about 500 yards by seventy.
The mountaineers approached the summit in divisions so as to make the
attack from opposite sides simultaneously. The center reached the enemy
first, and a furious and bloody fight was commenced. The royalists drove
the attacking division down the mountain side, but were compelled to
retreat by an onslaught from the end and opposite side. The battle
became general all around, Ferguson’s forces being huddled in the
center. The mountain men aimed coolly, and shot fatally, giving away
before a fierce charge at one point, and charging with equal fierceness
from another. The British commander, at length, gave up the idea of
further resistance, but, determined not to surrender, made a desperate
attempt to break through the lines. He fell in the charge with a mortal
shot. A white flag asked for terms of capitulation; 225 royalists and 30
patriots lay dead upon the field; 700 prisoners were taken in{220} custody;
1,500 stand of arms captured, and a great many horses and other booty
which had been taken from the settlers, restored to the rightful owners.
More than all, the frontier was freed from the ravages of a merciless
foe.
The captured arms and booty was shouldered upon the prisoners and taken
to a point in Rutherford county, where a court martial was held. Thirty
of the tories were sentenced to death for desertion and other crimes
they had committed, but only nine were executed. One of these was
Colonel Mills, a distinguished leader. The remaining prisoners and
captured arms were turned over to General Gates, commander of the
Continental army in the South.
John Sevier, one of the leading spirits in the King’s mountain affair,
and commander of the transmontane militia, was a brilliant, daring,
dashing character; the idol and leader of bold frontiersmen, who
nicknamed him “Nollichucky Jack.” The whole of Tennessee then belonged
to North Carolina, but the settlers on the Holston were so far removed
from the seat of government that, practically, they were without
government. Sevier and his friends conceived the idea of organizing a
new state, which, being in the nature of a measure for self-protection,
was unquestioned west of the mountains as a just and proper proceeding,
but by the home government denounced as an insurrection. The new state
was named Franklin, in honor of the Philadelphia philosopher and
patriot. For four years there was civil contention, which, in one
instance, resulted in contact of arms and bloodshed. After this the
parent state adopted a radical policy for the restraint of her premature
liberty-seeking child. “Nollichucky Jack,” the governor of the
insurrectionary state, was arrested for “high treason against the state
of North Carolina,” and taken to Morganton for trial.
The prisoner’s chivalric character and gallant military services, on the
one hand, and the extraordinary nature of the indictment{221} on the other,
gave the trial momentous interest. The village streets were crowded with
old soldiers and settlers from far and near, eager to catch a glimpse of
the court. There were others there with different purposes. The chivalry
of the infant settlement of Tennessee; the men who had suffered with the
trials of frontier life and savage warfare, who had fought under him to
establish their country’s freedom, and who loved him as a brother, armed
to the teeth, had followed the captive across the mountains, determined
to “rescue him, or leave their bones.” Their plan was to rescue him by
stratagem, but if that failed, to fire the town, and in the excitement
of the conflagration make their escape.
On the day of trial, two of the “Franks,” as they were called, leaving
their companions concealed near the town, and hiding reliable sidearms
under their hunting shirts, rode up before the court-house, one of them
on “Governor” Sevier’s fine race mare. He dismounted, and with the rein
carelessly thrown over her neck, stood with the manner of an indifferent
spectator. The companion having tied his horse, went into the
court-room. Sevier’s attention, by a slight gesture, was directed to the
man outside. During a pause in the trial, the bold “Frank” stepped into
the bar, and with decided manner and tone, addressed the judge: “Are you
done with that there man?” The scene was so unusual, the manner and tone
of the speaker so firm and dramatic, that both officers and audience
were thrown into confusion. The “Governor” sprang like a fox from his
cage, one leap took him to the door, and two more on his racer’s back.
The quick clash of hoofs gave notice of his escape. The silence of the
bewildered court was broken by the exclamation of a waggish by-stander:
“Yes, I’ll be damned if you haint done with him.”
Sevier was joined by his neighbors with a wild shout, and they bore him
safely to his home. No attempt was made to{222} re-arrest him. The State of
Franklin died from various causes, and a few years later the new State
of Tennessee honored “Nollichucky Jack” with the first governorship, and
later, by an election to the United States Senate.
Recall a picture of the mountain soldier a century ago, during the
heroic or military period: a tall, athletic form, hardy appearance,
noiseless step, and keen pair of eyes—attired in an upper garment of
blue home-spun, fringed at the bottom, and belted with wampum; deerskin
leggins and buckskin moccasins, and armed with a large knife, tomahawk,
and long rifle. This emblem of antiquity is now found only in museums.
Before the close of the Revolution there was a well-beaten road from the
Catawba to the Watauga, the path of travel from Carolina to the
incipient states west of the Alleghanies. South of this, except by
hunters and Indian traders, the passes of the Blue Ridge had not been
crossed. The fame of the luxuriant highland valleys was widespread,
however, when an extinguishment of the Indian title opened them up to
the settler.
It was a miscellaneous throng that filled the narrow roads leading from
the head-waters of the eastward streams, in search of homes and lands in
the cool upper plateau. Ahead, on horse-back, was a far-seeing man of
middle age, a member of the legislature, whose industry had rewarded him
with a small fortune, with which he would purchase a fertile tract of
wild land, and hold it for an advance of price. Slowly moving along
behind was a boat-shaped, great covered wagon, drawn by four oxen. It
contained the family and household goods of a man whose earthly
possessions amounted to but a few dollars besides. Then followed the
foot emigrants of a still poorer class, badly clad, and scantily fed.
The man and woman and larger children carried upon their backs, an axe,
a few agricultural tools, a couple of cooking pots, and a light bundle
of bed clothing. The man with the wagon would purchase a few hundred{223}
acres of valley land, erect a cabin, such as may yet be seen any where
in the rural districts, make a clearing, and eventually become a
prosperous citizen. The foot emigrant, without examining titles or
running lines, built a hut where it suited him, deadened the trees on a
few acres, which, cultivated with the hoe, yielded bread for his family.
A flint-lock rifle, saved from the soldiering times, supplied meat and
clothing. Neither the freehold settler nor the “squatter” was able to
convert more than the hides of wild animals into money with which to
make annual purchases of such supplies as could not be raised. The
squatter had the advantage from a cash point of view over the land
owner, for he had no taxes to pay, and more time to devote to the chase.
Alive to this advantage he had no incentive to aspire to the ownership
of property; an indifference to worldly condition characterized his
simple life, an indifference which his children and his children’s
children have inherited. It was different with the freeholder; he knew
of the luxury of low country civilization; he had himself tasted the
sweets of a substantial prosperity, and looked forward to their full
enjoyment in his new home in the mountains. When times grew better he
was able to purchase a few slaves, give his children an elementary
education, and live in a comfortable house. From this class of the
settler ancestry is descended the substantial element of the present
generation of native mountaineers. They are famous business and
professional men, who would be a credit to any community. They own
nearly all the land, and inhabit the most inviting farms. Many of the
wealthier land owners were not far behind the first settlers, and their
posterity may be found in almost every county, some of them continuing
to control large boundaries.
The nucleus of settlement was on the French Broad, at the mouth of the
Swannanoa. It was there that the first white child was born, in the
inter-montane plateau—James M. Smith.{224} In the year 1795, a wagon passed
from South Carolina, through Mill’s gap, down the French Broad, to the
prosperous settlements in Tennessee. Scores of emigrants, intending to
go on to the West, were charmed by broad stretches of valley between the
mountains, and went no further. The Indians frequently showed hostile
intentions, but the occasion for alarm was never great enough to deflect
the tide of settlement. The best lands on the French Broad and Pigeon
were occupied by freeholders, and the smoke of squatters’ cabins rose in
almost every cove, before the Cherokee treaty of 1819 opened up the
valleys beyond the Balsams, which were rapidly occupied by settlers
mainly from the piedmont and trans-Blue Ridge regions. East Tennessee
made slight contributions. The buying up of cove lands, by actual
settlers, from speculators, or the state, began after the valleys were
filled, and many small farms on mountain sides have been acquired by
“undisturbed possession.”
The counties of Western North Carolina, in the year 1777, were all
embraced in Burke, Wilkes, and Tryon. Ashe was carved off Wilkes,
in 1799, and Alleghany off Ashe in 1859. Tryon, which bore the name
of the most obnoxious of the colonial governors, was divided into
Lincoln and Rutherford, in 1779, and the hated name obliterated.
Cleveland was cut from both these counties in 1841. Caldwell was
taken from Burke in 1842, and McDowell was erected out of territory
from Burke and Rutherford; and Catawba from territory from Lincoln,
in the same year. Easton was carved off Lincoln in 1846. Buncombe
was erected in 1791, out of territory previously embraced, partly
in Rutherford, but mainly in Burke. It is the parent stem of all
the trans-Blue Ridge counties, excepting Ashe and Alleghany. The
first branch was Haywood, in 1808, from which Macon was taken, in
1828, and Jackson in 1850. From territory of both these Swain was
made in 1871. Cherokee was cut off Macon in 1839. From its
territory Clay was formed in 1861, and Graham in 1872. Henderson
was cut off Buncombe in 1838; Polk from Henderson and Rutherford in
1855; and Transylvania from Henderson and Jackson in 1861. Yancey
was erected from Buncombe in 1833; Watauga from Yancey, Wilkes,
Caldwell, and Ashe, in 1849. Madison was erected of territory from
Buncombe in 1850; and Mitchell in 1861, from territory from Burke,
McDowell, Caldwell, Watauga, and Yancey.
Two elements, in the settlement and population of the mountain country,
have not been considered in the foregoing pages. The one is, happily,
well nigh extinct, the other is the main hope of the future. In early
times, criminals and refugees from{225} justice made the fastnesses of the
wilderness hiding places. Their stay, in most cases, was short,
seclusion furnishing their profession a barren field for operation. A
few, however, remained, either adopting the wild, free life of the
chase, or preying upon the property of the community. The latter
occupation has been entirely abandoned by their posterity. There was a
time when it was unsafe to turn a good horse out to range on the grassy
mountain tops, but that time is passed. There are communities in the
mountains in which all the commands of the Decalogue are not
punctiliously observed, but “Thou shalt not steal,” is seldom violated.
Cattle and horses pasture on every range, stables are everywhere without
locks, houses are left open, and highway robbery is remembered only as a
tradition of the past.
By the element in the settlement referred to as the hope of the future,
we mean those classes who have come for the purpose of engaging in
business, and to establish summer homes, attracted by salubrity of
climate and beauty of scenery. Representatives of the latter class have
handsome estates at several places in the French Broad valley and along
the Blue Ridge.
Immigration for business purposes is just starting. The mineral deposits
and the lumber stores are bringing in good citizens from abroad. With
abundant resources, both of material and power, there is a wide field
here for manufacturers. The native population has not husbanded the
capital needed to start the ball rolling. Although settled for 100
years, Western North Carolina is a new country in many respects, but the
day of its rapid development is near at hand.
The great obstacle to development in the past has been the section’s
isolated position, an obstacle now almost removed. The building of a
turnpike from South Carolina to Tennessee was justly regarded a great
public improvement when it was completed in 1827, but during the last
half century horses have{226} been too slow to carry on the world’s work.
General Hayne, of South Carolina, was one of the first projectors of a
railroad through the mountains. It was to run from Charleston to
Cincinnati, a line which there is good reason for believing will be
pushed to completion at no distant day. The original project was given
chartered form in 1835.
The Western North Carolina road was also an early project, and is a part
of the system of public improvements contemplated by the state
government. A charter was granted in 1855. The state authorized the
issue of bonds for three-fourths of the stock, the remaining one-fourth
being subscribed by private individuals. R. C. Pearson was chosen
president, and J. C. Turner engineer. It was the latter gentleman who
first surveyed a route over the Blue Ridge via Swannanoa gap. The
construction of this road reached to within five miles of Morganton,
when the war opened and all operations were stopped. After the war,
under the successive administrations as president of A. M. Powell, S. M.
D. Tate, and Major J. W. Wilson, work was continued. The latter
gentleman, combining the office of engineer with that of president, took
the first locomotive around the coils and through the tunnels into the
Swannanoa valley. The road was sold and passed under its present
management, which is associated with the Richmond & Danville company, in
the spring of 1880. It has been completed to its junction with the E. T.
V. & G. R. R., and is being pushed over and through the massive
transverse chains of the plateau to its western terminus. The scenery
along its lines is spoken of at various places in the following pages.
The Blue Ridge has been crossed by the Spartanburg & Asheville railroad,
and there is good ground for hope that the Carolina Central will be
extended from Shelby to Asheville at an early day. All these enterprises
are necessarily expensive, and consequently show{227} the confidence which
capitalists place in the future of the region whose resources will be
opened up.
On account of the secluded position of Western North Carolina, there is
little to be said under the head of military reminiscences. The mountain
men, in the War of 1812, shouldered their rifles and marched to distant
climes, in defense of their country’s honor.
During the late struggle, this section escaped the desolation which the
greater portion of the South suffered. Stoneman’s Federal cavalry made a
raid, after the “surrender” of Lee into the trans-Blue Ridge country. He
passed by Hendersonville and Asheville, whence a Confederate fort had
been erected. Dividing into small squads, his men pillaged the country
as they went west.
A dare-devil expedition was accomplished by the Federal raider Kirk,
who, with his company of 325 East Tennesseeans, crossed the mountains,
through Mitchell county into Burke, surprised a larger force of
Confederates, and succeeded in capturing all their stores and taking the
men prisoners of war.
The mountain men were divided in sentiment and action during the war.
Most of the property holders joined the Confederate forces, while the
poorer classes refused to volunteer, and, when conscripted into the
service, deserted at the first opportunity. There were exceptions, of
course, with respect to both classes—some of the larger freeholders
being Union men, and some of the poor people in the coves being
enthusiastically loyal to the state.
The Southern Alleghanies, though “the oldest in the world,” have not yet
settled down to a state of absolute rest. Shocks and noises in several
localities have frequently been felt and heard, much to the discomfort
of inhabitants of the vicinity. There are reminiscences in the northern
part of Haywood county of shocks as early as 1812, and from time to time
ever{228} since. The restless mountain is in a spur of the New Found range,
near the head of Fine’s creek. General Clingman was the first to call
public attention to it, which he did in an elaborate paper in 1848.
There are cracks in the solid granite of which the ridge is composed,
and towards its foot, chasms four feet wide, extending at places in all
directions, like the radiating cracks made in a rock by a light blast of
gunpowder. There are evidences of trees having been thrown violently
down, and a trustworthy gentleman declares that a huge oak was split
from root to top by the opening of a chasm under it. General Clingman
says:
“I observed a large poplar tree which had been split through its
center so as to leave one-half of it standing 30 or 40 feet high.
The crack or opening under it was not an inch wide, but could be
traced for hundreds of yards, making it evident that there had been
an opening wide enough to split the tree, and that then the sides
of the chasm had returned to their original position without having
split so as to prevent the contact of broken rocks.”
A great mass of granite was broken into fragments, and after one of
these shocks every loose stone and piece of wood was moved from its
original place. These jars, accompanied with noise, used to occur at
intervals of two or three years, but none have been felt for some time.
About the year 1829 occurred a violent earthquake, covering a limited
area, in Cherokee county. One of the Valley River mountains was cleft
open for several hundred yards, making a chasm which is still visible.
Silas McDowell, a careful observer, late of Macon county, stated, in a
paper, that there was a violent shock on the divide between Ellijay and
Cullasaja many years ago. A chasm opened in the north side of the
mountain, accompanied with crashing sounds. Satoola mountain, bounding
the Highlands plateau, it has been stated, has crevices from which smoke
issues at intervals.
In Madison county there is a mountain which has been known{229} to rumble
and smoke. The warm springs are heated by volcanic action, probably by
hot gas from the earth’s molten interior, seeking an outlet through
crevices in the rocks and coming in contact with underground water
currents.
The most famous of the restless mountains of North Carolina is “Shaking
Bald.” The first shock, which occurred February 10, 1874, was followed
in such quick succession by others, as to cause general alarm in the
vicinity. This mountain for a time received national attention. Within
six months more than 100 shocks were felt.
The general facts of these terrestrial disturbances have never been
disputed, but concerning their cause, there has been widely diversified
speculation. Is there an upheaval or subsidence of the mountains
gradually going on? Are they the effect of explosions caused by the
chemical action of minerals under the influence of electric currents;
are they the effect of gases forced through fissures in the rocks from
the center of the earth, seeking an outlet at the surface? These are
questions on which scientists differ. Be the cause what it may, there is
no occasion to fear the eruption of an active volcano.
The scientific exploration of the grand summit of the Alleghany system,
was hinted at in the introduction, but on account of the great names
associated with the subject it is worthy of fuller treatment. The
extraordinary botanical resources of the mountains were first made known
by one of the most distinguished botanists of his day, Andre Michaux,
who made a tour of the valleys and some of the heights in 1787. In 1802
his son, an equally distinguished botanist, scaled the loftiest range.
Both these naturalists reported having found trees and other specimens
of alpine growth, that they had observed nowhere else south of Canada.
This was the first hint that the Black mountains were the highest
summits east of the Rockies.{230} This judgment was based entirely upon the
plant life of the region explored.
It was from entirely different data that John C. Calhoun arrived at the
same opinion in 1825. David L. Swain, afterwards governor and president
of the State University, was then a member of the legislature from
Buncombe, his native county. Calhoun was Vice-President of the United
States. Meeting each other in Raleigh, the latter made a playful
allusion to their height, saying that in that respect they were like
General Washington. “We can also,” said the Vice-President,
“congratulate ourselves on another fact, that we live in the vicinity of
the highest land east of the Rocky mountains.”
“The suggestion,” says Governor Swain, “took me entirely by surprise,
and I inquired whether the fact had been ascertained? He replied that it
had not been by measurement, but a very slight examination of the map
would satisfy me it was so.”
Dr. Elisha Mitchell, of the State University, five years later,
concurred in the opinion of Vice-President Calhoun, and announced to the
Board of Public Improvements his intention to make a systematic
geographical exploration. In the year 1835, with no other interest than
that of contributing to scientific knowledge, he made the first
barometrical measurements west of the Blue Ridge. With great labor and
infinite patience he climbed the several peaks of the Blacks. In the
language of a subsequent explorer: “At the time Dr. Mitchell gave his
observations with regard to the height of the Black mountain it was more
inaccessible than now, by reason of the progress of the settlements
around its base, so that he was liable to be misled, thwarted by
unforeseen obstacles, in his efforts to reach particular parts of the
chain, and when he did attain some point at the top of the ridge, nature
was too much exhausted to allow more than one observation as to the
immediate locality.” Any one{231} who has left the beaten path, and
attempted to penetrate the tangled thickets of laurel on the slopes of
the Black, will have some conception of the explorer’s difficulty.
Dr. Mitchell’s report was the first authoritative announcement of the
superior altitude of the highest southern summit to Mt. Washington. This
report gave rise to much controversy among geographers, but its
correctness was soon universally yielded.
In 1844 Dr. Mitchell again visited the region, making observations in
the interest of both geology and geography, and to confirm his former
measurements. About this time Hon. Thomas L. Clingman, then a member of
Congress, and a man of scientific tastes, began to make observations in
different sections—the Balsams, Smokies, and Blacks. In the latter
group he subsequently published that he had found a higher peak than the
one measured by Professor Mitchell. In the controversy which followed,
the fact of General Clingman having measured the highest point of ground
was undisputed. The question was: Had Dr. Mitchell measured the same
peak, or had he mistaken another for the highest, and ceased his
investigations without going to the top of the true dome?
Admitting the possibility of having been mistaken, the Professor, in the
summer vacation of 1857, embraced the first opportunity to review his
measurements. Accompanied by his son, Charles Mitchell, he began at the
railroad line to run a line of levels, that he might test the accuracy
of his barometer. They reached the Mountain house, half way up the
Black, at noon on Saturday, June 27th. Dismissing his son and assistant,
the professor left, saying he intended to cross the range by the route
he had gone in 1844, desiring to see the guide who at that time
accompanied him. On Monday Charles Mitchell climbed to the place
appointed to meet his father, but the day passed without his appearance.
The next day passed. “He must have met with some accidental delay,” was
the consolation.{232} But another day’s absence dispelled this hope. On
Thursday morning the alarm was spread. Messengers were sent across the
range to the valleys below. He had not reached the place for which he
had started. Friday evening the report of his disappearance reached
Asheville. From every direction came men of all grades and avocations in
life. Following them came their, wives and sisters, anxious to help in
the search for the lost man’s body in that wilderness of more than
100,000 acres, whose funereal gloom conceals caverns and pitfalls into
which the incautious traveler may disappear.
At least 500 men were engaged in the search, which began on Friday,
within one day of a week after the professor was last seen. It was
Tuesday before the trace of human footsteps was discovered. Thomas
Wilson, who had acted as the professors’s guide, in 1844, in following
the course they had then taken, distinguished a mark in the green turf,
near the highest summit. Wilson declared it to be the summit they had
both been on, and the professor had measured. The old hunter, followed
by rugged mountaineers, hurried down a branch of Cane creek. The marks
of the wanderer became plainer, as the ground became rougher. Down a
splashing stream they followed for more than a mile, to a sheer
waterfall of about forty feet. A broken laurel branch and torn moss told
the story. Below in the circular pool fourteen feet deep, of crystal
water, lay the body perfectly preserved.
The place has been thus described:
“The pure waters enveloped him in their winding sheet of crystal;
the leaping cataract sang his requiem in that wondrous and eternal
song, of which old ocean furnishes the grand, all comprehensive
key. Cream and white flowers flaked the billowy thickets of the
dark green laurel, and tall conical firs, delicately tapering
spruces, interlocked their weeping branches, from shore to shore.”
Enveloping the body in a sheet, they carried it up the mountain to the
summit, whence, at the request of the family, it was conveyed to
Asheville for burial. A year later it was {233}dis-interred, re-carried, and
amid a large concourse of people, deposited on the very pinnacle of the
Appalachians. There rests the “Christian hero’s dust.”
Since his death, Professor Mitchell’s claim to the credit of having
measured the peak which bears his name is admitted. He measured a great
many other pinnacles, but owing to the imperfection of his instruments
and other causes, he was somewhat inaccurate. The credit of having made
the first extensive survey and accurate measurements, is due Arnold
Guyot, professor of physical geography in Princeton college. He was
assisted in his long and unremunerated task, covering three summer
vacations, by General Clingman, M. E. Grand-Pierre, and E. Sandoz. Their
survey was begun in the Blacks in 1856. Professor Guyot’s report has
been revised and completed by Dr. W. C. Kerr, the late state geologist
of North Carolina.
To Dr. Curtis, of the University, the state is indebted for an
exposition of its botanical resources. He embodied in his collection and
several reports, the researches of Professors Gray and Carey, who, as
early as 1841, traversed the highest ranges. Had Dr. Curtis’ labor been
appreciated by the state government, North Carolina would have one of
the best collections of botanical specimens in the country.
We have now briefly sketched the settlement and leading incidents in the
progress of this highland country. The reader has no doubt reached the
conclusion that the mountaineers must be a happy people, for “their
annals are tiresome.” Should he visit the region, and stop in the homes
scattered through the picturesque valleys, he will find the confirmation
of that conclusion. If the inhabitants have little beyond the
lavishments of nature to boast of, they have the compensating knowledge
that they have little to be ashamed of. Their race and blood has
furnished to the country three of its Presidents—Jackson, Polk, and
Johnson; but greater than any of these, of the same kin,{234} was that
splendid specimen of statesmanship, John C. Calhoun, born in the
sub-montane district of South Carolina. The same race has given to the
gallery of frontier heroes, Daniel Boone, of the Yadkin, and David
Crockett, of the Nollichucky. Old Buncombe itself has filled the
governor’s chair with two incumbents, Swain and Vance; has given the
State University a president, Swain; and to the United States Senate two
of the most useful representatives the state has ever had—Clingman and
Vance. Of such ancestry, and of such representatives of its capacity for
development, any section might be proud. Of the attention its natural
features has received from the outside world, it has scarcely less
reason for pride and congratulation.{235}

THE SPARKLING CATAWBA SPRINGS.
{236}
{237}
HERE is something in a long ride on horseback that time
cannot obliterate. At its recollection one feels again the motion of the
horse, and can well imagine the bridle-reins in his fingers. With these
sensations come the cool breath of morning, the smooth stretches of road
through sunlight and shadow, the rough trail by wild, rushing waters,
the vistas of rich meadows and fields, and the green and purple outlines
of mountains. Such scenes become so impressed upon the memory that one
might well question with Byron:
This sketch is of a ride taken by the writer, through some of the most
scenic sections of the mountains. Treating, as it{238} does, of the country
and people as they are, the tourist in quest for information,
preparatory to a trip through the same region, need look no further than
these pages.
In the interest of my pocket, I hired a sound young horse, at
thirty-three and a third cents per day. He was my selection from several
that could have been taken from the same class of people, at a schedule
of prices ranging from twenty-five to fifty cents. If the tourist
intends traveling for a month or more, the wisest plan is to buy a
horse, and then sell at the finish. Money can be saved by this
operation, unless being ignorant concerning horse flesh, he falls into
the hands of an unscrupulous jockey.
It was in August, and clear bright skies for a season were predicted by
the weather prophets, when, early one morning, I mounted my steed before
an Asheville hotel. In the saddle-bags for myself was an extra suit of
blue flannel, two pairs of socks, a rubber coat, comb, and brush; and
for the horse two shoes and a paper of nails, to provide against losses
which might occur twenty-five or more miles from where a horse-shoe
could be procured. Country blacksmiths depend to a large extent upon
their customers to furnish the materials for their work.
There is a road that winds from the center of Asheville, onward down
hill and up, by pleasant door-yards, white-washed, stone-wall fences,
and trimmed groves, to the bridge over the Swannanoa-river. Just beyond
it, a wide road, turning sharp toward the left, is the route to Hickory
Nut gap, and the comparatively level county of Rutherford beyond.
From this point the road runs through pleasant valleys, by mills, small
streams, dwellings, and under forests, for eight miles, to the base of
the mountains, whereon is the opening of the noted gap—the gateway to
the picturesque region of Broad river. On the summit of the pass a
limited view can be had of{239} Buncombe county valley lands, dotted with
cornfields, checkered with forests and mountain-bounded.
The road now begins to descend through beautiful sylvan scenes,
combining all the gloom, luxuriance, wildness, and beauty of rocks,
vines, pines, rhododendrons, crystal waters, dark ravines, and blue
streaks of sky.
Where the Broad river crosses the road with a wide sweep, I drew rein
before a frame dwelling, whose scanty farm lands gave no promise of
yields which would afford enough extra money, by ten years’ savings, to
be used in painting its dingy sides. Fastened to it was a porch with one
end concealed by trailing vines, choked with dust. Before the weed-grown
potato patch was a rickety, board fence, on the top of which was seated
a man dressed in seedy, dusty, brown shirt, pantaloons, hat, and shoes.
Upon my inquiry whether dinner could be afforded here for horse and man,
he slid lazily off his perch with the remark:
“Plenty oats an’ hay; no corn. Will ye lite?”
The man started with my horse for the stable, and I went toward the
house. High steps reached up to the porch. On the latter stood a table,
white with powdered plaster of Paris, and covered with dental
instruments and teeth for false sets. Before it sat at work a
middle-aged man.
“Pleasant day,” I said.
“Eh? What’s that?” wrinkling his narrow forehead.
“Fine weather,” I repeated.
“Can’t hear you,” shoving his chair a little nearer mine. He was
evidently deaf.
“A pleasant day, this!” I thundered.
“Damn the weather! Where you from?”
“Asheville.”
“What’s your business?
“Seeing the country.”{240}
“Seein’ the country?” Then with a cynical curl of his lip, “Poor
business,” and he continued, whittling at his plaster cast.
I felt interested in the man. His cordial manners prompted me to fall on
his neck, but I restrained myself. Then I took up the examination.
“You’re not a native. You have a foreign air about you, you have,” I
shouted.
“You’re right.”
“Where do you hail from?”
“Been living with the Osage Indians for the last twelve years.”
I thought as much. He was all Indian, and I concluded to avoid him, but
he did not intend to drop the subject so easily.
“Do you see that Osage relic?” pointing to an Indian blanket hanging on
a hook against the wall. “That’s one of the things I brought back with
me. I’m a man with a history. I can give you some points about a country
that is a country.”
He again lapsed into silence. On the invitation to procure points, I
determined to interview him.
“What were you doing among the Indians? Hunting?” I asked.
“No.”
“A trader?”
“No.”
“A dentist?”
“No.”
“What then?”
“None of your damn business!”
I felt disconcerted. Evidently, the man was a gentleman,—he objected to
being interviewed. The tack looked like a bad one; clouds a little too
electric for fine sailing. A thin-haired woman in a calico dress and
rough shoes, with a care-worn{241} expression on her pale face, was sitting
at one end of the porch. She now spoke, in a voice inaudible to the
unapproachable:
“Don’t pay any attention to him. He’s been drinkin’. Hit allers makes
him ugly.”
“Who is he?” I whispered.
“My husband. We’ve been married a year; soon arter he cum from the
West.”
And then she sighed and looked out across the rickety fence, the roaring
waters of the Broad river, the brown mill and the few houses by it, and
then at the stony-faced mountains beyond. I sighed in sympathy.
A bare-footed black girl stuck her head out of the door and announced
that dinner was ready. Being tired and hungry, I was not backward in
answering this notice, and moved into the dining-room. On my plate,
after helping myself from everything on the table, were a chunk of fat
pork, a piece of doughy, hot, wheat bread, and some boiled green beans.
A tin cup of butter-milk was beside the mess to wash it down. Let me say
right here that this was an exceptional meal! I have been on many tramps
and rides through the Carolina mountains, but never had I met with such
a reception and such fare. They were not backward in demanding half a
dollar, the usual price asked by the mountaineer for supper, lodging and
breakfast for man and his horse.
The man in brown, as he mended my saddle bags after dinner, filled my
ears with a recital of the mysteries of Bat cave. He represented it as
the wonder of the mountains. Its gloomy depths contained chambers of
marvelous dimensions, while bats, the unholy habitants of darkness,
stuck to the walls and flitted in its precincts. He volunteered as a
guide, and as it lay on the way to Chimney Rock hotel, I mounted and
rode along with him.
By the bouldered river, before the guide’s cabin, I tied my{242} horse, and,
by means of a foot-log, crossed to the opposite bank. It was a half-mile
walk. We waded through the soft soil of several corn-fields, pitched
almost perpendicular on the mountain side; climbed a number of rail
fences; and after a steep ascent over tree-trunks and rocks, we arrived
at the mouth of the cave. An air as cold as a winter lake breeze came
from the darkness. It chilled us through and through. We went in without
torches. There were rifts in the apex of the roof, high above, through
which sunlight poured, dimly lighting up the whole interior. It failed
most miserably to meet my expectations.
“Where are your bats, Dotson?” I asked.
“Hit’s cu’rous; I don’t see nary one.”
Dotson shaded his eyes, as he spoke, and peered down into a well-like
hole, that broke away from our feet, and whose opposite wall, rock-piled
in front, ascended straight upward till the sides closed.
“Nor do I,” I returned; “where are they?”
“Hit ’pears they aint ’ere. I ’low they been skeered out,” he drawled,
rubbing his cheek.
That was all the satisfaction I obtained in regard to bats. A little
curiosity is connected with the cave, from the fact that it is in
granite rocks. At some convulsion of the mountain’s crust, the walls of
granite were rent asunder, and then their tops, meeting again, left an
opening between them. The air in it is cold and dry, for there is no
water dripping in its interior. There is another smaller, but deeper,
cave near the one just described. Torches are needed and one must crawl
to enter it. The rocks around it are also granite.
I was on my horse again. The scenery for the next two miles is of a
sublime description. The stone portals of a collossal gateway rise
against the sky. The large mountain on the north is the Round Top. It
presents a red cracked-stone front,{243} and resembles the venerable ruins
of a massive building, once swept by fire. Opposite to it is a line of
Titanic stone cliffs—the front of Chimney Rock mountain. A luxuriant
forest grows half way up its precipitous slope to the foot of the cliffs
of bare rock, in height over 1,000 feet. A silver thread of water can be
seen springing from the top-most edge, and falling down the bare face.
It is the highest water-fall in the mountain system. The eastern end of
the mountain projects its top forward, an abrupt headland. Its summit is
covered with trees. From the glimpses caught of it along the shaded
river, one might liken it to the bare forehead of some Cæsar, with
laurel crown, overlooking the distant lands of Rutherford county.
Around the traveler, as he rides, are beautiful wood-land landscapes. A
river, dammed with brown boulders, flows by the roadside. Where its
channel narrows, it runs deep and smooth under the birches, oaks and
pines; then at the shallows, among the rocks, it becomes a foaming
torrent. The road is on a stone causeway, high above the crooked stream.
Between the over-arching trees, glimpses of level road, yellow and
dusty, can be seen at times. In the center of the valley, that widens
out from the foot of the stone-fronted mountains, is a comfortable
farm-house, enlarged for summer boarders, and kept by General G. W.
Logan. It is the central point to view this scenic region of the
mountains. It is reached by good roads from Rutherfordton, seventeen
miles; Hendersonville, nineteen miles; Asheville, twenty-three miles;
and Shelby, the terminus of the Carolina Central railroad, forty miles
distant.
One mile from the hotel are the Pools. The stream is known as Pool
creek. It seeks its level down a steep ravine, clothed principally with
pines and oaks. Over three ledges of brown rock, whose edges still
remain abrupt, the crystal waters of the stream plunge in quick
succession, in as many thundering cascades. Where the cascades fall are
basins, or pot-holes,{244} formed perfectly round by the whirling of the
waters. They are from ten to fifteen feet in diameter and of fabulous
depth. The lower one is the largest, and has been sounded (as any one in
the neighborhood, with straight face, will tell you) to the depth of 200
feet without striking bottom. Fifteen feet of the stock end of a giant
pine projects out of it. The beauty and wildness of the spot could not
be enhanced by a knowledge, even if true, that a depth of more than 200
feet of water lay in the lower pool.
On the edge of the ford of the river, our party halted to witness a
sunset. It was an admirable point for observation. Before us spread a
level, yellow field, forming the bottom of a beautiful, little valley.
High mountains bound this vale on north and south, while directly in
front of us, like companion sentinels, guarding the western gateway down
which the sun was to march, stand Round Top and Chimney Rock mountains.
Behind Chimney Rock, trending toward the west, arise in close
succession, a number of mountains with distinct, broken summits,—a long
palisade, fencing the gap in whose depths rushes the Broad river. In the
center of the west, stands Bear Wallow mountain, the last visible knob
of Hickory Nut gap. The sun was sinking behind the white cumuli that
capped this mountain. Streamers of golden light, like the spokes of a
celestial chariot, whose hub was the hidden sun, barred the western sky.
The clouds shone with edges of beaten gold. Their centers, with every
minute, changed to all hues imaginable. The fronts of the sentinel
mountains were somber in the shadows, while the gap was radiant with the
light pouring through it, and every pine on the top of the palisade
stood black against the glowing sky.
It was dusk a few minutes after, but the roar of the river continued;
the scents of summer filled the air; the trees bowed in luxuriant
greenness over the road; the chirping of insects made{245} musical the
valley; the mountains rose gloomy and magnificent in the twilight.
The famous Bald mountain forms the north wall of the valley. Its sterile
face is distinctly visible from the hotel porch. Caves similar to Bat
cave are high on its front. In 1874, Bald mountain pushed itself into
prominence by shaking its eastern end with an earthquake-like rumble,
that rattled plates on pantry-shelves in the cabins of the valleys,
shook windows to pieces in their sashes, and even startled the quiet
inhabitants of Rutherfordton, 17 miles away. Since then rumblings have
occasionally been heard, and some people say they have seen smoke rising
in the atmosphere. There is an idea, wide-spread, that the mountain is
an extinct volcano. As evidence of a crater, they point to a fissure
about half a mile long, six feet wide in some places, and of unmeasured
depth. This fissure, bordered with trees, extends across the eastern end
of the peak. But the crater idea is effectually choked up by the fact
that the crack is of recent appearance. The crack widens every year,
and, as it widens, stones are dislodged from the mountain steeps. Their
thundering falls from the heights may explain the rumbling, and their
clouds of dust account for what appears to be smoke. The widening of the
crack is possibly due to the gradual upheaval of the mountain.
The region of the gap is famous for sensational stories. In 1811, when
known as Chimney Rock pass, a superstitious tale of a spectre cavalry
fight, occurring here, was widely published in the newspapers of the
day. The alleged witnesses of the spectacle were an old man and his wife
living in the gap before Chimney Rock fall. So much interest was created
in Rutherfordton by its recital, that a public meeting was held and a
delegation, headed by Generals Miller and Walton, with a magistrate and
clerk, visited the old couple and took their affidavits, to this effect:
For several evenings, while shadows{246} filled the pass and sunlight still
lingered on the mountain summits, they had seen, from their doorway, two
bodies of cavalry advance toward each other across the sky. They heard
the charge sounded, and saw them meet in conflict, with flashing swords,
groans, shouts of victory, and then disappear. Three more settlers
testified as witnesses of the same vision. They were all believed
trustworthy, but evidently deluded by some natural phenomenon. Giving
credence to the tale, explanations were advanced, but none are
satisfactory.
It is a half-day’s ride of unmarked interest from the bank of Broad
river across the Bald mountains to the Catawba. The road is an old mail
route to Marion, McDowell county. The air was hot and sultry in the
middle of the day, when, after crossing the Bald mountains, I traveled
over the foot-hills through woods of scrubby oaks and pines. The road
was white, dry, and dusty. The branches of the impoverished trees,
hanging with a melancholy droop, seemed panting with heat, and craving
the presence of a breeze. Hawks circled overhead, and on a rail fence,
visible at one break in the forest, a line of crows was roosting, with
their glossy black plumage reflecting the sunlight. Their cawing
heightened the effect of the scene. A ride alone through such scenery,
and under such influences, tells upon one’s strength and spirits. After
winding through a beautiful valley, and a moment later fording the Mill
fork of Catawba river, I found myself in the little village of Old Fort.
Its houses line a wide street, running parallel with the Western North
Carolina railroad, and range along several short cross streets. A wooded
hill rises back of it. During the Revolutionary war, and after, a fort
with a strong stockade, enclosing a spring, stood on the bank of the
stream. There were no battles fought here, but many depredations by
Cherokees occurred, in which several people were killed in the vicinity.
It is from this fort that the town takes its name.{247}
About an hour before sunset, on that August day, I left Old Fort, by way
of a well-traveled road, for Pleasant Gardens. There is many a level
stretch for a gallop along this road, and I improved the opportunities
afforded for a rapid push on my journey. Through the country I went,
with the fields on my right, and the woods of the hills on my left; past
large, pleasant-looking farm houses in the midst of ancestral orchards
and wide-spreading farm lands. The streams are clear, but slow and
smooth-flowing. The number of persimmon trees and hollies along the
roadside mark a difference between the woods of this section and those
of the higher counties.
It was after one of my easy gallops, that, bursting from a twilight
wood, I beheld lying before me a valley scene of striking beauty. A
broad and level tract of farming land, covered with meadows, corn and
pea-fields, stretched away from the forested skirts of the hill-sides.
From my point of observation not a house dotting the expanse could be
seen, and not even the sound of running water (a marked feature of the
higher valleys) disturbed the evening stillness. A cool pleasant breeze
was stirring, but it scarcely rustled the leaves overhead. The dark
outlines of Mackey’s mountains filled the foreground, making a broken
horizon for the blue sky. On the right lay low hills. On the left the
summits of a lofty line of peaks, behind which the sun was sinking, were
crowned with clouds of flame, while the scattered cat-tails held all the
tints and lustre of mother of pearl. That night I stopped in Pleasant
Gardens, one of the richest and most beautiful valleys to be found in
any land. It is miles in extent. John S. Brown was my hospitable and
entertaining host. The large, frame house and surroundings vividly
reminded me of my native state. Everything showed evidence of thrift and
neatness, and withal a certain ancestral air, one that only appears with
age, overhung the approach to, and portals of, the mansion. It was built
a century{248} ago, but many additions and repairs have been made since the
original log-raising. Osage-orange hedges line the path to it under the
cluster of noble trees. On the left as you approach, only a few feet
from the house’s foundations, flows Buck creek with swift, clear waters:
a trout stream in a day before civilization had cleared its banks.
Under a clouded sky I mounted my horse on the third morning of my
journey, and set out from Pleasant Gardens. The fording of a stream is
of so frequent occurrence in a trip through the Carolina mountains, that
one is apt to have a confused recollection of any one river or creek
that he crosses, although few are devoid of beauty or wildness. Those of
the Catawba, as it flows through McDowell county, have lost the
characteristics of the mountain ford. Boulders and out-cropping ledges
of rock are absent; the rush and roar of crystal waters have given place
to a smooth and less transparent flow, or noiseless, dimpled surface;
the banks are of crumbling soil, and, instead of rhododendrons and
pines, alders and willows fringe the waters’ edges.
The great valleys of the Catawba are covered principally with unfenced
fields of corn. The road leads through rustling acres, where one’s
horse, guided with slack rein by absent-minded rider, can, as he walks
along, break a green ear of corn from the standing stalk, without
stretching his neck over a fence. To prevent cattle from running at
large through these thickly-planted lands, gates are swung across the
roads at the division fence of each plantation, and from necessity, the
traveler must open them to ride through; and then, from moral
obligation, he must shut them behind him. The farm-houses are home-like
in appearance. They denote prosperity, happiness and culture in the
families inhabiting them. Many are of antique architecture, and set back
on level lawns, under ornamental trees and flourishing orchards.{249}
Toward the middle of the morning, the sharp outlines of the Linville
mountains showed themselves in the east, and after an abrupt turn from
the Bakersville road, I struck the North fork of the Catawba, and rode
twelve miles along its picturesque course. Its waters have a peculiar,
clear, green hue, and speak of speckled trout in their depths and shaded
rapids. Without a guide, I could have followed up the North fork, under
the shadows of Humpback mountain, and, by a trail, have crossed the
ridge to the Linville falls; but by this route the wild scenery of the
Linville cañon is lost. Bryson Magee was my guide to the Burke county
road along the summit of Bynum’s bluff. Just after a slight shower, he
overtook me as he was returning from a day’s work for a North Fork
farmer. He had an open, tanned countenance, fringed by a brown beard,
and capped by a head of long hair, hidden under the typical mountain
hat—a black, slouch felt, with a hole for ventilation in the center of
the crown and minus the band. An unbleached, linen shirt, crossed by
“galluses” which held his homespun pantaloons in place, covered his
body. He wore shoes and walked leisurely.
“Is there anyone on this road who can guide me up Bynum’s bluff?” I
asked him, after returning his “howdy.”
“Why, some niggers live nigh hyar who could do hit, but they’re all at
work two mile below.”
“Any one else I could get?”
“Not a soul, except—”
“Who?” I asked.
“Wal, stranger—I reckon you’s a furriner—I kin do hit, but I’m
powerful tired: worked all day.”
When we arrived at his log cabin, he had definitely determined to go. It
was then four o’clock, and clouds were driving thick and dark across the
sky. We tied the saddle-bags to the saddle, and then began the ascent.
Bryson led my horse; I walked on behind.{250}
Before we had proceeded 100 yards, a light rain began falling. This did
not deter us, for Bryson, like all the denizens of the coves, was
callous to dampness, heat, and cold, and as for myself, a rubber coat
came in play. The flinty ground was set with whortleberry bushes—a true
indicator of sterility. These berries were ripe, and we gathered them,
as we tramped along the trail, while the clouds grew heavier around us,
and the rain swept in blinding sheets through the scrubby forest. There
was no thunder to add variety to the storm, only the moan of the wind,
and the sound of tree tops swaying in the gusts. The water poured in
streams from my hat, and my legs, to the knees, were soaked from contact
with wet bushes; but gradually it cleared over-head, and when we reached
the main road, on the summit of the ridge, the clouds had parted, and
through their rifts the sun, still an hour high, poured a burning glory
over the dripping forests.
Looking southward in the direction the guide pointed, a mighty,
rock-topped mountain, lifting itself into the sunlight above the fog,
was visible. It appeared like a stone wall rising from the ocean.
Squared off in sharp outlines, without trees or lesser visible
vegetation on its level summit, it presents a striking contrast to the
other peaks of the Alleghanies south. It is the Table Rock mountain,
3,918 feet in altitude. Hawk-bill, a peak named from its top being
crowned with a tilted ledge of moss-mantled rock, resembling the beak of
a hawk, stood before me as I turned toward the left. Its altitude is
4,090 feet. Both these peaks are accessible for climbers, and are much
visited by tourists curious to examine the character of their rock
formation.
“We jist hit it,” broke forth the guide, “a minute more an’ we wouldn’t
seen ’em. See, the fog’s crawlin’ up, slow but shore.”
It was as he had said. The massed vapors in the low sunk{251} vales were
being driven upward, and a moment later they had enfolded Table Rock and
Hawk-bill, and were creeping through the woods around us. I now handed
him fifty cents, the price for a day’s common labor through that
section, and, shaking hands, we separated. It was five miles to the
nearest house, and lacked only one hour of sunset. Three miles had been
passed over, when a sound, as of some distant waterfall, struck on my
ears. It was a soft, steady, liquid murmur. Halting my horse, I sat in
the saddle and listened, then dismounted, tied, and walking through the
weeds a few steps, reached some broken rocks at the edge of a precipice.
Clinging to a tree, I leaned over and looked below through perpendicular
space over 1,000 feet. I shouted from the sensations created by the
wonderful wildness of the scene.
At first sight down into a cañon, that seemed almost fathomless, I saw
an inky, black band stretched through the depths, with surface streaked
with silver. It was the Linville river, but distance rendered its waters
motionless to the vision. A thin mist lent an indescribable weirdness to
the scene, and seemed veiling some mighty mystery in its folds.
“Wrapping the tall pines, dwindled as to shrubs in dizziness of
distance,” it was being shaken from its foothold by varying breezes,
broken into separate sheets of vapor, and pushed upward along the
perpendicular walls. It curled and twisted weirdly through the tangled
pines, filling black rents in the opposite mountain’s face, shielding a
ragged, red cliff here and there, but at every movement mounting toward
the cañon’s rim. Soon the profile faces on the upper cliffs jutted out
in clear air; the brick-like fronts of rock, in pine settings across the
chasm became plainly visible; the lower forests stood free; the dark
river, sweeping in an acute angle, within stone drop below, tossed
upward its eternal echo; the mists had clustered in thick clouds on the{252}
summit of an unknown peak, and then all grew dusky with the approach of
night.
A scene is sublime, according to its power to awaken the sense of fear;
the more startling, the more sublime. The view of Linville cañon from
the Bynum’s Bluff road possesses, in the writer’s opinion, more of the
elements of sublimity than any other landscape in North Carolina. The
region of the Linville is one of scenery grandly wild and picturesque.
The only region that approaches it in wildness and sublimity—being
somewhat similar in the perpendicularity of its mountains and the
clearness of its stream, but contrasting by the fertility of its soil
and luxuriance of its forests—is the Nantihala River valley.
The Linville range is a spur of the Blue Ridge, separated from the
latter by the North Fork valley. It trends south, and for a distance is
the dividing line between Burke and McDowell. Its highest altitude is
about 4,000 feet. Jonas’ Ridge runs parallel with it on the east, and
between them, through a narrow gorge, over 1,000 feet deep, flows
Linville river. The rocks of these mountains are sandstones and
quartzites. The soil is scanty and sterile, and the forests scrubby. The
falls are distant from Marion on the Western North Carolina railroad,
about twenty-five miles, and reached as the writer has described. From
Morgantown, on the same railroad, they can be reached by a day’s ride in
conveyance over the highway on the summit of the mountains. Hickory is
also a point from which to start, and one frequently taken by tourists.
That night I dried my clothes at T. C. Franklin’s fireside, one mile
from the falls of the Linville. Around the crackling logs (this was in
August) was a small party, such as is often collected at mountain
wayside farm-houses. Steaming their clothes with me at the broad hearth,
were two Philadelphia lawyers. A few days previous, closing their musty
tomes, filing away their legal documents, and reconciling importunate{253}
clients with fair promises, they had locked their doors to silence, dust
and cobwebs, and started southward. In Virginia they each bought a
horse, and equipped like myself, they were doing the mountains. It was
not only their first visit to Western North Carolina, but their first
trial in that mode of traveling; and, like all innocents abroad, they
had gathered some interesting matters from personal experience. While
the good-wife rattled away at the plates on a table just cleared by us
of everything in the shape of food, in spite of the steady patter of
rain on the roof, warmed by the glowing fire, and growing enthusiastic
over mutual praise of the mountain scenery, we drifted into the
following conversation:
“That view from the Roan eclipses everything I have ever seen in the
White, Green, Catskill and Virginia mountains; but I would not ascend it
again for all the views from Maine to Florida, if I had the same
experience to pass through,” said one, whose black hair, eyes, beard and
dark complexion gave him a brigand appearance.
“No,” returned his pleasant, fair-faced companion, “You know the peril
of your being abroad nights. Some one else, less timid, might actually
shoot you.”
“Were you in danger of being shot?” I asked.
“Yes; shot for a highwayman,” answered he of the open countenance, and
then he laughed.
“How so?”
“Oh! Hal’s joking about the shooting business. I was taken for a robber;
that’s a fact; but what I mean by an unpleasant experience was our being
lost on the Roan.”
“I intend to ascend the Roan. Is the way hard to find?” I spoke to the
dark-visaged man.
“It is from the Tennessee side. We took that route, with explicit
directions how to reach the hotel on the summit. It was only fifteen
miles distant from our stopping-place, but it{254} rained, and a dark
morning gave us a late start. From Cranberry to the foot of the Roan we
pursued a trail way, and a tangled pursuit it was. At the base of the
mountain we wound ourselves up in a net-work of log roads that, cut by
the lumbermen, branched out in every direction, crossing and recrossing
each other in the great woods. Extricating ourselves from this, we
climbed the mountain, arriving on the ridge about sunset. Just before
gaining the ridge, we met a party of four tourists on foot, whom we
saluted and left behind. A painted gate led us astray, and we followed
the ridge leading to the Little Roan. We retraced our steps in the rain
and darkness, and took shelter near the delusive gate in an empty but
comfortable cabin, erected evidently for lost wayfarers. I went out
after we had started a fire, and found the party of four men seated on a
log in the rain at some distance from the cabin. I invited them to
return with me, but they declined. I said nothing more, considering them
non compos mentis.”
“A singular party. Did you discover any reason for their refusal?”
“Yes,” began the one addressed as Hal, “Mat’s face, dress, and figure
frightened them; and, as they told the landlord in the morning, in spite
of their being well armed, they preferred an all night’s roost in the
rain to falling into the clutches of a highwayman.”
“Well, that’s so” said Mat, nodding his head and smiling; “However, we
were lucky in finding the cabin before they did. Had they got there
first, they would have barred the door against us, and, perhaps, warned
us away with a few pistol shots.”
Our social ring was at this point broken up by a party who seemed too
much preoccupied with themselves to join us, and so we separated for the
night. The party in question consisted of two newly married couples. The
knots had been tied in{255} Morganton, a few days previous, and they were
then on their bridal tour. They drove up in the rain, unharnessed and
tied their horses under the dripping trees (for the stable was full),
and came in upon us.
On the next morning, under a clear sky, I wound my way on foot under the
limbs of kalmia and rhododendrons to the Linville falls. It is a wild
approach. Over the hedges tower ancient hemlocks with mossed trunks. The
blue-jay screamed through the forest, and around the boles of the trees
and along the branches, squirrels, known as mountain boomers, chased
each other, halting in their scampers to look down on the disturber of
the solitude. Once, a brilliant-breasted pheasant, roused by my
footsteps, from a bed of fern-crested rocks, sprung in air close before
me, and with a startled whirr, sailed up a shaded ravine. A sportsman,
with a shot-gun, could easily have winged the bird in its flight,
thereby securing a valuable trophy for the taxidermist. The cock
pheasant of the mountains has not a shabby feather on his body: They are
found in many sections of the mountains, but not in great numbers. The
hollow drum-like sound caused by beating their wings against their
bodies, is in most instances their death tattoo. At its sound from the
neighboring cove, the hunter takes down his rifle, creeps near the
favorite log, and generally makes a dead shot.
An old mountaineer, famous as a narrator of bear and fish stories, was
particularly fond of telling one relating to pheasant shooting. One
autumn day, having already marked the forest locality from which the
drum of a pheasant resounded every morning, he crept near with his
rifle. The bird had just jumped in place and was drumming within his
sight. He took deliberate aim and fired. On running to the log he
discovered a red fox struggling in his death throes on the opposite side
of the log, and in his mouth a dead pheasant. Reynard, as the{256}
mountaineer explained, marking the frequented log, had secreted himself
close beside it, and, while the mountaineer was aiming, was preparing to
seize the bird, and did so at the moment the trigger was pulled.
The heavy thunder of the falls swept through the forest, increasing as I
advanced. The path diverged at one point, and, taking the right hand
trail, by means of the roots of the laurel, I descended a cliff’s face
in cool, dismal shade. At the bottom, I came out on a black ledge of
rock, close to the river. A stupendous fall was before; stern walls of a
rocky cañon, 100 feet high, around me, and a blue sky smiling above. I
climbed a stair-way of moist rocks, and walked along the path on the
cliff’s front to a point directly before the fall’s face. The great
volume of the Linville river, formed from drainage for fifteen miles
back to the water-shed of the Blue Ridge, here at the gap between Jonas’
Ridge and the Linville mountains, has cut asunder a massive wall,
leaving high perpendicular cliffs towering over its surface, and then,
with a tremendous leap, pours its current down through space, fifty
feet, into the bottom of the cañon. It seems to burst from a dark cavern
in the mountain’s center. A pool, sixty feet across, looking like the
surface of a lake with dark waves white-capped, spreads in a circle at
the base of the cliffs. After recovering from the dizziness of its
plunge, the river, leaving the piny walls on either side, rushes along
in view for a short distance, and then disappears around the corner of a
green promontory.
If one, in retracing one’s steps, takes the left hand trail at the point
of divergence, and follows it to the edge of the cliffs, a magnificent
downward view will be obtained, both of the foot of the cataract, and
above, where its waters race in serpentine course, increased in velocity
by the plunges over smaller falls only a few yards up the gorge.
A wilder solitude, a more picturesque confusion of crags,{257} waters,
woods, and mountain heights, can scarcely be found. But even here, man
once fitted for himself a dwelling-place; for plainly visible across the
tops of the trees, was a little cabin on a small, sloping clearing. No
smoke curled upward from its weather-worn roof; its doors had been torn
away and chimney leveled. A few cows pastured before it.
After dinner I left Franklin’s to ride over a good road up the Linville
river. The afternoon passed without any occurrences or scenes of marked
interest, and the sun was slowly sinking toward a mountain-rimmed
horizon when, making a last inquiry in regard to my route, I entered a
wilderness, unbroken by human habitation for nearly five miles. It was a
great, green-lined way. Linns, birches, and hemlocks met over-head,
rendering dark the shadows. Under this forest, grow in richest
luxuriance dark hedges of rhododendron, too dense for easy penetration,
and reaching up to the lower branches of the trees. It was late in
season for their flowers, still many of them were white and purple with
bloom. So deep and luxuriant was the foliage of the forest and its
undergrowth, and so cold the waters of the stream that crossed and
recrossed or occupied the road-bed itself, that the air was chilly at
the hour in which I rode, and must be so even at noon-day.
The shade continued to deepen, and the chilliness of the air increased;
still, in spite of the apparent great distance I had covered, no house
presented itself, and in only one place did the branches of the trees
separate themselves sufficiently to see out. Then, far beyond, I saw the
black summit of the Grandfather. That was all. The waters of the stream
are of a rich, Rhine-wine color. At one point that day, I noticed,
attached to a fence above the stream, a board bearing the words, “No
fishing allowed on this land.” This is the only posted warning against
angling that I have seen, or know of, in the mountains.
In that twilight hour the stream seemed to sing a doleful{258} refrain over
the smooth boulders and gnarled ivy roots. An owl hooted from its hidden
perch in a mossed pine; and a scared rabbit, interrupted in its evening
meal on an apple dropped by some lonely wayfarer, fled across the road,
and disappeared in the gloom of the thickets. A more dismal woodland for
a twilight ride could not well be imagined in the possibilities of
nature. It would naturally be more dismal to the unfamiliar traveler,
tired with a long day’s ride, and despairing of reaching a farm-house
before the approach of a cloudy night.
Suddenly the forest on one side opened, and a clearing of dead, girdled
trees, with brush fires blazing here and there among the white, standing
trunks, lay before me. Further on was a meadow and a small house, from
whose chimney a wreath of smoke was ascending straight to the zenith.
Over the house and farm loomed the rock-crowned summit of the Peak of
the Blue Ridge. An unshapely ledge cropped from the mountain’s top.
I was now on the summit of one of the gaps of the Blue Ridge, at an
elevation of 4,100 feet. On one side down a gradual descent through the
wilderness described, flow the waters of the Linville on the way to the
Atlantic; on the other, close on the dividing line, wells up the spring
forming the Watauga, whose waters mingle with the Mississippi. A short
mile below this point, down the Watauga side, is Calloway’s, at the foot
of the Grandfather, as the sign-board directly before the gate will tell
the man who stops to read it. In the dusk, I dismounted here, tossed my
horse’s bridle to a barefooted boy, and then lugged my saddle-bags to
the porch before the unpainted front of a new addition on an old house.
I was well received and seated.
Beside the road, before the house, was presented that evening a scene
that merits description. It was the camp of a family who, having
abandoned one home, was seeking another. An{259} open fire blazed on the
ground. Its light shone on a white covered, rickety wagon, at whose rear
end were feeding, out of a box strapped there, a mule and a horse. The
mule was all ears; the horse all ribs, backbone, and neck, plainly
appearing through a drum-tight hide. Around the fire was a squalid group
consisting of a man, woman, and four small boys. The man and boys were
barefooted, and wore nothing but hats, breeches, and shirts. The woman
had on a tattered gown, and had her pinched features concealed within a
dark bonnet. At that moment they were drinking coffee in turns from a
single tin cup, and eating corn bread. The pinched features, straggling
hair, and sallow, almost beardless face of the man, made his a visage of
stolid apathy. At intervals, a gust, sweeping down the narrow valley,
would lay low the flames and whirl the smoke in a circle, enveloping the
group, and awakening a loud coughing from the woman. My supper was not
ready until after I had seen the last one of the family crawl after the
others into the wagon for the night.
The next morning I went out to talk with them as they ate breakfast.
“Where are you from?” I asked.
“Tenesy,” answered the man, giving the accent on the first syllable, a
pronunciation peculiar to the uneducated natives.
“How do you come to be here?”
“Movin’. Got ejected in Tenesy, an’ we’re now huntin’ a new place.”
“Where?”
“Dunno. We reckon on squattin’ somewhar in the Blue Ridge.”
“Will you buy or rent the property?”
“Buy?” answered he, with an expression of astonishment on his face;
“What do you reckon I’d buy with, stranger? I ain’t got a copper, an’
thet mule, hoss, wagin, an’ hay an’ corn{260} in hit, an’ them harnesses,
could’nt be swapped fer much land, I reckon. All I’ve got? Yes, ’cept
the ole woman an’ them boys. I’ll jist put up a cabin somewhars in the
woods, plant a crap, an’ stick thar till they done driv me out.”
After this reply, he leaned forward and poured out another cup of coffee
for himself and family, as I slowly turned and walked away. No more
poverty-stricken families can be found than some of these occasionally
seen moving through the mountains. This one had property in a team and
wagon, but I have met them traveling on foot and carrying their sole
possessions.
A family of the latter description I came across near the Ocona Lufta in
Swain county. It was a warm May day, and the road was dry and dusty. I
was on foot with a companion from the Richland valley. On descending a
short hill to a small stream gliding out from under a clump of wayside
willows, we met the party. There were eight of them, as destitute,
ragged, forlorn, and withal as healthy a family as I ever saw. The
father and husband was fully 70 years of age. His long gray hair,
although unkempt; his wrinkled face, and mild blue eyes, had something
in all to arouse reverence and pity in the most thoughtless of mankind.
He was dressed in an unbleached muslin shirt, much the worse for wear; a
pair of pantaloons so completely covered with patches that it would have
taken an artisan tailor to distinguish the original ground-work; a pair
of cloth suspenders, and a battered hat. He was bare-footed, and carried
on his shoulders half a bushel of corn. The wife and mother was much
younger. Her face was stolid enough to be utterly indifferent to their
condition. She had on the least possible quantity of clothes to cover
her form, and a calico bonnet on her head. Under her arm was a bundle of
spring onions, probably gathered from some convenient yard near which
they had encamped in true gypsy fashion. The eldest daughter, a{261} grown
woman, was no better attired than her Mother. She had in her possession
a roll of tattered blankets. The five remaining, frowzy children,
barefooted and ragged like their sire, had in their respective keepings,
a coffee-pot, two or three gourds and an iron kettle. This was the whole
family with a full inventory of their worldly possessions. They said
that they were moving back to Tennessee; that they had been burnt out;
that the head of the family could not earn more than 20 cents per day;
that it was “split the Smoky mountings or bust.” We were under the
impression that the 20 cents per day included the board for the family.
We gave them some small change and tobacco and then separated.
The Grandfather mountain, in the extreme southern corner of Watauga
county, is the highest point of the Blue Ridge. The elevation is 5,897
feet, and being 35 miles in an air-line distant from the loftier summits
of the Black mountains, and fifteen miles from the Roan, over-topping as
it does all the nearer peaks by an altitude of nearly 1,000 feet, it
commands an almost limitless view of mountain country. It merits the
name of Grandfather, for its rocks are of the Archæan age, and the
oldest out-croppings on the globe. Two other reasons for its name are
ascribed; one from the profile of a man’s face seen from the Watauga
river; the other from the resemblance of the rhododendrons, when clad in
ice and snow, to the white, flowing beard of a patriarch.
Differing from all the mountains of the South, dense labyrinths of
rhododendrons and pines begin at its base. The traveler enters their
shadows by the road-side, and for two and a half miles, the distance
from Calloway’s to the summit, they are continually with him. Although
the first two miles are often accomplished on horseback, it is too steep
for easy riding. The path winds like the trail of a serpent, brushing by
the bases of low, vine-draped cliffs, around yellow hemlocks, and{262}
disappearing in the rocky channel of a torrent, or into hedges of
rhododendrons.
On the morning that I made the ascent, I was impressed with the
noticeable absence of birds. Not a note from a feathered songster
resounded through the forest. No life was visible or audible, except
occasionally on the cliffs, quick-eyed lizards, of the color of the
rocks, appeared and then disappeared in the mossed crevices of the
stone.
One-half mile from the summit, under a tall, dark cliff whose cold face
seems never to have been kissed by sunlight, bubbles a large spring. Its
water is of a temperature less than eight degrees above the freezing
point. This, as far as is known, is the coldest spring south of New York
state. Here the steepest part of the ascent begins. At intervals old
logs are piled across the narrow trail, and in places rocks have set
themselves on edge. Grasses grow rankly with weeds and ferns. These,
covered with the moisture of the clouds that had dropped with the night
about the forehead of the Grandfather, and only lifted with daylight,
wet the person pushing through them as thoroughly as if he had fallen in
the torrent.
The summit of the mountain is a narrow, ragged ridge, covered with
balsams. If these trees were cleared from the central pinnacle, a
sweeping view toward every point of the compass could be obtained,
without change of position. As it is, they obstruct the vision, and to
see out on every side it is necessary to move to three points, all close
together, known as the Watauga, Caldwell, and Burke views.
Let the reader imagine himself stationed at one of these views. Mantling
the steep declivities are the wildernesses of black balsams. A cool
breeze swings and beats their branches together. The sun rides in an
atmosphere so clear that there seems no limit to vision. A precipice
breaks away from your feet, but you do not notice where it ends; for at
the attempted{263} downward look, the mountains below, like the billows of a
stormy ocean stilled in their rolling by some mighty hand, crowd upon
the vision. They have all the colors of the ocean, wave beyond wave,
surge beyond surge, till they blend in with the sky, or hide their most
distant outlines in the cumuli bounding the horizon. You fancy hearing
the sound of breakers, and look directly below as though seeking for the
reason of no roar arising from the waves lying at the base of the
headland. Then the dream of the sea vanishes. There lie the forests,
dwarfed but real, dark green, covering the unsightly rocks and ending at
brown clearings, in whose centers appear farm-houses, the almost
invisible fences running wild over the hills, the yellow road revealed
at intervals, and the silver threads of streams.
It was on a beautiful Sunday morning that I left Calloway’s and rode
down the western slope of the Blue Ridge. A quiet, seemingly more
hallowed than that of other days, was brooding over the valley through
which, beside the Watauga, the road descended. The fields and meadows
were vacant; and the mountaineers, observant of the Sabbath, were all
within their homely dwellings, or assembled at the meeting-house of the
neighborhood. This place of prayer is a plain, unpainted, frame
building, enclosed by a rail fence, beside the road. Just before
reaching it your horse must splash through a roaring, crystal ford of
the Watauga. When I passed it that morning, services had already begun,
and the sounds of a hymn, sung by all the congregation, in strong,
melodious chorus, came wafted through the trees. A long line of saddled
horses and mules were ranged along the fence, or tied to the
rhododendron hedges on the opposite side of the road. The house seemed
packed; for many of the men were standing bare-headed in the sunlight
before the crowded door, and a number of young folks were gathered in
groups about the yard, the latter more intent on their own conversation
than on what was doing indoors.{264} Some of them nodded to me as I passed.
This manner of the mountaineers saluting every one, friend or stranger,
is a pleasant one, and prevents, in the traveler, all feelings of
loneliness arising from his being in a strange country.
At one point on the road, the further rocky end of the Grandfather
mountain presents the distinct features of a face. You can see it
looking out from its head-dress of firs, like a demi-god, holding
eternal watch over the myriad mountains and valleys.
The vicinity of Blowing Rock is a summer resort. It is a lofty plateau
of the Blue Ridge, covered with dense forests, level farms, and crossed
by smooth highways. Good country accommodations are offered here for the
tourist. From the edge of the mountain wall, which overhangs Caldwell
county, two points—Blowing Rock and Fairview—afford admirable stands,
for overlooking the piedmont country. The views are similar in
character. From Fairview the valley of the John’s river, embosomed in
green mountains, lies in the low foreground; while rolling back, spread
ranges, picturesque in outline and purple coloring. In the morning or
evening, when the sunlight is thrown aslant across them, bathing the
fronting slopes in fire, and leaving, under the opposite brows, gloomy
shadows, so long drawn out that many of the valleys are as dark as they
are silent, the scene is such that one can never tire of viewing it, or
ever lose the impressions that even one sight of it will awaken.
A ride of eight miles from the center of the plateau resort, will bring
the traveler to Boone, the county seat of Watauga. Along the way several
sweeping landscape prospects are afforded. In one of the dense woods I
passed men engaged in clearing a laurel thicket. The soil where the
laurel springs being generally rich, it requires, after its clearing,
nothing but a slight plowing, and enough corn for planting, to have the{265}

WATAUGA FALLS.
{266}
{267}
expanse, which, during the last season, was blooming with white and
purple rhododendron flowers, transformed into a green and tasseled
corn-field.
Boone, the most elevated county seat east of the Rocky mountains, is
3,222 feet above the sea. Its population numbers about 200, and lives
along a street rising and falling with the hills. Due to the fact of no
majestic mountains arising round it, there is, in its surroundings, less
of the attractive features that distinguish the most of the mountain
county seats. Near the stream which flows on one side of the town,
Daniel Boone, the famous hunter, is said to have encamped while on a
hunting tour. It is from this tradition of the camp that the village
took its name.
An afternoon ride from Boone will land the traveler at Elk river. The
scenery on the route is picturesque. In the valleys they were raking hay
that August day. One valley in particular, by the Watauga, is of
captivating loveliness. The mountains rise around it, as though placed
there with no other purpose than to protect its jewel-like expanse from
rough incursions of storm. It lay smooth and level under the warm
sunlight. Nothing but grass and clover covered it—in some fields wholly
standing, in others being laid low by the reapers. It is evidently a
stock farm; for large droves of sleek, fat cattle were grazing in some
of the meadows. A cheerful farm-house and large out-buildings stand on
one side of the road. The noise of a spinning wheel, coming from the
sunlight-flooded porch where a gray-haired matron was visible, blended
with the sounds from the fields—the lowing of cattle, the noise of
sharpening scythes, and laughter from rosy-cheeked girls and men, who,
pausing in their work, looked for a moment at the travel-worn horse and
rider. This valley I would love to live in.
As a county perfectly adapted for stock-raising, Watauga{268} cannot be
surpassed. One and three-quarters miles off the road you are now
pursuing, is the Marianna falls of the Little Dutch creek. It is easily
approached by the foot-traveler. After reaching the stream from above,
by descending a winding, trail you come out on the flat rocks directly
below and before the fall. It is eighty-five feet high and makes a
perpendicular descent over mossed and lichened rocks.
Valle Crucis lie on the left of the way that winds under the trees along
the base of one of its mountain limits. It is a valley containing
probably 600 acres, and noted for its beauty. The name is taken from its
imaginary resemblance to a cross. The length of the valley, running
between the rounded parallel ranges, is compared to the upright piece of
the cross, and the openings between these ranges on either side where
green levels reach back, to the arms. From the best point of observation
which I gained, it seemed a perfect square—a vivid green lake, fringed
with the rich foliage of the forests which decked the slopes of the
bordering mountains.
A little religious history is connected with this Valley of the Cross.
On one spot in it there are still to be seen amid weeds and luxuriant
grasses the scattered ruins of a building. They are all the remaining
evidences of a mission school, founded many years since by the Episcopal
Church of the state. It was under the particular supervision of Bishop
Levi S. Ives; and it was here that, 30 years ago, he openly renounced
loyalty to his church and went over to the Roman Catholic faith. With
this singular apostacy, work at the mission school closed, and the
building gradually assumed its present proportions.
Over lonely mountains the road now leads to Elk river. I rode for mile
after mile that evening without seeing a cabin or farm-house. The
scenery along the Elk has something decidedly romantic in its features.
On one hand would be perched a moss-grown cottage on the mountain slope,
with a{269} few giant hemlocks, allowed to stand at the time of the general
clearing, overshadowing it. Below, on the other hand, would lie fertile
fields, watered by the noisy Elk, and enclosed on three sides by the
dark and sober forests of the hemlock. The serenity of the evening was
not disturbed by the farewell whistling of the quails; the rattling of
the bells from the cows coming homeward across the pastures; the barking
of a dog behind the barnyard fence, and the opening cry of the
whip-poor-will.
The moon had turned from silver to gold; the stream under the spruces
was sparkling where no shadows fell athwart its surface, and a cold,
evening breeze, the usual companion of night over the mountains, was
rustling the black foliage of the trees, when I dismounted at a
hospitable farm-house on the Elk, where I had a wholesome supper; shared
a bed with the farmer’s son, a graduate of the North Carolina
University; had an early breakfast, and before sunrise, mounting my
horse, I was on the way toward the foot of the Roan. An old forge, where
the iron taken from the mountain near by was smelted, stands by the
road. It was abandoned a few years since. The Cranberry mines are a mile
off the main road. They are in Humpback mountain, Mitchell county, North
Carolina, and included in a tract of 4,000 acres, owned by the Cranberry
Iron & Coal Company of Philadelphia, of which A. Pardee is president.
Mines have been worked in this mountain for the last half-century. They
are now being operated on a large scale. The narrow-gauge railway, an
off-shoot of the E. T:, V. & G. R. R., runs to the tunnel; and the raw
ore is transferred by rail to furnaces in the North. The tunnel to the
ore bank is run in on a level from the railroad, to a depth of 325 feet.
Both steam and hand drills are being worked. The vein now struck appears
inexhaustible. It was discovered half a mile above on the mountain side,
and then the lower tunnel was projected in to it.{270} The company’s
saw-mill is in active operation near by. A town will soon be in
existence here.
From the Tennessee side the ascent of the Roan is arduous, and if one
has not taken precaution to secure explicit directions, he may be
obliged to sleep out all night in the gloomy woods, in this regard being
more unfortunate than the two travelers whom I met on the Linville.
Profiting through their misfortune, I learned every crook of the way,
and with only the steepness of the ascent to discomfit me, arrived at
sunset on the summit of that majestic mountain. The scene below, in
every direction, except where the Little Roan uplifts its gray dome, was
one tumultuous mountain ocean, rolling with rough and smooth swells
alternately toward the ragged horizon:
One hundred and twelve feet below the extreme top of Roan mountain is
situated Cloudland Hotel, over 6,200 feet above the sea, and the highest
habitation east of the Rockies. There is enough novelty in the situation
of a summer resort at so lofty an altitude to captivate the tourist,
even were there no attractions of sky, climate, scenery, or the aspect
of the mountain top itself. It is a beautiful, rounded meadow, where the
rocks, which one would naturally expect to see exposed, are hidden under
a soil clad with luxuriant grasses, mountain heather, and clumps of
rhododendrons, and azaleas. Sombre forests of balsam stretch like
natural fences around the edges of the treeless expanse, which, for over
two miles, pursues the center ridge of the mountain. At one end of the
Roan, naked granite cliffs descend into soundless gorges, and the
sublimity of the view from the brow of the precipice is indescribable.{271}
The mountain brooks teem with speckled trout, and a series of beautiful
cascades on one wild slope will attract the lover of nature. From June
until October the air is balmy and bracing, the temperature ranging
during the summer from 58° to 73°.
The regular route to Cloudland is over a turnpike from Johnson City, a
station on the East Tennessee, Virginia, & Georgia railroad. A line of
comfortable, covered stages make the trip of thirty-two miles every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. For travelers coming from Eastern North
Carolina and beyond, conveyances can be obtained at Marion, on the
Western North Carolina railroad; distant 45 miles.
The slopes of this mountain are covered by vast tracts of cherry and
other hard-wood trees. Its timbered wealth is incalculable. Saw-mills
have lately sprung into place, and the bases and gentle uplands are now
crossed with fresh roads and dotted with loggers’ camps. General Wilder,
of Chattanooga, the owner of Cloudland Hotel and of most of the
mountain, is the principal operator in this line.
As related by General J. W. Bowman, one of the first citizens of
Mitchell county and descendant of a Revolutionary patriot, the summit of
the Roan was the rendezvous for the mountain men of the Washington
district and Watauga settlement, assembling for the march ending in the
battle of King’s mountain.
In Yancey county, visible from the Roan, and forty-five miles from
Asheville, is a peak known as Grier’s Bald, named in memory of David
Grier, a hermit, who lived upon it for thirty-two years. From posthumous
papers of Silas McDowell, we learn the following facts of the hermit’s
singular history. A native of South Carolina, he came into the mountains
in 1798, and made his home with Colonel David Vance, whose daughter he
fell in love with. His suit was not encouraged; the young lady was
married to another, and Grier, with mind evidently{272} crazed, plunged into
the wilderness. This was in 1802. On reaching the bald summit of the
peak which bears his name, he determined to erect a permanent lodge in
one of the coves. He built a log house and cleared a tract of nine
acres, subsisting in the meantime by hunting and on a portion of the
$250 paid him by Colonel Vance for his late services. He was twenty
miles from a habitation. For years he lived undisturbed; then settlers
began to encroach on his wild domains. In a quarrel about some of his
real or imaginary landed rights, he killed a man named Holland Higgins.
At the trial he was cleared on the ground of insanity, and returned home
to meet his death at the hands of one of Holland’s friends. Grier was a
man of strong mind and fair education. After killing Higgins, he
published a pamphlet in justification of his act, and sold it on the
streets. He left papers of interest, containing his life’s record and
views of life in general, showing that he was a deist, and a believer in
the right of every man to take the executive power of the law into his
own hands.
While I was at the hotel a terrific thunder storm visited—not the
summit of the Roan—but the valleys below it. It came after dark, and
from the porch we looked out and down upon the world in which it raged.
Every flash of lightning was a revelation of glory, disclosing a sea of
clouds of immaculate whiteness—a boundless archipelago whose islands
were the black peaks of the mountains. Not a valley could be seen;
nothing but the snowy bosom of this cloud ocean, and the stately summits
which had lifted themselves above its vapors. In the height of the
storm, the lightning blazed in one incessant sheet, and the thunder came
rolling up through the black awful edge of the balsams, producing
somewhat similar sensations to those which fill the breast of a
superstitious savage at the recurrence of an every-day storm above him.
When I descended the mountains on the following afternoon,{273} the ravages
of the storm were visible on several splintered oak trees, which lay
prone across some of the wayside clearings and Big Rock creek was high
and still roaring, with its excess of water.
At sight, of the rocky fords of this stream, the traveler would
naturally form the opinion that it flows through wild, rugged scenery,
in a country devoid of clearings. There is, however, fine farming land,
cleared and occupied, along Big Rock creek. One portion of it, in
particular, of soil rich and fertile, is settled by a prosperous and
hard-working class of people, who, during the late war, sided with the
North. It is now said that they will allow none, except white men, to
stay, either permanently or as day laborers, in their community. The
reason given is that they fought to liberate the negro from bondage,
and, having thus helped him, they wish to be free from all contact with
him. The same feeling prevails in other isolated localities through the
mountains, one being on the Little Tennessee, in the region of its lower
reaches, near the state line.
Bakersville, with a population of 500 people, is eight miles down from
the summit of the Roan. It is situated on Cane creek. The town has been
in existence only twenty-one years, is substantially built up, and
growing rapidly. The mica interests are doing considerable to enrich it.
An Indian town was once situated here, and to this day, although unused
for 100 years, the old beaten trail of the red man, leading from Turkey
Cove to the Nollichucky, is still visible, by the bank of the creek,
under the bending grasses which grow along its edges, but still refuse
to spring where the moccasin-footed aborigines, for probably centuries,
wended back and forth from Tennessee.
Here, near the village, for one night’s encampment, in the course of
their flight from Morganton, halted the “Franks” with “Nollichucky
Jack,” their spirited and beloved leader. The details of his escape from
trial are given in another chapter.{274}
The 400 acres of valley, in which the town is situated, was a land grant
of 1778, from North Carolina to William Sharpe and John McKnitt
Alexander, clerk of the famous Mecklenburg convention. The old grant,
with the surveyor’s plat of date September 30, 1770, and the great wax
seal of the state attached, is among the archives of the county.
The Clarissa mica mine, in operation about three miles from the village,
is a point of attraction for the tourist. At present work is going on
more than 400 feet under ground, the passage down being through a dismal
hole. If you attempt the descent, the daylight will be appreciated on
your return.
The blocks of mica, after being blasted from the quartz and granite
walls in which they lie embedded, are brought to the company’s shop in
Bakersville. Here it is again sorted, the bent and otherwise worthless
mica being thrown aside. That which appears merchantable is piled on the
table before the workmen. Block by block it is taken and split into
sheets, sufficiently thin to be cut by large iron shears. Specks or
flaws in the mica are discovered by the workman holding each sheet, in
turn, between his eyes and the light through a window, before him. The
defects are remedied by again splitting the piece and taking off the
thin defective layer. When entirely clear it is marked off in
rectangular shapes, with patterns, and then cut by the shears. The sizes
are assorted, and then wrapped and tied in pound packages. The value of
mica ranges from half a dollar to three or four dollars per pound, the
price depending upon the size.
The Sink-hole mines, near Bakersville, now abandoned, have some
interesting facts connected with them. Years ago, a series of
closely-connected, round, basin-like holes in the soil of a slope,
creating some curiosity as to why and by whom they were formed, induced
investigations. One was dug into, and in the center of its bottom,
embedded in the rock, was discovered{275} a vein of mica, which was followed
until exhausted. The other holes were then worked in turn by the miners,
several thousand dollars’ worth of mica being obtained. All efforts to
strike the vein, beyond the line of the holes, proved unsuccessful.
There was no mica discovered in the vicinity outside the sink-holes. In
some of them curious stone tools were found, and the surface of the
rock, around the mica blocks, in many instances, was chipped and worn,
as though done by instruments in the hands of persons trying to
extricate the mica. These ancient operations are attributed to the Mound
Builders. In this connection, I had a conversation with Garret Ray, of
Burnsville, containing the following:
When a boy, Mr. Ray had his attention attracted by a line of stone posts
set, with about fifteen feet of space between each, on a mountain slope
of his father’s farm. Years after, upon gaining possession of the
property, he carried into execution a long-cherished idea of
investigating the mystery of these posts. They marked a valuable mica
vein, whose limits did not extend beyond them. There was no evidence
that the located vein had ever been worked. By what surface indications
or arts the mica was first discovered by the pre-historic practical
miners, can only be answered by an oracle.
Many other traces have been discovered through the mountain country of a
people who inhabited it before the advent of the Cherokees. Among the
numerous mounds to be seen by the traveler in the broad valleys of the
region, the one at Franklin undoubtedly takes precedence in shapeliness
of outline. A few years since it was opened and a quantity of stone
tools and ornaments taken from it. Eight miles southeast of Franklin, in
the year 1820, soon after the transfer of that section by the Cherokees
to the whites, a negro tenant of Silas McDowell, while at work plowing,
discovered, fifteen inches under ground, a stratum of charcoal, and
under this a burned clay slab, bearing{276} on its lower side the imprint of
the face and form of a man. Unfortunately, the slab, which was seven by
four feet in dimensions, was broken into pieces, thus destroying a relic
of untold value to the archæologist. The former inmate of this sepulchre
was probably buried and then cremated by the race, according to its
religious rites.
The Pigeon valley has been a great field for the relic hunter. Mr.
Osborne, living about three miles south of the Pigeon River station,
has, for a number of years, acted as an agent for a Richmond gentleman,
in collecting the most curious of the ornaments and pieces of pottery
turned up by the farmer’s plows. At least 2,000 of these relics have
passed through his hands. Among a few which the writer saw at Mr.
Osborne’s farm-house, was a group of men seated around a great bowl and
smoking the pipe of peace. It consisted of one entire piece of
soapstone, the figures being sculptured in correct proportions. They
were raised about three inches above the ground part on which they were
resting. Another was of two men struggling with a bear. Thousands of
arrow and spear heads have been found in the valley. That the latter
have no commercial value is evident from the fact that the long walks
from the front fence to the house of the above mentioned farmer, are
paved with them. Stone walls upon hill slopes have been unearthed in the
vicinity. After this digression let us return to the journey.
The ride, by the nearest road from Bakersville to Burnsville, will lead
the traveler for some distance along the banks of the Toe river. Deep,
wide fords are to be crossed, and lonely forests ridden through. To the
lover of nature, the solitude of some portions of the road will have in
them nothing of a depressing nature. Burnsville is described in another
chapter. From the latter village the road leads direct to Asheville. The
dark outlines of the Black mountains are visible throughout a great part
of the way. The road was in splendid condition{277} when I traveled over it,
and enabled me, with a sound horse, to arrive, in good shape, in the
county seat of Buncombe, after an interesting horse-back journey of more
than 300 miles.
{278}
{279}
AINLY the mountaineers beside the ancient stage-road,
up the Blue Ridge from McDowell county into Buncombe may listen for the
old-time winding of the driver’s bugle, the rumbling of strong-spoked
wheels, and the rattling of trace-chains; or wait to see the familiar
outlines of four gray horses, hallooing reinsman and loaded Concord
stage swinging round some bold cliff, and drawing nearer up the rich
green avenue of the forest: the days of staging by this route into
Asheville are over. But “Jehu” with his prancing steeds and swaying
coach is not, in this region, a being of the past; for the whistle of
the locomotive has only served to drive him further into the mountains.
To those who are little familiar with stage-riding, there is in{280} it
something of pleasing novelty. I never see the old red vehicle lumbering
along without having awakened in my mind some one of Dickens’ many vivid
pictures of rapid drives, where, in his words:—“Houses in twos and
threes pass by us, solitary farms, ruinous buildings, dye-works,
tanneries and the like, open country, avenues of leafless trees. The
hard uneven pavement is under us, the soft deep mud on either side.
Sometimes, we strike into the skirting mud, to avoid the stones that
clatter us and shake us; sometimes, we strike into ruts and stick there.
The wind is rushing after us, and the clouds are flying after us, and
the moon is plunging after us, and the whole wild night is in pursuit of
us.”
One of the stage routes, now in operation, is from the present terminus
of the Western North Carolina railroad at Pigeon River, to Waynesville,
ten miles distant. If the time-table is the same it was when we last
traveled over the new-laid rails from Asheville, up the Hominy valley,
over dizzy trestle-works, and burst through a narrow mud-cut between the
hills into the wide valley of the Pigeon;—if it is this way, I say, the
tourist will take a late dinner at a large brick farm-house beside the
station, and then secure a place with the colored driver on the top of
the stage. A jolly crowd is packed away inside. Perhaps, if you are an
agreeable fellow, one of the young ladies may prefer a perch outside
with you, and thus help to fill up the boot and hinder the spread of the
reinsman’s elbows as he rounds some of the coming curves. Trunks and
band-boxes are piled up behind you. You wave your hand to the landlord;
the driver gives a parting wink at the cook who is peering through the
shutters of the kitchen; and then, responsive to the crack of the whip,
the horses start, and whirling behind it a cloud of dust, the stage
begins its journey.
There is nothing particularly enchanting about the landscape for the
next ten miles. The road beneath is beaten hard, and{281} smooth as a floor.
It is not always so agreeable riding over, however, for it is of red
clay; and in winter, with snows, thaws, and rains, it becomes almost
impassible. They tell of empty wagons being stalled in places during the
inclement seasons. I have a vivid recollection of helping, one dark
April night, to unload a light Jersey wagon, drawn by two stout horses,
in order to release the hub-deep sunken wheels, and allow us to proceed
on our way from Waynesville.
Now a broad valley is whirled through, with humble cottages along the
way; then a hill is ascended, the stage rising slowly, and then rattling
on behind the lively trotting of the horses as you pass down the
opposite declivity. The driver over mountain roads always trots his
horses going down hill. It is necessary in order to make up for the
delay incurred in the long, wearisome ascents, and the horses, in
contradiction to first principles, appear to stand up well under it.
Again you strike the Big Pigeon. Concealed by its wood-bordered banks,
it has passed through the valley, and now through vistas of vines,
azaleas, chinquapin bushes, locust and beech trees, reveals its limpid
waters, swift and slow, in turns, as the basin is deep, or a
pebble-shingled bottom throws it in splashing rapids. Pairs of whistling
sand-pipers run teetering over the sands, and then fly on down the river
at your noisy approach; turtle doves, with “shocking tameness,” only
rise from the road when some of the pebbles, struck up by the horses,
shower around them; a surly dog, from a weather-worn dwelling, leaps
through the broken pickets of the fence, and for a hundred yards
follows, barking, close to the wheels; long open fields extend on one
side; and then the driver, with foot on the break, with loud “whoa,”
stops the sweating horses before a country store. He reaches down under
his feet, into the giant pocket of the stage, and draws forth a
pad-locked leather mail-bag which he tosses down into the outstretched
arms of{282} the bare-headed post-master, grocer, and township magistrate
combined.
“How yer to-day, squire?” asks the driver.
“Good. How’s yourself?”
“Bettah.”
“Who you got inside?”
“Party from Alabam’, I reckon.”
“Where they going?”
“White Sulphur; an’ say, look a heah, foh dis in-foh-ma-shun bring me
out a twist o’ backer.”
The recipient of the bag passes through a crowd of six or eight men
about the door-way, and enters the store. A few minutes elapse in which
the “Jehu” fires some tongue shots at the loungers; then the mail-bag is
returned, the foot is taken from the break, the whip cracks, and away
you go. Another store is passed with a saw-mill opposite to it, and the
river, blocked until it spreads to twice its customary breadth, pouring
and thundering over a substantial dam. The noise of waters and the saw
is deafening; then, in a twinkling, it is all still, and you are
trotting along between green hedges, and great clouds of dust envelope
the barking dogs which follow.
Along the way is seen the prepared trail for the iron horse which is to
supersede stage-travel;—the great yellow dirt embankments through the
fields; the deep grading sinking dizzily close at the roadside; the
short curves through narrow valleys, and the swallowing of it all by the
solitary woods.
If you are fortunate enough to ride with the same good-natured driver
whom we had, and he is in mellow mood, you may be interested for an hour
by a story which he is fond of telling. For fear that you might get the
wrong man, I will tell it in condensed form.
In the fall of 1877, the driver was employed on the stage route from
Asheville to Henry’s. He was an old reinsman, but the{283} road was
unfamiliar to him from the fact of his being only lately transferred
from another branch. One afternoon in November, with the highway
slippery under-foot from a cold sleet, he left Asheville with the heavy
stage and a party of five persons inside,—an old, white-haired man and
four women. He was unavoidably delayed at different points, so that,
when he began the actual descent of the Blue Ridge, a black, cold night
enveloped the landscape. With his teeth chattering, he lighted the
lamps, drew on his gloves again, mounted to his place, and began
rumbling downward. Over-head the trees creaked and groaned in the hollow
blast; the horses slipped in turns as they pushed along, and the huge
stage would occasionally slide, in spite of the locked brake, down on
the flanks of the rear span. Even with this uncomfortable state of
affairs, he could have driven along without much hazard, but suddenly
the lamps went out. Through strange carelessness he had forgotten to
refill them when he left the stables. The darkness was like that of a
soundless mine: it was almost palpable. Staggered with the situation, he
checked his horses. He must go on, but how could he? Near at hand he
knew was the most dangerous place in the whole road, where even a slight
pull to one side would send the stage and its occupants rolling down a
declivity, steep, deep and rugged enough to smash the former, and kill
every one of the latter. The horses, accustomed to the way, might
possibly be trusted; but then that possibility! It was too slippery to
lead them, and besides his foot must be on and off the break in turns.
It was imperative for him to be at Henry’s that night, both on account
of his express duties and his passengers, who would freeze before
morning. He sat shivering on the stage top.
He heard the stage door open below, but knew not for what reason, nor
whose feet were striking the ground, until a voice came up out of the
pitchy darkness:{284}
“Why don’t you go on?”
It was the old gentleman who spoke.
“Can’t. Don’t you see de lamps ar’ out?”
“What of that? We must go on.”
“Dar’s a bad pitch right yeh, an’ I wouldn’t risk hit foh no money.”
“Do you know exactly where we are? I can’t distinguish anything.”
“Yes, at de cliff spring.”
“The cliff spring. I remember it. All right;” and, saying this, the
elderly passenger was climbing up beside the driver. “Let me take the
reins,” he continued.
“You!” exclaimed the driver.
“Yes. I know this road like a book. I’ve driven over it many as dark
nights as this, during forty years of my life.”
And as the driver told it to me: “I done jist let dat ole man pull dem
ribbans outer my han’s, an’ I hel’ onter de brake, while he put dose
hosses down aroun’ dat ben’; an’ in less ’en an houh we wuz stannin’
afoah de Henry hotel. Hit beat de debbil how dat wrinkled, rich-lookin’
ole fellah driv! Couldn’t fine out a ting ’bout him; no one peered ter
know him. An’ I’m done badgered ter know who he wuz, enny how. He’d a
made a crackin’ ole stage drivah; an’ dar’s no use talkin’ on dat pint!”
So went the story. Meanwhile your journey is progressing. The stage has
rattled around a bend, leaving the neat, home-like, brick dwelling of
Dr. Samuel Love, on the top of a wooded hill, beside the road; and then,
before you, stretches an enchanting mountain landscape. On the summit of
a plateau-like expanse, in the center of the scene, is a picturesque
village. You see the clustered white frame and brick buildings, with the
smoke curling above them from home fires; the modest church steeples,
and, perhaps, if it is growing dusky, you may hear{285} the mellow chiming
of bells through the evening air. Majestic mountains rise on all sides
into the blue sky. Afar, Old Bald, his brethren Balsams, Lickstone
mountain, and Mount Serbal, lift their heads. In lofty outlines, the
Junaluska group of Balsams stand black against the glowing western sky.
Across a low, plank bridge, which covers a little stream coming from the
rabbit-haunted hedges of a valley meadow,—up a mild declivity of
hill,—through a long, yellow street with dwellings, a church, a
court-house, a jail, hotels, and stores, on either side,—and you are in
the center of Waynesville.
Waynesville, the county-seat of Haywood, is 2,756 feet above the ocean.
Of the peaks in sight around it, five attain a height of 6,000 feet and
upwards. Every mountain is clothed from base to summit with heavy woods.
That chain arising in the south in lofty outlines, black with firs, is
the Balsam. The Haywood mountains, bounding the northern line of vision,
are, owing to their distance, arrayed in purple, and usually crowned
with white masses of clouds, which at sunset turn to orange, run to
molten gold and then blazing with scarlet resolve into darkness. The
village occupies the most elevated portion of the plateau. Two parallel
streets, crossed by four or five shorter ones, make up the general
ground-work of the town. Interspersed with vacant, weed-grown lots, the
dwellings and buildings, occupied by about 300 people, face on these
winding thoroughfares. A few locust trees border the rough, stony walks.
Apple and peach trees hang over thickly-planted gardens within the
unpainted long board fences before many of the houses.
The head-center for daily congregation seems to be the postoffice. Its
red-mud-splattered front and porch-posts whisper of a rainy season and
stamping horses to the tourist who stands on the hard level road. The
mosses on the porch roof also speak of dampness and age. Opposite the
post-office, in 1882,{286} was still standing, intact and in use, the
county’s venerable hall of justice. To some it may appear a sarcasm to
use that title for it: still, justice is no less likely to preside in
pristine purity within battered, worm-eaten doors, above a tan-bark
floor, under a low ceiling, and surrounded by dingy walls, than within
frescoed ceilings, stone walls and chiseled columns!
However, the court days for the old hall are past. A new and imposing
brick structure has just been erected at the north end of the village.
That an air of enterprise is circulating is evident. Numerous new
buildings, with fresh-painted or brick fronts have lately arisen in
place, making striking contrasts with the old rookeries of fifty years
existence standing here and there.
The village was named in honor of “Mad Anthony” Wayne in the long gone
years of its birth. Until the last half decade of years it has rested in
a quiet little less profound than that of the dreamy valleys around it.
Of late new energy has been infused into it. The world beyond the
mountain limits of this hidden hamlet is beginning to hear of it as a
summer resort. Acting upon this knowledge, the tourists with every
season now come trooping up from the low-lands. The grading, bridges,
and embankments for the railroad are all completed, and even before many
months Waynesville will have the cars within its corporate boundaries.
In all the mountain towns court-week is the marked event of the year.
There is a spring and fall term. As the counties increase in population,
the two terms are frequently lengthened into weeks. At such times the
village streets are packed with a mass of humanity. The court might well
be likened to a magnet, the limit to its attraction being the boundaries
of the county; and within that circle, during the periods of its
operation,{287} having an irresistible, invisible power to draw every
citizen into the county-seat. They are all there at some interval of its
proceedings.
As a court-day in any one of the villages is typical of what is seen at
such times in all the others, the writer will use as an illustration one
which he spent in Waynesville. It was at the time of the fall term; the
month being October. On the Sunday preceding the opening Monday, the
honorable judge, having closed court in the neighboring county, drove
into the village. The usual number of lawyers from scattered villages
who go on the circuit soon came straggling in on horse-back not far in
his honor’s wake. Later in the evening and the next morning others of
the profession entered on foot, pursuing this method of traveling as
though desirous of saving a little money, or perhaps having none either
to save or spend. The days of the circuit are interesting ones for this
legal coterie. It has its jovial, crusty, bumptious, bashful, boyish,
and bald-headed members; old pettifoggers, young shysters, and the
brilliant and erudite real attorney. The active out-door exercise
enjoyed in following the court in his rounds tends to make the village
lawyer a good-natured fellow, and besides, even if his practice is poor,
he has no exorbitant office rent to worry him. He ought certainly to be
a healthy, contented specimen of humanity.
Even before all the shop-keepers had opened their doors and swung back
their shutters to exhibit newly stocked counters, the farming population
began pouring in. Now and then the broad hat of a man on foot would
appear above the crest of the hill; then would follow a strong team of
horses drawing a white-covered, Pennsylvania wagon; next, a slow-moving
ox team with hooped and canvassed vehicle. These tents on wheels would
disgorge into the street either a whole family or a crowd of men
evidently from the same neighborhood. On other occasions they (the
wagons) loaded with apples and possibly a barrel{288} of hard cider, would
be longer in getting relieved of their contents. The Jerseys of
independent valley farmers came rattling in at a later hour. The general
way of coming to town, however, is in the saddle. Horses and mules, with
good, easy gait, are always in demand through this country, and the
number of them ranged along the street fences appears strange to the
Northerner.
That morning I saw on the street several Indians from the banks of Soco
creek twenty miles distant. They were not arrayed in the picturesque
pomp of the savage, but in the garb of civilization—home-spun coats and
pantaloons, muslin shirts, and black hats. One of them, mounted on a
stout little bay pony, was trying to sell his animal to some one in a
crowd of horse-traders. Ponies can be purchased of the Cherokees at
prices ranging from forty to seventy-five dollars. At present, however,
there are very few of the full-blooded stock in the reservation. The
other aborigines whom I chanced to see were, with moccasined feet,
threading their ways through the crowds of lighter-complexioned,
blue-clothed dwellers of the forests.
The strongest drink sold openly during court-week is cider. Several
wagons, holding barrels containing it, occupy stations close by the
court-house door. A supply of ginger cake is sold with the cider.
Whiskey can be procured at the drug store, but only on prescription. To
the uninitiated it is a mystery where so many prescriptions come from;
but perhaps a certain judge from a lower county, who some time since
presided in this court, might rise and explain. The judge in question
was exhausted from travel, and badly under the weather. Upon his arrival
in the village he dispatched a negro to the drug store for a bottle of
this singularly accredited panacea for all evils. The druggist refused
to comply with the request, sending back word that he was obliged in all
cases to conform to the requirements of the law, and that his honor
should consult{289} a physician. Later in the day the judge himself appeared
at the drug store, and taking a package of paper from his pocket, cooly
counted off sixteen prescriptions. Said he:
“I have consulted my physician. You may fill one of these now; hang the
others on your hook, and fill them as I send my order.”
Whether the judge called for them all during the time he presided on
that bench, is no part of the story.
In the practice before the bar of the tribunal there is no marked
difference between the proceedings of the mountain county court and
those of the courts of other states practicing under the code. It has a
peculiar but beneficent feature, however, in the rapidity with which
cases are disposed of. One great end of justice, too frequently
neglected—that wrongs shall be promptly righted—is hereby secured. A
false and irreversible judgment of the court occurring, as may be, upon
too hasty examination of a case, is no worse for the litigant than the
trial of the heart between hope and despair for long, weary years before
a decision is rendered, even though that decision be just.
I witnessed one murder case disposed of in two days, when, anywhere in
the North, the same trial would have occupied as many weeks. The call of
the crier from an upstairs window announced that the court was open.
During the course of the morning I went in. Seats arranged on a scale
ascending from the lawyers’ tables to the rear wall were crowded to
overflowing. The single aisle was filled so that one could hardly elbow
one’s way in. The crowd changed considerably in its make-up during the
morning session; for uninterested auditors were continually sliding out
of one of the handy windows and others crawling in to fill the
vacancies. Some wormed their way out through the aisle.
In regular routine, cases were called, facts stated by attorneys,{290} usual
examination and brow-beating of witnesses, wrangling of counsel,
hammering for order by the sheriff, the old practitioner’s quiet and
plausible argument to the drowsy jury, the spread-eagle burst of oratory
on the part of the fresh blossomed sprig of the law, the charge of the
judge (which, in truth, is generally the settlement of the whole
proceeding), and then the departure of the twelve confused peers to a
house on a back street, or a vacant lot near by, where, on a pile of
lumber, they resolve the abstruse questions involved and bring in a
verdict according to the facts.(?) Judgment pronounced forthwith, or
suspended on motion.
At 12 o’clock the court adjourned, and the crier appearing at the front
door gave vent in high-strung monotone to the following: “Hear ye! hear
ye! This honorable court is now adjourned.” Here he took breath and went
on again: “The good people of Haywood will take notice that at 2 o’clock
the Honorable General Clingman will address them on the issues of the
day!”
This sounded queer to a stranger; court adjourning to give way for a
political speech. A number of elections were to take place in November.
It was fit that the people should be prepared to cast their ballots with
discretion. In accordance with this view, during that fall term of
court, the respective candidates of either party for the offices of
solicitor, representative, senator, and state offices were given the
afternoons of the session to enlighten the populace with their wisdom on
state and municipal affairs, and sway them with their eloquence. With
the afternoon speeches, ended the court day.
The White Sulphur Spring Hotel is three-quarters of a mile from the
village. It was by the stage line that we approached it in the summer of
1882. The mail-bags had been flung down to the good-natured-looking
post-master, and several passengers distributed at the hotels on the
village street, when we turned{291} down a hill toward Richland creek, first
passing several plain dwellings and two churches. One of the churches
(the Episcopal) is a well-built little house of worship. The creek must
be forded, and then follows a delightful stretch of road along its
banks, until, after swinging around several corners, rattling over
rivulet bridges, speeding by a house or two on knolls in fields, we
passed through a frame gate into the grounds of the Sulphur Spring.
The grounds are naturally adapted for a summer resort. A grand forest,
principally of oaks, covers about eight acres of level ground, through
which, with green sward on either hand, winds the road toward the hotel.
The hotel is a large farmhouse, remodeled and added to until its
original proportions and design are lost. Near it, at the foot of a low
wooded hill, is a line of cottages connected with the main structure
simply by a graveled walk, which also leads to the sulphur spring
bubbling up in a stone basin within a small summer-house. There is a
comfortable, healthy air about the hotel and its surroundings.
Close in the rear of the resort buildings rises a line of mountains,
lofty in height, but forming only the foot-hills to the Junaluska group.
The highest pinnacle of the foot-hill range is Mount Maria, so named in
honor of the wife of Major W. W. Stringfield, the proprietor of the
Spring property. From the wide porches of the hotel sublime mountain
prospects can be obtained. A smooth, cultivated valley, a mile or more
in length, by a half-mile wide, fills the foreground to these views.
Some portions of it are covered with corn, and in the meadows are
generally grazing a hundred head of cattle. A pleasant pastoral air
pervades this foreground picture set in the emerald frame of the
forests. And then in the distance is discerned the green front of Mount
Serbal, and beyond it the black summits of the Richland Balsam
mountains. Just across the creek,{292} which flows outside the grounds, lies
the prepared railroad bed. It is only a minute’s walk from it to the
hotel.
Of all country roads for quiet rambles or delightful horseback rides,
there are none in the mountains to excel the one up Richland creek, from
the White Sulphur Spring, to the base of Old Bald. The forests all along
the stream are cool and refreshing. Where the road comes down to its
fords under the concealing chestnuts and oaks, long foot-logs reach from
bank to bank. The old mill at one of these fords presents a picture for
the artist—the brilliant beech that rustles around it; the crystal
race; the roar in the flume; the piles of old logs and scattered timber;
and the open, dingy front of the structure itself.
On crossing the state road, the Richland creek road enters a large,
unfenced forest, where nearly every evening, in spring, summer, or fall,
teamsters, who are either farmers or root buyers, encamp for the night.
Their Pennsylvania wagons are like great white-covered scows strangely
mounted on wheels. At night, with the light of camp fires thrown on
them, they are spectral in their whiteness. Often, in the darkness of
the forest, while on our way from the village to our temporary home in
the country, we have suddenly run upon these encampments after their
fires have smouldered, and only been awakened to a knowledge of their
presence by the sharp barking of wakeful dogs.
One particular night, well worth remembering, I was returning on foot
from Waynesville after a late wait there for the irregular evening mail.
It was cloudy and quite dark, even where the state road, which I was
trudging over, runs between open fields. On branching into the Richland
creek road and into the forest just mentioned, the change to still
deeper darkness would have made it difficult for me to avoid stumbling
over the rocks that here and there are scattered on the way, and even to
keep clear of tree boles, if the bright light of a high fire had not{293}

THE MACON HIGHLANDS.
{294}
{295}
illuminated the outer margin of the wood. Under a gigantic poplar two
large white wagons were visible, and between them was the fire. A group
of men was seated near it. At my approach two dogs sprang up growling
from the scattered hay where the horses were feeding, but at the warning
yell of some one who was evidently their master, they became quiet
again. The group consisted of four men seated on the end boards taken
from the wagons, and laid on the ground. They were playing cards, and
having a good time. I was about to pass on, but recognizing the face and
voice of one member of the party, I stepped up to them, and was in turn
recognized by him.
“Wal, glad to see you,” said he, dropping the pack of cards he was
dealing, and jumping to his feet.
“Howdy!” exclaimed the others in turn as I spoke to each. “Why, what are
you skulking round the woods so late at night for?” continued the first
speaker.
He was a good-natured and intelligent young man, by name Upson, whom I
had met once before in an adjoining county at a country store, where he
was exchanging dry-goods and tinware for ginseng, Solomon’s snake roots,
herbs and mica. I answered his question, and upon urgent invitation
seated myself by the fire. Two of the party were going to Asheville to
attend Federal court. The elderly man and owner of one wagon was
journeying in company with the young trader and his wagon to the
Asheville market. The interrupted game of seven-up was never resumed. In
the course of conversation Upson spoke of mica mining, and after stating
that he was a Georgian, and had been in the mountains only a few years,
he related a thrilling story, which I will give as nearly as possible in
his own words, and call it{296}

THE HAUNTED CABIN.

On one of the highest ridges of the Nantihala mountains, twenty-five
miles from Franklin, Tabal and I had been out prospecting for mica for
several days. With a blanket apiece, a pick, a spade and a quantity of
provisions we had left the valley, intending to open a spot on the
mountain, where mica had been discovered cropping out. All the afternoon
of the 26th of February, and all day of the 27th, we worked at the
surface mica, and had followed a promising vein of the mineral for
several feet into the crumbling rock. The weather had been fine, and the
night of the last mentioned date came on with fair and clear skies.
Wrapped in our blankets, we slept by a roaring fire, under a shelving
rock, in a thicket of black firs. By morning the weather had changed; a
cold wet wind was sighing through the pines; the sky was overcast with
dull heavy clouds, and the last day of February bid fair to end in a
snow storm.
Tabal was rather uneasy, and wished to start for the settlement
immediately; but with a nicely sorted-out pile of mica at our feet, and
a solid block twelve inches square shining from the bottom of the
excavation, I insisted on remaining until there was a decided change for
the better or worse; so, after our morning repast, we went steadily to
work again.
We did not notice the increasing coldness of the wind, and were only
awakened to a sense of our dangerous position, when snow began to fall.
To be caught on a mountain summit over 6,000 feet high in a snow storm
was something little to be desired; and, with that idea, Tabal threw
down his pick and proposed starting with haste for the settlement.
Affairs did look threatening, and I concluded that his proposition was
not to be despised. Hiding our tools and mica, with our blankets over
our shoulders, we struck out on the trail for the valley.
The snow fell thicker and faster around us; and at the end{297} of our first
mile it was an inch deep. The way-worn path beneath our feet was of the
same appearance as the forest slopes, all seeming one open wilderness,
with nothing but occasional blazes on the scrub-oak tree trunks to mark
the path of descent. Tabal needed nothing of the kind to find his way.
So familiar is he with the whole range that, in the darkest night he
could reach the valley without a wandering footstep. After two hours of
slow travel the snow lay shoe-mouth deep, and the bitter wind, as it
swept across the ridges, chilled and buffeted us, until, half frozen,
with wet and benumbed feet, exhausted by ten miles of wading, and
bruised by falls and slides, I felt my strength giving way. It was then
half-past four by my watch; the snow was a foot in depth, and still
falling.
“Only three mile further,” said my companion, when he noticed how I was
lagging in my pace, “and we’ll fetch up at Ramear’s cabin. Cheer up,
man, an’ in a few minutes we’ll be all right, I ’low.”
With this encouragement I quickened my footsteps and struggled on.
Another mile had been slowly reeled out behind us; we had left the ridge
and were in a hollow or cove, when a cabin suddenly appeared before us.
The place was one of the wildest and dreariest of the mountains. On one
side rose a forest of balsams; with somber foliage covered with the
white mantle of the storm; almost perpendicularly upward it trended.
Tangled laurel spread over the bottom land, and interwoven with the ivy,
hedged the banks of a stream fresh from its sources. On the other side a
rocky bluff, crowned with snow and clad in evergreen vines, loomed up
like the crumbling wall of some ancient castle, with its summit lost in
the veil of the falling snow.
The cabin was jammed into a niche of this wall some twenty feet above
the path we were following. It was a log hut of the humblest
pretensions, tottering from age and decay on its{298} rock foundation. In
the shadow of the precipice, most gloomy it appeared, with its
snow-burdened roof, moss-grown front, rough-plastered log chimney, and
doorless entrance opening into a black interior. It looked to have been
deserted a score or more of years, and its surroundings, unkept by the
hand of man, by Nature were again being trained into primitive wildness.
A cataract came pouring down by the cabin’s site. A regular ascent of
steps led up to it through the laurel.
In spite of the place’s uninviting aspect, I welcomed it as a safe
refuge from the storm and the night. Tabal seemed not to see it, and was
plodding steadily ahead a few feet in advance of me.
“Hold on!” I called. “Here is a shelter for the night. No need of going
further.”
He turned with a strange expression in his face.
“For God sake, don’t stop hyar! We must go on. Nothin’ could hire me to
stop in thet ’air shell.”
His set determined way of speaking, together with his words, I could not
at that time account for, and without waiting for an explanation,
replied: “Stop here we must, in half an hour ’twill be night,” and
pushing through the snow-burdened laurel, in a few steps I gained the
cabin door.
A violent hand was laid on my shoulder that instant. My blanket was
almost torn from my grasp, and I reeled backward, with difficulty
rescuing myself from falling.
It was Tabal who had thus struck me. Taken by surprise at his
uncalled-for action, I could but listen to what he said.
“Come, come, we must make tracks from this place! You’d better die in
the snow a peaceful death than be toted away by hants. Thar be a power
’o hants hyar. I’ve seed ’em an’ seed blood, blood! on the floor and
nary man in the settlement but what’s heerd ’em. Don’t for all ye love
in the world,{299} don’t stop hyar, but foller me and in two mile we’ll be
at Ramear’s.”
As he finished his excited remarks, with one hand still on my shoulder,
he was standing partly in the cabin; while I, puzzled at his
extraordinary statement, and with the earnest, almost desperate, manner
in which he urged me to leave the spot, had sunk down on a half-rotten
log that lay across the doorway. I really could have gone no further if
I had wished, and instead of what I had heard from him awakening my
fears and strengthening me to travel on, it aroused my curiosity to
remain and see upon what his superstition was based.
On making known to him my exhausted condition and determination to
remain, an abject terror overspread the mountaineer’s face, and for
several minutes there was a struggle within him whether to stay and
brave the well known horrors of the place, or to expose his cowardice by
leaving and pushing on alone in the darkness and driving snow. The
latter alternative did not hold out very bright prospects, and in spite
of professed superstition, mountaineers dread nothing much more than
being called cowards. Meanwhile I laughed down and shamed his fears, and
the bribe of a half gallon of “moonshine” completed the business.
The gloom of the continuing storm, and the rapidly approaching night,
rendered the gorge almost destitute of light. Every minute it grew
darker, but objects about the interior of the cabin were still
distinguishable. There was but one room, with rotten board floor,
strewed with the mouldering leaves of several autumns, and grown with
moss along the edges of the walls. Fungi choked the interstices between
the logs, and over them snow had sifted, and fallen in streaks upon the
floor. An unboarded window opposite to the solitary door looked out upon
the grim, stony cliff that rose not ten feet away. A fire-place, filled
with snow, was at the end of the room, and over{300} three-fourths of the
apartment was a loft, rather shaky in appearance.
We scraped the snow from the hearth; Tabal, under my instructions, tore
off a pile of well-seasoned boards from the loft floor, and soon a
crackling fire brightened and cheered the interior of the cabin. My
companion was now more at his ease, and spreading our blankets, we laid
down with our feet to the grateful fire.
As I spread out my blanket I noticed a pool of fresh blood, fully two
feet in diameter on the floor by my hand. I covered it instantly,
fearful that Tabal might see it. How did it come there?
“Tabal,” I said, “tell me now what you meant by this hut having ghosts
or ‘hants’ as you term them; and why do you think it so haunted?”
He responded with a long story which I will make short: The cove had
been cleared thirty years before by Cummings, a denizen of the
mountains. One night when he was on a spree in the settlement, his wife,
in a crazy fit, hung herself to a cabin rafter. Cummings, with his
household property and progeny, deserted the premises, and for many
years the cabin remained unoccupied, until a party of hunters made a
night’s lodging there, and in an altercation a man named Gil True was
instantly killed by an enraged companion. Strange sights and sounds were
connected with it after the first death, and more after the second.
Every superstitious old woman told some terrible tale about it, until it
had become known throughout the country as the “haunted” cabin.
After this narrative the train of thoughts which it awakened and the
strangeness of my situation prevented me from going immediately to
sleep, and hours elapsed before I was in the arms of “Nature’s fond
nurse.” Tabal’s regular snoring I suppose put me in that condition.{301}
How long I slept I know not, but I awoke with a start. Terrible,
blood-curdling cries, like those from a woman or child in distress, came
from the end of the room opposite the chimney.
The fire was still blazing, and by it I saw that Tabal was awake, lying
half raised from his blanket, and with eyes fixed on the back of the
room, was intent on listening. Several piercing cries, with intervals
between, rang out, and the last one had just died down, when there was a
sound of some heavy body falling on the roof, a rumble, then a terrific
crash, after which all was darkness, blackest darkness in the room.
Successive creakings of the cabin, and sputterings and hissings from the
fire-place ensued.
I attempted to call out but could not.
I leaned over and reached, in the darkness, for my companion. He was not
there—nowhere on his blanket, which I felt still unrolled. I groped
around the room.
Nothing!
The room was deserted, and I was alone in the haunted cabin.
I leaned out of the door. It was as black outside as in. Again I
attempted to call, and then my voice broke from me. The halloo rang out,
echoed along the cliff, and instantly seemed swallowed by the night; but
no answer came.
With these efforts courage returned, and I stepped back into the center
of the apartment. As I did so, I heard a fall on the window, then one on
the floor, and the pit-pat of feet sounded plainly as something brushed
against my legs, and shot with sudden velocity out of the cabin door.
“What else,” I thought; “what other unaccountable things were to happen?
Tabal was right; the cabin is haunted.”
I drew out a large clasp-knife from my pocket, opened it, and retreated
to one corner of the room. I stirred not, scarcely breathed. For hours I
stood there, as rigid as a statue. Again{302} the foot-falls resounded
through the room; again a fall on the window by the cliff—then
death-like stillness again intervened.
In the black, unbroken silence, I heard nothing but the action of my
heart, thumping, thumping, till it seemed it would beat the breath from
my chest, and all the while I was, in vain, seeking a solution for these
mysteries of the night. Where was Tabal? What caused the blood spots,
the horrible cries, the crash, the fire’s extinguishment, and the
foot-falls?
Gray light began to sift in. It grew stronger, brighter, and the light
of morning filled the room. Black objects assumed regular outlines,
became distinct, regained their natural shapes, and everything around me
was revealed. There lay the tumbled blankets; the fire-place filled a
foot high with snow. I started. The crash and following darkness were
explained. A snow slide off the cliff had struck the roof and then
fallen down the chimney.
I went to the door. A man’s footprints long and far between, led from
the door-step down through the laurel. Tabal had disappeared in that
direction. I expected to see footprints besides those of the
mountaineer,—the footprints of the owner of the footfalls in the
night,—but none were there, at least, no human tracks, but, instead, in
the snow were prints like those of a dog. What did this mean?
I ran to the window. The same impressions were on the snow-covered sill,
and then beyond on the near ledge of the cliff. Some animal had entered
by the window, rushed through the cabin, and then re-entering, had
retreated by the same way to the cliff. That it was a wild-cat or
panther I was convinced; and this conviction was strengthened when my
mind reverted to the cries, which were similar to those made by the cat
species.
The whole mystery seemed cleared up. The wild, rugged precipice held on
its face a den of panthers; the cabin was{303} another retreat of theirs,
and the bloody pool on the floor was the mark of some recent feast.
Gathering up the blankets I followed in Tabal’s footprints for half a
mile, when I met him coming towards me with the settler he had remained
with during a part of the previous night. My appearance to him was like
one raised from the dead. We returned to the cabin, and my conclusions
were confirmed by their immediate affirmations that, “nairy varmint but
a painter hed made them tracks, an’ they ’lowed the cabin mought not be
hanted arter all.”
Soon after this night’s adventure, a systematic hunt was organized; and
in the chase four panthers which had had their hereditary den in the
cliff’s face were killed. With this slaughter all reasonable fears of
the cabin’s being haunted vanished, and now it is made the usual
rendezvous for hunters driving bears or deer in that locality.
“Wal,” exclaimed one of the Federal court witnesses, “thet’s a blamed
good way to git red o’ hants!”
“Now,” said Upson, directing his speech toward me, “we would like to
hear from you.”
“I have no personal experience to relate,” I replied, “but can tell you
something, similar in nature to your story, as it was told me by an old
resident of Graham county.”
Immediately there was a hearty invitation extended me to begin; so
without ceremony I preluded what follows with the announcement that the
tale was the one of

THE PHANTOM MILLERS.

Three years ago, while taking a tramp through the wilderness of the
Santeetlah and Unaka mountains, I stopped for a few days with an
intelligent, elderly farmer on the bank of Cheowah river. One pleasant
afternoon, during the time of my visit, I took a ramble with my host
over his extensive farm. Through{304} the cool woods, upward along the
roaring stream, we slowly walked for probably half a mile, when suddenly
the rough wagon-trail we were following led away from the river; and,
looking through the thick undergrowth in the direction where with
redoubled roar the waters still kept their way, I saw the outlines of an
old building.
“What ancient looking structure is that?” I asked, pointing toward it.
“That,” my companion answered, “is a worn out mill.”
“Why,” I returned, “this is the first mill I have noticed on the river.
It does, in fact, appear dilapidated; but, looking at the heavy thickets
and tall trees that stand so close to it, I should think that at the
time it was abandoned it might have been in pretty good condition. See,
there’s a tree apparently fifteen years old thrusting its whole top
through a window, and the casements that are around it are not yet
rotted away.”
“You are a close observer,” said Mr. Staley, “but, nevertheless, we quit
running that mill because it couldn’t be worked.”
“Why so?” I asked with interest.
“Because it was haunted!”
“Haunted! A haunted mill!”
“Yes, sir; the subject is one I don’t like to commence on, but I suppose
now you must hear it.”
“Yes, by all means, but wait first till I see the mill.”
I pushed through the tangled thickets under the scrubby oaks, and a
minute after stood before the structure. It was a mill which even at
this date would, if new, have been suited to a more open country. The
side that faced us was farthest from the river. One door, up to which
rotten steps led, and two windows, through one of which the tree before
mentioned, spread its heavy limbs, were on the front. The siding was
falling and hanging loosely in places from the upright timbers, and the
entire structure was fast becoming a skeleton, for all the{305} clapboards
had been torn by the wind or thievish hands from the three remaining
sides. The roof, in part, had fallen in, but had been caught by the
shaky stringers of the upper, half-story floor. The spot on the river
bank was peculiarly suited for a mill site. The channel of the stream
above was rock bound, the banks being steep and narrow. Just before it
reached the mill the body of waters compressed into an impetuous volume,
shot over a fall of twenty feet. An outlet had been blasted through the
solid rock close by the side of the fall, and a wooden race set up
leading to the mill. This race had long since disappeared, worn away by
time and water. The old wheel, though, hung in its place beside the
structure almost under the fall, and above the mad waters, boiling and
foaming below.
Going around to one of the sides, we managed to clamber in and on the
plank floor. There was half a partition through the center, forming on
either side two rooms, each about 20 X 25 feet in dimensions. The
mill-stones were yet in place, but the hopper and grain bins were
missing.
We seated ourselves on the floor at the back side of the building, and
with our feet hanging over the green, rotten wheel, with the thin spray
of the cataract now and then touching us, and the turbulent river
sweeping onward below, he began as follows:
“When I came here from Charleston, South Carolina, and settled, in the
spring of 184-, the first thing I found necessary, after building my
house, was a mill. As many families, apparently, lived in these valleys
then as live here now. I was compelled to go to Murphy, a distance of
eighteen miles, to get my flour and meal, or take my grain to a
primitive hopper, two miles below on this river, and wait a day for it
to grind a bushel. Either was an exasperating procedure. This site
seemed the best adapted one along the river. The race was formed, a{306}
foundation laid, and, by the aid of a temporary saw, enough lumber was
gotten out to finish this mill complete by the following summer.
“Well, time went by; the mill run smoothly, and with it I managed to
make enough to keep my family. One morning, however, on entering here I
saw that the wheel, which I left running for the night, in order to
grind out an extra amount of meal, had stopped, while the water was
still pouring on it. On examination I found the dead body of a young
man, a farmer, who lived on the slope of Deer mountain, hanging fastened
to the lowest paddle of the wheel. All that could be learned of his
untimely end was that he had left home for an evening’s trout-fishing
the day before. He had undoubtedly fallen into the deep, swift stream
above; had been drowned; swept through the race down on to the wheel;
and, his clothes catching on the splintered paddle, he had hung there.
“A short time after the last sad occurrence, a neighbor’s boy fell
through the trap door and broke his neck. Superstitious people then
began to whisper that a spell was on the place. They had had, as yet, no
ocular demonstration of what they imagined and reported, but such was
the influence that my mill was avoided at night, travelers beating a new
path around it through the forest. Of course, this talk had no effect
upon me, and in fact I rather liked it, for, as far as I was able to
perceive, it kept a class of indigent mountaineers away from the mill,
whom I had reason before to suspect of grinding their corn
surreptitiously at night.
“But in the spring of 1861 something really strange did occur. My
youngest brother was one day with me at the mill. I had left him inside
here while I had gone some distance back into the woods to get a
second-growth hickory. Probably half an hour had passed and I was
returning, when just before coming in sight of the mill I heard angry
voices. One voice was{307} that of my brother, the other I could not
recognize; neither had I time to consider, for suddenly the report of a
fire-arm sounded in that direction. I hallooed loudly at the moment I
heard it, and at the same time came out of the wood. A comparatively
clear space, with the exception of a few large trees, was between me and
the mill. I saw no one near but my brother, and he was leaning partly
out the front window there, where now grows the red maple.
“ ‘Halloo! what have you shot?’ I shouted.
“There was no answer.
“The day was growing terribly dark. Black clouds, heavy with moisture,
were filling and piling deep the entire face of the sky between these
circling mountains. The lightning had not yet begun to play, but it
would not have taken a prophet to tell of its speedy coming.
“I was somewhat surprised at hearing no return to my salute; and as I
drew nearer I noticed that his face was deadly pale. I ran up the steps.
I caught hold of him. He had fainted. I laid him in the doorway. My
first thought was that he had been shot by some one and was in a death
faint. I tore his shirt open, discovering a small red mark under the
nipple. Five minutes after he was a corpse. But where was he who fired
the fatal shot? I had seen no one, and in vain I looked around the mill.
“Meanwhile the storm burst with appalling fury. One of the first flashes
of lightning struck a monarch ash, whose decaying stump stands just over
there, not thirty feet from the mill’s front. In some manner it struck
the tree and ran down its bark, then cut through its base, or struck the
bole at once; for the whole body of the ash fell with a resounding
crash. I was knocked down and blinded for an instant by the electricity.
It was the hardest rain that has drenched these mountains since{308} 1840.
All night long it continued, and I remained in the mill with my dead
brother.
“It must have been past midnight when, in the pitchy darkness, I heard
hoarse cries, hollow shouts, and groans, that seemed to proceed from
without the mill, but which swept through the open rooms with chilling
and horrible earnestness. The building shook in the wind and storm; the
doors rattled on their hinges; the cataract’s roar increased with the
swelling flood; but yet above all these deafening sounds, at intervals,
rang this muffled voice. I must confess that I laid it to the
supernatural.
“Morning and calm came together, and with the first streaks of light two
of my farm-hands appeared. The storm had made a havoc before the mill.
Lengthways, and down the center of the road the ash had fallen, the body
of the tree lying close against the base of that great hollow oak you
see still standing. We carried the body home. Who had killed him was the
unanswered question on every one’s lips. Well, we buried the
mysteriously murdered man in the old churchyard down the river, and the
day after I went on business to Murphy. As fortune would have it I was
just in time to be drafted into the Confederate army. I had only a day
to spare to go to my house and return.
“The occurrences of that stormy night had unavoidably kept me away from
the mill, and on my flying visit home before taking a long departure, I
had no time to go to it. My wife told a strange story of ghostly cries,
strange flames and apparitions which had been heard and seen at the mill
for two nights by one of the farm-hands and a neighbor. Nothing could
hire any of the men in the neighborhood to go near the place, even in
the daytime. The description of the sounds coincided singularly with
what I had heard. Having no time to investigate, and thinking these
fears would wear away, I left{309} orders for one of the hired men to run
the mill during my absence.
“Four years passed, and I had returned from the war. What changes had
taken place is not my intention to relate only to speak of the mill. The
fears of the mountaineers had caused it to be abandoned. The one whom I
had designed to work it had wholly disregarded my orders. By a train of
petty circumstances connected with this man’s refusal to run the mill,
together with the superstitious ideas of the people, all the
mountaineers began to take their grain to the lower “corn-cracker.” This
course was not adopted by all until several of the more venturesome ones
had actual, unexplainable encounters with ghosts at my mill.
“A few days after my return I went up to look at the forsaken place. I
found the underbrush rather heavy, fair-sized trees springing up, the
old ash lying undisturbed where it had been struck down, and
consequently the old road was lost. Everything within the mill, though,
was in excellent condition. What struck me as curious was that the mill
appeared never to have stopped running; for the stones were not mossed
in the least, but on the contrary were still white with flour. The floor
was also white, and a close observer would at once have declared that a
supply of wheat had been ground there that week.
“ ‘Jist so,’ said an old neighbor who was with me. ‘In course these hyar
stones never quit runnin’ at night, ez I tole yer; but hit ain’t no
humin bein’s ez runs ’em. Many a night I’ve cum up the new road over
yander, an’ stopped an’ shivered as I heered the ole wheel splashin’
round, seed lights an’ seed yer brother standin’ right hyar at this
winder, I’ll swar! Why didn’t I sarch into the matter? Didn’t I though!