# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2006
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Émile Zola, L'Assommoir
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/8600/8600-h/8600-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Madame Lorilleux turned round and stared at her. Here was a wheedler
 trying to get round them. To-day she asked them for ten sous, to-morrow it
 would be for twenty, and there would be no reason to stop. No, indeed; it
 would be a warm day in winter if they lent her anything.
 

 "But, my dear," cried Madame Lorilleux. "You know very well that we
 haven't any money! Look! There's the lining of my pocket. You can search
 us. If we could, it would be with a willing heart, of course."
 

 "The heart's always there," growled Lorilleux. "Only when one can't, one
 can't."
 

 Gervaise looked very humble and nodded her head approvingly. However, she
 did not take herself off. She squinted at the gold, at the gold tied
 together hanging on the walls, at the gold wire the wife was drawing out
 with all the strength of her little arms, at the gold links lying in a
 heap under the husband's knotty fingers. And she thought that the least
 bit of this ugly black metal would suffice to buy her a good dinner. The
 workroom was as dirty as ever, full of old iron, coal dust and sticky oil
 stains, half wiped away; but now, as Gervaise saw it, it seemed
 resplendent with treasure, like a money changer's shop. And so she
 ventured to repeat softly: "I would return them to you, return them
 without fail. Ten sous wouldn't inconvenience you."
 

 Her heart was swelling with the effort she made not to own that she had
 had nothing to eat since the day before. Then she felt her legs give way.
 She was frightened that she might burst into tears, and she still
 stammered:
 

 "It would be kind of you! You don't know. Yes, I'm reduced to that, good
 Lord—reduced to that!"
 

 Thereupon the Lorilleuxs pursed their lips and exchanged covert glances.
 So Clump-clump was begging now! Well, the fall was complete. But they did
 not care for that kind of thing by any means. If they had known, they
 would have barricaded the door, for people should always be on their guard
 against beggars—folks who make their way into apartments under a
 pretext and carry precious objects away with them; and especially so in
 this place, as there was something worth while stealing. One might lay
 one's fingers no matter where, and carry off thirty or forty francs by
 merely closing the hands. They had felt suspicious several times already
 on noticing how strange Gervaise looked when she stuck herself in front of
 the gold. This time, however, they meant to watch her. And as she
 approached nearer, with her feet on the board, the chainmaker roughly
 called out, without giving any further answer to her question: "Look out,
 pest—take care; you'll be carrying some scraps of gold away on the
 soles of your shoes. One would think you had greased them on purpose to
 make the gold stick to them."
 

 Gervaise slowly drew back. For a moment she leant against a rack, and
 seeing that Madame Lorilleux was looking at her hands, she opened them and
 showed them, saying softly, without the least anger, like a fallen women
 who accepts anything:
 

 "I have taken nothing; you can look."
 

 And then she went off, because the strong smell of the cabbage soup and
 the warmth of the workroom made her feel too ill.
 

 Ah! the Lorilleuxs did not detain her. Good riddance; just see if they
 opened the door to her again. They had seen enough of her face. They
 didn't want other people's misery in their rooms, especially when that
 misery was so well deserved. They reveled in their selfish delight at
 being seated so cozily in a warm room, with a dainty soup cooking. Boche
 also stretched himself, puffing with his cheeks still more and more, so
 much, indeed, that his laugh really became indecent. They were all nicely
 revenged on Clump-clump, for her former manners, her blue shop, her
 spreads, and all the rest. It had all worked out just as it should,
 proving where a love of showing-off would get you.
 

 "So that is the style now? Begging for ten sous," cried Madame Lorilleux
 as soon as Gervaise had gone. "Wait a bit; I'll lend her ten sous, and no
 mistake, to go and get drunk with."
 

 Gervaise shuffled along the passage in her slippers, bending her back and
 feeling heavy. On reaching her door she did not open it—her room
 frightened her. It would be better to walk about, she would learn
 patience. As she passed by she stretched out her neck, peering into Pere
 Bru's kennel under the stairs. There, for instance, was another one who
 must have a fine appetite, for he had breakfasted and dined by heart
 during the last three days. However, he wasn't at home, there was only his
 hole, and Gervaise felt somewhat jealous, thinking that perhaps he had
 been invited somewhere. Then, as she reached the Bijards' she heard Lalie
 moaning, and, as the key was in the lock as usual, she opened the door and
 went in.
 

 "What is the matter?" she asked.
 

 The room was very clean. One could see that Lalie had carefully swept it,
 and arranged everything during the morning. Misery might blow into the
 room as much as it liked, carry off the chattels and spread all the dirt
 and refuse about. Lalie, however, came behind and tidied everything,
 imparting, at least, some appearance of comfort within. She might not be
 rich, but you realized that there was a housewife in the place. That
 afternoon her two little ones, Henriette and Jules, had found some old
 pictures which they were cutting out in a corner. But Gervaise was greatly
 surprised to see Lalie herself in bed, looking very pale, with the sheet
 drawn up to her chin. In bed, indeed, then she must be seriously ill!
 

 "What is the matter with you?" inquired Gervaise, feeling anxious.
 

 Lalie no longer groaned. She slowly raised her white eyelids, and tried to
 compel her lips to smile, although they were convulsed by a shudder.
 

 "There's nothing the matter with me," she whispered very softly. "Really
 nothing at all."
 

 Then, closing her eyes again, she added with an effort:
 

 "I made myself too tired during the last few days, and so I'm doing the
 idle; I'm nursing myself, as you see."
 

 But her childish face, streaked with livid stains, assumed such an
 expression of anguish that Gervaise, forgetting her own agony, joined her
 hands and fell on her knees near the bed. For the last month she had seen
 the girl clinging to the walls for support when she went about, bent
 double indeed, by a cough which seemed to presage a coffin. Now the poor
 child could not even cough. She had a hiccough and drops of blood oozed
 from the corners of her mouth.
 

 "It's not my fault if I hardly feel strong," she murmured, as if relieved.
 "I've tired myself to-day, trying to put things to rights. It's pretty
 tidy, isn't it? And I wanted to clean the windows as well, but my legs
 failed me. How stupid! However, when one has finished one can go to bed."
 

 She paused, then said, "Pray, see if my little ones are not cutting
 themselves with the scissors."
 

 And then she relapsed into silence, trembling and listening to a heavy
 footfall which was approaching up the stairs. Suddenly father Bijard
 brutally opened the door. As usual he was far gone, and his eyes shone
 with the furious madness imparted by the vitriol he had swallowed. When he
 perceived Lalie in bed, he tapped on his thighs with a sneer, and took the
 whip from where it hung.
 

 "Ah! by blazes, that's too much," he growled, "we'll soon have a laugh. So
 the cows lie down on their straw at noon now! Are you poking fun at me,
 you lazy beggar? Come, quick now, up you get!"
 

 And he cracked the whip over the bed. But the child beggingly replied:
 

 "Pray, papa, don't—don't strike me. I swear to you you will regret
 it. Don't strike!"
 

 "Will you jump up?" he roared still louder, "or else I'll tickle your
 ribs! Jump up, you little hound!"
 

 Then she softly said, "I can't—do you understand? I'm going to die."
 

 Gervaise had sprung upon Bijard and torn the whip away from him. He stood
 bewildered in front of the bed. What was the dirty brat talking about? Do
 girls die so young without even having been ill? Some excuse to get sugar
 out of him no doubt. Ah! he'd make inquiries, and if she lied, let her
 look out!
 

 "You will see, it's the truth," she continued. "As long as I could I
 avoided worrying you; but be kind now, and bid me good-bye, papa."
 

 Bijard wriggled his nose as if he fancied she was deceiving him. And yet
 it was true she had a singular look, the serious mien of a grown up
 person. The breath of death which passed through the room in some measure
 sobered him. He gazed around like a man awakened from a long sleep, saw
 the room so tidy, the two children clean, playing and laughing. And then
 he sank on to a chair stammering, "Our little mother, our little mother."
 

 Those were the only words he could find to say, and yet they were very
 tender ones to Lalie, who had never been much spoiled. She consoled her
 father. What especially worried her was to go off like this without having
 completely brought up the little ones. He would take care of them, would
 he not? With her dying breath she told him how they ought to be cared for
 and kept clean. But stultified, with the fumes of drink seizing hold of
 him again, he wagged his head, watching her with an uncertain stare as she
 was dying. All kind of things were touched in him, but he could find no
 more to say and he was too utterly burnt with liquor to shed a tear.
 

 "Listen," resumed Lalie, after a pause. "We owe four francs and seven sous
 to the baker; you must pay that. Madame Gaudron borrowed an iron of ours,
 which you must get from her. I wasn't able to make any soup this evening,
 but there's some bread left and you can warm up the potatoes."
 

 Till her last rattle, the poor kitten still remained the little mother.
 Surely she could never be replaced! She was dying because she had had, at
 her age, a true mother's reason, because her breast was too small and weak
 for so much maternity. And if her ferocious beast of a father lost his
 treasure, it was his own fault. After kicking the mother to death, hadn't
 he murdered the daughter as well? The two good angels would lie in the
 pauper's grave and all that could be in store for him was to kick the
 bucket like a dog in the gutter.
 

 Gervaise restrained herself not to burst out sobbing. She extended her
 hands, desirous of easing the child, and as the shred of a sheet was
 falling, she wished to tack it up and arrange the bed. Then the dying
 girl's poor little body was seen. Ah! Mon Dieu! what misery! What
 woe! Stones would have wept. Lalie was bare, with only the remnants of a
 camisole on her shoulders by way of chemise; yes, bare, with the grievous,
 bleeding nudity of a martyr. She had no flesh left; her bones seemed to
 protrude through the skin. From her ribs to her thighs there extended a
 number of violet stripes—the marks of the whip forcibly imprinted on
 her. A livid bruise, moreover, encircled her left arm, as if the tender
 limb, scarcely larger than a lucifer, had been crushed in a vise. There
 was also an imperfectly closed wound on her right leg, left there by some
 ugly blow and which opened again and again of a morning, when she went
 about doing her errands. From head to foot, indeed, she was but one
 bruise! Oh! this murdering of childhood; those heavy hands crushing this
 lovely girl; how abominable that such weakness should have such a weighty
 cross to bear! Again did Gervaise crouch down, no longer thinking of
 tucking in the sheet, but overwhelmed by the pitiful sight of this
 martyrdom; and her trembling lips seemed to be seeking for words of
 prayer.
 

 "Madame Coupeau," murmured the child, "I beg you—"
 

 With her little arms she tried to draw up the sheet again, ashamed as it
 were for her father. Bijard, as stultified as ever, with his eyes on the
 corpse which was his own work, still wagged his head, but more slowly,
 like a worried animal might do.
 

 When she had covered Lalie up again, Gervaise felt she could not remain
 there any longer. The dying girl was growing weaker and ceased speaking;
 all that was left to her was her gaze—the dark look she had had as a
 resigned and thoughtful child and which she now fixed on her two little
 ones who were still cutting out their pictures. The room was growing
 gloomy and Bijard was working off his liquor while the poor girl was in
 her death agonies. No, no, life was too abominable! How frightful it was!
 How frightful! And Gervaise took herself off, and went down the stairs,
 not knowing what she was doing, her head wandering and so full of disgust
 that she would willingly have thrown herself under the wheels of an
 omnibus to have finished with her own existence.
 

 As she hastened on, growling against cursed fate, she suddenly found
 herself in front of the place where Coupeau pretended that he worked. Her
 legs had taken her there, and now her stomach began singing its song
 again, the complaint of hunger in ninety verses—a complaint she knew
 by heart. However, if she caught Coupeau as he left, she would be able to
 pounce upon the coin at once and buy some grub. A short hour's waiting at
 the utmost; she could surely stay that out, though she had sucked her
 thumbs since the day before.
 

 She was at the corner of Rue de la Charbonniere and Rue de Chartres. A
 chill wind was blowing and the sky was an ugly leaden grey. The impending
 snow hung over the city but not a flake had fallen as yet. She tried
 stamping her feet to keep warm, but soon stopped as there was no use
 working up an appetite.
 

 There was nothing amusing about. The few passers-by strode rapidly along,
 wrapped up in comforters; naturally enough one does not care to tarry when
 the cold is nipping at your heels. However, Gervaise perceived four or
 five women who were mounting guard like herself outside the door of the
 zinc-works; unfortunate creatures of course—wives watching for the
 pay to prevent it going to the dram-shop. There was a tall creature as
 bulky as a gendarme leaning against the wall, ready to spring on her
 husband as soon as he showed himself. A dark little woman with a delicate
 humble air was walking about on the other side of the way. Another one, a
 fat creature, had brought her two brats with her and was dragging them
 along, one on either hand, and both of them shivering and sobbing. And all
 these women, Gervaise like the others, passed and repassed, exchanging
 glances, but without speaking to one another. A pleasant meeting and no
 mistake. They didn't need to make friends to learn what number they lived
 at. They could all hang out the same sideboard, "Misery & Co." It
 seemed to make one feel even colder to see them walk about in silence,
 passing each other in this terrible January weather.
 

 However, nobody as yet left the zinc-works. But presently one workman
 appeared, then two, and then three, but these were no doubt decent fellows
 who took their pay home regularly, for they jerked their heads
 significantly as they saw the shadows wandering up and down. The tall
 creature stuck closer than ever to the side of the door, and suddenly fell
 upon a pale little man who was prudently poking his head out. Oh! it was
 soon settled! She searched him and collared his coin. Caught, no more
 money, not even enough to pay for a dram! Then the little man, looking
 very vexed and cast down, followed his gendarme, weeping like a child. The
 workmen were still coming out; and as the fat mother with the two brats
 approached the door, a tall fellow, with a cunning look, who noticed her,
 went hastily inside again to warn her husband; and when the latter arrived
 he had stuffed a couple of cart wheels away, two beautiful new five franc
 pieces, one in each of his shoes. He took one of the brats on his arm, and
 went off telling a variety of lies to his old woman who was complaining.
 There were other workmen also, mournful-looking fellows, who carried in
 their clinched fists the pay for the three or five days' work they had
 done during a fortnight, who reproached themselves with their own
 laziness, and took drunkards' oaths. But the saddest thing of all was the
 grief of the dark little woman, with the humble, delicate look; her
 husband, a handsome fellow, took himself off under her very nose, and so
 brutally indeed that he almost knocked her down, and she went home alone,
 stumbling past the shops and weeping all the tears in her body.
 

 At last the defile finished. Gervaise, who stood erect in the middle of
 the street, was still watching the door. The look-out seemed a bad one. A
 couple of workmen who were late appeared on the threshold, but there were
 still no signs of Coupeau. And when she asked the workmen if Coupeau
 wasn't coming, they answered her, being up to snuff, that he had gone off
 by the back-door with Lantimeche. Gervaise understood what this meant.
 Another of Coupeau's lies; she could whistle for him if she liked. Then
 shuffling along in her worn-out shoes, she went slowly down the Rue de la
 Charbonniere. Her dinner was going off in front of her, and she shuddered
 as she saw it running away in the yellow twilight. This time it was all
 over. Not a copper, not a hope, nothing but night and hunger. Ah! a fine
 night to kick the bucket, this dirty night which was falling over her
 shoulders!
 

 She was walking heavily up the Rue des Poissonniers when she suddenly
 heard Coupeau's voice. Yes, he was there in the Little Civet, letting
 My-Boots treat him. That comical chap, My-Boots, had been cunning enough
 at the end of last summer to espouse in authentic fashion a lady who,
 although rather advanced in years, had still preserved considerable traces
 of beauty. She was a lady-of-the-evening of the Rue des Martyrs, none of
 your common street hussies. And you should have seen this fortunate
 mortal, living like a man of means, with his hands in his pockets, well
 clad and well fed. He could hardly be recognised, so fat had he grown. His
 comrades said that his wife had as much work as she liked among the
 gentlemen of her acquaintance. A wife like that and a country-house is all
 one can wish for to embellish one's life. And so Coupeau squinted
 admiringly at My-Boots. Why, the lucky dog even had a gold ring on his
 little finger!
 

 Gervaise touched Coupeau on the shoulder just as he was coming out of the
 little Civet.
 

 "Say, I'm waiting; I'm hungry! I've got an empty stomach which is all I
 ever get from you."
 

 But he silenced her in a capital style, "You're hungry, eh? Well, eat your
 fist, and keep the other for to-morrow."
 

 He considered it highly improper to do the dramatic in other people's
 presence. What, he hadn't worked, and yet the bakers kneaded bread all the
 same. Did she take him for a fool, to come and try to frighten him with
 her stories?
 

 "Do you want me to turn thief?" she muttered, in a dull voice.
 

 My-Boots stroked his chin in conciliatory fashion. "No, that's forbidden,"
 said he. "But when a woman knows how to handle herself—"
 

 And Coupeau interrupted him to call out "Bravo!" Yes, a woman always ought
 to know how to handle herself, but his wife had always been a helpless
 thing. It would be her fault if they died on the straw. Then he relapsed
 into his admiration for My-Boots. How awfully fine he looked! A regular
 landlord; with clean linen and swell shoes! They were no common stuff! His
 wife, at all events, knew how to keep the pot boiling!
 

 The two men walked towards the outer Boulevard, and Gervaise followed
 them. After a pause, she resumed, talking behind Coupeau's back: "I'm
 hungry; you know, I relied on you. You must find me something to nibble."
 

 He did not answer, and she repeated, in a tone of despairing agony: "Is
 that all I get from you?"
 

 "Mon Dieu! I've no coin," he roared, turning round in a fury. "Just
 leave me alone, eh? Or else I'll hit you."
 

 He was already raising his fist. She drew back, and seemed to make up her
 mind. "All right, I'll leave you. I guess I can find a man."
 

 The zinc-worker laughed at this. He pretended to make a joke of the
 matter, and strengthened her purpose without seeming to do so. That was a
 fine idea of hers, and no mistake! In the evening, by gaslight, she might
 still hook a man. He recommended her to try the Capuchin restaurant where
 one could dine very pleasantly in a small private room. And, as she went
 off along the Boulevard, looking pale and furious he called out to her:
 "Listen, bring me back some dessert. I like cakes! And if your gentleman
 is well dressed, ask him for an old overcoat. I could use one."
 

 With these words ringing in her ears, Gervaise walked softly away. But
 when she found herself alone in the midst of the crowd, she slackened her
 pace. She was quite resolute. Between thieving and the other, well she
 preferred the other; for at all events she wouldn't harm any one. No doubt
 it wasn't proper. But what was proper and what was improper was sorely
 muddled together in her brain. When you are dying of hunger, you don't
 philosophize, you eat whatever bread turns up. She had gone along as far
 as the Chaussee-Clignancourt. It seemed as if the night would never come.
 However, she followed the Boulevards like a lady who is taking a stroll
 before dinner. The neighborhood in which she felt so ashamed, so greatly
 was it being embellished, was now full of fresh air.
 

 Lost in the crowd on the broad footway, walking past the little plane
 trees, Gervaise felt alone and abandoned. The vistas of the avenues seemed
 to empty her stomach all the more. And to think that among this flood of
 people there were many in easy circumstances, and yet not a Christian who
 could guess her position, and slip a ten sous piece into her hand! Yes, it
 was too great and too beautiful; her head swam and her legs tottered under
 this broad expanse of grey sky stretched over so vast a space. The
 twilight had the dirty-yellowish tinge of Parisian evenings, a tint that
 gives you a longing to die at once, so ugly does street life seem. The
 horizon was growing indistinct, assuming a mud-colored tinge as it were.
 Gervaise, who was already weary, met all the workpeople returning home. At
 this hour of the day the ladies in bonnets and the well-dressed gentlemen
 living in the new houses mingled with the people, with the files of men
 and women still pale from inhaling the tainted atmosphere of workshops and
 workrooms. From the Boulevard Magenta and the Rue du
 Faubourg-Poissonniere, came bands of people, rendered breathless by their
 uphill walk. As the omnivans and the cabs rolled by less noiselessly among
 the vans and trucks returning home empty at a gallop, an ever-increasing
 swarm of blouses and blue vests covered the pavement. Commissionaires
 returned with their crotchets on their backs. Two workmen took long
 strides side by side, talking to each other in loud voices, with any
 amount of gesticulation, but without looking at one another; others who
 were alone in overcoats and caps walked along the curbstones with lowered
 noses; others again came in parties of five or six, following each other,
 with pale eyes and their hands in their pockets and not exchanging a word.
 Some still had their pipes, which had gone out between their teeth. Four
 masons poked their white faces out of the windows of a cab which they had
 hired between them, and on the roof of which their mortar-troughs rocked
 to and fro. House-painters were swinging their pots; a zinc-worker was
 returning laden with a long ladder, with which he almost poked people's
 eyes out; whilst a belated plumber, with his box on his back, played the
 tune of "The Good King Dagobert" on his little trumpet. Ah! the sad music,
 a fitting accompaniment to the tread of the flock, the tread of the weary
 beasts of burden.
 

 Suddenly on raising her eyes she noticed the old Hotel Boncoeur in front
 of her. After being an all-night cafe, which the police had closed down,
 the little house was now abandoned; the shutters were covered with
 posters, the lantern was broken, and the whole building was rotting and
 crumbling away from top to bottom, with its smudgy claret-colored paint,
 quite moldy. The stationer's and the tobacconist's were still there. In
 the rear, over some low buildings, you could see the leprous facades of
 several five-storied houses rearing their tumble-down outlines against the
 sky. The "Grand Balcony" dancing hall no longer existed; some
 sugar-cutting works, which hissed continually, had been installed in the
 hall with the ten flaming windows. And yet it was here, in this dirty den—the
 Hotel Boncoeur—that the whole cursed life had commenced. Gervaise
 remained looking at the window of the first floor, from which hung a
 broken shutter, and recalled to mind her youth with Lantier, their first
 rows and the ignoble way in which he had abandoned her. Never mind, she
 was young then, and it all seemed gay to her, seen from a distance. Only
 twenty years. Mon Dieu! and yet she had fallen to street-walking.
 Then the sight of the lodging house oppressed her and she walked up the
 Boulevard in the direction of Montmartre.
 

 The night was gathering, but children were still playing on the heaps of
 sand between the benches. The march past continued, the workgirls went by,
 trotting along and hurrying to make up for the time they had lost in
 looking in at the shop windows; one tall girl, who had stopped, left her
 hand in that of a big fellow, who accompanied her to within three doors of
 her home; others as they parted from each other, made appointments for the
 night at the "Great Hall of Folly" or the "Black Ball." In the midst of
 the groups, piece-workmen went by, carrying their clothes folded under
 their arms. A chimney sweep, harnessed with leather braces, was drawing a
 cart along, and nearly got himself crushed by an omnibus. Among the crowd
 which was now growing scantier, there were several women running with bare
 heads; after lighting the fire, they had come downstairs again and were
 hastily making their purchases for dinner; they jostled the people they
 met, darted into the bakers' and the pork butchers', and went off again
 with all despatch, their provisions in their hands. There were little
 girls of eight years old, who had been sent out on errands, and who went
 along past the shops, pressing long loaves of four pounds' weight, as tall
 as they were themselves, against their chests, as if these loaves had been
 beautiful yellow dolls; at times these little ones forgot themselves for
 five minutes or so, in front of some pictures in a shop window, and rested
 their cheeks against the bread. Then the flow subsided, the groups became
 fewer and farther between, the working classes had gone home; and as the
 gas blazed now that the day's toil was over, idleness and amusement seemed
 to wake up.
 

 Ah! yes; Gervaise had finished her day! She was wearier even than all this
 mob of toilers who had jostled her as they went by. She might lie down
 there and croak, for work would have nothing more to do with her, and she
 had toiled enough during her life to say: "Whose turn now? I've had
 enough." At present everyone was eating. It was really the end, the sun
 had blown out its candle, the night would be a long one. Mon Dieu!
 To stretch one's self at one's ease and never get up again; to think one
 had put one's tools by for good and that one could ruminate like a cow
 forever! That's what is good, after tiring one's self out for twenty
 years! And Gervaise, as hunger twisted her stomach, thought in spite of
 herself of the fete days, the spreads and the revelry of her life. Of one
 occasion especially, an awfully cold day, a mid-Lent Thursday. She had
 enjoyed herself wonderfully well. She was very pretty, fair-haired and
 fresh looking at that time. Her wash-house in the Rue Neuve had chosen her
 as queen in spite of her leg. And then they had had an outing on the
 boulevards in carts decked with greenery, in the midst of stylish people
 who ogled her. Real gentlemen put up their glasses as if she had been a
 true queen. In the evening there was a wonderful spread, and then they had
 danced till daylight. Queen; yes Queen! With a crown and a sash for
 twenty-four hours—twice round the clock! And now oppressed by
 hunger, she looked on the ground, as if she were seeking for the gutter in
 which she had let her fallen majesty tumble.
 

 She raised her eyes again. She was in front of the slaughter-houses which
 were being pulled down; through the gaps in the facade one could see the
 dark, stinking courtyards, still damp with blood. And when she had gone
 down the Boulevard again, she also saw the Lariboisiere Hospital, with its
 long grey wall, above which she could distinguish the mournful, fan-like
 wings, pierced with windows at even distances. A door in the wall filled
 the neighborhood with dread; it was the door of the dead in solid oak, and
 without a crack, as stern and as silent as a tombstone. Then to escape her
 thoughts, she hurried further down till she reached the railway bridge.
 The high parapets of riveted sheet-iron hid the line from view; she could
 only distinguish a corner of the station standing out against the luminous
 horizon of Paris, with a vast roof black with coal-dust. Through the clear
 space she could hear the engines whistling and the cars being shunted, in
 token of colossal hidden activity. Then a train passed by, leaving Paris,
 with puffing breath and a growing rumble. And all she perceived of this
 train was a white plume, a sudden gust of steam which rose above the
 parapet and then evaporated. But the bridge had shaken, and she herself
 seemed impressed by this departure at full speed. She turned round as if
 to follow the invisible engine, the noise of which was dying away.
 

 She caught a glimpse of open country through a gap between tall buildings.
 Oh, if only she could have taken a train and gone away, far away from this
 poverty and suffering. She might have started an entirely new life! Then
 she turned to look at the posters on the bridge sidings. One was on pretty
 blue paper and offered a fifty-franc reward for a lost dog. Someone must
 have really loved that dog!
 

 Gervaise slowly resumed her walk. In the smoky fog which was falling, the
 gas lamps were being lighted up; and the long avenues, which had grown
 bleak and indistinct, suddenly showed themselves plainly again, sparkling
 to their full length and piercing through the night, even to the vague
 darkness of the horizon. A great gust swept by; the widened spaces were
 lighted up with girdles of little flames, shining under the far-stretching
 moonless sky. It was the hour when, from one end of the Boulevard to the
 other, the dram-shops and the dancing-halls flamed gayly as the first
 glasses were merrily drunk and the first dance began. It was the great
 fortnightly pay-day, and the pavement was crowded with jostling revelers
 on the spree. There was a breath of merrymaking in the air—deuced
 fine revelry, but not objectionable so far. Fellows were filling
 themselves in the eating-houses; through the lighted windows you could see
 people feeding, with their mouths full and laughing without taking the
 trouble to swallow first. Drunkards were already installed in the
 wineshops, squabbling and gesticulating. And there was a cursed noise on
 all sides, voices shouting amid the constant clatter of feet on the
 pavement.
 

 "Say, are you coming to sip?" "Make haste, old man; I'll pay for a glass
 of bottled wine." "Here's Pauline! Shan't we just laugh!" The doors swung
 to and fro, letting a smell of wine and a sound of cornet playing escape
 into the open air. There was a gathering in front of Pere Colombe's
 l'Assommoir, which was lighted up like a cathedral for high mass. Mon
 Dieu! you would have said a real ceremony was going on, for several
 capital fellows, with rounded paunches and swollen cheeks, looking for all
 the world like professional choristers, were singing inside. They were
 celebrating Saint-Pay, of course—a very amiable saint, who no doubt
 keeps the cash box in Paradise. Only, on seeing how gaily the evening
 began, the retired petty tradesmen who had taken their wives out for a
 stroll wagged their heads, and repeated that there would be any number of
 drunken men in Paris that night. And the night stretched very dark,
 dead-like and icy, above this revelry, perforated only with lines of gas
 lamps extending to the four corners of heaven.
 

 Gervaise stood in front of l'Assommoir, thinking that if she had had a
 couple of sous she could have gone inside and drunk a dram. No doubt a
 dram would have quieted her hunger. Ah! what a number of drams she had
 drunk in her time! Liquor seemed good stuff to her after all. And from
 outside she watched the drunk-making machine, realizing that her
 misfortune was due to it, and yet dreaming of finishing herself off with
 brandy on the day she had some coin. But a shudder passed through her hair
 as she saw it was now almost dark. Well, the night time was approaching.
 She must have some pluck and sell herself coaxingly if she didn't wish to
 kick the bucket in the midst of the general revelry. Looking at other
 people gorging themselves didn't precisely fill her own stomach. She
 slackened her pace again and looked around her. There was a darker shade
 under the trees. Few people passed along, only folks in a hurry, who
 swiftly crossed the Boulevards. And on the broad, dark, deserted footway,
 where the sound of the revelry died away, women were standing and waiting.
 They remained for long intervals motionless, patient and as stiff-looking
 as the scrubby little plane trees; then they slowly began to move,
 dragging their slippers over the frozen soil, taking ten steps or so and
 then waiting again, rooted as it were to the ground. There was one of them
 with a huge body and insect-like arms and legs, wearing a black silk rag,
 with a yellow scarf over her head; there was another one, tall and bony,
 who was bareheaded and wore a servant's apron; and others, too—old
 ones plastered up and young ones so dirty that a ragpicker would not have
 picked them up. However, Gervaise tried to learn what to do by imitating
 them; girlish-like emotion tightened her throat; she was hardly aware
 whether she felt ashamed or not; she seemed to be living in a horrible
 dream. For a quarter of an hour she remained standing erect. Men hurried
 by without even turning their heads. Then she moved about in her turn, and
 venturing to accost a man who was whistling with his hands in his pockets,
 she murmured, in a strangled voice:
 

 "Sir, listen a moment—"
 

 The man gave her a side glance and then went off, whistling all the
 louder.
 

 Gervaise grew bolder, and, with her stomach empty, she became absorbed in
 this chase, fiercely rushing after her dinner, which was still running
 away. She walked about for a long while, without thinking of the flight of
 time or of the direction she took. Around her the dark, mute women went to
 and fro under the trees like wild beasts in a cage. They stepped out of
 the shade like apparitions, and passed under the light of a gas lamp with
 their pale masks fully apparent; then they grew vague again as they went
 off into the darkness, with a white strip of petticoat swinging to and
 fro. Men let themselves be stopped at times, talked jokingly, and then
 started off again laughing. Others would quietly follow a woman to her
 room, discreetly, ten paces behind. There was a deal of muttering,
 quarreling in an undertone and furious bargaining, which suddenly subsided
 into profound silence. And as far as Gervaise went she saw these women
 standing like sentinels in the night. They seemed to be placed along the
 whole length of the Boulevard. As soon as she met one she saw another
 twenty paces further on, and the file stretched out unceasingly. Entire
 Paris was guarded. She grew enraged on finding herself disdained, and
 changing her place, she now perambulated between the Chaussee de
 Clignancourt and the Grand Rue of La Chapelle. All were beggars.
 

 "Sir, just listen."
 

 But the men passed by. She started from the slaughter-houses, which stank
 of blood. She glanced on her way at the old Hotel Boncoeur, now closed.
 She passed in front of the Lariboisiere Hospital, and mechanically counted
 the number of windows that were illuminated with a pale quiet glimmer,
 like that of night-lights at the bedside of some agonizing sufferers. She
 crossed the railway bridge as the trains rushed by with a noisy rumble,
 rending the air in twain with their shrill whistling! Ah! how sad
 everything seemed at night-time! Then she turned on her heels again and
 filled her eyes with the sight of the same houses, doing this ten and
 twenty times without pausing, without resting for a minute on a bench. No;
 no one wanted her. Her shame seemed to be increased by this contempt. She
 went down towards the hospital again, and then returned towards the
 slaughter-houses. It was her last promenade—from the blood-stained
 courtyards, where animals were slaughtered, down to the pale hospital
 wards, where death stiffened the patients stretched between the sheets. It
 was between these two establishments that she had passed her life.
 

 "Sir, just listen."
 

 But suddenly she perceived her shadow on the ground. When she approached a
 gas-lamp it gradually became less vague, till it stood out at last in full
 force—an enormous shadow it was, positively grotesque, so portly had
 she become. Her stomach, breast and hips, all equally flabby jostled
 together as it were. She walked with such a limp that the shadow bobbed
 almost topsy-turvy at every step she took; it looked like a real Punch!
 Then as she left the street lamp behind her, the Punch grew taller,
 becoming in fact gigantic, filling the whole Boulevard, bobbing to and fro
 in such style that it seemed fated to smash its nose against the trees or
 the houses. Mon Dieu! how frightful she was! She had never realised
 her disfigurement so thoroughly. And she could not help looking at her
 shadow; indeed, she waited for the gas-lamps, still watching the Punch as
 it bobbed about. Ah! she had a pretty companion beside her! What a figure!
 It ought to attract the men at once! And at the thought of her
 unsightliness, she lowered her voice, and only just dared to stammer
 behind the passers-by:
 

 "Sir, just listen."
 

 It was now getting quite late. Matters were growing bad in the
 neighborhood. The eating-houses had closed and voices, gruff with drink,
 could be heard disputing in the wineshops. Revelry was turning to
 quarreling and fisticuffs. A big ragged chap roared out, "I'll knock yer
 to bits; just count yer bones." A large woman had quarreled with a fellow
 outside a dancing place, and was calling him "dirty blackguard" and "lousy
 bum," whilst he on his side just muttered under his breath. Drink seemed
 to have imparted a fierce desire to indulge in blows, and the passers-by,
 who were now less numerous, had pale contracted faces. There was a battle
 at last; one drunken fellow came down on his back with all four limbs
 raised in the air, whilst his comrade, thinking he had done for him, ran
 off with his heavy shoes clattering over the pavement. Groups of men sang
 dirty songs and then there would be long silences broken only by hiccoughs
 or the thud of a drunk falling down.
 

 Gervaise still hobbled about, going up and down, with the idea of walking
 forever. At times, she felt drowsy and almost went to sleep, rocked, as it
 were, by her lame leg; then she looked round her with a start, and noticed
 she had walked a hundred yards unconsciously. Her feet were swelling in
 her ragged shoes. The last clear thought that occupied her mind was that
 her hussy of a daughter was perhaps eating oysters at that very moment.
 Then everything became cloudy; and, albeit, she remained with open eyes,
 it required too great an effort for her to think. The only sensation that
 remained to her, in her utter annihilation, was that it was frightfully
 cold, so sharply, mortally cold, she had never known the like before. Why,
 even dead people could not feel so cold in their graves. With an effort
 she raised her head, and something seemed to lash her face. It was the
 snow, which had at last decided to fall from the smoky sky—fine
 thick snow, which the breeze swept round and round. For three days it had
 been expected and what a splendid moment it chose to appear.
 

 Woken up by the first gusts, Gervaise began to walk faster. Eager to get
 home, men were running along, with their shoulders already white. And as
 she suddenly saw one who, on the contrary, was coming slowly towards her
 under the trees, she approached him and again said: "Sir, just listen—"
 

 The man has stopped. But he did not seem to have heard her. He held out
 his hand, and muttered in a low voice: "Charity, if you please!"
 

 They looked at one another. Ah! Mon Dieu! They were reduced to this—Pere
 Bru begging, Madame Coupeau walking the streets! They remained stupefied
 in front of each other. They could join hands as equals now. The old
 workman had prowled about the whole evening, not daring to stop anyone,
 and the first person he accosted was as hungry as himself. Lord, was it
 not pitiful! To have toiled for fifty years and be obliged to beg! To have
 been one of the most prosperous laundresses in the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or
 and to end beside the gutter! They still looked at one another. Then,
 without saying a word, they went off in different directions under the
 lashing snow.
 

 It was a perfect tempest. On these heights, in the midst of this open
 space, the fine snow revolved round and round as if the wind came from the
 four corners of heaven. You could not see ten paces off, everything was
 confused in the midst of this flying dust. The surroundings had
 disappeared, the Boulevard seemed to be dead, as if the storm had
 stretched the silence of its white sheet over the hiccoughs of the last
 drunkards. Gervaise still went on, blinded, lost. She felt her way by
 touching the trees. As she advanced the gas-lamps shone out amidst the
 whiteness like torches. Then, suddenly, whenever she crossed an open
 space, these lights failed her; she was enveloped in the whirling snow,
 unable to distinguish anything to guide her. Below stretched the ground,
 vaguely white; grey walls surrounded her, and when she paused, hesitating
 and turning her head, she divined that behind this icy veil extended the
 immense avenue with interminable vistas of gas-lamps—the black and
 deserted Infinite of Paris asleep.
 

 She was standing where the outer Boulevard meets the Boulevards Magenta
 and Ornano, thinking of lying down on the ground, when suddenly she heard
 a footfall. She began to run, but the snow blinded her, and the footsteps
 went off without her being able to tell whether it was to the right or to
 the left. At last, however, she perceived a man's broad shoulders, a dark
 form which was disappearing amid the snow. Oh! she wouldn't let this man
 get away. And she ran on all the faster, reached him, and caught him by
 the blouse: "Sir, sir, just listen."
 

 The man turned round. It was Goujet.
 

 So now she had accosted Golden-Beard. But what had she done on earth to be
 tortured like this by Providence? It was the crowning blow—to
 stumble against Goujet, and be seen by her blacksmith friend, pale and
 begging, like a common street walker. And it happened just under a
 gas-lamp; she could see her deformed shadow swaying on the snow like a
 real caricature. You would have said she was drunk. Mon Dieu! not
 to have a crust of bread, or a drop of wine in her body, and to be taken
 for a drunken women! It was her own fault, why did she booze? Goujet no
 doubt thought she had been drinking, and that she was up to some nasty
 pranks.
 

 He looked at her while the snow scattered daisies over his beautiful
 yellow beard. Then as she lowered her head and stepped back he detained
 her.
 

 "Come," said he.
 

 And he walked on first. She followed him. They both crossed the silent
 district, gliding noiselessly along the walls. Poor Madame Goujet had died
 of rheumatism in the month of October. Goujet still resided in the little
 house in the Rue Neuve, living gloomily alone. On this occasion he was
 belated because he had sat up nursing a wounded comrade. When he had
 opened the door and lighted a lamp, he turned towards Gervaise, who had
 remained humbly on the threshold. Then, in a low voice, as if he were
 afraid his mother could still hear him, he exclaimed, "Come in."
 

 The first room, Madame Goujet's, was piously preserved in the state she
 had left it. On a chair near the window lay the tambour by the side of the
 large arm-chair, which seemed to be waiting for the old lace-worker. The
 bed was made, and she could have stretched herself beneath the sheets if
 she had left the cemetery to come and spend the evening with her child.
 There was something solemn, a perfume of honesty and goodness about the
 room.
 

 "Come in," repeated the blacksmith in a louder tone.
 

 She went in, half frightened, like a disreputable woman gliding into a
 respectable place. He was quite pale, and trembled at the thought of
 ushering a woman like this into his dead mother's home. They crossed the
 room on tip-toe, as if they were ashamed to be heard. Then when he had
 pushed Gervaise into his own room he closed the door. Here he was at home.
 It was the narrow closet she was acquainted with; a schoolgirl's room,
 with the little iron bedstead hung with white curtains. On the walls the
 engravings cut out of illustrated newspapers had gathered and spread, and
 they now reached to the ceiling. The room looked so pure that Gervaise did
 not dare to advance, but retreated as far as she could from the lamp. Then
 without a word, in a transport as it were, he tried to seize hold of her
 and press her in his arms. But she felt faint and murmured: "Oh! Mon
 Dieu! Oh, mon Dieu!"
 

 The fire in the stove, having been covered with coke-dust, was still
 alight, and the remains of a stew which Goujet had put to warm, thinking
 he should return to dinner, was smoking in front of the cinders. Gervaise,
 who felt her numbness leave her in the warmth of this room, would have
 gone down on all fours to eat out of the saucepan. Her hunger was stronger
 than her will; her stomach seemed rent in two; and she stooped down with a
 sigh. Goujet had realized the truth. He placed the stew on the table, cut
 some bread, and poured her out a glass of wine.
 

 "Thank you! Thank you!" said she. "Oh, how kind you are! Thank you!"
 

 She stammered; she could hardly articulate. When she caught hold of her
 fork she began to tremble so acutely that she let it fall again. The
 hunger that possessed her made her wag her head as if senile. She carried
 the food to her mouth with her fingers. As she stuffed the first potato
 into her mouth, she burst out sobbing. Big tears coursed down her cheeks
 and fell onto her bread. She still ate, gluttonously devouring this bread
 thus moistened by her tears, and breathing very hard all the while. Goujet
 compelled her to drink to prevent her from stifling, and her glass
 chinked, as it were, against her teeth.
 

 "Will you have some more bread?" he asked in an undertone.
 

 She cried, she said "no," she said "yes," she didn't know. Ah! how nice
 and yet how painful it is to eat when one is starving.
 

 And standing in front of her, Goujet looked at her all the while; under
 the bright light cast by the lamp-shade he could see her well. How aged
 and altered she seemed! The heat was melting the snow on her hair and
 clothes, and she was dripping. Her poor wagging head was quite grey; there
 were any number of grey locks which the wind had disarranged. Her neck
 sank into her shoulders and she had become so fat and ugly you might have
 cried on noticing the change. He recollected their love, when she was
 quite rosy, working with her irons, and showing the child-like crease
 which set such a charming necklace round her throat. In those times he had
 watched her for hours, glad just to look at her. Later on she had come to
 the forge, and there they had enjoyed themselves whilst he beat the iron,
 and she stood by watching his hammer dance. How often at night, with his
 head buried in his pillow, had he dreamed of holding her in his arms.
 

 Gervaise rose; she had finished. She remained for a moment with her head
 lowered, and ill at ease. Then, thinking she detected a gleam in his eyes,
 she raised her hand to her jacket and began to unfasten the first button.
 But Goujet had fallen on his knees, and taking hold of her hands, he
 exclaimed softly:
 

 "I love you, Madame Gervaise; oh! I love you still, and in spite of
 everything, I swear it to you!"
 

 "Don't say that, Monsieur Goujet!" she cried, maddened to see him like
 this at her feet. "No, don't say that; you grieve me too much."
 

 And as he repeated that he could never love twice in his life, she became
 yet more despairing.
 

 "No, no, I am too ashamed. For the love of God get up. It is my place to
 be on the ground."
 

 He rose, he trembled all over and stammered: "Will you allow me to kiss
 you?"
 

 Overcome with surprise and emotion she could not speak, but she assented
 with a nod of the head. After all she was his; he could do what he chose
 with her. But he merely kissed her.
 

 "That suffices between us, Madame Gervaise," he muttered. "It sums up all
 our friendship, does it not?"
 

 He had kissed her on the forehead, on a lock of her grey hair. He had not
 kissed anyone since his mother's death. His sweetheart Gervaise alone
 remained to him in life. And then, when he had kissed her with so much
 respect, he fell back across his bed with sobs rising in his throat. And
 Gervaise could not remain there any longer. It was too sad and too
 abominable to meet again under such circumstances when one loved. "I love
 you, Monsieur Goujet," she exclaimed. "I love you dearly, also. Oh! it
 isn't possible you still love me. Good-bye, good-bye; it would smother us
 both; it would be more than we could stand."
 

 And she darted through Madame Goujet's room and found herself outside on
 the pavement again. When she recovered her senses she had rung at the door
 in the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or and Boche was pulling the string. The house
 was quite dark, and in the black night the yawning, dilapidated porch
 looked like an open mouth. To think that she had been ambitious of having
 a corner in this barracks! Had her ears been stopped up then, that she had
 not heard the cursed music of despair which sounded behind the walls?
 Since she had set foot in the place she had begun to go down hill. Yes, it
 must bring bad luck to shut oneself up in these big workmen's houses; the
 cholera of misery was contagious there. That night everyone seemed to have
 kicked the bucket. She only heard the Boches snoring on the right-hand
 side, while Lantier and Virginie on the left were purring like a couple of
 cats who were not asleep, but have their eyes closed and feel warm. In the
 courtyard she fancied she was in a perfect cemetery; the snow paved the
 ground with white; the high frontages, livid grey in tint, rose up
 unlighted like ruined walls, and not a sigh could be heard. It seemed as
 if a whole village, stiffened with cold and hunger, were buried here. She
 had to step over a black gutter—water from the dye-works—which
 smoked and streaked the whiteness of the snow with its muddy course. It
 was the color of her thoughts. The beautiful light blue and light pink
 waters had long since flowed away.
 

 Then, whilst ascending the six flights of stairs in the dark, she could
 not prevent herself from laughing; an ugly laugh which hurt her. She
 recalled her ideal of former days: to work quietly, always have bread to
 eat and a tidy house to sleep in, to bring up her children, not to be
 beaten and to die in her bed. No, really, it was comical how all that was
 becoming realized! She no longer worked, she no longer ate, she slept on
 filth, her husband frequented all sorts of wineshops, and her husband
 drubbed her at all hours of the day; all that was left for her to do was
 to die on the pavement, and it would not take long if on getting into her
 room, she could only pluck up courage to fling herself out of the window.
 Was it not enough to make one think that she had hoped to earn thirty
 thousand francs a year, and no end of respect? Ah! really, in this life it
 is no use being modest; one only gets sat upon. Not even pap and a nest,
 that is the common lot.
 

 What increased her ugly laugh was the recollection of her grand hope of
 retiring into the country after twenty years passed in ironing. Well! she
 was on her way to the country. She was going to have her green corner in
 the Pere-Lachaise cemetery.
 

 When she entered the passage she was like a mad-woman. Her poor head was
 whirling round. At heart her great grief was at having bid the blacksmith
 an eternal farewell. All was ended between them; they would never see each
 other more. Then, besides that, all her other thoughts of misfortune
 pressed upon her, and almost caused her head to split. As she passed she
 poked her nose in at the Bijards' and beheld Lalie dead, with a look of
 contentment on her face at having at last been laid out and slumbering
 forever. Ah, well! children were luckier than grown-up people. And, as a
 glimmer of light passed under old Bazouge's door, she walked boldly in,
 seized with a mania for going off on the same journey as the little one.
 

 That old joker, Bazouge, had come home that night in an extraordinary
 state of gaiety. He had had such a booze that he was snoring on the ground
 in spite of the temperature, and that no doubt did not prevent him from
 dreaming something pleasant, for he seemed to be laughing from his stomach
 as he slept. The candle, which he had not put out, lighted up his old
 garments, his black cloak, which he had drawn over his knees as though it
 had been a blanket.
 

 On beholding him Gervaise uttered such a deep wailing that he awoke.
 

 "Mon Dieu! shut the door! It's so cold! Ah! it's you! What's the
 matter? What do you want?"
 

 Then, Gervaise, stretching out her arms, no longer knowing what she
 stuttered, began passionately to implore him:
 

 "Oh! take me away! I've had enough; I want to go off. You mustn't bear me
 any grudge. I didn't know. One never knows until one's ready. Oh, yes;
 one's glad to go one day! Take me away! Take me away and I shall thank
 you!"
 

 She fell on her knees, all shaken with a desire which caused her to turn
 ghastly pale. Never before had she thus dragged herself at a man's feet.
 Old Bazouge's ugly mug, with his mouth all on one side and his hide
 begrimed with the dust of funerals, seemed to her as beautiful and
 resplendent as a sun. The old fellow, who was scarcely awake thought,
 however, that it was some sort of bad joke.
 

 "Look here," murmured he, "no jokes!"
 

 "Take me away," repeated Gervaise more ardently still. "You remember, I
 knocked one evening against the partition; then I said that it wasn't
 true, because I was still a fool. But see! Give me your hands. I'm no
 longer frightened. Take me away to by-by; you'll see how still I'll be.
 Oh! sleep, that's all I care for. Oh! I'll love you so much!"
 

 Bazouge, ever gallant, thought that he ought not to be hasty with a lady
 who appeared to have taken such a fancy to him. She was falling to pieces,
 but all the same, what remained was very fine, especially when she was
 excited.
 

 "What you say is very true," said he in a convinced manner. "I packed up
 three more to-day who would only have been too glad to have given me
 something for myself, could they but have got their hands to their
 pockets. But, little woman, it's not so easily settled as all that—"
 

 "Take me away, take me away," continued Gervaise, "I want to die."
 

 "Ah! but there's a little operation to be gone through beforehand—you
 know, glug!"
 

 And he made a noise in his throat, as though swallowing his tongue. Then,
 thinking it a good joke, he chuckled.
 

 Gervaise slowly rose to her feet. So he too could do nothing for her. She
 went to her room and threw herself on her straw, feeling stupid, and
 regretting she had eaten. Ah! no indeed, misery did not kill quickly
 enough.
 

 
 
 

 That night Coupeau went on a spree. Next day, Gervaise received ten francs
 from her son Etienne, who was a mechanic on some railway. The youngster
 sent her a few francs from time to time, knowing that they were not very
 well off at home. She made some soup, and ate it all alone, for that
 scoundrel Coupeau did not return on the morrow. On Monday he was still
 absent, and on Tuesday also. The whole week went by. Ah, it would be good
 luck if some woman took him in.
 

 On Sunday Gervaise received a printed document. It was to inform her that
 her husband was dying at the Sainte-Anne asylum.
 

 Gervaise did not disturb herself. He knew the way; he could very well get
 home from the asylum by himself. They had cured him there so often that
 they could once more do him the sorry service of putting him on his pins
 again. Had she not heard that very morning that for the week before
 Coupeau had been seen as round as a ball, rolling about Belleville from
 one dram shop to another in the company of My-Boots. Exactly so; and it
 was My-Boots, too, who stood treat. He must have hooked his missus's
 stocking with all the savings gained at very hard work. It wasn't clean
 money they had used, but money that could infect them with any manner of
 vile diseases. Well, anyway, they hadn't thought to invite her for a
 drink. If you wanted to drink by yourself, you could croak by yourself.
 

 However, on Monday, as Gervaise had a nice little meal planned for the
 evening, the remains of some beans and a pint of wine, she pretended to
 herself that a walk would give her an appetite. The letter from the asylum
 which she had left lying on the bureau bothered her. The snow had melted,
 the day was mild and grey and on the whole fine, with just a slight
 keenness in the air which was invigorating. She started at noon, for her
 walk was a long one. She had to cross Paris and her bad leg always slowed
 her. With that the streets were crowded; but the people amused her; she
 reached her destination very pleasantly. When she had given her name, she
 was told a most astounding story to the effect that Coupeau had been
 fished out of the Seine close to the Pont-Neuf. He had jumped over the
 parapet, under the impression that a bearded man was barring his way. A
 fine jump, was it not? And as for finding out how Coupeau got to be on the
 Pont-Neuf, that was a matter he could not even explain himself.
 

 One of the keepers escorted Gervaise. She was ascending a staircase, when
 she heard howlings which made her shiver to her very bones.
 

 "He's playing a nice music, isn't he?" observed the keeper.
 

 "Who is?" asked she.
 

 "Why, your old man! He's been yelling like that ever since the day before
 yesterday; and he dances, you'll just see."
 

 Mon Dieu! what a sight! She stood as one transfixed. The cell was
 padded from the floor to the ceiling. On the floor there were two straw
 mats, one piled on top of the other; and in a corner were spread a
 mattress and a bolster, nothing more. Inside there Coupeau was dancing and
 yelling, his blouse in tatters and his limbs beating the air. He wore the
 mask of one about to die. What a breakdown! He bumped up against the
 window, then retired backwards, beating time with his arms and shaking his
 hands as though he were trying to wrench them off and fling them in
 somebody's face. One meets with buffoons in low dancing places who imitate
 the delirium tremens, only they imitate it badly. One must see this
 drunkard's dance if one wishes to know what it is like when gone through
 in earnest. The song also has its merits, a continuous yell worthy of
 carnival-time, a mouth wide open uttering the same hoarse trombone notes
 for hours together. Coupeau had the howl of a beast with a crushed paw.
 Strike up, music! Gentlemen, choose your partners!
 

 "Mon Dieu! what is the matter with him? What is the matter with
 him?" repeated Gervaise, seized with fear.
 

 A house surgeon, a big fair fellow with a rosy countenance, and wearing a
 white apron, was quietly sitting taking notes. The case was a curious one;
 the doctor did not leave the patient.
 

 "Stay a while if you like," said he to the laundress; "but keep quiet. Try
 and speak to him, he will not recognise you."
 

 Coupeau indeed did not even appear to see his wife. She had only had a bad
 view of him on entering, he was wriggling about so much. When she looked
 him full in the face, she stood aghast. Mon Dieu! was it possible
 he had a countenance like that, his eyes full of blood and his lips
 covered with scabs? She would certainly never have known him. To begin
 with, he was making too many grimaces, without saying why, his mouth
 suddenly out of all shape, his nose curled up, his cheeks drawn in, a
 perfect animal's muzzle. His skin was so hot the air steamed around him;
 and his hide was as though varnished, covered with a heavy sweat which
 trickled off him. In his mad dance, one could see all the same that he was
 not at his ease, his head was heavy and his limbs ached.
 

 Gervaise drew near to the house surgeon, who was strumming a tune with the
 tips of his fingers on the back of his chair.
 

 "Tell me, sir, it's serious then this time?"
 

 The house surgeon nodded his head without answering.
 

 "Isn't he jabbering to himself? Eh! don't you hear? What's it about?
 

 "About things he sees," murmured the young man. "Keep quiet, let me
 listen."
 

 Coupeau was speaking in a jerky voice. A glimmer of amusement lit up his
 eyes. He looked on the floor, to the right, to the left, and turned about
 as though he had been strolling in the Bois de Vincennes, conversing with
 himself.
 

 "Ah! that's nice, that's grand! There're cottages, a regular fair. And
 some jolly fine music! What a Balthazar's feast! They're smashing the
 crockery in there. Awfully swell! Now it's being lit up; red balls in the
 air, and it jumps, and it flies! Oh! oh! what a lot of lanterns in the
 trees! It's confoundedly pleasant! There's water flowing everywhere,
 fountains, cascades, water which sings, oh! with the voice of a chorister.
 The cascades are grand!"
 

 And he drew himself up, as though the better to hear the delicious song of
 the water; he sucked in forcibly, fancying he was drinking the fresh spray
 blown from the fountains. But, little by little, his face resumed an
 agonized expression. Then he crouched down and flew quicker than ever
 around the walls of the cell, uttering vague threats.
 

 "More traps, all that! I thought as much. Silence, you set of swindlers!
 Yes, you're making a fool of me. It's for that that you're drinking and
 bawling inside there with your viragoes. I'll demolish you, you and your
 cottage! Damnation! Will you leave me in peace?"
 

 He clinched his fists; then he uttered a hoarse cry, stooping as he ran.
 And he stuttered, his teeth chattering with fright.
 

 "It's so that I may kill myself. No, I won't throw myself in! All that
 water means that I've no heart. No, I won't throw myself in!"
 

 The cascades, which fled at his approach, advanced when he retired. And
 all of a sudden, he looked stupidly around him, mumbling, in a voice which
 was scarcely audible:
 

 "It isn't possible, they set conjurers against me!"
 

 "I'm off, sir. I've got to go. Good-night!" said Gervaise to the house
 surgeon. "It upsets me too much; I'll come again."
 

 She was quite white. Coupeau was continuing his breakdown from the window
 to the mattress and from the mattress to the window, perspiring, toiling,
 always beating the same rhythm. Then she hurried away. But though she
 scrambled down the stairs, she still heard her husband's confounded jig
 until she reached the bottom. Ah! Mon Dieu! how pleasant it was out
 of doors, one could breathe there!
 

 That evening everyone in the tenement was discussing Coupeau's strange
 malady. The Boches invited Gervaise to have a drink with them, even though
 they now considered Clump-clump beneath them, in order to hear all the
 details. Madame Lorilleux and Madame Poisson were there also. Boche told
 of a carpenter he had known who had been a drinker of absinthe. The man
 shed his clothes, went out in the street and danced the polka until he
 died. That rather struck the ladies as comic, even though it was very sad.
 

 Gervaise got up in the middle of the room and did an imitation of Coupeau.
 Yes, that's just how it was. Can anyone feature a man doing that for hours
 on end? If they didn't believe they could go see for themselves.
 

 On getting up the next morning, Gervaise promised herself she would not
 return to the Sainte-Anne again. What use would it be? She did not want to
 go off her head also. However, every ten minutes, she fell to musing and
 became absent-minded. It would be curious though, if he were still
 throwing his legs about. When twelve o'clock struck, she could no longer
 resist; she started off and did not notice how long the walk was, her
 brain was so full of her desire to go and the dread of what awaited her.
 

 Oh! there was no need for her to ask for news. She heard Coupeau's song
 the moment she reached the foot of the staircase. Just the same tune, just
 the same dance. She might have thought herself going up again after having
 only been down for a minute. The attendant of the day before, who was
 carrying some jugs of tisane along the corridor, winked his eye as he met
 her, by way of being amiable.
 

 "Still the same, then?" said she.
 

 "Oh! still the same!" he replied without stopping.
 

 She entered the room, but she remained near the door, because there were
 some people with Coupeau. The fair, rosy house surgeon was standing up,
 having given his chair to a bald old gentleman who was decorated and had a
 pointed face like a weasel. He was no doubt the head doctor, for his
 glance was as sharp and piercing as a gimlet. All the dealers in sudden
 death have a glance like that.
 

 No, really, it was not a pretty sight; and Gervaise, all in a tremble,
 asked herself why she had returned. To think that the evening before they
 accused her at the Boches' of exaggerating the picture! Now she saw better
 how Coupeau set about it, his eyes wide open looking into space, and she
 would never forget it. She overheard a few words between the house surgeon
 and the head doctor. The former was giving some details of the night: her
 husband had talked and thrown himself about, that was what it amounted to.
 Then the bald-headed old gentleman, who was not very polite by the way, at
 length appeared to become aware of her presence; and when the house
 surgeon had informed him that she was the patient's wife, he began to
 question her in the harsh manner of a commissary of the police.
 

 "Did this man's father drink?"
 

 "Yes, sir; just a little like everyone. He killed himself by falling from
 a roof one day when he was tipsy."
 

 "Did his mother drink?"
 

 "Well! sir, like everyone else, you know; a drop here, a drop there. Oh!
 the family is very respectable! There was a brother who died very young in
 convulsions."
 

 The doctor looked at her with his piercing eye. He resumed in his rough
 voice:
 

 "And you, you drink too, don't you?"
 

 Gervaise stammered, protested, and placed her hand upon her heart, as
 though to take her solemn oath.
 

 "You drink! Take care; see where drink leads to. One day or other you will
 die thus."
 

 Then she remained close to the wall. The doctor had turned his back to
 her. He squatted down, without troubling himself as to whether his
 overcoat trailed in the dust of the matting; for a long while he studied
 Coupeau's trembling, waiting for its reappearance, following it with his
 glance. That day the legs were going in their turn, the trembling had
 descended from the hands to the feet; a regular puppet with his strings
 being pulled, throwing his limbs about, whilst the trunk of his body
 remained as stiff as a piece of wood. The disease progressed little by
 little. It was like a musical box beneath the skin; it started off every
 three or four seconds and rolled along for an instant; then it stopped and
 then it started off again, just the same as the little shiver which shakes
 stray dogs in winter, when cold and standing in some doorway for
 protection. Already the middle of the body and the shoulders quivered like
 water on the point of boiling. It was a funny demolition all the same,
 going off wriggling like a girl being tickled.
 

 Coupeau, meanwhile, was complaining in a hollow voice. He seemed to suffer
 a great deal more than the day before. His broken murmurs disclosed all
 sorts of ailments. Thousands of pins were pricking him. He felt something
 heavy all about his body; some cold, wet animal was crawling over his
 thighs and digging its fangs into his flesh. Then there were other animals
 sticking to his shoulders, tearing his back with their claws.
 

 "I'm thirsty, oh! I'm thirsty!" groaned he continually.
 

 The house surgeon handed him a little lemonade from a small shelf; Coupeau
 seized the mug in both hands and greedily took a mouthful, spilling half
 the liquid over himself; but he spat it out at once with furious disgust,
 exclaiming:
 

 "Damnation! It's brandy!"
 

 Then, on a sign from the doctor, the house surgeon tried to make him drink
 some water without leaving go of the bottle. This time he swallowed the
 mouthful, yelling as though he had swallowed fire.
 

 "It's brandy; damnation! It's brandy!"
 

 Since the night before, everything he had had to drink was brandy. It
 redoubled his thirst and he could no longer drink, because everything
 burnt him. They had brought him some broth, but they were evidently trying
 to poison him, for the broth smelt of vitriol. The bread was sour and
 moldy. There was nothing but poison around him. The cell stank of sulphur.
 He even accused persons of rubbing matches under his nose to infect him.
 

 All on a sudden he exclaimed:
 

 "Oh! the rats, there're the rats now!"
 

 There were black balls that were changing into rats. These filthy animals
 got fatter and fatter, then they jumped onto the mattress and disappeared.
 There was also a monkey which came out of the wall, and went back into the
 wall, and which approached so near him each time, that he drew back
 through fear of having his nose bitten off. Suddenly there was another
 change, the walls were probably cutting capers, for he yelled out, choking
 with terror and rage:
 

 "That's it, gee up! Shake me, I don't care! Gee up! Tumble down! Yes, ring
 the bells, you black crows! Play the organ to prevent my calling the
 police. They've put a bomb behind the wall, the lousy scoundrels! I can
 hear it, it snorts, they're going to blow us up! Fire! Damnation, fire!
 There's a cry of fire! There it blazes. Oh, it's getting lighter, lighter!
 All the sky's burning, red fires, green fires, yellow fires. Hi! Help!
 Fire!"
 

 His cries became lost in a rattle. He now only mumbled disconnected words,
 foaming at the mouth, his chin wet with saliva. The doctor rubbed his nose
 with his finger, a movement no doubt habitual with him in the presence of
 serious cases. He turned to the house surgeon, and asked him in a low
 voice:
 

 "And the temperature, still the hundred degrees, is it not?"
 

 "Yes, sir."
 

 The doctor pursed his lips. He continued there another two minutes, his
 eyes fixed on Coupeau. Then he shrugged his shoulders, adding:
 

 "The same treatment, broth, milk, lemonade, and the potion of extract of
 quinine. Do not leave him, and call me if necessary."
 

 He went out and Gervaise followed him, to ask him if there was any hope.
 But he walked so stiffly along the corridor, that she did not dare
 approach him. She stood rooted there a minute, hesitating whether to
 return and look at her husband. The time she had already passed had been
 far from pleasant. As she again heard him calling out that the lemonade
 smelt of brandy, she hurried away, having had enough of the performance.
 In the streets, the galloping of the horses and the noise of the vehicles
 made her fancy that all the inmates of Saint-Anne were at her heels. And
 that the doctor had threatened her! Really, she already thought she had
 the complaint.
 

 In the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or the Boches and the others were naturally
 awaiting her. The moment she appeared they called her into the concierge's
 room. Well! was old Coupeau still in the land of the living? Mon Dieu!
 yes, he still lived. Boche seemed amazed and confounded; he had bet a
 bottle that old Coupeau would not last till the evening. What! He still
 lived! And they all exhibited their astonishment, and slapped their
 thighs. There was a fellow who lasted! Madame Lorilleux reckoned up the
 hours; thirty-six hours and twenty-four hours, sixty hours. Sacre Dieu!
 already sixty hours that he had been doing the jig and screaming! Such a
 feat of strength had never been seen before. But Boche, who was upset that
 he had lost the bet, questioned Gervaise with an air of doubt, asking her
 if she was quite sure he had not filed off behind her back. Oh! no, he had
 no desire to, he jumped about too much. Then Boche, still doubting, begged
 her to show them again a little how he was acting, just so they could see.
 Yes, yes, a little more! The request was general! The company told her she
 would be very kind if she would oblige, for just then two neighbors
 happened to be there who had not been present the day before, and who had
 come down purposely to see the performance. The concierge called to
 everybody to make room, they cleared the centre of the apartment, pushing
 one another with their elbows, and quivering with curiosity. Gervaise,
 however, hung down her head. Really, she was afraid it might upset her.
 Desirous though of showing that she did not refuse for the sake of being
 pressed, she tried two or three little leaps; but she became quite queer,
 and stopped; on her word of honor, she was not equal to it! There was a
 murmur of disappointment; it was a pity, she imitated it perfectly.
 However, she could not do it, it was no use insisting! And when Virginie
 left to return to her shop, they forgot all about old Coupeau and began to
 gossip about the Poissons and their home, a real mess now. The day before,
 the bailiffs had been; the policeman was about to lose his place; as for
 Lantier, he was now making up to the daughter of the restaurant keeper
 next door, a fine woman, who talked of setting up as a tripe-seller. Ah!
 it was amusing, everyone already beheld a tripe-seller occupying the shop;
 after the sweets should come something substantial. And that blind
 Poisson! How could a man whose profession required him to be so smart fail
 to see what was going on in his own home? They stopped talking suddenly
 when they noticed that Gervaise was off in a corner by herself imitating
 Coupeau. Her hands and feet were jerking. Yes, they couldn't ask for a
 better performance! Then Gervaise started as if waking from a dream and
 hurried away calling out good-night to everyone.
 

 On the morrow, the Boches saw her start off at twelve, the same as on the
 two previous days. They wished her a pleasant afternoon. That day the
 corridor at Sainte-Anne positively shook with Coupeau's yells and kicks.
 She had not left the stairs when she heard him yelling:
 

 "What a lot of bugs!—Come this way again that I may squash you!—Ah!
 they want to kill me! ah! the bugs!—I'm a bigger swell than the lot
 of you! Clear out, damnation! Clear out."
 

 For a moment she stood panting before the door. Was he then fighting
 against an army? When she entered, the performance had increased and was
 embellished even more than on previous occasions. Coupeau was a raving
 madman, the same as one sees at the Charenton mad-house! He was throwing
 himself about in the center of the cell, slamming his fists everywhere, on
 himself, on the walls, on the floor, and stumbling about punching empty
 space. He wanted to open the window, and he hid himself, defended himself,
 called, answered, produced all this uproar without the least assistance,
 in the exasperated way of a man beset by a mob of people. Then Gervaise
 understood that he fancied he was on a roof, laying down sheets of zinc.
 He imitated the bellows with his mouth, he moved the iron about in the
 fire and knelt down so as to pass his thumb along the edges of the mat,
 thinking that he was soldering it. Yes, his handicraft returned to him at
 the moment of croaking; and if he yelled so loud, if he fought on his
 roof, it was because ugly scoundrels were preventing him doing his work
 properly. On all the neighboring roofs were villains mocking and
 tormenting him. Besides that, the jokers were letting troops of rats loose
 about his legs. Ah! the filthy beasts, he saw them always! Though he kept
 crushing them, bringing his foot down with all his strength, fresh hordes
 of them continued passing, until they quite covered the roof. And there
 were spiders there too! He roughly pressed his trousers against his thigh
 to squash some big spiders which had crept up his leg. Mon Dieu! he
 would never finish his day's work, they wanted to destroy him, his
 employer would send him to prison. Then, whilst making haste, he suddenly
 imagined he had a steam-engine in his stomach; with his mouth wide open,
 he puffed out the smoke, a dense smoke which filled the cell and found an
 outlet by the window; and, bending forward, still puffing, he looked
 outside of the cloud of smoke as it unrolled and ascended to the sky,
 where it hid the sun.
 

 "Look!" cried he, "there's the band of the Chaussee Clignancourt,
 disguised as bears with drums, putting on a show."
 

 He remained crouching before the window, as though he had been watching a
 procession in a street, from some rooftop.
 

 "There's the cavalcade, lions and panthers making grimaces—there's
 brats dressed up as dogs and cats—there's tall Clemence, with her
 wig full of feathers. Ah! Mon Dieu! she's turning head over heels;
 she's showed everything—you'd better run, Duckie. Hey, the cops,
 leave her alone!—just you leave her alone—don't shoot! Don't
 shoot—"
 

 His voice rose, hoarse and terrified and he stooped down quickly, saying
 that the police and the military were below, men who were aiming at him
 with rifles. In the wall he saw the barrel of a pistol emerging, pointed
 at his breast. They had dragged the girl away.
 

 "Don't shoot! Mon Dieu! Don't shoot!"
 

 Then, the buildings were tumbling down, he imitated the cracking of a
 whole neighborhood collapsing; and all disappeared, all flew off. But he
 had no time to take breath, other pictures passed with extraordinary
 rapidity. A furious desire to speak filled his mouth full of words which
 he uttered without any connection, and with a gurgling sound in his
 throat. He continued to raise his voice, louder and louder.
 

 "Hallow, it's you? Good-day! No jokes! Don't make me nuzzle your hair."
 

 And he passed his hand before his face, he blew to send the hairs away.
 The house surgeon questioned him.
 

 "Who is it you see?"
 

 "My wife, of course!"
 

 He was looking at the wall, with his back to Gervaise. The latter had a
 rare fright, and she examined the wall, to see if she also could catch
 sight of herself there. He continued talking.
 

 "Now, you know, none of your wheedling—I won't be tied down! You are
 pretty, you have got a fine dress. Where did you get the money for it, you
 cow? You've been at a party, camel! Wait a bit and I'll do for you! Ah!
 you're hiding your boy friend behind your skirts. Who is it? Stoop down
 that I may see. Damnation, it's him again!"
 

 With a terrible leap, he went head first against the wall; but the padding
 softened the blow. One only heard his body rebounding onto the matting,
 where the shock had sent him.
 

 "Who is it you see?" repeated the house surgeon.
 

 "The hatter! The hatter!" yelled Coupeau.
 

 And the house surgeon questioning Gervaise, the latter stuttered without
 being able to answer, for this scene stirred up within her all the worries
 of her life. The zinc-worker thrust out his fists.
 

 "We'll settle this between us, my lad. It's full time I did for you! Ah,
 you coolly come, with that virago on your arm, to make a fool of me before
 everyone. Well! I'm going to throttle you—yes, yes, I! And without
 putting any gloves on either! I'll stop your swaggering. Take that! And
 that! And that!"
 

 He hit about in the air viciously. Then a wild rage took possession of
 him. Having bumped against the wall in walking backwards, he thought he
 was being attacked from behind. He turned round, and fiercely hammered
 away at the padding. He sprang about, jumped from one corner to another,
 knocked his stomach, his back, his shoulder, rolled over, and picked
 himself up again. His bones seemed softened, his flesh had a sound like
 damp oakum. He accompanied this pretty game with atrocious threats, and
 wild and guttural cries. However the battle must have been going badly for
 him, for his breathing became quicker, his eyes were starting out of his
 head, and he seemed little by little to be seized with the cowardice of a
 child.
 

 "Murder! Murder! Be off with you both. Oh! you brutes, they're laughing.
 There she is on her back, the virago! She must give in, it's settled. Ah!
 the brigand, he's murdering her! He's cutting off her leg with his knife.
 The other leg's on the ground, the stomach's in two, it's full of blood.
 Oh! Mon Dieu! Oh! Mon Dieu!"
 

 And, covered with perspiration, his hair standing on end, looking a
 frightful object, he retired backwards, violently waving his arms, as
 though to send the abominable sight from him. He uttered two heart-rending
 wails, and fell flat on his back on the mattress, against which his heels
 had caught.
 

 "He's dead, sir, he's dead!" said Gervaise, clasping her hands.
 

 The house surgeon had drawn near, and was pulling Coupeau into the middle
 of the mattress. No, he was not dead. They had taken his shoes off. His
 bare feet hung off the end of the mattress and they were dancing all by
 themselves, one beside the other, in time, a little hurried and regular
 dance.
 

 Just then the head doctor entered. He had brought two of his colleagues—one
 thin, the other fat, and both decorated like himself. All three stooped
 down without saying a word, and examined the man all over; then they
 rapidly conversed together in a low voice. They had uncovered Coupeau from
 his thighs to his shoulders, and by standing on tiptoe Gervaise could see
 the naked trunk spread out. Well! it was complete. The trembling had
 descended from the arms and ascended from the legs, and now the trunk
 itself was getting lively!
 

 "He's sleeping," murmured the head doctor.
 

 And he called the two others' attention to the man's countenance. Coupeau,
 his eyes closed, had little nervous twinges which drew up all his face. He
 was more hideous still, thus flattened out, with his jaw projecting, and
 his visage deformed like a corpse's that had suffered from nightmare; but
 the doctors, having caught sight of his feet, went and poked their noses
 over them, with an air of profound interest. The feet were still dancing.
 Though Coupeau slept the feet danced. Oh! their owner might snore, that
 did not concern them, they continued their little occupation without
 either hurrying or slackening. Regular mechanical feet, feet which took
 their pleasure wherever they found it.
 

 Gervaise having seen the doctors place their hands on her old man, wished
 to feel him also. She approached gently and laid a hand on his shoulder,
 and she kept it there a minute. Mon Dieu! whatever was taking place
 inside? It danced down into the very depths of the flesh, the bones
 themselves must have been jumping. Quiverings, undulations, coming from
 afar, flowed like a river beneath the skin. When she pressed a little she
 felt she distinguished the suffering cries of the marrow. What a fearful
 thing, something was boring away like a mole! It must be the rotgut from
 l'Assommoir that was hacking away inside him. Well! his entire body had
 been soaked in it.
 

 The doctors had gone away. At the end of an hour Gervaise, who had
 remained with the house surgeon, repeated in a low voice:
 

 "He's dead, sir; he's dead!"
 

 But the house surgeon, who was watching the feet, shook his head. The bare
 feet, projecting beyond the mattress, still danced on. They were not
 particularly clean and the nails were long. Several more hours passed. All
 on a sudden they stiffened and became motionless. Then the house surgeon
 turned towards Gervaise, saying:
 

 "It's over now."
 

 Death alone had been able to stop those feet.
 

 When Gervaise got back to the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or she found at the
 Boches' a number of women who were cackling in excited tones. She thought
 they were awaiting her to have the latest news, the same as the other
 days.
 

 "He's gone," said she, quietly, as she pushed open the door, looking tired
 out and dull.
 

 But no one listened to her. The whole building was topsy-turvy. Oh! a most
 extraordinary story. Poisson had caught his wife with Lantier. Exact
 details were not known, because everyone had a different version. However,
 he had appeared just when they were not expecting him. Some further
 information was given, which the ladies repeated to one another as they
 pursed their lips. A sight like that had naturally brought Poisson out of
 his shell. He was a regular tiger. This man, who talked but little and who
 always seemed to walk with a stick up his back, had begun to roar and jump
 about. Then nothing more had been heard. Lantier had evidently explained
 things to the husband. Anyhow, it could not last much longer, and Boche
 announced that the girl of the restaurant was for certain going to take
 the shop for selling tripe. That rogue of a hatter adored tripe.
 

 On seeing Madame Lorilleux and Madame Lerat arrive, Gervaise repeated,
 faintly:
 

 "He's gone. Mon Dieu! Four days' dancing and yelling—"
 

 Then the two sisters could not do otherwise than pull out their
 handkerchiefs. Their brother had had many faults, but after all he was
 their brother. Boche shrugged his shoulders and said, loud enough to be
 heard by everyone:
 

 "Bah! It's a drunkard the less."
 

 From that day, as Gervaise often got a bit befuddled, one of the
 amusements of the house was to see her imitate Coupeau. It was no longer
 necessary to press her; she gave the performance gratis, her hands and
 feet trembling as she uttered little involuntary shrieks. She must have
 caught this habit at Sainte-Anne from watching her husband too long.
 

 Gervaise lasted in this state several months. She fell lower and lower
 still, submitting to the grossest outrages and dying of starvation a
 little every day. As soon as she had four sous she drank and pounded on
 the walls. She was employed on all the dirty errands of the neighborhood.
 Once they even bet her she wouldn't eat filth, but she did it in order to
 earn ten sous. Monsieur Marescot had decided to turn her out of her room
 on the sixth floor. But, as Pere Bru had just been found dead in his
 cubbyhole under the staircase, the landlord had allowed her to turn into
 it. Now she roosted there in the place of Pere Bru. It was inside there,
 on some straw, that her teeth chattered, whilst her stomach was empty and
 her bones were frozen. The earth would not have her apparently. She was
 becoming idiotic. She did not even think of making an end of herself by
 jumping out of the sixth floor window on to the pavement of the courtyard
 below. Death had to take her little by little, bit by bit, dragging her
 thus to the end through the accursed existence she had made for herself.
 It was never even exactly known what she did die of. There was some talk
 of a cold, but the truth was she died of privation and of the filth and
 hardship of her ruined life. Overeating and dissoluteness killed her,
 according to the Lorilleuxs. One morning, as there was a bad smell in the
 passage, it was remembered that she had not been seen for two days, and
 she was discovered already green in her hole.
 

 It happened to be old Bazouge who came with the pauper's coffin under his
 arm to pack her up. He was again precious drunk that day, but a jolly
 fellow all the same, and as lively as a cricket. When he recognized the
 customer he had to deal with he uttered several philosophical reflections,
 whilst performing his little business.
 

 "Everyone has to go. There's no occasion for jostling, there's room for
 everyone. And it's stupid being in a hurry that just slows you up. All I
 want to do is to please everybody. Some will, others won't. What's the
 result? Here's one who wouldn't, then she would. So she was made to wait.
 Anyhow, it's all right now, and faith! She's earned it! Merrily, just take
 it easy."
 

 And when he took hold of Gervaise in his big, dirty hands, he was seized
 with emotion, and he gently raised this woman who had had so great a
 longing for his attentions. Then, as he laid her out with paternal care at
 the bottom of the coffin, he stuttered between two hiccoughs:
 

 "You know—now listen—it's me, Bibi-the-Gay, called the ladies'
 consoler. There, you're happy now. Go by-by, my beauty!"
 

 THE END 


 
 
CONTENTS

 CHAPTER I. 
 CHAPTER II. 
 CHAPTER III. 
 CHAPTER IV. 

 CHAPTER V. 
 CHAPTER VI. 
 CHAPTER VII. 
 CHAPTER VIII 

 CHAPTER IX 
 CHAPTER X 
 CHAPTER XI 
 CHAPTER XII 
 CHAPTER XIII 
 

 
 

 Gervaise had waited up for Lantier until two in the morning. Then,
 shivering from having remained in a thin loose jacket, exposed to the
 fresh air at the window, she had thrown herself across the bed, drowsy,
 feverish, and her cheeks bathed in tears.
 

 For a week past, on leaving the "Two-Headed Calf," where they took their
 meals, he had sent her home with the children and never reappeared himself
 till late at night, alleging that he had been in search of work. That
 evening, while watching for his return, she thought she had seen him enter
 the dancing-hall of the "Grand-Balcony," the ten blazing windows of which
 lighted up with the glare of a conflagration the dark expanse of the
 exterior Boulevards; and five or six paces behind him, she had caught
 sight of little Adele, a burnisher, who dined at the same restaurant,
 swinging her hands, as if she had just quitted his arm so as not to pass
 together under the dazzling light of the globes at the door.
 

 When, towards five o'clock, Gervaise awoke, stiff and sore, she broke
 forth into sobs. Lantier had not returned. For the first time he had slept
 away from home. She remained seated on the edge of the bed, under the
 strip of faded chintz, which hung from the rod fastened to the ceiling by
 a piece of string. And slowly, with her eyes veiled by tears, she glanced
 round the wretched lodging, furnished with a walnut chest of drawers,
 minus one drawer, three rush-bottomed chairs, and a little greasy table,
 on which stood a broken water-jug. There had been added, for the children,
 an iron bedstead, which prevented any one getting to the chest of drawers,
 and filled two-thirds of the room. Gervaise's and Lantier's trunk, wide
 open, in one corner, displayed its emptiness, and a man's old hat right at
 the bottom almost buried beneath some dirty shirts and socks; whilst,
 against the walls, above the articles of furniture, hung a shawl full of
 holes, and a pair of trousers begrimed with mud, the last rags which the
 dealers in second-hand clothes declined to buy. In the centre of the
 mantel-piece, lying between two odd zinc candle-sticks, was a bundle of
 pink pawn-tickets. It was the best room of the hotel, the first floor
 room, looking on to the Boulevard.
 

 The two children were sleeping side by side, with their heads on the same
 pillow. Claude, aged eight years, was breathing quietly, with his little
 hands thrown outside the coverlet; while Etienne, only four years old, was
 smiling, with one arm round his brother's neck. And bare-footed, without
 thinking to again put on the old shoes that had fallen on the floor, she
 resumed her position at the window, her eyes searching the pavements in
 the distance.
 

 The hotel was situated on the Boulevard de la Chapelle, to the left of the
 Barriere Poissonniere. It was a building of two stories high, painted a
 red, of the color of wine dregs, up to the second floor, and with shutters
 all rotted by the rain. Over a lamp with starred panes of glass, one could
 manage to read, between the two windows, the words, "Hotel Boncoeur, kept
 by Marsoullier," painted in big yellow letters, several pieces of which
 the moldering of the plaster had carried away. The lamp preventing her
 seeing, Gervaise raised herself on tiptoe, still holding the handkerchief
 to her lips. She looked to the right, towards the Boulevard Rochechouart,
 where groups of butchers, in aprons smeared with blood, were hanging about
 in front of the slaughter-houses; and the fresh breeze wafted occasionally
 a stench of slaughtered beasts. Looking to the left, she scanned a long
 avenue that ended nearly in front of her, where the white mass of the
 Lariboisiere Hospital was then in course of construction. Slowly, from one
 end of the horizon to the other, she followed the octroi wall, behind
 which she sometimes heard, during night time, the shrieks of persons being
 murdered; and she searchingly looked into the remote angles, the dark
 corners, black with humidity and filth, fearing to discern there Lantier's
 body, stabbed to death.
 

 She looked at the endless gray wall that surrounded the city with its belt
 of desolation. When she raised her eyes higher, she became aware of a
 bright burst of sunlight. The dull hum of the city's awakening already
 filled the air. Craning her neck to look at the Poissonniere gate, she
 remained for a time watching the constant stream of men, horses, and carts
 which flooded down from the heights of Montmartre and La Chapelle, pouring
 between the two squat octroi lodges. It was like a herd of plodding
 cattle, an endless throng widened by sudden stoppages into eddies that
 spilled off the sidewalks into the street, a steady procession of laborers
 on their way back to work with tools slung over their back and a loaf of
 bread under their arm. This human inundation kept pouring down into Paris
 to be constantly swallowed up. Gervaise leaned further out at the risk of
 falling when she thought she recognized Lantier among the throng. She
 pressed the handkerchief tighter against her mouth, as though to push back
 the pain within her.
 

 The sound of a young and cheerful voice caused her to leave the window.
 

 "So the old man isn't here, Madame Lantier?"
 

 "Why, no, Monsieur Coupeau," she replied, trying to smile.
 

 Coupeau, a zinc-worker who occupied a ten franc room on the top floor,
 having seen the door unlocked, had walked in as friends will do.
 

 "You know," he continued, "I'm now working over there in the hospital.
 What beautiful May weather, isn't it? The air is rather sharp this
 morning."
 

 And he looked at Gervaise's face, red with weeping. When he saw that the
 bed had not been slept in, he shook his head gently; then he went to the
 children's couch where they were sleeping, looking as rosy as cherubs,
 and, lowering his voice, he said,
 

 "Come, the old man's not been home, has he? Don't worry yourself, Madame
 Lantier. He's very much occupied with politics. When they were voting for
 Eugene Sue the other day, he was acting almost crazy. He has very likely
 spent the night with some friends blackguarding crapulous Bonaparte."
 

 "No, no," she murmured with an effort. "You don't think that. I know where
 Lantier is. You see, we have our little troubles like the rest of the
 world!"
 

 Coupeau winked his eye, to indicate he was not a dupe of this falsehood;
 and he went off, after offering to fetch her milk, if she did not care to
 go out: she was a good and courageous woman, and might count upon him on
 any day of trouble.
 

 As soon as he was gone, Gervaise again returned to the window. At the
 Barriere, the tramp of the drove still continued in the morning air:
 locksmiths in short blue blouses, masons in white jackets, house painters
 in overcoats over long smocks. From a distance the crowd looked like a
 chalky smear of neutral hue composed chiefly of faded blue and dingy gray.
 When one of the workers occasionally stopped to light his pipe the others
 kept plodding past him, without sparing a laugh or a word to a comrade.
 With cheeks gray as clay, their eyes were continually drawn toward Paris
 which was swallowing them one by one.
 

 At both corners of the Rue des Poissonniers however, some of the men
 slackened their pace as they neared the doors of the two wine-dealers who
 were taking down their shutters; and, before entering, they stood on the
 edge of the pavement, looking sideways over Paris, with no strength in
 their arms and already inclined for a day of idleness. Inside various
 groups were already buying rounds of drinks, or just standing around,
 forgetting their troubles, crowding up the place, coughing, spitting,
 clearing their throats with sip after sip.
 

 Gervaise was watching Pere Colombe's wineshop to the left of the street,
 where she thought she had seen Lantier, when a stout woman, bareheaded and
 wearing an apron called to her from the middle of the roadway:
 

 "Hey, Madame Lantier, you're up very early!"
 

 Gervaise leaned out. "Why! It's you, Madame Boche! Oh! I've got a lot of
 work to-day!"
 

 "Yes, things don't do themselves, do they?"
 

 The conversation continued between roadway and window. Madame Boche was
 concierge of the building where the "Two-Headed Calf" was on the ground
 floor. Gervaise had waited for Lantier more than once in the concierge's
 lodge, so as not to be alone at table with all the men who ate at the
 restaurant. Madame Boche was going to a tailor who was late in mending an
 overcoat for her husband. She mentioned one of her tenants who had come in
 with a woman the night before and kept everybody awake past three in the
 morning. She looked at Gervaise with intense curiosity.
 

 "Is Monsieur Lantier, then, still in bed?" she asked abruptly.
 

 "Yes, he's asleep," replied Gervaise, who could not avoid blushing.
 

 Madame Boche saw the tears come into her eyes; and, satisfied no doubt,
 she turned to go, declaring men to be a cursed, lazy set. As she went off,
 she called back:
 

 "It's this morning you go to the wash-house, isn't it? I've something to
 wash, too. I'll keep you a place next to me, and we can chat together."
 Then, as if moved with sudden pity, she added:
 

 "My poor little thing, you had far better not remain there; you'll take
 harm. You look quite blue with cold."
 

 Gervaise still obstinately remained at the window during two mortal hours,
 till eight o'clock. Now all the shops had opened. Only a few work men were
 still hurrying along.
 

 The working girls now filled the boulevard: metal polishers, milliners,
 flower sellers, shivering in their thin clothing. In small groups they
 chattered gaily, laughing and glancing here and there. Occasionally there
 would be one girl by herself, thin, pale, serious-faced, picking her way
 along the city wall among the puddles and the filth.
 

 After the working girls, the office clerks came past, breathing upon their
 chilled fingers and munching penny rolls. Some of them are gaunt young
 fellows in ill-fitting suits, their tired eyes still fogged from sleep.
 Others are older men, stooped and tottering, with faces pale and drawn
 from long hours of office work and glancing nervously at their watches for
 fear of arriving late.
 

 In time the Boulevards settle into their usual morning quiet. Old folks
 come out to stroll in the sun. Tired young mothers in bedraggled skirts
 cuddle babies in their arms or sit on a bench to change diapers. Children
 run, squealing and laughing, pushing and shoving.
 

 Then Gervaise felt herself choking, dizzy with anguish, all hopes gone; it
 seemed to her that everything was ended, even time itself, and that
 Lantier would return no more. Her eyes vacantly wandered from the old
 slaughter-house, foul with butchery and with stench, to the new white
 hospital which, through the yawning openings of its ranges of windows,
 disclosed the naked wards, where death was preparing to mow. In front of
 her on the other side of the octroi wall the bright heavens dazzled her,
 with the rising sun which rose higher and higher over the vast awaking
 city.
 

 The young woman was seated on a chair, no longer crying, and with her
 hands abandoned on her lap, when Lantier quietly entered the room.
 

 "It's you! It's you!" she cried, rising to throw herself upon his neck.
 

 "Yes, it's me. What of it?" he replied. "You are not going to begin any of
 your nonsense, I hope!"
 

 He had pushed her aside. Then, with a gesture of ill-humor he threw his
 black felt hat to the chest of drawers. He was a young fellow of
 twenty-six years of age, short and very dark, with a handsome figure, and
 slight moustaches which his hand was always mechanically twirling. He wore
 a workman's overalls and an old soiled overcoat, which he had belted
 tightly at the waist, and he spoke with a strong Provencal accent.
 

 Gervaise, who had fallen back on her chair, gently complained, in short
 sentences: "I've not had a wink of sleep. I feared some harm had happened
 to you. Where have you been? Where did you spend the night? For heaven's
 sake! Don't do it again, or I shall go crazy. Tell me Auguste, where have
 you been?"
 

 "Where I had business, of course," he returned shrugging his shoulders.
 "At eight o'clock, I was at La Glaciere, with my friend who is to start a
 hat factory. We sat talking late, so I preferred to sleep there. Now, you
 know, I don't like being spied upon, so just shut up!"
 

 The young woman recommenced sobbing. The loud voices and the rough
 movements of Lantier, who upset the chairs, had awakened the children.
 They sat up in bed, half naked, disentangling their hair with their tiny
 hands, and, hearing their mother weep, they uttered terrible screams,
 crying also with their scarcely open eyes.
 

 "Ah! there's the music!" shouted Lantier furiously. "I warn you, I'll take
 my hook! And it will be for good, this time. You won't shut up? Then, good
 morning! I'll return to the place I've just come from."
 

 He had already taken his hat from off the chest of drawers. But Gervaise
 threw herself before him, stammering: "No, no!"
 

 And she hushed the little ones' tears with her caresses, smoothed their
 hair, and soothed them with soft words. The children, suddenly quieted,
 laughing on their pillow, amused themselves by punching each other. The
 father however, without even taking off his boots, had thrown himself on
 the bed looking worn out, his face bearing signs of having been up all
 night. He did not go to sleep, he lay with his eyes wide open, looking
 round the room.
 

 "It's a mess here!" he muttered. And after observing Gervaise a moment, he
 malignantly added: "Don't you even wash yourself now?"
 

 Gervaise was twenty-two, tall and slim with fine features, but she was
 already beginning to show the strain of her hard life. She seemed to have
 aged ten years from the hours of agonized weeping. Lantier's mean remark
 made her mad.
 

 "You're not fair," she said spiritedly. "You well know I do all I can.
 It's not my fault we find ourselves here. I would like to see you, with
 two children, in a room where there's not even a stove to heat some water.
 When we arrived in Paris, instead of squandering your money, you should
 have made a home for us at once, as you promised."
 

 "Listen!" Lantier exploded. "You cracked the nut with me; it doesn't
 become you to sneer at it now!"
 

 Apparently not listening, Gervaise went on with her own thought. "If we
 work hard we can get out of the hole we're in. Madame Fauconnier, the
 laundress on Rue Neuve, will start me on Monday. If you work with your
 friend from La Glaciere, in six months we will be doing well. We'll have
 enough for decent clothes and a place we can call our own. But we'll have
 to stick with it and work hard."
 

 Lantier turned over towards the wall, looking greatly bored. Then Gervaise
 lost her temper.
 

 "Yes, that's it, I know the love of work doesn't trouble you much. You're
 bursting with ambition, you want to be dressed like a gentleman. You don't
 think me nice enough, do you, now that you've made me pawn all my dresses?
 Listen, Auguste, I didn't intend to speak of it, I would have waited a bit
 longer, but I know where you spent the night; I saw you enter the
 'Grand-Balcony' with that trollop Adele. Ah! you choose them well! She's a
 nice one, she is! She does well to put on the airs of a princess! She's
 been the ridicule of every man who frequents the restaurant."
 

 At a bound Lantier sprang from the bed. His eyes had become as black as
 ink in his pale face. With this little man, rage blew like a tempest.
 

 "Yes, yes, of every man who frequents the restaurant!" repeated the young
 woman. "Madame Boche intends to give them notice, she and her long stick
 of a sister, because they've always a string of men after them on the
 staircase."
 

 Lantier raised his fists; then, resisting the desire of striking her, he
 seized hold of her by the arms, shook her violently and sent her sprawling
 upon the bed of the children, who recommenced crying. And he lay down
 again, mumbling, like a man resolving on something that he previously
 hesitated to do:
 

 "You don't know what you've done, Gervaise. You've made a big mistake;
 you'll see."
 

 For an instant the children continued sobbing. Their mother, who remained
 bending over the bed, held them both in her embrace, and kept repeating
 the same words in a monotonous tone of voice.
 

 "Ah! if it weren't for you! My poor little ones! If it weren't for you! If
 it weren't for you!"
 

 Stretched out quietly, his eyes raised to the faded strip of chintz,
 Lantier no longer listened, but seemed to be buried in a fixed idea. He
 remained thus for nearly an hour, without giving way to sleep, in spite of
 the fatigue which weighed his eyelids down.
 

 He finally turned toward Gervaise, his face set hard in determination. She
 had gotten the children up and dressed and had almost finished cleaning
 the room. The room looked, as always, dark and depressing with its sooty
 black ceiling and paper peeling from the damp walls. The dilapidated
 furniture was always streaked and dirty despite frequent dustings.
 Gervaise, devouring her grief, trying to assume a look of indifference,
 hurried over her work.
 

 Lantier watched as she tidied her hair in front of the small mirror
 hanging near the window. While she washed herself he looked at her bare
 arms and shoulders. He seemed to be making comparisons in his mind as his
 lips formed a grimace. Gervaise limped with her right leg, though it was
 scarcely noticeable except when she was tired. To-day, exhausted from
 remaining awake all night, she was supporting herself against the wall and
 dragging her leg.
 

 Neither one spoke, they had nothing more to say. Lantier seemed to be
 waiting, while Gervaise kept busy and tried to keep her countenance
 expressionless. Finally, while she was making a bundle of the dirty
 clothes thrown in a corner, behind the trunk, he at length opened his lips
 and asked:
 

 "What are you doing there? Where are you going?"
 

 She did not answer at first. Then, when he furiously repeated his
 question, she made up her mind, and said:
 

 "I suppose you can see for yourself. I'm going to wash all this. The
 children can't live in filth."
 

 He let her pick up two or three handkerchiefs. And, after a fresh pause,
 he resumed: "Have you got any money?"
 

 At these words she stood up and looked him full in the face, without
 leaving go of the children's dirty clothes, which she held in her hand.
 

 "Money! And where do you think I can have stolen any? You know well enough
 that I got three francs the day before yesterday on my black skirt. We've
 lunched twice off it, and money goes quick at the pork-butcher's. No, you
 may be quite sure I've no money. I've four sous for the wash-house. I
 don't have an extra income like some women."
 

 He let this allusion pass. He had moved off the bed, and was passing in
 review the few rags hanging about the room. He ended by taking up the pair
 of trousers and the shawl, and searching the drawers, he added two
 chemises and a woman's loose jacket to the parcel; then, he threw the
 whole bundle into Gervaise's arms, saying:
 

 "Here, go and pop this."
 

 "Don't you want me to pop the children as well?" asked she. "Eh! If they
 lent on children, it would be a fine riddance!"
 

 She went to the pawn-place, however. When she returned at the end of half
 an hour, she laid a hundred sou piece on the mantel-shelf, and added the
 ticket to the others, between the two candlesticks.
 

 "That's what they gave me," said she. "I wanted six francs, but I couldn't
 manage it. Oh! they'll never ruin themselves. And there's always such a
 crowd there!"
 

 Lantier did not pick up the five franc piece directly. He would rather
 that she got change, so as to leave her some of it. But he decided to slip
 it into his waistcoat pocket, when he noticed a small piece of ham wrapped
 up in paper, and the remains of a loaf on the chest of drawers.
 

 "I didn't dare go to the milkwoman's, because we owe her a week,"
 explained Gervaise. "But I shall be back early; you can get some bread and
 some chops whilst I'm away, and then we'll have lunch. Bring also a bottle
 of wine."
 

 He did not say no. Their quarrel seemed to be forgotten. The young woman
 was completing her bundle of dirty clothes. But when she went to take
 Lantier's shirts and socks from the bottom of the trunk, he called to her
 to leave them alone.
 

 "Leave my things, d'ye hear? I don't want 'em touched!"
 

 "What's it you don't want touched?" she asked, rising up. "I suppose you
 don't mean to put these filthy things on again, do you? They must be
 washed."
 

 She studied his boyishly handsome face, now so rigid that it seemed
 nothing could ever soften it. He angrily grabbed his things from her and
 threw them back into the trunk, saying:
 

 "Just obey me, for once! I tell you I won't have 'em touched!"
 

 "But why?" she asked, turning pale, a terrible suspicion crossing her
 mind. "You don't need your shirts now, you're not going away. What can it
 matter to you if I take them?"
 

 He hesitated for an instant, embarrassed by the piercing glance she fixed
 upon him. "Why—why—" stammered he, "because you go and tell
 everyone that you keep me, that you wash and mend. Well! It worries me,
 there! Attend to your own business and I'll attend to mine, washerwomen
 don't work for dogs."
 

 She supplicated, she protested she had never complained; but he roughly
 closed the trunk and sat down upon it, saying, "No!" to her face. He could
 surely do as he liked with what belonged to him! Then, to escape from the
 inquiring looks she leveled at him, he went and laid down on the bed
 again, saying that he was sleepy, and requesting her not to make his head
 ache with any more of her row. This time indeed, he seemed to fall asleep.
 Gervaise, for a while, remained undecided. She was tempted to kick the
 bundle of dirty clothes on one side, and to sit down and sew. But
 Lantier's regular breathing ended by reassuring her. She took the ball of
 blue and the piece of soap remaining from her last washing, and going up
 to the little ones who were quietly playing with some old corks in front
 of the window, she kissed them, and said in a low voice:
 

 "Be very good, don't make any noise; papa's asleep."
 

 When she left the room, Claude's and Etienne's gentle laughter alone
 disturbed the great silence beneath the blackened ceiling. It was ten
 o'clock. A ray of sunshine entered by the half open window.
 

 On the Boulevard, Gervaise turned to the left, and followed the Rue Neuve
 de la Goutte-d'Or. As she passed Madame Fauconnier's shop, she slightly
 bowed her head. The wash-house she was bound for was situated towards the
 middle of the street, at the part where the roadway commenced to ascend.
 

 The rounded, gray contours of the three large zinc wash tanks, studded
 with rivets, rose above the flat-roofed building. Behind them was the
 drying room, a high second story, closed in on all sides by narrow-slatted
 lattices so that the air could circulate freely, and through which laundry
 could be seen hanging on brass wires. The steam engine's smokestack
 exhaled puffs of white smoke to the right of the water tanks.
 

 Gervaise was used to puddles and did not bother to tuck her skirts up
 before making her way through the doorway, which was cluttered with jars
 of bleaching water. She was already acquainted with the mistress of the
 wash-house, a delicate little woman with red, inflamed eyes, who sat in a
 small glazed closet with account books in front of her, bars of soap on
 shelves, balls of blue in glass bowls, and pounds of soda done up in
 packets; and, as she passed, she asked for her beetle and her
 scouring-brush, which she had left to be taken care of the last time she
 had done her washing there. Then, after obtaining her number, she entered
 the wash-house.
 

 It was an immense shed, with large clear windows, and a flat ceiling,
 showing the beams supported on cast-iron pillars. Pale rays of light
 passed through the hot steam, which remained suspended like a milky fog.
 Smoke arose from certain corners, spreading about and covering the
 recesses with a bluish veil. A heavy moisture hung around, impregnated
 with a soapy odor, a damp insipid smell, continuous though at moments
 overpowered by the more potent fumes of the chemicals. Along the
 washing-places, on either side of the central alley, were rows of women,
 with bare arms and necks, and skirts tucked up, showing colored stockings
 and heavy lace-up shoes. They were beating furiously, laughing, leaning
 back to call out a word in the midst of the din, or stooping over their
 tubs, all of them brutal, ungainly, foul of speech, and soaked as though
 by a shower, with their flesh red and reeking.
 

 All around the women continuously flowed a river from hot-water buckets
 emptied with a sudden splash, cold-water faucets left dripping, soap suds
 spattering, and the dripping from rinsed laundry which was hung up. It
 splashed their feet and drained away across the sloping flagstones. The
 din of the shouting and the rhythmic beating was joined by the patter of
 steady dripping. It was slightly muffled by the moisture-soaked ceiling.
 Meanwhile, the steam engine could be heard as it puffed and snorted
 ceaselessly while cloaked in its white mist. The dancing vibration of its
 flywheel seemed to regulate the volume of the noisy turbulence.
 

 Gervaise passed slowly along the alley, looking to the right and left,
 carrying her laundry bundle under one arm, with one hip thrust high and
 limping more than usual. She was jostled by several women in the hubbub.
 

 "This way, my dear!" cried Madame Boche, in her loud voice. Then, when the
 young woman had joined her at the very end on the left, the concierge, who
 was furiously rubbing a dirty sock, began to talk incessantly, without
 leaving off her work. "Put your things there, I've kept your place. Oh, I
 sha'n't be long over what I've got. Boche scarcely dirties his things at
 all. And you, you won't be long either, will you? Your bundle's quite a
 little one. Before twelve o'clock we shall have finished, and we can go
 off to lunch. I used to send my things to a laundress in the Rue Poulet,
 but she destroyed everything with her chlorine and her brushes; so now I
 do the washing myself. It's so much saved; it only costs the soap. I say,
 you should have put those shirts to soak. Those little rascals of
 children, on my word! One would think their bodies were covered with
 soot."
 

 Gervaise, having undone her bundle, was spreading out the little ones'
 shirts, and as Madame Boche advised her to take a pailful of lye, she
 answered, "Oh, no! warm water will do. I'm used to it." She had sorted her
 laundry with several colored pieces to one side. Then, after filling her
 tub with four pails of cold water from the tap behind her, she plunged her
 pile of whites into it.
 

 "You're used to it?" repeated Madame Boche. "You were a washerwoman in
 your native place, weren't you, my dear?"
 

 Gervaise, with her sleeves pushed back, displayed the graceful arms of a
 young blonde, as yet scarcely reddened at the elbows, and started
 scrubbing her laundry. She spread a shirt out on the narrow rubbing board
 which was water-bleached and eroded by years of use. She rubbed soap into
 the shirt, turned it over, and soaped the other side. Before replying to
 Madame Boche she grasped her beetle and began to pound away so that her
 shouted phrases were punctuated with loud and rhythmic thumps.
 

 "Yes, yes, a washerwoman—When I was ten—That's twelve years
 ago—We used to go to the river—It smelt nicer there than it
 does here—You should have seen, there was a nook under the trees,
 with clear running water—You know, at Plassans—Don't you know
 Plassans?—It's near Marseilles."
 

 "How you go at it!" exclaimed Madame Boche, amazed at the strength of her
 blows. "You could flatten out a piece of iron with your little lady-like
 arms."
 

 The conversation continued in a very high volume. At times, the concierge,
 not catching what was said, was obliged to lean forward. All the linen was
 beaten, and with a will! Gervaise plunged it into the tub again, and then
 took it out once more, each article separately, to rub it over with soap a
 second time and brush it. With one hand she held the article firmly on the
 plank; with the other, which grasped the short couch-grass brush, she
 extracted from the linen a dirty lather, which fell in long drips. Then,
 in the slight noise caused by the brush, the two women drew together, and
 conversed in a more intimate way.
 

 "No, we're not married," resumed Gervaise. "I don't hide it. Lantier isn't
 so nice for any one to care to be his wife. If it weren't for the
 children! I was fourteen and he was eighteen when we had our first one. It
 happened in the usual way, you know how it is. I wasn't happy at home. Old
 man Macquart would kick me in the tail whenever he felt like it, for no
 reason at all. I had to have some fun outside. We might have been married,
 but—I forget why—our parents wouldn't consent."
 

 She shook her hands, which were growing red in the white suds. "The
 water's awfully hard in Paris."
 

 Madame Boche was now washing only very slowly. She kept leaving off,
 making her work last as long as she could, so as to remain there, to
 listen to that story, which her curiosity had been hankering to know for a
 fortnight past. Her mouth was half open in the midst of her big, fat face;
 her eyes, which were almost at the top of her head, were gleaming. She was
 thinking, with the satisfaction of having guessed right.
 

 "That's it, the little one gossips too much. There's been a row."
 

 Then, she observed out loud, "He isn't nice, then?"
 

 "Don't mention it!" replied Gervaise. "He used to behave very well in the
 country; but, since we've been in Paris, he's been unbearable. I must tell
 you that his mother died last year and left him some money—about
 seventeen hundred francs. He would come to Paris, so, as old Macquart was
 forever knocking me about without warning, I consented to come away with
 him. We made the journey with two children. He was to set me up as a
 laundress, and work himself at his trade of a hatter. We should have been
 very happy; but, you see, Lantier's ambitious and a spendthrift, a fellow
 who only thinks of amusing himself. In short, he's not worth much. On
 arriving, we went to the Hotel Montmartre, in the Rue Montmartre. And then
 there were dinners, and cabs, and the theatre; a watch for himself and a
 silk dress for me, for he's not unkind when he's got the money. You
 understand, he went in for everything, and so well that at the end of two
 months we were cleaned out. It was then that we came to live at the Hotel
 Boncoeur, and that this horrible life began."
 

 She interrupted herself. A lump had suddenly risen in her throat, and she
 could scarcely restrain her tears. She had finished brushing the things.
 

 "I must go and fetch my hot water," she murmured.
 

 But Madame Boche, greatly disappointed at this break off in the
 disclosures, called to the wash-house boy, who was passing, "My little
 Charles, kindly get madame a pail of hot water; she's in a hurry."
 

 The youth took the bucket and brought it back filled. Gervaise paid him;
 it was a sou the pailful. She poured the hot water into the tub, and
 soaped the things a last time with her hands, leaning over them in a mass
 of steam, which deposited small beads of grey vapor in her light hair.
 

 "Here put some soda in, I've got some by me," said the concierge,
 obligingly.
 

 And she emptied into Gervaise's tub what remained of a bag of soda which
 she had brought with her. She also offered her some of the chemical water,
 but the young woman declined it; it was only good for grease and wine
 stains.
 

 "I think he's rather a loose fellow," resumed Madame Boche, returning to
 Lantier, but without naming him.
 

 Gervaise, bent almost double, her hands all shriveled, and thrust in
 amongst the clothes, merely tossed her head.
 

 "Yes, yes," continued the other, "I have noticed several little things—"
 But she suddenly interrupted herself, as Gervaise jumped up, with a pale
 face, and staring wildly at her. Then she exclaimed, "Oh, no! I don't know
 anything! He likes to laugh a bit, I think, that's all. For instance, you
 know the two girls who lodge at my place, Adele and Virginie. Well, he
 larks about with 'em, but he just flirts for sport."
 

 The young woman standing before her, her face covered with perspiration,
 the water dripping from her arms, continued to stare at her with a fixed
 and penetrating look. Then the concierge got excited, giving herself a
 blow on the chest, and pledging her word of honor, she cried:
 

 "I know nothing, I mean it when I say so!"
 

 Then calming herself, she added in a gentle voice, as if speaking to a
 person on whom loud protestations would have no effect, "I think he has a
 frank look about the eyes. He'll marry you, my dear, I'm sure of it."
 

 Gervaise wiped her forehead with her wet hand. Shaking her head again, she
 pulled another garment out of the water. Both of them kept silence for a
 moment. The wash-house was quieting down, for eleven o'clock had struck.
 Half of the washerwomen were perched on the edge of their tubs, eating
 sausages between slices of bread and drinking from open bottles of wine.
 Only housewives who had come to launder small bundles of family linen were
 hurrying to finish.
 

 Occasional beetle blows could still be heard amid the subdued laughter and
 gossip half-choked by the greedy chewing of jawbones. The steam engine
 never stopped. Its vibrant, snorting voice seemed to fill the entire hall,
 though not one of the women even heard it. It was like the breathing of
 the wash-house, its hot breath collecting under the ceiling rafters in an
 eternal floating mist.
 

 The heat was becoming intolerable. Through the tall windows on the left
 sunlight was streaming in, touching the steamy vapors with opalescent
 tints of soft pinks and grayish blues. Charles went from window to window,
 letting down the heavy canvas awnings. Then he crossed to the shady side
 to open the ventilators. He was applauded by cries and hand clapping and a
 rough sort of gaiety spread around. Soon even the last of the
 beetle-pounding stopped.
 

 With full mouths, the washerwomen could only make gestures. It became so
 quiet that the grating sound of the fireman shoveling coal into the
 engine's firebox could be heard at regular intervals from far at the other
 end.
 

 Gervaise was washing her colored things in the hot water thick with
 lather, which she had kept for the purpose. When she had finished, she
 drew a trestle towards her and hung across it all the different articles;
 the drippings from which made bluish puddles on the floor; and she
 commenced rinsing. Behind her, the cold water tap was set running into a
 vast tub fixed to the ground, and across which were two wooden bars
 whereon to lay the clothes. High up in the air were two other bars for the
 things to finish dripping on.
 

 "We're almost finished, and not a bad job," said Madame Boche. "I'll wait
 and help you wring all that."
 

 "Oh! it's not worth while; I'm much obliged though," replied the young
 woman, who was kneading with her hands and sousing the colored things in
 some clean water. "If I'd any sheets, it would be another thing."
 

 But she had, however, to accept the concierge's assistance. They were
 wringing between them, one at each end, a woolen skirt of a washed-out
 chestnut color, from which dribbled a yellowish water, when Madame Boche
 exclaimed:
 

 "Why, there's tall Virginie! What has she come here to wash, when all her
 wardrobe that isn't on her would go into a pocket handkerchief?"
 

 Gervaise jerked her head up. Virginie was a girl of her own age, taller
 than she was, dark and pretty in spite of her face being rather long and
 narrow. She had on an old black dress with flounces, and a red ribbon
 round her neck; and her hair was done up carefully, the chignon being
 enclosed in a blue silk net. She stood an instant in the middle of the
 central alley, screwing up her eyes as though seeking someone; then, when
 she caught sight of Gervaise, she passed close to her, erect, insolent,
 and with a swinging gait, and took a place in the same row, five tubs away
 from her.
 

 "There's a freak for you!" continued Madame Boche in a lower tone of
 voice. "She never does any laundry, not even a pair of cuffs. A seamstress
 who doesn't even sew on a loose button! She's just like her sister, the
 brass burnisher, that hussy Adele, who stays away from her job two days
 out of three. Nobody knows who their folks are or how they make a living.
 Though, if I wanted to talk . . . What on earth is she scrubbing there? A
 filthy petticoat. I'll wager it's seen some lovely sights, that
 petticoat!"
 

 Madame Boche was evidently trying to make herself agreeable to Gervaise.
 The truth was she often took a cup of coffee with Adele and Virginia, when
 the girls had any money. Gervaise did not answer, but hurried over her
 work with feverish hands. She had just prepared her blue in a little tub
 that stood on three legs. She dipped in the linen things, and shook them
 an instant at the bottom of the colored water, the reflection of which had
 a pinky tinge; and after wringing them lightly, she spread them out on the
 wooden bars up above. During the time she was occupied with this work, she
 made a point of turning her back on Virginie. But she heard her chuckles;
 she could feel her sidelong glances. Virginie appeared only to have come
 there to provoke her. At one moment, Gervaise having turned around, they
 both stared into each other's faces.
 

 "Leave her alone," whispered Madame Boche. "You're not going to pull each
 other's hair out, I hope. When I tell you there's nothing to it! It isn't
 her, anyhow!"
 

 At this moment, as the young woman was hanging up the last article of
 clothing, there was a sound of laughter at the door of the wash-house.
 

 "Here are two brats who want their mamma!" cried Charles.
 

 All the women leant forward. Gervaise recognized Claude and Etienne. As
 soon as they caught sight of her, they ran to her through the puddles, the
 heels of their unlaced shoes resounding on the flagstones. Claude, the
 eldest, held his little brother by the hand. The women, as they passed
 them, uttered little exclamations of affection as they noticed their
 frightened though smiling faces. And they stood there, in front of their
 mother, without leaving go of each other's hands, and holding their fair
 heads erect.
 

 "Has papa sent you?" asked Gervaise.
 

 But as she stooped to tie the laces of Etienne's shoes, she saw the key of
 their room on one of Claude's fingers, with the brass number hanging from
 it.
 

 "Why, you've brought the key!" she said, greatly surprised. "What's that
 for?"
 

 The child, seeing the key which he had forgotten on his finger, appeared
 to recollect, and exclaimed in his clear voice:
 

 "Papa's gone away."
 

 "He's gone to buy the lunch, and told you to come here to fetch me?"
 

 Claude looked at his brother, hesitated, no longer recollecting. Then he
 resumed all in a breath: "Papa's gone away. He jumped off the bed, he put
 all the things in the trunk, he carried the trunk down to a cab. He's gone
 away."
 

 Gervaise, who was squatting down, slowly rose to her feet, her face
 ghastly pale. She put her hands to her cheeks and temples, as though she
 felt her head was breaking; and she could find only these words, which she
 repeated twenty times in the same tone of voice:
 

 "Ah! good heavens!—ah! good heavens!—ah! good heavens!"
 

 Madame Boche, however, also questioned the child, quite delighted at the
 chance of hearing the whole story.
 

 "Come, little one, you must tell us just what happened. It was he who
 locked the door and who told you to bring the key, wasn't it?" And,
 lowering her voice, she whispered in Claude's ear: "Was there a lady in
 the cab?"
 

 The child again got confused. Then he recommenced his story in a
 triumphant manner: "He jumped off the bed, he put all the things in the
 trunk. He's gone away."
 

 Then, when Madame Boche let him go, he drew his brother in front of the
 tap, and they amused themselves by turning on the water. Gervaise was
 unable to cry. She was choking, leaning back against her tub, her face
 still buried in her hands. Brief shudders rocked her body and she wailed
 out long sighs while pressing her hands tighter against her eyes, as
 though abandoning herself to the blackness of desolation, a dark, deep pit
 into which she seemed to be falling.
 

 "Come, my dear, pull yourself together!" murmured Madame Boche.
 

 "If you only knew! If you only knew!" said she at length very faintly. "He
 sent me this morning to pawn my shawl and my chemises to pay for that
 cab."
 

 And she burst out crying. The memory of the events of that morning and of
 her trip to the pawn-place tore from her the sobs that had been choking
 her throat. That abominable trip to the pawn-place was the thing that hurt
 most in all her sorrow and despair. Tears were streaming down her face but
 she didn't think of using her handkerchief.
 

 "Be reasonable, do be quiet, everyone's looking at you," Madame Boche, who
 hovered round her, kept repeating. "How can you worry yourself so much on
 account of a man? You loved him, then, all the same, did you, my poor
 darling? A little while ago you were saying all sorts of things against
 him; and now you're crying for him, and almost breaking your heart. Dear
 me, how silly we all are!"
 

 Then she became quite maternal.
 

 "A pretty little woman like you! Can it be possible? One may tell you
 everything now, I suppose. Well! You recollect when I passed under your
 window, I already had my suspicions. Just fancy, last night, when Adele
 came home, I heard a man's footsteps with hers. So I thought I would see
 who it was. I looked up the staircase. The fellow was already on the
 second landing; but I certainly recognized Monsieur Lantier's overcoat.
 Boche, who was on the watch this morning, saw him tranquilly nod adieu. He
 was with Adele, you know. Virginie has a situation now, where she goes
 twice a week. Only it's highly imprudent all the same, for they've only
 one room and an alcove, and I can't very well say where Virginie managed
 to sleep."
 

 She interrupted herself an instant, turned round, and then resumed,
 subduing her loud voice:
 

 "She's laughing at seeing you cry, that heartless thing over there. I'd
 stake my life that her washing's all a pretence. She's packed off the
 other two, and she's come here so as to tell them how you take it."
 

 Gervaise removed her hands from her face and looked. When she beheld
 Virginie in front of her, amidst three or four women, speaking low and
 staring at her, she was seized with a mad rage. Her arms in front of her,
 searching the ground, she stumbled forward a few paces. Trembling all
 over, she found a bucket full of water, grabbed it with both hands, and
 emptied it at Virginie.
 

 "The virago!" yelled tall Virginie.
 

 She had stepped back, and her boots alone got wet. The other women, who
 for some minutes past had all been greatly upset by Gervaise's tears,
 jostled each other in their anxiety to see the fight. Some, who were
 finishing their lunch, got on the tops of their tubs. Others hastened
 forward, their hands smothered with soap. A ring was formed.
 

 "Ah! the virago!" repeated tall Virginie. "What's the matter with her?
 She's mad!"
 

 Gervaise, standing on the defensive, her chin thrust out, her features
 convulsed, said nothing, not having yet acquired the Paris gift of street
 gab. The other continued:
 

 "Get out! This girl's tired of wallowing about in the country; she wasn't
 twelve years old when the soldiers were at her. She even lost her leg
 serving her country. That leg's rotting off."
 

 The lookers-on burst out laughing. Virginie, seeing her success, advanced
 a couple of steps, drawing herself up to her full height, and yelling
 louder than ever:
 

 "Here! Come a bit nearer, just to see how I'll settle you! Don't you come
 annoying us here. Do I even know her, the hussy? If she'd wetted me, I'd
 have pretty soon shown her battle, as you'd have seen. Let her just say
 what I've ever done to her. Speak, you vixen; what's been done to you?"
 

 "Don't talk so much," stammered Gervaise. "You know well enough. Some one
 saw my husband last night. And shut up, because if you don't I'll most
 certainly strangle you."
 

 "Her husband! That's a good one! As if cripples like her had husbands! If
 he's left you it's not my fault. Surely you don't think I've stolen him,
 do you? He was much too good for you and you made him sick. Did you keep
 him on a leash? Has anyone here seen her husband? There's a reward."
 

 The laughter burst forth again. Gervaise contented herself with
 continually murmuring in a low tone of voice:
 

 "You know well enough, you know well enough. It's your sister. I'll
 strangle her—your sister."
 

 "Yes, go and try it on with my sister," resumed Virginie sneeringly. "Ah!
 it's my sister! That's very likely. My sister looks a trifle different to
 you; but what's that to me? Can't one come and wash one's clothes in peace
 now? Just dry up, d'ye hear, because I've had enough of it!"
 

 But it was she who returned to the attack, after giving five or six
 strokes with her beetle, intoxicated by the insults she had been giving
 utterance to, and worked up into a passion. She left off and recommenced
 again, speaking in this way three times:
 

 "Well, yes! it's my sister. There now, does that satisfy you? They adore
 each other. You should just see them bill and coo! And he's left you with
 your children. Those pretty kids with scabs all over their faces! You got
 one of them from a gendarme, didn't you? And you let three others die
 because you didn't want to pay excess baggage on your journey. It's your
 Lantier who told us that. Ah! he's been telling some fine things; he'd had
 enough of you!"
 

 "You dirty jade! You dirty jade! You dirty jade!" yelled Gervaise, beside
 herself, and again seized with a furious trembling. She turned round,
 looking once more about the ground; and only observing the little tub, she
 seized hold of it by the legs, and flung the whole of the bluing at
 Virginie's face.
 

 "The beast! She's spoilt my dress!" cried the latter, whose shoulder was
 sopping wet and whose left hand was dripping blue. "Just wait, you
 wretch!"
 

 In her turn she seized a bucket, and emptied it over Gervaise. Then a
 formidable battle began. They both ran along the rows of tubs, seized hold
 of the pails that were full, and returned to dash the contents at each
 other's heads. And each deluge was accompanied by a volley of words.
 Gervaise herself answered now:
 

 "There, you scum! You got it that time. It'll help to cool you."
 

 "Ah! the carrion! That's for your filth. Wash yourself for once in your
 life."
 

 "Yes, yes, I'll wash the salt out of you, you cod!"
 

 "Another one! Brush your teeth, fix yourself up for your post to-night at
 the corner of the Rue Belhomme."
 

 They ended by having to refill the buckets at the water taps, continuing
 to insult each other the while. The initial bucketfuls were so poorly
 aimed as to scarcely reach their targets, but they soon began to splash
 each other in earnest. Virginie was the first to receive a bucketful in
 the face. The water ran down, soaking her back and front. She was still
 staggering when another caught her from the side, hitting her left ear and
 drenching her chignon which then came unwound into a limp, bedraggled
 string of hair.
 

 Gervaise was hit first in the legs. One pail filled her shoes full of
 water and splashed up to her thighs. Two more wet her even higher. Soon
 both of them were soaked from top to bottom and it was impossible to count
 the hits. Their clothes were plastered to their bodies and they looked
 shrunken. Water was dripping everywhere as from umbrellas in a rainstorm.
 

 "They look jolly funny!" said the hoarse voice of one of the women.
 

 Everyone in the wash-house was highly amused. A good space was left to the
 combatants, as nobody cared to get splashed. Applause and jokes circulated
 in the midst of the sluice-like noise of the buckets emptied in rapid
 succession! On the floor the puddles were running one into another, and
 the two women were wading in them up to their ankles. Virginie, however,
 who had been meditating a treacherous move, suddenly seized hold of a pail
 of lye, which one of her neighbors had left there and threw it. The same
 cry arose from all. Everyone thought Gervaise was scalded; but only her
 left foot had been slightly touched. And, exasperated by the pain, she
 seized a bucket, without troubling herself to fill it this time, and threw
 it with all her might at the legs of Virginie, who fell to the ground. All
 the women spoke together.
 

 "She's broken one of her limbs!"
 

 "Well, the other tried to cook her!"
 

 "She's right, after all, the blonde one, if her man's been taken from
 her!"
 

 Madame Boche held up her arms to heaven, uttering all sorts of
 exclamations. She had prudently retreated out of the way between two tubs;
 and the children, Claude and Etienne, crying, choking, terrified, clung to
 her dress with the continuous cry of "Mamma! Mamma!" broken by their sobs.
 When she saw Virginie fall she hastened forward, and tried to pull
 Gervaise away by her skirt, repeating the while,
 

 "Come now, go home! Be reasonable. On my word, it's quite upset me. Never
 was such a butchery seen before."
 

 But she had to draw back and seek refuge again between the two tubs, with
 the children. Virginie had just flown at Gervaise's throat. She squeezed
 her round the neck, trying to strangle her. The latter freed herself with
 a violent jerk, and in her turn hung on to the other's hair, as though she
 was trying to pull her head off. The battle was silently resumed, without
 a cry, without an insult. They did not seize each other round the body,
 they attacked each other's faces with open hands and clawing fingers,
 pinching, scratching whatever they caught hold of. The tall, dark girl's
 red ribbon and blue silk hair net were torn off. The body of her dress,
 giving way at the neck, displayed a large portion of her shoulder; whilst
 the blonde, half stripped, a sleeve gone from her loose white jacket
 without her knowing how, had a rent in her underlinen, which exposed to
 view the naked line of her waist. Shreds of stuff flew in all directions.
 It was from Gervaise that the first blood was drawn, three long scratches
 from the mouth to the chin; and she sought to protect her eyes, shutting
 them at every grab the other made, for fear of having them torn out. No
 blood showed on Virginie as yet. Gervaise aimed at her ears, maddened at
 not being able to reach them. At length she succeeded in seizing hold of
 one of the earrings—an imitation pear in yellow glass—which
 she pulled out and slit the ear, and the blood flowed.
 

 "They're killing each other! Separate them, the vixens!" exclaimed several
 voices.
 

 The other women had drawn nearer. They formed themselves into two camps.
 Some were cheering the combatants on as the others were trembling and
 turning their heads away saying that it was making them sick. A large
 fight nearly broke out between the two camps as the women called each
 other names and brandished their fists threateningly. Three loud slaps
 rang out.
 

 Madame Boche, meanwhile, was trying to discover the wash-house boy.
 

 "Charles! Charles! Wherever has he got to?"
 

 And she found him in the front rank, looking on with his arms folded. He
 was a big fellow, with an enormous neck. He was laughing and enjoying the
 sight of the skin which the two women displayed. The little blonde was as
 fat as a quail. It would be fun if her chemise burst open.
 

 "Why," murmured he, blinking his eye, "she's got a strawberry birthmark
 under her arm."
 

 "What! You're there!" cried Madame Boche, as she caught sight of him.
 "Just come and help us separate them. You can easily separate them, you
 can!"
 

 "Oh, no! thank you, not if I know it," said he coolly. "To get my eye
 scratched like I did the other day, I suppose! I'm not here for that sort
 of thing; I have enough to do without that. Don't be afraid, a little
 bleeding does 'em good; it'll soften 'em."
 

 The concierge then talked of fetching the police; but the mistress of the
 wash-house, the delicate young woman with the red, inflamed eyes, would
 not allow her to do this. She kept saying:
 

 "No, no, I won't; it'll compromise my establishment."
 

 The struggle on the ground continued. All on a sudden, Virginie raised
 herself up on her knees. She had just gotten hold of a beetle and held it
 on high. She had a rattle in her throat and in an altered voice, she
 exclaimed,
 

 "Here's something that'll settle you! Get your dirty linen ready!"
 

 Gervaise quickly thrust out her hand, and also seized a beetle, and held
 it up like a club; and she too spoke in a choking voice,
 

 "Ah! you want to wash. Let me get hold of your skin that I may beat it
 into dish-cloths!"
 

 For a moment they remained there, on their knees, menacing each other.
 Their hair all over their faces, their breasts heaving, muddy, swelling
 with rage, they watched one another, as they waited and took breath.
 Gervaise gave the first blow. Her beetle glided off Virginie's shoulder,
 and she at once threw herself on one side to avoid the latter's beetle,
 which grazed her hip. Then, warming to their work they struck at each
 other like washerwomen beating clothes, roughly, and in time. Whenever
 there was a hit, the sound was deadened, so that one might have thought it
 a blow in a tub full of water. The other women around them no longer
 laughed. Several had gone off saying that it quite upset them; those who
 remained stretched out their necks, their eyes lighted up with a gleam of
 cruelty, admiring the pluck displayed. Madame Boche had led Claude and
 Etienne away, and one could hear at the other end of the building the
 sound of their sobs, mingled with the sonorous shocks of the two beetles.
 But Gervaise suddenly yelled. Virginie had caught her a whack with all her
 might on her bare arm, just above the elbow. A large red mark appeared,
 the flesh at once began to swell. Then she threw herself upon Virginie,
 and everyone thought she was going to beat her to death.
 

 "Enough! Enough!" was cried on all sides.
 

 Her face bore such a terrible expression, that no one dared approach her.
 Her strength seemed to have increased tenfold. She seized Virginie round
 the waist, bent her down and pressed her face against the flagstones.
 Raising her beetle she commenced beating as she used to beat at Plassans,
 on the banks of the Viorne, when her mistress washed the clothes of the
 garrison. The wood seemed to yield to the flesh with a damp sound. At each
 whack a red weal marked the white skin.
 

 "Oh, oh!" exclaimed the boy Charles, opening his eyes to their full extent
 and gloating over the sight.
 

 Laughter again burst forth from the lookers-on, but soon the cry, "Enough!
 Enough!" recommenced. Gervaise heard not, neither did she tire. She
 examined her work, bent over it, anxious not to leave a dry place. She
 wanted to see the whole of that skin beaten, covered with contusions. And
 she talked, seized with a ferocious gaiety, recalling a washerwoman's
 song,
 

 "Bang! Bang! Margot at her tub.
 Bang! Bang! Beating rub-a-dub.
 Bang! Bang! Tries to wash her heart.
 Bang! Bang! Black with grief to part."

 
 And then she resumed,
 

 "That's for you, that's for your sister.
 That's for Lantier.
 When you next see them,
 You can give them that.
 Attention! I'm going to begin again.
 That's for Lantier, that's for your sister.
 That's for you.
 Bang! Bang! Margot at her tub.
 Bang! Bang! Beating rub-a-dub—"

 
 The others were obliged to drag Virginie away from her. The tall, dark
 girl, her face bathed in tears and purple with shame, picked up her things
 and hastened away. She was vanquished. Gervaise slipped on the sleeve of
 her jacket again, and fastened up her petticoats. Her arm pained her a
 good deal, and she asked Madame Boche to place her bundle of clothes on
 her shoulder. The concierge referred to the battle, spoke of her emotions,
 and talked of examining the young woman's person, just to see.
 

 "You may, perhaps, have something broken. I heard a tremendous blow."
 

 But Gervaise wanted to go home. She made no reply to the pitying remarks
 and noisy ovation of the other women who surrounded her, erect in their
 aprons. When she was laden she gained the door, where the children awaited
 her.
 

 "Two hours, that makes two sous," said the mistress of the wash-house,
 already back at her post in the glazed closet.
 

 Why two sous? She no longer understood that she was asked to pay for her
 place there. Then she gave the two sous; and limping very much beneath the
 weight of the wet clothes on her shoulder, the water dripping from off
 her, her elbow black and blue, her cheek covered with blood, she went off,
 dragging Claude and Etienne with her bare arms, whilst they trotted along
 on either side of her, still trembling, and their faces besmeared with
 their tears.
 

 Once she was gone, the wash-house resumed its roaring tumult. The
 washerwomen had eaten their bread and drunk their wine. Their faces were
 lit up and their spirits enlivened by the fight between Gervaise and
 Virginie.
 

 The long lines of tubs were astir again with the fury of thrashing arms,
 of craggy profiles, of marionettes with bent backs and slumping shoulders
 that twisted and jerked violently as though on hinges. Conversations went
 on from one end to the other in loud voices. Laughter and coarse remarks
 crackled through the ceaseless gurgling of the water. Faucets were
 sputtering, buckets spilling, rivulets flowing underneath the rows of
 washboards. Throughout the huge shed rising wisps of steam reflected a
 reddish tint, pierced here and there by disks of sunlight, golden globes
 that had leaked through holes in the awnings. The air was stiflingly warm
 and odorous with soap.
 

 Suddenly the hall was filled with a white mist. The huge copper lid of the
 lye-water kettle was rising mechanically along a notched shaft, and from
 the gaping copper hollow within its wall of bricks came whirling clouds of
 vapor. Meanwhile, at one side the drying machines were hard at work;
 within their cast-iron cylinders bundles of laundry were being wrung dry
 by the centrifugal force of the steam engine, which was still puffing,
 steaming, jolting the wash-house with the ceaseless labor of its iron
 limbs.
 

 When Gervaise turned into the entry of the Hotel Boncoeur, her tears again
 mastered her. It was a dark, narrow passage, with a gutter for the dirty
 water running alongside the wall; and the stench which she again
 encountered there caused her to think of the fortnight she had passed in
 the place with Lantier—a fortnight of misery and quarrels, the
 recollection of which was now a bitter regret. It seemed to bring her
 abandonment home to her.
 

 Upstairs the room was bare, in spite of the sunshine which entered through
 the open window. That blaze of light, that kind of dancing golden dust,
 exposed the lamentable condition of the blackened ceiling, and of the
 walls half denuded of paper, all the more. The only thing left hanging in
 the room was a woman's small neckerchief, twisted like a piece of string.
 The children's bedstead, drawn into the middle of the apartment, displayed
 the chest of drawers, the open drawers of which exposed their emptiness.
 Lantier had washed himself and had used up the last of the pomatum—two
 sous' worth of pomatum in a playing card; the greasy water from his hands
 filled the basin. And he had forgotten nothing. The corner which until
 then had been filled by the trunk seemed to Gervaise an immense empty
 space. Even the little mirror which hung on the window-fastening was gone.
 When she made this discovery, she had a presentiment. She looked on the
 mantel-piece. Lantier had taken away the pawn tickets; the pink bundle was
 no longer there, between the two odd zinc candlesticks.
 

 She hung her laundry over the back of a chair and just stood there, gazing
 around at the furniture. She was so dulled and bewildered that she could
 no longer cry. She had only one sou left. Then, hearing Claude and Etienne
 laughing merrily by the window, their troubles already forgotten, she went
 to them and put her arms about them, losing herself for a moment in
 contemplation of that long gray avenue where, that very morning, she had
 watched the awakening of the working population, of the immense work-shop
 of Paris.
 

 At this hour immense heat was rising from the pavement and from all the
 furnaces in the factories, setting alight a reflecting oven over the city
 and beyond the octroi wall. Out upon this very pavement, into this furnace
 blast, she had been tossed, alone with her little ones. As she glanced up
 and down the boulevard, she was seized with a dull dread that her life
 would be fixed there forever, between a slaughter-house and a hospital.
 

 
 
 

 Three weeks later, towards half-past eleven, one beautiful sunshiny day,
 Gervaise and Coupeau, the zinc-worker, were each partaking of a plum
 preserved in brandy, at "l'Assommoir" kept by Pere Colombe. Coupeau, who
 had been smoking a cigarette on the pavement, had prevailed on her to go
 inside as she returned from taking home a customer's washing; and her big
 square laundress's basket was on the floor beside her, behind the little
 zinc covered table.
 

 Pere Colombe's l'Assommoir was at the corner of Rue des Poissonniers and
 Boulevard de Rochechouart. The sign, in tall blue letters stretching from
 one end to the other said: Distillery. Two dusty oleanders planted in half
 casks stood beside the doorway. A long bar with its tin measuring cups was
 on the left as you entered. The large room was decorated with casks
 painted a gay yellow, bright with varnish, and gleaming with copper taps
 and hoops.
 

 On the shelves above the bar were liquor bottles, jars of fruit preserved
 in brandy, and flasks of all shapes. They completely covered the wall and
 were reflected in the mirror behind the bar as colorful spots of apple
 green, pale gold, and soft brown. The main feature of the establishment,
 however, was the distilling apparatus. It was at the rear, behind an oak
 railing in a glassed-in area. The customers could watch its functioning,
 long-necked still-pots, copper worms disappearing underground, a devil's
 kitchen alluring to drink-sodden work men in search of pleasant dreams.
 

 L'Assommoir was nearly empty at the lunch hour. Pere Colombe, a heavy man
 of forty, was serving a ten year old girl who had asked him to place four
 sous' worth of brandy into her cup. A shaft of sunlight came through the
 entrance to warm the floor which was always damp from the smokers'
 spitting. From everything, the casks, the bar, the entire room, a
 liquorish odor arose, an alcoholic aroma which seemed to thicken and
 befuddle the dust motes dancing in the sunlight.
 

 Coupeau was making another cigarette. He was very neat, in a short blue
 linen blouse and cap, and was laughing and showing his white teeth. With a
 projecting under jaw and a slightly snub nose, he had handsome chestnut
 eyes, and the face of a jolly dog and a thorough good fellow. His coarse
 curly hair stood erect. His skin still preserved the softness of his
 twenty-six years. Opposite to him, Gervaise, in a thin black woolen dress,
 and bareheaded, was finishing her plum which she held by the stalk between
 the tips of her fingers. They were close to the street, at the first of
 the four tables placed alongside the barrels facing the bar.
 

 When the zinc-worker had lit his cigarette, he placed his elbows on the
 table, thrust his face forward, and for an instant looked without speaking
 at the young woman, whose pretty fair face had that day the milky
 transparency of china. Then, alluding to a matter known to themselves
 alone, and already discussed between them, he simply asked in a low voice:
 

 "So it's to be 'no'? you say 'no'?"
 

 "Oh! most decidedly 'no' Monsieur Coupeau," quietly replied Gervaise with
 a smile. "I hope you're not going to talk to me about that here. You know
 you promised me you would be reasonable. Had I known, I wouldn't have let
 you treat me."
 

 Coupeau kept silence, looking at her intently with a boldness. She sat
 still, at ease and friendly. At the end of a brief silence she added:
 

 "You can't really mean it. I'm an old woman; I've a big boy eight years
 old. Whatever could we two do together?"
 

 "Why!" murmured Coupeau, blinking his eyes, "what the others do, of
 course, get married!"
 

 She made a gesture of feeling annoyed. "Oh! do you think it's always
 pleasant? One can very well see you've never seen much of living. No,
 Monsieur Coupeau, I must think of serious things. Burdening oneself never
 leads to anything, you know! I've two mouths at home which are never tired
 of swallowing, I can tell you! How do you suppose I can bring up my little
 ones, if I only sit here talking indolently? And listen, besides that, my
 misfortune has been a famous lesson to me. You know I don't care a bit
 about men now. They won't catch me again for a long while."
 

 She spoke with such cool objectivity that it was clear she had resolved
 this in her mind, turning it about thoroughly.
 

 Coupeau was deeply moved and kept repeating: "I feel so sorry for you. It
 causes me a great deal of pain."
 

 "Yes, I know that," resumed she, "and I am sorry, Monsieur Coupeau. But
 you mustn't take it to heart. If I had any idea of enjoying myself, mon
 Dieu!, I would certainly rather be with you than anyone else. You're a
 good boy and gentle. Only, where's the use, as I've no inclination to wed?
 I've been for the last fortnight, now, at Madame Fauconnier's. The
 children go to school. I've work, I'm contented. So the best is to remain
 as we are, isn't it?"
 

 And she stooped down to take her basket.
 

 "You're making me talk; they must be expecting me at the shop. You'll
 easily find someone else prettier than I, Monsieur Coupeau, and who won't
 have two boys to drag about with her."
 

 He looked at the clock inserted in the frame-work of the mirror, and made
 her sit down again, exclaiming:
 

 "Don't be in such a hurry! It's only eleven thirty-five. I've still
 twenty-five minutes. You don't have to be afraid that I shall do anything
 foolish; there's the table between us. So you detest me so much that you
 won't stay and have a little chat with me."
 

 She put her basket down again, so as not to disoblige him; and they
 conversed like good friends. She had eaten her lunch before going out with
 the laundry. He had gulped down his soup and beef hurriedly to be able to
 wait for her. All the while she chatted amiably, Gervaise kept looking out
 the window at the activity on the street. It was now unusually crowded
 with the lunch time rush.
 

 Everywhere were hurried steps, swinging arms, and pushing elbows. Some
 late comers, hungry and angry at being kept extra long at the job, rushed
 across the street into the bakery. They emerged with a loaf of bread and
 went three doors farther to the Two-Headed Calf to gobble down a six-sou
 meat dish.
 

 Next door to the bakery was a grocer who sold fried potatoes and mussels
 cooked with parsley. A procession of girls went in to get hot potatoes
 wrapped in paper and cups of steaming mussels. Other pretty girls bought
 bunches of radishes. By leaning a bit, Gervaise could see into the sausage
 shop from which children issued, holding a fried chop, a sausage or a
 piece of hot blood pudding wrapped in greasy paper. The street was always
 slick with black mud, even in clear weather. A few laborers had already
 finished their lunch and were strolling aimlessly about, their open hands
 slapping their thighs, heavy from eating, slow and peaceful amid the
 hurrying crowd. A group formed in front of the door of l'Assommoir.
 

 "Say, Bibi-the-Smoker," demanded a hoarse voice, "aren't you going to buy
 us a round of vitriol?"
 

 Five laborers came in and stood by the bar.
 

 "Ah! Here's that thief, Pere Colombe!" the voice continued. "We want the
 real old stuff, you know. And full sized glasses, too."
 

 Pere Colombe served them as three more laborers entered. More blue smocks
 gathered on the street corner and some pushed their way into the
 establishment.
 

 "You're foolish! You only think of the present," Gervaise was saying to
 Coupeau. "Sure, I loved him, but after the disgusting way in which he left
 me—"
 

 They were talking of Lantier. Gervaise had not seen him again; she thought
 he was living with Virginie's sister at La Glaciere, in the house of that
 friend who was going to start a hat factory. She had no thought of running
 after him. She had been so distressed at first that she had thought of
 drowning herself in the river. But now that she had thought about it,
 everything seemed to be for the best. Lantier went through money so fast,
 that she probably never could have raised her children properly. Oh, she'd
 let him see his children, all right, if he bothered to come round. But as
 far as she was concerned, she didn't want him to touch her, not even with
 his finger tips.
 

 She told all this to Coupeau just as if her plan of life was well settled.
 Meanwhile, Coupeau never forgot his desire to possess her. He made a jest
 of everything she said, turning it into ribaldry and asking some very
 direct questions about Lantier. But he proceeded so gaily and which such a
 smile that she never thought of being offended.
 

 "So, you're the one who beat him," said he at length. "Oh! you're not
 kind. You just go around whipping people."
 

 She interrupted him with a hearty laugh. It was true, though, she had
 whipped Virginie's tall carcass. She would have delighted in strangling
 someone on that day. She laughed louder than ever when Coupeau told her
 that Virginie, ashamed at having shown so much cowardice, had left the
 neighborhood. Her face, however, preserved an expression of childish
 gentleness as she put out her plump hands, insisting she wouldn't even
 harm a fly.
 

 She began to tell Coupeau about her childhood at Plassans. She had never
 cared overmuch for men; they had always bored her. She was fourteen when
 she got involved with Lantier. She had thought it was nice because he said
 he was her husband and she had enjoyed playing a housewife. She was too
 soft-hearted and too weak. She always got passionately fond of people who
 caused her trouble later. When she loved a man, she wasn't thinking of
 having fun in the present; she was dreaming about being happy and living
 together forever.
 

 And as Coupeau, with a chuckle, spoke of her two children, saying they
 hadn't come from under a bolster, she slapped his fingers; she added that
 she was, no doubt made on the model of other women; women thought of their
 home, slaved to keep the place clean and tidy, and went to bed too tired
 at night not to go to sleep at once. Besides, she resembled her mother, a
 stout laboring woman who died at her work and who had served as beast of
 burden to old Macquart for more than twenty years. Her mother's shoulders
 had been heavy enough to smash through doors, but that didn't prevent her
 from being soft-hearted and madly attracted to people. And if she limped a
 little, she no doubt owed that to the poor woman, whom old Macquart used
 to belabor with blows. Her mother had told her about the times when
 Macquart came home drunk and brutally bruised her. She had probably been
 born with her lame leg as a result of one of those times.
 

 "Oh! it's scarcely anything, it's hardly perceptible," said Coupeau
 gallantly.
 

 She shook her head; she knew well enough that it could be seen; at forty
 she would look broken in two. Then she added gently, with a slight laugh:
 "It's a funny fancy of yours to fall in love with a cripple."
 

 With his elbows still on the table, he thrust his face closer to hers and
 began complimenting her in rather dubious language as though to intoxicate
 her with his words. But she kept shaking her head "no," and didn't allow
 herself to be tempted although she was flattered by the tone of his voice.
 While listening, she kept looking out the window, seeming to be fascinated
 by the interesting crowd of people passing.
 

 The shops were now almost empty. The grocer removed his last panful of
 fried potatoes from the stove. The sausage man arranged the dishes
 scattered on his counter. Great bearded workmen were as playful as young
 boys, clumping along in their hobnailed boots. Other workmen were smoking,
 staring up into the sky and blinking their eyes. Factory bells began to
 ring in the distance, but the workers, in no hurry, relit their pipes.
 Later, after being tempted by one wineshop after another, they finally
 decided to return to their jobs, but were still dragging their feet.
 

 Gervaise amused herself by watching three workmen, a tall fellow and two
 short ones who turned to look back every few yards; they ended by
 descending the street, and came straight to Pere Colombe's l'Assommoir.
 

 "Ah, well," murmured she, "there're three fellows who don't seem inclined
 for work!"
 

 "Why!" said Coupeau, "I know the tall one, it's My-Boots, a comrade of
 mine."
 

 Pere Colombe's l'Assommoir was now full. You had to shout to be heard.
 Fists often pounded on the bar, causing the glasses to clink. Everyone was
 standing, hands crossed over belly or held behind back. The drinking
 groups crowded close to one another. Some groups, by the casks, had to
 wait a quarter of an hour before being able to order their drinks of Pere
 Colombe.
 

 "Hallo! It's that aristocrat, Young Cassis!" cried My-Boots, bringing his
 hand down roughly on Coupeau's shoulder. "A fine gentleman, who smokes
 paper, and wears shirts! So we want to do the grand with our sweetheart;
 we stand her little treats!"
 

 "Shut up! Don't bother me!" replied Coupeau, greatly annoyed.
 

 But the other added, with a chuckle, "Right you are! We know what's what,
 my boy. Muffs are muffs, that's all!"
 

 He turned his back after leering terribly as he looked at Gervaise. The
 latter drew back, feeling rather frightened. The smoke from the pipes, the
 strong odor of all those men, ascended in the air, already foul with the
 fumes of alcohol; and she felt a choking sensation in her throat, and
 coughed slightly.
 

 "Oh, what a horrible thing it is to drink!" said she in a low voice.
 

 And she related that formerly at Plassans she used to drink anisette with
 her mother. But on one occasion it nearly killed her, and that disgusted
 her with it; now, she could never touch any liqueurs.
 

 "You see," added she, pointing to her glass, "I've eaten my plum; only I
 must leave the juice, because it would make me ill."
 

 For himself, Coupeau couldn't understand how anyone could drink glass
 after glass of cheap brandy. A brandied plum occasionally could not hurt,
 but as for cheap brandy, absinthe and the other strong stuff, no, not for
 him, no matter how much his comrades teased him about it. He stayed out on
 the sidewalk when his friends went into low establishments. Coupeau's
 father had smashed his head open one day when he fell from the eaves of
 No. 25 on Rue Coquenard. He was drunk. This memory keeps Coupeau's entire
 family from the drink. Every time Coupeau passed that spot, he thought he
 would rather lick up water from the gutter than accept a free drink in a
 bar. He would always say: "In our trade, you have to have steady legs."
 

 Gervaise had taken up her basket again. She did not rise from her seat
 however, but held the basket on her knees, with a vacant look in her eyes
 and lost in thought, as though the young workman's words had awakened
 within her far-off thoughts of existence. And she said again, slowly, and
 without any apparent change of manner:
 

 "Mon Dieu! I'm not ambitious; I don't ask for much. My desire is to
 work in peace, always to have bread to eat and a decent place to sleep in,
 you know; with a bed, a table, and two chairs, nothing more. If I can, I'd
 like to raise my children to be good citizens. Also, I'd like not to be
 beaten up, if I ever again live with a man. It's not my idea of
 amusement." She pondered, thinking if there was anything else she wanted,
 but there wasn't anything of importance. Then, after a moment she went on,
 "Yes, when one reaches the end, one might wish to die in one's bed. For
 myself, having trudged through life, I should like to die in my bed, in my
 own home."
 

 And she rose from her seat. Coupeau, who cordially approved her wishes,
 was already standing up, anxious about the time. But they did not leave
 yet. Gervaise was curious enough to go to the far end of the room for a
 look at the big still behind the oak railing. It was chugging away in the
 little glassed-in courtyard. Coupeau explained its workings to her,
 pointing at the different parts of the machinery, showing her the
 trickling of the small stream of limpid alcohol. Not a single gay puff of
 steam was coming forth from the endless coils. The breathing could barely
 be heard. It sounded muffled as if from underground. It was like a sombre
 worker, performing dark deeds in the bright daylight, strong but silent.
 

 My-Boots, accompanied by his two comrades, came to lean on the railing
 until they could get a place at the bar. He laughed, looking at the
 machine. Tonnerre de Dieu, that's clever. There's enough stuff in
 its big belly to last for weeks. He wouldn't mind if they just fixed the
 end of the tube in his mouth, so he could feel the fiery spirits flowing
 down to his heels like a river. It would be better than the tiny sips
 doled out by Pere Colombe! His two comrades laughed with him, saying that
 My-Boots was quite a guy after all.
 

 The huge still continued to trickle forth its alcoholic sweat. Eventually
 it would invade the bar, flow out along the outer Boulevards, and inundate
 the immense expanse of Paris.
 

 Gervaise stepped back, shivering. She tried to smile as she said:
 

 "It's foolish, but that still and the liquor gives me the creeps."
 

 Then, returning to the idea she nursed of a perfect happiness, she
 resumed: "Now, ain't I right? It's much the nicest isn't it—to have
 plenty of work, bread to eat, a home of one's own, and to be able to bring
 up one's children and to die in one's bed?"
 

 "And never to be beaten," added Coupeau gaily. "But I would never beat
 you, if you would only try me, Madame Gervaise. You've no cause for fear.
 I don't drink and then I love you too much. Come, shall it be marriage?
 I'll get you divorced and make you my wife."
 

 He was speaking low, whispering at the back of her neck while she made her
 way through the crowd of men with her basket held before her. She kept
 shaking her head "no." Yet she turned around to smile at him, apparently
 happy to know that he never drank. Yes, certainly, she would say "yes" to
 him, except she had already sworn to herself never to start up with
 another man. Eventually they reached the door and went out.
 

 When they left, l'Assommoir was packed to the door, spilling its hubbub of
 rough voices and its heavy smell of vitriol into the street. My-Boots
 could be heard railing at Pere Colombe, calling him a scoundrel and
 accusing him of only half filling his glass. He didn't have to come in
 here. He'd never come back. He suggested to his comrades a place near the
 Barriere Saint-Denis where you drank good stuff straight.
 

 "Ah," sighed Gervaise when they reached the sidewalk. "You can breathe out
 here. Good-bye, Monsieur Coupeau, and thank you. I must hurry now."
 

 He seized her hand as she started along the boulevard, insisting, "Take a
 walk with me along Rue de la Goutte-d'Or. It's not much farther for you.
 I've got to see my sister before going back to work. We'll keep each other
 company."
 

 In the end, Gervaise agreed and they walked beside each other along the
 Rue des Poissonniers, although she did not take his arm. He told her about
 his family. His mother, an old vest-maker, now had to do housekeeping
 because her eyesight was poor. Her birthday was the third of last month
 and she was sixty-two. He was the youngest. One of his sisters, a widow of
 thirty-six, worked in a flower shop and lived in the Batignolles section,
 on Rue des Moines. The other sister was thirty years old now. She had
 married a deadpan chainmaker named Lorilleux. That's where he was going
 now. They lived in a big tenement on the left side. He ate with them in
 the evenings; it saved a bit for all of them. But he had been invited out
 this evening and he was going to tell her not to expect him.
 

 Gervaise, who was listening to him, suddenly interrupted him to ask, with
 a smile: "So you're called 'Young Cassis,' Monsieur Coupeau?"
 

 "Oh!" replied he, "it's a nickname my mates have given me because I
 generally drink 'cassis' when they force me to accompany them to the
 wineshop. It's no worse to be called Young Cassis than My-Boots, is it?"
 

 "Of course not. Young Cassis isn't an ugly name," observed the young
 woman.
 

 And she questioned him about his work. He was still working there, behind
 the octroi wall at the new hospital. Oh! there was no want of work, he
 would not be finished there for a year at least. There were yards and
 yards of gutters!
 

 "You know," said he, "I can see the Hotel Boncoeur when I'm up there.
 Yesterday you were at the window, and I waved my arms, but you didn't
 notice me."
 

 They had already gone about a hundred paces along the Rue de la
 Goutte-d'Or, when he stood still and raising his eyes, said:
 

 "That's the house. I was born farther on, at No. 22. But this house is,
 all the same, a fine block of masonry! It's as big as a barrack inside!"
 

 Gervaise looked up, examining the facade. On the street side, the tenement
 had five stories, each with fifteen windows, whose black shutters with
 their broken slats gave an air of desolation to the wide expanse of wall.
 Four shops occupied the ground floor. To the right of the entrance, a
 large, greasy hash house, and to the left, a coal dealer, a notions
 seller, and an umbrella merchant. The building appeared even larger than
 it was because it had on each side a small, low building which seemed to
 lean against it for support. This immense, squared-off building was
 outlined against the sky. Its unplastered side walls were as bare as
 prison walls, except for rows of roughly jutting stones which suggested
 jaws full of decayed teeth yawning vacantly.
 

 Gervaise was gazing at the entrance with interest. The high, arched
 doorway rose to the second floor and opened onto a deep porch, at the end
 of which could be seen the pale daylight of a courtyard. This entranceway
 was paved like the street, and down the center flowed a streamlet of
 pink-stained water.
 

 "Come in," said Coupeau, "no one will eat you."
 

 Gervaise wanted to wait for him in the street. However, she could not
 resist going through the porch as far as the concierge's room on the
 right. And there, on the threshold, she raised her eyes. Inside, the
 building was six stories high, with four identical plain walls enclosing
 the broad central court. The drab walls were corroded by yellowish spots
 and streaked by drippings from the roof gutters. The walls went straight
 up to the eaves with no molding or ornament except the angles on the drain
 pipes at each floor. Here the sink drains added their stains. The glass
 window panes resembled murky water. Mattresses of checkered blue ticking
 were hanging out of several windows to air. Clothes lines stretched from
 other windows with family washing hanging to dry. On a third floor line
 was a baby's diaper, still implanted with filth. This crowded tenement was
 bursting at the seams, spilling out poverty and misery through every
 crevice.
 

 Each of the four walls had, at ground level, a narrow entrance, plastered
 without a trace of woodwork. This opened into a vestibule containing a
 dirt-encrusted staircase which spiraled upward. They were each labeled
 with one of the first four letters of the alphabet painted on the wall.
 

 Several large work-shops with weather-blackened skylights were scattered
 about the court. Near the concierge's room was the dyeing establishment
 responsible for the pink streamlet. Puddles of water infested the
 courtyard, along with wood shavings and coal cinders. Grass and weeds grew
 between the paving stones. The unforgiving sunlight seemed to cut the
 court into two parts. On the shady side was a dripping water tap with
 three small hens scratching for worms with their filth-smeared claws.
 

 Gervaise slowly gazed about, lowering her glance from the sixth floor to
 the paving stones, then raising it again, surprised at the vastness,
 feeling as it were in the midst of a living organ, in the very heart of a
 city, and interested in the house, as though it were a giant before her.
 

 "Is madame seeking for any one?" called out the inquisitive concierge,
 emerging from her room.
 

 The young woman explained that she was waiting for a friend. She returned
 to the street; then as Coupeau did not come, she went back to the
 courtyard seized with the desire to take another look. She did not think
 the house ugly. Amongst the rags hanging from the windows she discovered
 various cheerful touches—a wall-flower blooming in a pot, a cage of
 chirruping canaries, shaving-glasses shining like stars in the depth of
 the shadow. A carpenter was singing in his work-shop, accompanied by the
 whining of his plane. The blacksmith's hammers were ringing rhythmically.
 

 In contrast to the apparent wretched poverty, at nearly every open window
 appeared the begrimed faces of laughing children. Women with peaceful
 faces could be seen bent over their sewing. The rooms were empty of men
 who had gone back to work after lunch. The whole tenement was tranquil
 except for the sounds from the work-shops below which served as a sort of
 lullaby that went on, unceasingly, always the same.
 

 The only thing she did not like was the courtyard's dampness. She would
 want rooms at the rear, on the sunny side. Gervaise took a few more steps
 into the courtyard, inhaling the characteristic odor of the slums,
 comprised of dust and rotten garbage. But the sharp odor of the waste
 water from the dye shop was strong, and Gervaise thought it smelled better
 here than at the Hotel Boncoeur. She chose a window for herself, the one
 at the far left with a small window box planted with scarlet runners.
 

 "I'm afraid I've kept you waiting rather a long time," said Coupeau, whom
 she suddenly heard close beside her. "They always make an awful fuss
 whenever I don't dine with them, and it was worse than ever to-day as my
 sister had bought some veal."
 

 And as Gervaise had slightly started with surprise, he continued glancing
 around in his turn:
 

 "You were looking at the house. It's always all let from the top to the
 bottom. There are three hundred lodgers, I think. If I had any furniture,
 I would have secured a small room. One would be comfortable here, don't
 you think so?"
 

 "Yes, one would be comfortable," murmured Gervaise. "In our street at
 Plassans there weren't near so many people. Look, that's pretty—that
 window up on the fifth floor, with the scarlet runners."
 

 The zinc-worker's obstinate desire made him ask her once more whether she
 would or she wouldn't. They could rent a place here as soon as they found
 a bed. She hurried out the arched entranceway, asking him not to start
 that subject again. There was as much chance of this building collapsing
 as there was of her sleeping under the same blanket with him. Still, when
 Coupeau left her in front of Madame Fauconnier's shop, he was allowed to
 hold her hand for a moment.
 

 For a month the young woman and the zinc-worker were the best of friends.
 He admired her courage, when he beheld her half killing herself with work,
 keeping her children tidy and clean, and yet finding time at night to do a
 little sewing. Often other women were hopelessly messy, forever nibbling
 or gadding about, but she wasn't like them at all. She was much too
 serious. Then she would laugh, and modestly defend herself. It was her
 misfortune that she had not always been good, having been with a man when
 only fourteen. Then too, she had often helped her mother empty a bottle of
 anisette. But she had learned a few things from experience. He was wrong
 to think of her as strong-willed; her will power was very weak. She had
 always let herself be pushed into things because she didn't want to hurt
 someone's feelings. Her one hope now was to live among decent people, for
 living among bad people was like being hit over the head. It cracks your
 skull. Whenever she thought of the future, she shivered. Everything she
 had seen in life so far, especially when a child, had given her lessons to
 remember.
 

 Coupeau, however, chaffed her about her gloomy thoughts, and brought back
 all her courage by trying to pinch her hips. She pushed him away from her,
 and slapped his hands, whilst he called out laughingly that, for a weak
 woman, she was not a very easy capture. He, who always joked about
 everything did not trouble himself regarding the future. One day followed
 another, that was all. There would always be somewhere to sleep and a bite
 to eat. The neighborhood seemed decent enough to him, except for a gang of
 drunkards that ought to be cleaned out of the gutters.
 

 Coupeau was not a bad sort of fellow. He sometimes had really sensible
 things to say. He was something of a dandy with his Parisian working man's
 gift for banter, a regular gift of gab, and besides, he was attractive.
 

 They had ended by rendering each other all sorts of services at the Hotel
 Boncoeur. Coupeau fetched her milk, ran her errands, carried her bundles
 of clothes; often of an evening, as he got home first from work, he took
 the children for a walk on the exterior Boulevard. Gervaise, in return for
 his polite attentions, would go up into the narrow room at the top of the
 house where he slept, and see to his clothes, sewing buttons on his blue
 linen trousers, and mending his linen jackets. A great familiarity existed
 between them. She was never bored when he was around. The gay songs he
 sang amused her, and so did his continuous banter of jokes and jibes
 characteristic of the Paris streets, this being still new to her.
 

 On Coupeau's side, this continual familiarity inflamed him more and more
 until it began to seriously bother him. He began to feel tense and uneasy.
 He continued with his foolish talk, never failing to ask her, "When will
 it be?" She understood what he meant and teased him. He would then come to
 visit her carrying his bedroom slippers, as if he were moving in. She
 joked about it and continued calmly without blushing at the allusions with
 which he was always surrounding her. She stood for anything from him as
 long as he didn't get rough. She only got angry once when he pulled a
 strand of her hair while trying to force a kiss from her.
 

 Towards the end of June, Coupeau lost his liveliness. He became most
 peculiar. Gervaise, feeling uneasy at some of his glances, barricaded
 herself in at night. Then, after having sulked ever since the Sunday, he
 suddenly came on the Tuesday night about eleven o'clock and knocked at her
 room. She would not open to him; but his voice was so gentle and so
 trembling that she ended by removing the chest of drawers she had pushed
 against the door. When he entered, she thought he was ill; he looked so
 pale, his eyes were so red, and the veins on his face were all swollen.
 And he stood there, stuttering and shaking his head. No, no, he was not
 ill. He had been crying for two hours upstairs in his room; he wept like a
 child, biting his pillow so as not to be heard by the neighbors. For three
 nights past he had been unable to sleep. It could not go on like that.
 

 "Listen, Madame Gervaise," said he, with a swelling in his throat and on
 the point of bursting out crying again; "we must end this, mustn't we?
 We'll go and get married. It's what I want. I've quite made up my mind."
 

 Gervaise showed great surprise. She was very grave.
 

 "Oh! Monsieur Coupeau," murmured she, "whatever are you thinking of? You
 know I've never asked you for that. I didn't care about it—that was
 all. Oh, no, no! it's serious now; think of what you're saying, I beg of
 you."
 

 But he continued to shake his head with an air of unalterable resolution.
 He had already thought it all over. He had come down because he wanted to
 have a good night. She wasn't going to send him back to weep again he
 supposed! As soon as she said "yes," he would no longer bother her, and
 she could go quietly to bed. He only wanted to hear her say "yes." They
 could talk it over on the morrow.
 

 "But I certainly can't say 'yes' just like that," resumed Gervaise. "I
 don't want you to be able to accuse me later on of having incited you to
 do a foolish thing. You shouldn't be so insistent, Monsieur Coupeau. You
 can't really be sure that you're in love with me. If you didn't see me for
 a week, it might fade away. Sometimes men get married and then there's day
 after day, stretching out into an entire lifetime, and they get pretty
 well bored by it all. Sit down there; I'm willing to talk it over at
 once."
 

 Then until one in the morning, in the dark room and by the faint light of
 a smoky tallow candle which they forgot to snuff, they talked of their
 marriage, lowering their voices so as not to wake the two children, Claude
 and Etienne, who were sleeping, both heads on the same pillow. Gervaise
 kept pointing out the children to Coupeau, what a funny kind of dowry they
 were. She really shouldn't burden him with them. Besides, what would the
 neighbors say? She'd feel ashamed for him because everyone knew about the
 story of her life and her lover. They wouldn't think it decent if they saw
 them getting married barely two months later.
 

 Coupeau replied by shrugging his shoulders. He didn't care about the
 neighbors! He never bothered about their affairs. So, there was Lantier
 before him, well, so what? What's so bad about that? She hadn't been
 constantly bringing men upstairs, as some women did, even rich ladies! The
 children would grow up, they'd raise them right. Never had he known before
 such a woman, such sound character, so good-hearted. Anyway, she could
 have been anything, a streetwalker, ugly, lazy and good-for-nothing, with
 a whole gang of dirty kids, and so what? He wanted her.
 

 "Yes, I want you," he repeated, bringing his hand down on his knee with a
 continuos hammering. "You understand, I want you. There's nothing to be
 said to that, is there?"
 

 Little by little, Gervaise gave way. Her emotions began to take control
 when faced with his encompassing desire. Still, with her hands in her lap
 and her face suffused with a soft sweetness, she hesitantly offered
 objections. From outside, through the half-open window, a lovely June
 night breathed in puffs of sultry air, disturbing the candle with its long
 wick gleaming red like a glowing coal. In the deep silence of the sleeping
 neighborhood the only sound was the infantile weeping of a drunkard lying
 in the middle of the street. Far away, in the back room of some
 restaurant, a violin was playing a dance tune for some late party.
 

 Coupeau was silent. Then, knowing she had no more arguments, he smiled,
 took hold of her hands and pulled her toward him. She was in one of those
 moments of weakness she so greatly mistrusted, persuaded at last, too
 emotionally stirred to refuse anything or to hurt anyone's feelings.
 Coupeau didn't realize that she was giving way. He held her wrists so
 tightly as to almost crush them. Together they breathed a long sigh that
 to both of them meant a partial satisfaction of their desire.
 

 "You'll say 'yes,' won't you," asked he.
 

 "How you worry me!" she murmured. "You wish it? Well then, 'yes.' Ah!
 we're perhaps doing a very foolish thing."
 

 He jumped up, and, seizing her round the waist, kissed her roughly on the
 face, at random. Then, as this caress caused a noise, he became anxious,
 and went softly and looked at Claude and Etienne.
 

 "Hush, we must be careful," said he in a whisper, "and not wake the
 children. Good-bye till to-morrow."
 

 And he went back to his room. Gervaise, all in a tremble, remained seated
 on the edge of her bed, without thinking of undressing herself for nearly
 an hour. She was touched; she felt that Coupeau was very honorable; for at
 one moment she had really thought it was all over, and that he would
 forget her. The drunkard below, under the window, was now hoarsely
 uttering the plaintive cry of some lost animal. The violin in the distance
 had left off its saucy tune and was now silent.
 

 During the following days Coupeau sought to get Gervaise to call some
 evening on his sister in the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or; but the young woman,
 who was very timid, showed a great dread of this visit to the Lorilleux.
 She knew that Coupeau had a lingering fear of that household, even though
 he certainly wasn't dependent on his sister, who wasn't even the oldest of
 the family. Mamma Coupeau would certainly give her consent at once, as she
 never refused her only son anything. The thing was that the Lorilleuxs
 were supposed to be earning ten francs a day or more and that gave them a
 certain authority. Coupeau would never dare to get married unless his wife
 was acceptable to them.
 

 "I have spoken to them of you, they know our plans," explained he to
 Gervaise. "Come now! What a child you are! Let's call on them this
 evening. I've warned you, haven't I? You'll find my sister rather stiff.
 Lorilleux, too, isn't always very amiable. In reality they are greatly
 annoyed, because if I marry, I shall no longer take my meals with them,
 and it'll be an economy the less. But that doesn't matter, they won't turn
 you out. Do this for me, it's absolutely necessary."
 

 These words only frightened Gervaise the more. One Saturday evening,
 however, she gave in. Coupeau came for her at half-past eight. She had
 dressed herself in a black dress, a crape shawl with yellow palms, and a
 white cap trimmed with a little cheap lace. During the six weeks she had
 been working, she had saved the seven francs for the shawl, and the two
 and a half francs for the cap; the dress was an old one cleaned and made
 up afresh.
 

 "They're expecting you," said Coupeau to her, as they went round by the
 Rue des Poissonniers. "Oh! they're beginning to get used to the idea of my
 being married. They seem nice indeed, to-night. And you know if you've
 never seen gold chains made, it'll amuse you to watch them. They just
 happen to have a pressing order for Monday."
 

 "They've got gold in their room?" asked Gervaise.
 

 "I should think so; there's some on the walls, on the floor, in fact
 everywhere."
 

 They had passed the arched doorway and crossed the courtyard. The
 Lorilleuxs lived on the sixth floor, staircase B. Coupeau laughingly told
 her to hold the hand-rail tight and not to leave go of it. She looked up,
 and blinked her eyes, as she perceived the tall hollow tower of the
 staircase, lighted by three gas jets, one on every second landing; the
 last one, right up at the top looked like a star twinkling in a black sky,
 whilst the other two cast long flashes of light, of fantastic shapes,
 among the interminable windings of the stairs.
 

 "By Jove!" said the zinc-worker as he reached the first floor, smiling,
 "there's a strong smell of onion soup. Someone's having onion soup, I'm
 sure."
 

 Staircase B, with its gray, dirty steps and hand-rail, its scratched walls
 and chipped plaster, was full of strong kitchen odors. Long corridors,
 echoing with noise, led away from each landing. Doors, painted yellow,
 gaped open, smeared black around the latch from dirty hands. A sink on
 each landing gave forth a fetid humidity, adding its stench to the sharp
 flavor of the cooking of onions. From the basement, all the way to the
 sixth floor, you could hear dishes clattering, saucepans being rinsed,
 pots being scraped and scoured.
 

 On the first floor Gervaise saw a half-opened door with the word
 "Designer" written on it in large letters. Inside were two men sitting by
 a table, the dishes cleared away from its oilcloth cover, arguing
 furiously amid a cloud of pipe smoke. The second and third floors were
 quieter, and through cracks in the woodwork only such sounds filtered as
 the rhythm of a cradle rocking, the stifled crying of a child, a woman's
 voice sounding like the dull murmur of running water with no words
 distinct. Gervaise read the various signs on the doors giving the names of
 the occupants: "Madame Gaudron, wool-carder" and "Monsieur Madinier,
 cardboard boxes." There was a fight in progress on the fourth floor: a
 stomping of feet that shook the floor, furniture banged around, a racket
 of curses and blows; but this did not bother the neighbors opposite, who
 were playing cards with their door opened wide to admit more air.
 

 When Gervaise reached the fifth floor, she had to stop to take a breath;
 she was not used to going up so high; that wall for ever turning, the
 glimpses she had of the lodgings following each other, made her head ache.
 Anyway, there was a family almost blocking the landing: the father washing
 the dishes over a small earthenware stove near the sink and the mother
 sitting with her back to the stair-rail and cleaning the baby before
 putting it to bed.
 

 Coupeau kept urging Gervaise along, and they finally reached the sixth
 floor. He encouraged her with a smile; they had arrived! She had been
 hearing a voice all the way up from the bottom and she was gazing upward,
 wondering where it could be coming from, a voice so clear and piercing
 that it had dominated all the other sounds. It came from a little old
 woman in an attic room who sang while putting dresses on cheap dolls. When
 a tall girl came by with a pail of water and entered a nearby apartment,
 Gervaise saw a tumbled bed on which a man was sprawled, his eyes fixed on
 the ceiling. As the door closed behind her, Gervaise saw the hand-written
 card: "Mademoiselle Clemence, ironing."
 

 Now that she had finally made it to the top, her legs weary and her breath
 short, Gervaise leaned over the railing to look down. Now it was the
 gaslight on the first floor which seemed a distant star at the bottom of a
 narrow well six stories deep. All the odors and all the murmurings of the
 immense variety of life within the tenement came up to her in one stifling
 breath that flushed her face as she hazarded a worried glance down into
 the gulf below.
 

 "We're not there yet," said Coupeau. "Oh! It's quite a journey!"
 

 He had gone down a long corridor on the left. He turned twice, the first
 time also to the left, the second time to the right. The corridor still
 continued branching off, narrowing between walls full of crevices, with
 plaster peeling off, and lighted at distant intervals by a slender
 gas-jet; and the doors all alike, succeeded each other the same as the
 doors of a prison or a convent, and nearly all open, continued to display
 homes of misery and work, which the hot June evening filled with a reddish
 mist. At length they reached a small passage in complete darkness.
 

 "We're here," resumed the zinc-worker. "Be careful, keep to the wall;
 there are three steps."
 

 And Gervaise carefully took another ten steps in the obscurity. She
 stumbled and then counted the three steps. But at the end of the passage
 Coupeau had opened a door, without knocking. A brilliant light spread over
 the tiled floor. They entered.
 

 It was a narrow apartment, and seemed as if it were the continuation of
 the corridor. A faded woolen curtain, raised up just then by a string,
 divided the place in two. The first part contained a bedstead pushed
 beneath an angle of the attic ceiling, a cast-iron stove still warm from
 the cooking of the dinner, two chairs, a table and a wardrobe, the cornice
 of which had had to be sawn off to make it fit in between the door and the
 bedstead. The second part was fitted up as a work-shop; at the end, a
 narrow forge with its bellows; to the right, a vise fixed to the wall
 beneath some shelves on which pieces of old iron lay scattered; to the
 left near the window, a small workman's bench, encumbered with greasy and
 very dirty pliers, shears and microscopical saws, all very dirty and
 grimy.
 

 "It's us!" cried Coupeau advancing as far as the woolen curtain.
 

 But no one answered at first. Gervaise, deeply affected, moved especially
 by the thought that she was about to enter a place full of gold, stood
 behind the zinc-worker, stammering and venturing upon nods of her head by
 way of bowing. The brilliant light, a lamp burning on the bench, a brazier
 full of coals flaring in the forge, increased her confusion still more.
 She ended however, by distinguishing Madame Lorilleux—little,
 red-haired and tolerably strong, pulling with all the strength of her
 short arms, and with the assistance of a big pair of pincers, a thread of
 black metal which she passed through the holes of a draw-plate fixed to
 the vise. Seated in front of the bench, Lorilleux, quite as small of
 stature, but more slender in the shoulders, worked with the tips of his
 pliers, with the vivacity of a monkey, at a labor so minute, that it was
 impossible to follow it between his scraggy fingers. It was the husband
 who first raised his head—a head with scanty locks, the face of the
 yellow tinge of old wax, long, and with an ailing expression.
 

 "Ah! it's you; well, well!" murmured he. "We're in a hurry you know. Don't
 come into the work-room, you'd be in our way. Stay in the bedroom."
 

 And he resumed his minute task, his face again in the reflection of a
 glass globe full of green-colored water, through which the lamp shed a
 circle of bright light over his work.
 

 "Take the chairs!" called out Madame Lorilleux in her turn. "It's that
 lady, isn't it? Very well, very well!"
 

 She had rolled the wire and she carried it to the forge, and then,
 reviving the fire of the brazier with a large wooden fan, she proceeded to
 temper the wire before passing it through the last holes of the
 draw-plate.
 

 Coupeau moved the chairs forward and seated Gervaise by the curtain. The
 room was so narrow that he could not sit beside her, so he sat behind her,
 leaning over her shoulder to explain the work in progress. Gervaise was
 intimidated by this strange reception and felt uneasy. She had a buzzing
 in her ears and couldn't hear clearly. She thought the wife looked older
 than her thirty years and not very neat with her hair in a pigtail
 dangling down the back of her loosely worn wrapper. The husband, who was
 only a year older, appeared already an old man with mean, thin lips, as he
 sat there working in his shirt sleeves with his bare feet thrust into down
 at the heel slippers. Gervaise was dismayed by the smallness of the shop,
 the grimy walls, the rustiness of the tools, and the black soot spread all
 over what looked like the odds and ends of a scrap-iron peddler's wares.
 

 "And the gold?" asked Gervaise in a low voice.
 

 Her anxious glances searched the corners and sought amongst all that filth
 for the resplendence she had dreamt of. But Coupeau burst out laughing.
 

 "Gold?" said he; "why there's some; there's some more, and there's some at
 your feet!"
 

 He pointed successively to the fine wire at which his sister was working,
 and to another roll of wire, similar to the ordinary iron wire, hanging
 against the wall close to the vise; then going down on all fours, he
 picked up, beneath the wooden screen which covered the tiled floor of the
 work-room, a piece of waste, a tiny fragment resembling the point of a
 rusty needle. But Gervaise protested; that couldn't be gold, that blackish
 piece of metal as ugly as iron! He had to bite into the piece and show her
 the gleaming notch made by his teeth. Then he continued his explanations:
 the employers provided the gold wire, already alloyed; the craftsmen first
 pulled it through the draw-plate to obtain the correct size, being careful
 to anneal it five or six times to keep it from breaking. It required a
 steady, strong hand, and plenty of practice. His sister would not let her
 husband touch the wire-drawing since he was subject to coughing spells.
 She had strong arms for it; he had seen her draw gold to the fineness of a
 hair.
 

 Lorilleux, seized with a fit of coughing, almost doubled up on his stool.
 In the midst of the paroxysm, he spoke, and said in a choking voice, still
 without looking at Gervaise, as though he was merely mentioning the thing
 to himself:
 

 "I'm making the herring-bone chain."
 

 Coupeau urged Gervaise to get up. She might draw nearer and see. The
 chainmaker consented with a grunt. He wound the wire prepared by his wife
 round a mandrel, a very thin steel rod. Then he sawed gently, cutting the
 wire the whole length of the mandrel, each turn forming a link, which he
 soldered. The links were laid on a large piece of charcoal. He wetted them
 with a drop of borax, taken from the bottom of a broken glass beside him;
 and he made them red-hot at the lamp beneath the horizontal flame produced
 by the blow-pipe. Then, when he had soldered about a hundred links he
 returned once more to his minute work, propping his hands against the edge
 of the cheville, a small piece of board which the friction of his
 hands had polished. He bent each link almost double with the pliers,
 squeezed one end close, inserted it in the last link already in place and
 then, with the aid of a point opened out again the end he had squeezed;
 and he did this with a continuous regularity, the links joining each other
 so rapidly that the chain gradually grew beneath Gervaise's gaze, without
 her being able to follow, or well understand how it was done.
 

 "That's the herring-bone chain," said Coupeau. "There's also the long
 link, the cable, the plain ring, and the spiral. But that's the
 herring-bone. Lorilleux only makes the herring-bone chain."
 

 The latter chuckled with satisfaction. He exclaimed, as he continued
 squeezing the links, invisible between his black finger-nails.
 

 "Listen to me, Young Cassis! I was making a calculation this morning. I
 commenced work when I was twelve years old, you know. Well! Can you guess
 how long a herring-bone chain I must have made up till to-day?"
 

 He raised his pale face, and blinked his red eye-lids.
 

 "Twenty-six thousand feet, do you hear? Two leagues! That's something! A
 herring-bone chain two leagues long! It's enough to twist round the necks
 of all the women of the neighborhood. And you know, it's still increasing.
 I hope to make it long enough to reach from Paris to Versailles."
 

 Gervaise had returned to her seat, disenchanted and thinking everything
 very ugly. She smiled to be polite to the Lorilleuxs. The complete silence
 about her marriage bothered her. It was the sole reason for her having
 come. The Lorilleuxs were treating her as some stranger brought in by
 Coupeau. When a conversation finally did get started, it concerned the
 building's tenants. Madame Lorilleux asked her husband if he had heard the
 people on the fourth floor having a fight. They fought every day. The
 husband usually came home drunk and the wife had her faults too, yelling
 in the filthiest language. Then they spoke of the designer on the first
 floor, an uppity show-off with a mound of debts, always smoking, always
 arguing loudly with his friends. Monsieur Madinier's cardboard business
 was barely surviving. He had let two girl workers go yesterday. The
 business ate up all his money, leaving his children to run around in rags.
 And that Madame Gaudron was pregnant again; this was almost indecent at
 her age. The landlord was going to evict the Coquets on the fifth floor.
 They owed nine months' rent, and besides, they insisted on lighting their
 stove out on the landing. Last Saturday the old lady on the sixth floor,
 Mademoiselle Remanjou, had arrived just in time to save the Linguerlot
 child from being badly burned. Mademoiselle Clemence, one who took in
 ironing, well, she lived life as she pleased. She was so kind to animals
 though and had such a good heart that you couldn't say anything against
 her. It was a pity, a fine girl like her, the company she kept. She'd be
 walking the streets before long.
 

 "Look, here's one," said Lorilleux to his wife, giving her the piece of
 chain he had been working on since his lunch. "You can trim it." And he
 added, with the persistence of a man who does not easily relinquish a
 joke: "Another four feet and a half. That brings me nearer to Versailles."
 

 Madame Lorilleux, after tempering it again, trimmed it by passing it
 through the regulating draw-plate. Then she put it in a little copper
 saucepan with a long handle, full of lye-water, and placed it over the
 fire of the forge. Gervaise, again pushed forward by Coupeau, had to
 follow this last operation. When the chain was thoroughly cleansed, it
 appeared a dull red color. It was finished, and ready to be delivered.
 

 "They're always delivered like that, in their rough state," the
 zinc-worker explained. "The polishers rub them afterwards with cloths."
 

 Gervaise felt her courage failing her. The heat, more and more intense,
 was suffocating her. They kept the door shut, because Lorilleux caught
 cold from the least draught. Then as they still did not speak of the
 marriage, she wanted to go away and gently pulled Coupeau's jacket. He
 understood. Besides, he also was beginning to feel ill at ease and vexed
 at their affectation of silence.
 

 "Well, we're off," said he. "We mustn't keep you from your work."
 

 He moved about for a moment, waiting, hoping for a word or some allusion
 or other. At length he decided to broach the subject himself.
 

 "I say, Lorilleux, we're counting on you to be my wife's witness."
 

 The chainmaker pretended, with a chuckle, to be greatly surprised; whilst
 his wife, leaving her draw-plates, placed herself in the middle of the
 work-room.
 

 "So it's serious then?" murmured he. "That confounded Young Cassis, one
 never knows whether he is joking or not."
 

 "Ah! yes, madame's the person involved," said the wife in her turn, as she
 stared rudely at Gervaise. "Mon Dieu! We've no advice to give you,
 we haven't. It's a funny idea to go and get married, all the same. Anyhow,
 it's your own wish. When it doesn't succeed, one's only got oneself to
 blame, that's all. And it doesn't often succeed, not often, not often."
 

 She uttered these last words slower and slower, and shaking her head, she
 looked from the young woman's face to her hands, and then to her feet as
 though she had wished to undress her and see the very pores of her skin.
 She must have found her better than she expected.
 

 "My brother is perfectly free," she continued more stiffly. "No doubt the
 family might have wished—one always makes projects. But things take
 such funny turns. For myself, I don't want to have any unpleasantness. Had
 he brought us the lowest of the low, I should merely have said: 'Marry her
 and go to blazes!' He was not badly off though, here with us. He's fat
 enough; one can very well see he didn't fast much; and he always found his
 soup hot right on time. I say, Lorilleux, don't you think madame's like
 Therese—you know who I mean, that woman who used to live opposite,
 and who died of consumption?"
 

 "Yes, there's a certain resemblance," replied the chainmaker.
 

 "And you've got two children, madame? Now, I must admit I said to my
 brother: 'I can't understand how you can want to marry a woman who's got
 two children.' You mustn't be offended if I consult his interests; its
 only natural. You don't look strong either. Don't you think, Lorilleux,
 that madame doesn't look very strong?"
 

 "No, no, she's not strong."
 

 They did not mention her leg; but Gervaise understood by their side
 glances, and the curling of their lips, that they were alluding to it. She
 stood before them, wrapped in her thin shawl with the yellow palms,
 replying in monosyllables, as though in the presence of her judges.
 Coupeau, seeing she was suffering, ended by exclaiming:
 

 "All that's nothing to do with it. What you are talking about isn't
 important. The wedding will take place on Saturday, July 29. I calculated
 by the almanac. Is it settled? Does it suit you?"
 

 "Oh, it's all the same to us," said his sister. "There was no necessity to
 consult us. I shan't prevent Lorilleux being witness. I only want peace
 and quiet."
 

 Gervaise, hanging her head, not knowing what to do with herself had put
 the toe of her boot through one of the openings in the wooden screen which
 covered the tiled floor of the work-room; then afraid of having disturbed
 something when she had withdrawn it, she stooped down and felt about with
 her hand. Lorilleux hastily brought the lamp, and he examined her fingers
 suspiciously.
 

 "You must be careful," said he, "the tiny bits of gold stick to the shoes,
 and get carried away without one knowing it."
 

 It was all to do with business. The employers didn't allow a single speck
 for waste. He showed her the rabbit's foot he used to brush off any flecks
 of gold left on the cheville and the leather he kept on his lap to
 catch any gold that fell. Twice weekly the shop was swept out carefully,
 the sweepings collected and burned and the ashes sifted. This recovered up
 to twenty-five or thirty francs' worth of gold a month.
 

 Madame Lorilleux could not take her eyes from Gervaise's shoes.
 

 "There's no reason to get angry," murmured she with an amiable smile.
 "But, perhaps madame would not mind looking at the soles of her shoes."
 

 And Gervaise, turning very red, sat down again, and holding up her feet
 showed that there was nothing clinging to them. Coupeau had opened the
 door, exclaiming: "Good-night!" in an abrupt tone of voice. He called to
 her from the corridor. Then she in her turn went off, after stammering a
 few polite words: she hoped to see them again, and that they would all
 agree well together. Both of the Lorilleux had already gone back to their
 work at the far end of their dark hole of a work-room. Madame Lorilleux,
 her skin reflecting the red glow from the bed of coals, was drawing on
 another wire, each effort swelling her neck and making the strained
 muscles stand out like taut cords. Her husband, hunched over beneath the
 greenish gleam of the globe was starting another length of chain, twisting
 each link with his pliers, pressing it on one side, inserting it into the
 next link above, opening it again with the pointed tool, continuously,
 mechanically, not wasting a motion, even to wipe the sweat from his face.
 

 When Gervaise emerged from the corridor on to the landing, she could not
 help saying, with tears in her eyes:
 

 "That doesn't promise much happiness."
 

 Coupeau shook his head furiously. He would get even with Lorilleux for
 that evening. Had anyone ever seen such a miserly fellow? To think that
 they were going to walk off with two or three grains of his gold dust! All
 the fuss they made was from pure avarice. His sister thought perhaps that
 he would never marry, so as to enable her to economize four sous on her
 dinner every day. However, it would take place all the same on July 29. He
 did not care a hang for them!
 

 Nevertheless, Gervaise still felt depressed. Tormented by a foolish
 fearfulness, she peered anxiously into every dark shadow along the
 stair-rail as she descended. It was dark and deserted at this hour, lit
 only by a single gas jet on the second floor. In the shadowy depths of the
 dark pit, it gave a spot of brightness, even with its flame turned so
 low. It was now silent behind the closed doors; the weary laborers had
 gone to sleep after eating. However, there was a soft laugh from
 Mademoiselle Clemence's room and a ray of light shone through the keyhole
 of Mademoiselle Remanjou's door. She was still busy cutting out dresses
 for the dolls. Downstairs at Madame Gaudron's, a child was crying. The
 sinks on the landings smelled more offensive than ever in the midst of the
 darkness and stillness.
 

 In the courtyard, Gervaise turned back for a last look at the tenement as
 Coupeau called out to the concierge. The building seemed to have grown
 larger under the moonless sky. The drip-drip of water from the faucet
 sounded loud in the quiet. Gervaise felt that the building was threatening
 to suffocate her and a chill went through her body. It was a childish fear
 and she smiled at it a moment later.
 

 "Watch your step," warned Coupeau.
 

 To get to the entrance, Gervaise had to jump over a wide puddle that had
 drained from the dye shop. The puddle was blue now, the deep blue of a
 summer sky. The reflections from the night light of the concierge sparkled
 in it like stars.
 

 
 
 

 Gervaise did not want to have a wedding-party! What was the use of
 spending money? Besides, she still felt somewhat ashamed; it seemed to her
 quite unnecessary to parade the marriage before the whole neighborhood.
 But Coupeau cried out at that. One could not be married without having a
 feed. He did not care a button for the people of the neighborhood! Nothing
 elaborate, just a short walk and a rabbit ragout in the first eating-house
 they fancied. No music with dessert. Just a glass or two and then back
 home.
 

 The zinc-worker, chaffing and joking, at length got the young woman to
 consent by promising her that there should be no larks. He would keep his
 eye on the glasses, to prevent sunstrokes. Then he organized a sort of
 picnic at five francs a head, at the "Silver Windmill," kept by Auguste,
 on the Boulevard de la Chapelle. It was a small cafe with moderate charges
 and had a dancing place in the rear, beneath the three acacias in the
 courtyard. They would be very comfortable on the first floor. During the
 next ten days, he got hold of guests in the house where his sister lived
 in the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or—Monsieur Madinier, Mademoiselle
 Remanjou, Madame Gaudron and her husband. He even ended by getting
 Gervaise to consent to the presence of two of his comrades—Bibi-the-Smoker
 and My-Boots. No doubt My-Boots was a boozer; but then he had such a
 fantastic appetite that he was always asked to join those sort of
 gatherings, just for the sight of the caterer's mug when he beheld that
 bottomless pit swallowing his twelve pounds of bread. The young woman on
 her side, promised to bring her employer Madame Fauconnier and the Boches,
 some very agreeable people. On counting, they found there would be fifteen
 to sit down to table, which was quite enough. When there are too many,
 they always wind up by quarrelling.
 

 Coupeau however, had no money. Without wishing to show off, he intended to
 behave handsomely. He borrowed fifty francs of his employer. Out of that,
 he first of all purchased the wedding-ring—a twelve franc gold
 wedding-ring, which Lorilleux procured for him at the wholesale price of
 nine francs. He then bought himself a frock coat, a pair of trousers and a
 waistcoat at a tailor's in the Rue Myrrha, to whom he gave merely
 twenty-five francs on account; his patent leather shoes and his hat were
 still good enough. When he had put by the ten francs for his and
 Gervaise's share of the feast—the two children not being charged for—he
 had exactly six francs left—the price of a low mass at the altar of
 the poor. He had no liking for those black crows, the priests. It would
 gripe him to pay his last six francs to keep their whistles wet; however,
 a marriage without a mass wasn't a real marriage at all.
 

 Going to the church himself, he bargained for a whole hour with a little
 old priest in a dirty cassock who was as sharp at dealing as a push-cart
 peddler. Coupeau felt like boxing his ears. For a joke, he asked the
 priest if he didn't have a second-hand mass that would do for a modest
 young couple. The priest, mumbling that God would take small pleasure in
 blessing their union, finally let him have his mass for five francs. Well
 after all, that meant twenty sous saved.
 

 Gervaise also wanted to look decent. As soon as the marriage was settled,
 she made her arrangements, worked extra time in the evenings, and managed
 to put thirty francs on one side. She had a great longing for a little
 silk mantle marked thirteen francs in the Rue du Faubourg Poissonniere.
 She treated herself to it, and then bought for ten francs off the husband
 of a washerwoman who had died in Madame Fauconnier's house a blue woolen
 dress, which she altered to fit herself. With the seven francs remaining
 she procured a pair of cotton gloves, a rose for her cap, and some shoes
 for Claude, her eldest boy. Fortunately the youngsters' blouses were
 passable. She spent four nights cleaning everything, and mending the
 smallest holes in her stockings and chemise.
 

 On Friday night, the eve of the great day, Gervaise and Coupeau had still
 a good deal of running about to do up till eleven o'clock, after returning
 home from work. Then before separating for the night they spent an hour
 together in the young woman's room, happy at being about to be released
 from their awkward position. In spite of the fact that they had originally
 resolved not to put themselves out to impress the neighbors, they had
 ended by taking it seriously and working themselves till they were weary.
 By the time they said "Good-night," they were almost asleep on their feet.
 They breathed a great sigh of relief now that everything was ready.
 

 Coupeau's witnesses were to be Monsieur Madinier and Bibi-the-Smoker. They
 were counting on Lorilleux and Boche for Gervaise's witnesses. They were
 to go quietly to the mayor's office and the church, just the six of them,
 without a whole procession of people trailing behind them. The
 bridegroom's two sisters had even declared that they would stay home,
 their presence not being necessary. Coupeau's mother, however, had sobbed
 and wailed, threatening to go ahead of them and hide herself in some
 corner of the church, until they had promised to take her along. The
 meeting of the guests was set for one o'clock at the Silver Windmill. From
 there, they would go to Saint-Denis, going out by railroad and returning
 on foot along the highway in order to work up an appetite. The party
 promised to be quite all right.
 

 Saturday morning, while getting dressed, Coupeau felt a qualm of
 uneasiness in view of the single franc in his pocket. He began to think
 that it was a matter of ordinary courtesy to offer a glass of wine and a
 slice of ham to the witnesses while awaiting dinner. Also, there might be
 unforeseen expenses. So, after taking Claude and Etienne to stay with
 Madame Boche, who was to bring them to the dinner later that afternoon, he
 hurried over to the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or to borrow ten francs from
 Lorilleux. Having to do that griped him immensely as he could guess the
 attitude his brother-in-law would take. The latter did grumble a bit, but
 ended by lending him two five-franc pieces. However, Coupeau overheard his
 sister muttering under her breath, "This is a fine beginning."
 

 The ceremony at the mayor's was to take place at half-past ten. It was
 beautiful weather—a magnificent sun seemed to roast the streets. So
 as not to be stared at the bride and bridegroom, the old mother, and the
 four witnesses separated into two bands. Gervaise walked in front with
 Lorilleux, who gave her his arm; whilst Monsieur Madinier followed with
 mother Coupeau. Then, twenty steps behind on the opposite side of the way,
 came Coupeau, Boche, and Bibi-the-Smoker. These three were in black frock
 coats, walking erect and swinging their arms. Boche's trousers were bright
 yellow. Bibi-the-Smoker didn't have a waistcoat so he was buttoned up to
 the neck with only a bit of his cravat showing. The only one in a full
 dress suit was Monsieur Madinier and passers-by gazed at this well-dressed
 gentleman escorting the huge bulk of mother Coupeau in her green shawl and
 black bonnet with red ribbons.
 

 Gervaise looked very gay and sweet in her dress of vivid blue and with her
 new silk mantle fitted tightly to her shoulders. She listened politely to
 the sneering remarks of Lorilleux, who seemed buried in the depths of the
 immense overcoat he was wearing. From time to time, Gervaise would turn
 her head a little to smile brightly at Coupeau, who was rather
 uncomfortable under the hot sun in his new clothes.
 

 Though they walked very slowly, they arrived at the mayor's quite half an
 hour too soon. And as the mayor was late, their turn was not reached till
 close upon eleven o'clock. They sat down on some chairs and waited in a
 corner of the apartment, looking by turns at the high ceiling and bare
 walls, talking low, and over-politely pushing back their chairs each time
 that one of the attendants passed. Yet among themselves they called the
 mayor a sluggard, saying he must be visiting his blonde to get a massage
 for his gout, or that maybe he'd swallowed his official sash.
 

 However, when the mayor did put in his appearance, they rose respectfully
 in his honor. They were asked to sit down again and they had to wait
 through three other marriages. The hall was crowded with the three
 bourgeois wedding parties: brides all in white, little girls with
 carefully curled hair, bridesmaids wearing wide sashes, an endless
 procession of ladies and gentlemen dressed in their best and looking very
 stylish.
 

 When at length they were called, they almost missed being married
 altogether, Bibi-the-Smoker having disappeared. Boche discovered him
 outside smoking his pipe. Well! They were a nice lot inside there to
 humbug people about like that, just because one hadn't yellow kid gloves
 to shove under their noses! And the various formalities—the reading
 of the Code, the different questions to be put, the signing of all the
 documents—were all got through so rapidly that they looked at each
 other with an idea that they had been robbed of a good half of the
 ceremony. Gervaise, dizzy, her heart full, pressed her handkerchief to her
 lips. Mother Coupeau wept bitterly. All had signed the register, writing
 their names in big struggling letters with the exception of the
 bridegroom, who not being able to write, had put his cross. They each gave
 four sous for the poor. When an attendant handed Coupeau the marriage
 certificate, the latter, prompted by Gervaise who nudged his elbow, handed
 him another five sous.
 

 It was a fair walk from the mayor's office in the town hall to the church.
 The men stopped along the way to have a beer. Mother Coupeau and Gervaise
 took cassis with water. Then they had to trudge along the long street
 where the sun glared straight down without the relief of shade.
 

 When they arrived at the church they were hurried along and asked if they
 came so late in order to make a mockery of religion. A priest came
 forward, his face pale and resentful from having to delay his lunch. An
 altar boy in a soiled surplice ran before him.
 

 The mass went very fast, with the priest turning, bowing his head,
 spreading out his arms, making all the ritual gestures in haste while
 casting sidelong glances at the group. Gervaise and Coupeau, before the
 altar, were embarrassed, not knowing when they should kneel or rise or
 seat themselves, expecting some indication from the attendant. The
 witnesses, not knowing what was proper, remained standing during the
 ceremony. Mother Coupeau was weeping again and shedding her tears into the
 missal she had borrowed from a neighbor.
 

 Meanwhile, the noon chimes had sounded and the church began to fill with
 noise from the shuffling feet of sacristans and the clatter of chairs
 being put back in place. The high altar was apparently being prepared for
 some special ceremony.
 

 Thus, in the depths of this obscure chapel, amid the floating dust, the
 surly priest placed his withered hands on the bared heads of Gervaise and
 Coupeau, blessing their union amid a hubbub like that of moving day. The
 wedding party signed another registry, this time in the sacristy, and then
 found themselves out in the bright sunlight before the church doors where
 they stood for a moment, breathless and confused from having been carried
 along at such a break-neck speed.
 

 "Voila!" said Coupeau with an embarrassed laugh. "Well, it sure didn't
 take long. They shove it at you so; it's like being at the painless
 dentist's who doesn't give you time to cry out. Here you get a painless
 wedding!"
 

 "Yes, it's a quick job," Lorilleux smirked. "In five minutes you're tied
 together for the rest of your life. You poor Young Cassis, you've had it."
 

 The four witnesses whacked Coupeau on the shoulders as he arched his back
 against the friendly blows. Meanwhile Gervaise was hugging and kissing
 mother Coupeau, her eyes moist, a smile lighting her face. She replied
 reassuringly to the old woman's sobbing: "Don't worry, I'll do my best. I
 want so much to have a happy life. If it doesn't work out it won't be my
 fault. Anyhow, it's done now. It's up to us to get along together and do
 the best we can for each other."
 

 After that they went straight to the Silver Windmill. Coupeau had taken
 his wife's arm. They walked quickly, laughing as though carried away,
 quite two hundred steps ahead of the others, without noticing the houses
 or the passers-by, or the vehicles. The deafening noises of the faubourg
 sounded like bells in their ears. When they reached the wineshop, Coupeau
 at once ordered two bottles of wine, some bread and some slices of ham, to
 be served in the little glazed closet on the ground floor, without plates
 or table cloth, simply to have a snack. Then, noticing that Boche and
 Bibi-the-Smoker seemed to be very hungry, he had a third bottle brought,
 as well as a slab of brie cheese. Mother Coupeau was not hungry, being too
 choked up to be able to eat. Gervaise found herself very thirsty, and
 drank several large glasses of water with a small amount of wine added.
 

 "I'll settle for this," said Coupeau, going at once to the bar, where he
 paid four francs and five sous.
 

 It was now one o'clock and the other guests began to arrive. Madame
 Fauconnier, a fat woman, still good looking, first put in an appearance;
 she wore a chintz dress with a flowery pattern, a pink tie and a cap
 over-trimmed with flowers. Next came Mademoiselle Remanjou, looking very
 thin in the eternal black dress which she seemed to keep on even when she
 went to bed; and the two Gaudrons—the husband, like some heavy
 animal and almost bursting his brown jacket at the slightest movement, the
 wife, an enormous woman, whose figure indicated evident signs of an
 approaching maternity and whose stiff violet colored skirt still more
 increased her rotundity. Coupeau explained that they were not to wait for
 My-Boots; his comrade would join the party on the Route de Saint-Denis.
 

 "Well!" exclaimed Madame Lerat as she entered, "it'll pour in torrents
 soon! That'll be pleasant!"
 

 And she called everyone to the door of the wineshop to see the clouds as
 black as ink which were rising rapidly to the south of Paris. Madame
 Lerat, eldest of the Coupeaus, was a tall, gaunt woman who talked through
 her nose. She was unattractively dressed in a puce-colored robe that hung
 loosely on her and had such long dangling fringes that they made her look
 like a skinny poodle coming out of the water. She brandished her umbrella
 like a club. After greeting Gervaise, she said, "You've no idea. The heat
 in the street is like a slap on the face. You'd think someone was throwing
 fire at you."
 

 Everyone agreed that they knew the storm was coming. It was in the air.
 Monsieur Madinier said that he had seen it as they were coming out of the
 church. Lorilleux mentioned that his corns were aching and he hadn't been
 able to sleep since three in the morning. A storm was due. It had been
 much too hot for three days in a row.
 

 "Well, maybe it will just be a little mist," Coupeau said several times,
 standing at the door and anxiously studying the sky. "Now we have to wait
 only for my sister. We'll start as soon as she arrives."
 

 Madame Lorilleux was late. Madame Lerat had stopped by so they could come
 together, but found her only beginning to get dressed. The two sisters had
 argued. The widow whispered in her brother's ear, "I left her flat! She's
 in a dreadful mood. You'll see."
 

 And the wedding party had to wait another quarter of an hour, walking
 about the wineshop, elbowed and jostled in the midst of the men who
 entered to drink a glass of wine at the bar. Now and again Boche, or
 Madame Fauconnier, or Bibi-the-Smoker left the others and went to the edge
 of the pavement, looking up at the sky. The storm was not passing over at
 all; a darkness was coming on and puffs of wind, sweeping along the
 ground, raised little clouds of white dust. At the first clap of thunder,
 Mademoiselle Remanjou made the sign of the cross. All the glances were
 anxiously directed to the clock over the looking-glass; it was twenty
 minutes to two.
 

 "Here it goes!" cried Coupeau. "It's the angels who're weeping."
 

 A gush of rain swept the pavement, along which some women flew, holding
 down their skirts with both hands. And it was in the midst of this first
 shower that Madame Lorilleux at length arrived, furious and out of breath,
 and struggling on the threshold with her umbrella that would not close.
 

 "Did any one ever see such a thing?" she exclaimed. "It caught me just at
 the door. I felt inclined to go upstairs again and take my things off. I
 should have been wise had I done so. Ah! it's a pretty wedding! I said how
 it would be. I wanted to put it off till next Saturday; and it rains
 because they wouldn't listen to me! So much the better, so much the
 better! I wish the sky would burst!"
 

 Coupeau tried to pacify her without success. He wouldn't have to pay for
 her dress if it was spoilt! She had on a black silk dress in which she was
 nearly choking, the bodice, too tight fitting, was almost bursting the
 button-holes, and was cutting her across the shoulders; while the skirt
 only allowed her to take very short steps in walking. However, the ladies
 present were all staring at her, quite overcome by her costume.
 

 She appeared not to notice Gervaise, who was sitting beside mother
 Coupeau. She asked her husband for his handkerchief. Then she went into a
 corner and very carefully wiped off the raindrops that had fallen on her
 silk dress.
 

 The shower had abruptly ceased. The darkness increased, it was almost like
 night—a livid night rent at times by large flashes of lightning.
 Bibi-the-Smoker said laughingly that it would certainly rain priests. Then
 the storm burst forth with extreme violence. For half an hour the rain
 came down in bucketsful, and the thunder rumbled unceasingly. The men
 standing up before the door contemplated the grey veil of the downpour,
 the swollen gutters, the splashes of water caused by the rain beating into
 the puddles. The women, feeling frightened, had sat down again, holding
 their hands before their eyes. They no longer conversed, they were too
 upset. A jest Boche made about the thunder, saying that St. Peter was
 sneezing up there, failed to raise a smile. But, when the thunder-claps
 became less frequent and gradually died away in the distance, the wedding
 guests began to get impatient, enraged against the storm, cursing and
 shaking their fists at the clouds. A fine and interminable rain now poured
 down from the sky which had become an ashy grey.
 

 "It's past two o'clock," cried Madame Lorilleux. "We can't stop here for
 ever."
 

 Mademoiselle Remanjou, having suggested going into the country all the
 same, even though they went no farther than the moat of the
 fortifications, the others scouted the idea: the roads would be in a nice
 state, one would not even be able to sit down on the grass; besides, it
 did not seem to be all over yet, there might perhaps be another downpour.
 Coupeau, who had been watching a workman, completely soaked, yet quietly
 walking along in the rain, murmured:
 

 "If that animal My-Boots is waiting for us on the Route de Saint-Denis, he
 won't catch a sunstroke."
 

 That made some of them laugh; but the general ill-humor increased. It was
 becoming ludicrous. They must decide on something unless they planned to
 sit there, staring at each other, until time for dinner. So for the next
 quarter of an hour, while the persistent rain continued, they tried to
 think of what to do. Bibi-the-Smoker suggested that they play cards. Boche
 slyly suggesting a most amusing game, the game of true confessions. Madame
 Gaudron thought of going to eat onion tarts on the Chaussee Clignancourt.
 Madame Lerat wanted to hear some stories. Gaudron said he wasn't a bit put
 out and thought they were quite well off where they were, out of the
 downpour. He suggested sitting down to dinner immediately.
 

 There was a discussion after each proposal. Some said that this would put
 everybody to sleep or that that would make people think they were stupid.
 Lorilleux had to get his word in. He finally suggested a walk along the
 outer Boulevards to Pere Lachaise cemetery. They could visit the tomb of
 Heloise and Abelard. Madame Lorilleux exploded, no longer able to control
 herself. She was leaving, she was. Were they trying to make fun of her?
 She got all dressed up and came out in the rain. And for what? To be
 wasting time in a wineshop. No, she had had enough of this wedding party.
 She'd rather be in her own home. Coupeau and Lorilleux had to get between
 her and the door to keep her from leaving. She kept telling them, "Get out
 of my way! I am leaving, I tell you!"
 

 Lorilleux finally succeeded in calming her down. Coupeau went over to
 Gervaise, who had been sitting quietly in a corner with mother Coupeau and
 Madame Fauconnier.
 

 "You haven't suggested anything," he said to her.
 

 "Oh! Whatever they want," she replied, laughing. "I don't mind. We can go
 out or stay here."
 

 She seemed aglow with contentment. She had spoken to each guest as they
 arrived. She spoke sensibly, in her soft voice, not getting into any
 disagreements. During the downpour, she had sat with her eyes wide open,
 watching the lightning as though she could see the future in the sudden
 flashes.
 

 Monsieur Madinier had up to this time not proposed anything. He was
 leaning against the bar, with the tails of his dress coat thrust apart,
 while he fully maintained the important air of an employer. He kept on
 expectorating, and rolled his big eyes about.
 

 "Mon Dieu!" said he, "we might go to the Museum."
 

 And he stroked his chin, as he blinkingly consulted the other members of
 the party.
 

 "There are antiquities, pictures, paintings, a whole heap of things. It is
 very instructive. Perhaps you have never been there. Oh! it is quite worth
 seeing at least once in a while."
 

 They looked at each other interrogatively. No, Gervaise had never been;
 Madame Fauconnier neither, nor Boche, nor the others. Coupeau thought he
 had been one Sunday, but he was not sure. They hesitated, however, when
 Madame Lorilleux, greatly impressed by Monsieur Madinier's importance,
 thought the suggestion a very worthy and respectable one. As they were
 wasting the day, and were all dressed up, they might as well go somewhere
 for their own instruction. Everyone approved. Then, as it still rained a
 little, they borrowed some umbrellas from the proprietor of the wineshop,
 old blue, green, and brown umbrellas, forgotten by different customers,
 and started off to the Museum.
 

 The wedding party turned to the right, and descended into Paris along the
 Faubourg Saint-Denis. Coupeau and Gervaise again took the lead, almost
 running and keeping a good distance in front of the others. Monsieur
 Madinier now gave his arm to Madame Lorilleux, mother Coupeau having
 remained behind in the wineshop on account of her old legs. Then came
 Lorilleux and Madame Lerat, Boche and Madame Fauconnier, Bibi-the-Smoker
 and Mademoiselle Remanjou, and finally the two Gaudrons. They were twelve
 and made a pretty long procession on the pavement.
 

 "I swear to you, we had nothing to do with it," Madame Lorilleux explained
 to Monsieur Madinier. "We don't even know how they met, or, we know only
 too well, but that's not for us to discuss. My husband even had to buy the
 wedding ring. We were scarcely out of bed this morning when he had to lend
 them ten francs. And, not a member of her family at her wedding, what kind
 of bride is that? She says she has a sister in Paris who works for a pork
 butcher. Why didn't she invite her?" She stopped to point at Gervaise, who
 was limping awkwardly because of the slope of the pavement. "Just look at
 her. Clump-clump."
 

 "Clump-clump" ran through the wedding procession. Lorilleux laughed under
 his breath, and said they ought to call her that, but Madame Fauconnier
 stood up for Gervaise. They shouldn't make fun of her; she was neat as a
 pin and did a good job when there was washing to be done.
 

 When the wedding procession came out of the Faubourg Saint-Denis, they had
 to cross the boulevard. The street had been transformed into a morass of
 sticky mud by the storm. It had started to pour again and they had opened
 the assorted umbrellas. The women picked their way carefully through the
 mud, holding their skirts high as the men held the sorry-looking umbrellas
 over their heads. The procession stretched out the width of the street.
 

 "It's a masquerade!" yelled two street urchins.
 

 People turned to stare. These couples parading across the boulevard added
 a splash of vivid color against the damp background. It was a parade of a
 strange medley of styles showing fancy used clothing such as constitute
 the luxury of the poor. The gentlemen's hats caused the most merriment,
 old hats preserved for years in dark and dusty cupboards, in a variety of
 comical forms: tall ones, flattened ones, sharply peaked ones, hats with
 extraordinary brims, curled back or flat, too narrow or too wide. Then at
 the very end, Madame Gaudron came along with her bright dress over her
 bulging belly and caused the smiles of the audience to grow even wider.
 The procession made no effort to hasten its progress. They were, in fact,
 rather pleased to attract so much attention and admiration.
 

 "Look! Here comes the bride!" one of the urchins shouted, pointing to
 Madame Gaudron. "Oh! Isn't it too bad! She must have swallowed something!"
 

 The entire wedding procession burst into laughter. Bibi-the-Smoker turned
 around and laughed. Madame Gaudron laughed the most of all. She wasn't
 ashamed as she thought more than one of the women watching had looked at
 her with envy.
 

 They turned into the Rue de Clery. Then they took the Rue du Mail. On
 reaching the Place des Victoires, there was a halt. The bride's left shoe
 lace had come undone, and as she tied it up again at the foot of the
 statue of Louis XIV., the couples pressed behind her waiting, and joking
 about the bit of calf of her leg that she displayed. At length, after
 passing down the Rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs, they reached the Louvre.
 

 Monsieur Madinier politely asked to be their cicerone. It was a big place,
 and they might lose themselves; besides, he knew the best parts, because
 he had often come there with an artist, a very intelligent fellow from
 whom a large dealer bought designs to put on his cardboard boxes. Down
 below, when the wedding party entered the Assyrian Museum, a slight shiver
 passed through it. The deuce! It was not at all warm there; the hall would
 have made a capital cellar. And the couples slowly advanced, their chins
 raised, their eyes blinking, between the gigantic stone figures, the black
 marble gods, dumb in their hieratic rigidity, and the monstrous beasts,
 half cats and half women, with death-like faces, attenuated noses, and
 swollen lips. They thought all these things very ugly. The stone carvings
 of the present day were a great deal better. An inscription in Phoenician
 characters amazed them. No one could possibly have ever read that scrawl.
 But Monsieur Madinier, already up on the first landing with Madame
 Lorilleux, called to them, shouting beneath the vaulted ceiling:
 

 "Come along! They're nothing, all those things! The things to see are on
 the first floor!"
 

 The severe barrenness of the staircase made them very grave. An attendant,
 superbly attired in a red waistcoat and a coat trimmed with gold lace, who
 seemed to be awaiting them on the landing, increased their emotion. It was
 with great respect, and treading as softly as possible, that they entered
 the French Gallery.
 

 Then, without stopping, their eyes occupied with the gilding of the
 frames, they followed the string of little rooms, glancing at the passing
 pictures too numerous to be seen properly. It would have required an hour
 before each, if they had wanted to understand it. What a number of
 pictures! There was no end to them. They must be worth a mint of money.
 Right at the end, Monsieur Madinier suddenly ordered a halt opposite the
 "Raft of the Medusa" and he explained the subject to them. All deeply
 impressed and motionless, they uttered not a word. When they started off
 again, Boche expressed the general feeling, saying it was marvellous.
 

 In the Apollo Gallery, the inlaid flooring especially astonished the party—a
 shining floor, as clear as a mirror, and which reflected the legs of the
 seats. Mademoiselle Remanjou kept her eyes closed, because she could not
 help thinking that she was walking on water. They called to Madame Gaudron
 to be careful how she trod on account of her condition. Monsieur Madinier
 wanted to show them the gilding and paintings of the ceiling; but it
 nearly broke their necks to look up above, and they could distinguish
 nothing. Then, before entering the Square Salon, he pointed to a window,
 saying:
 

 "That's the balcony from which Charles IX. fired on the people."
 

 He looked back to make sure the party was following. In the middle of the
 Salon Carre, he held up his hand. "There are only masterpieces here," he
 said, in a subdued voice, as though in church. They went all around the
 room. Gervaise wanted to know about "The Wedding at Cana." Coupeau paused
 to stare at the "Mona Lisa," saying that she reminded him of one of his
 aunts. Boche and Bibi-the-Smoker snickered at the nudes, pointing them out
 to each other and winking. The Gaudrons looked at the "Virgin" of Murillo,
 he with his mouth open, she with her hands folded on her belly.
 

 When they had been all around the Salon, Monsieur Madinier wished them to
 go round it again, it was so worth while. He was very attentive to Madame
 Lorilleux, because of her silk dress; and each time that she questioned
 him he answered her gravely, with great assurance. She was curious about
 "Titian's Mistress" because the yellow hair resembled her own. He told her
 it was "La Belle Ferronniere," a mistress of Henry IV. about whom there
 had been a play at the Ambigu.
 

 Then the wedding party invaded the long gallery occupied by the Italian
 and Flemish schools. More paintings, always paintings, saints, men and
 women, with faces which some of them could understand, landscapes that
 were all black, animals turned yellow, a medley of people and things, the
 great mixture of the colors of which was beginning to give them all
 violent headaches. Monsieur Madinier no longer talked as he slowly headed
 the procession, which followed him in good order, with stretched necks and
 upcast eyes. Centuries of art passed before their bewildered ignorance,
 the fine sharpness of the early masters, the splendors of the Venetians,
 the vigorous life, beautiful with light, of the Dutch painters. But what
 interested them most were the artists who were copying, with their easels
 planted amongst the people, painting away unrestrainedly; an old lady,
 mounted on a pair of high steps, working a big brush over the delicate sky
 of an immense painting, struck them as something most peculiar.
 

 Slowly the word must have gone around that a wedding party was visiting
 the Louvre. Several painters came over with big smiles. Some visitors were
 so curious that they went to sit on benches ahead of the group in order to
 be comfortable while they watched them pass in review. Museum guards bit
 back comments. The wedding party was now quite weary and beginning to drag
 their feet.
 

 Monsieur Madinier was reserving himself to give more effect to a surprise
 that he had in store. He went straight to the "Kermesse" of Rubens; but
 still he said nothing. He contented himself with directing the others'
 attention to the picture by a sprightly glance. The ladies uttered faint
 cries the moment they brought their noses close to the painting. Then,
 blushing deeply they turned away their heads. The men though kept them
 there, cracking jokes, and seeking for the coarser details.
 

 "Just look!" exclaimed Boche, "it's worth the money. There's one spewing,
 and another, he's watering the dandelions; and that one—oh! that
 one. Ah, well! They're a nice clean lot, they are!"
 

 "Let us be off," said Monsieur Madinier, delighted with his success.
 "There is nothing more to see here."
 

 They retraced their steps, passing again through the Salon Carre and the
 Apollo Gallery. Madame Lerat and Mademoiselle Remanjou complained,
 declaring that their legs could scarcely bear them. But the cardboard box
 manufacturer wanted to show Lorilleux the old jewelry. It was close by in
 a little room which he could find with his eyes shut. However, he made a
 mistake and led the wedding party astray through seven or eight cold,
 deserted rooms, only ornamented with severe looking-glass cases,
 containing numberless broken pots and hideous little figures.
 

 While looking for an exit they stumbled into the collection of drawings.
 It was immense. Through room after room they saw nothing interesting, just
 scribblings on paper that filled all the cases and covered the walls. They
 thought there was no end to these drawings.
 

 Monsieur Madinier, losing his head, not willing to admit that he did not
 know his way, ascended a flight of stairs, making the wedding party mount
 to the next floor. This time they traversed the Naval Museum, among models
 of instruments and cannons, plans in relief, and vessels as tiny as
 playthings. After going a long way, and walking for a quarter of an hour,
 the party came upon another staircase; and, having descended this, found
 itself once more surrounded by the drawings. Then despair took possession
 of them as they wandered at random through long halls, following Monsieur
 Madinier, who was furious and mopping the sweat from his forehead. He
 accused the government of having moved the doors around. Museum guards and
 visitors looked on with astonishment as the procession, still in a column
 of couples, passed by. They passed again through the Salon Carre, the
 French Gallery and then along the cases where minor Eastern divinities
 slumbered peacefully. It seemed they would never find their way out. They
 were getting tired and made a lot of noise.
 

 "Closing time! Closing time!" called out the attendants, in a loud tone of
 voice.
 

 And the wedding party was nearly locked in. An attendant was obliged to
 place himself at the head of it, and conduct it to a door. Then in the
 courtyard of the Louvre, when it had recovered its umbrellas from the
 cloakroom, it breathed again. Monsieur Madinier regained his assurance. He
 had made a mistake in not turning to the left, now he recollected that the
 jewelry was to the left. The whole party pretended to be very pleased at
 having seen all they had.
 

 Four o'clock was striking. There were still two hours to be employed
 before the dinner time, so it was decided they should take a stroll, just
 to occupy the interval. The ladies, who were very tired, would have
 preferred to sit down; but, as no one offered any refreshments, they
 started off, following the line of quays. There they encountered another
 shower and so sharp a one that in spite of the umbrellas, the ladies'
 dresses began to get wet. Madame Lorilleux, her heart sinking within her
 each time a drop fell upon her black silk, proposed that they should
 shelter themselves under the Pont-Royal; besides if the others did not
 accompany her, she threatened to go all by herself. And the procession
 marched under one of the arches of the bridge. They were very comfortable
 there. It was, most decidedly a capital idea! The ladies, spreading their
 handkerchiefs over the paving-stones, sat down with their knees wide
 apart, and pulled out the blades of grass that grew between the stones
 with both hands, whilst they watched the dark flowing water as though they
 were in the country. The men amused themselves with calling out very loud,
 so as to awaken the echoes of the arch. Boche and Bibi-the-Smoker shouted
 insults into the air at the top of their voices, one after the other. They
 laughed uproariously when the echo threw the insults back at them. When
 their throats were hoarse from shouting, they made a game of skipping flat
 stones on the surface of the Seine.
 

 The shower had ceased but the whole party felt so comfortable that no one
 thought of moving away. The Seine was flowing by, an oily sheet carrying
 bottle corks, vegetable peelings, and other refuse that sometimes
 collected in temporary whirlpools moving along with the turbulent water.
 Endless traffic rumbled on the bridge overhead, the noisy bustle of Paris,
 of which they could glimpse only the rooftops to the left and right, as
 though they were in the bottom of a deep pit.
 

 Mademoiselle Remanjou sighed; if the leaves had been out this would have
 reminded her of a bend of the Marne where she used to go with a young man.
 It still made her cry to think of him.
 

 At last, Monsieur Madinier gave the signal for departure. They passed
 through the Tuileries gardens, in the midst of a little community of
 children, whose hoops and balls upset the good order of the couples. Then
 as the wedding party on arriving at the Place Vendome looked up at the
 column, Monsieur Madinier gallantly offered to treat the ladies to a view
 from the top. His suggestion was considered extremely amusing. Yes, yes,
 they would go up; it would give them something to laugh about for a long
 time. Besides, it would be full of interest for those persons who had
 never been higher than a cow pasture.
 

 "Do you think Clump-clump will venture inside there with her leg all out
 of place?" murmured Madame Lorilleux.
 

 "I'll go up with pleasure," said Madame Lerat, "but I won't have any men
 walking behind me."
 

 And the whole party ascended. In the narrow space afforded by the spiral
 staircase, the twelve persons crawled up one after the other, stumbling
 against the worn steps, and clinging to the walls. Then, when the
 obscurity became complete, they almost split their sides with laughing.
 The ladies screamed when the gentlemen pinched their legs. But they were
 weren't stupid enough to say anything! The proper plan is to think that it
 is the mice nibbling at them. It wasn't very serious; the men knew when to
 stop.
 

 Boche thought of a joke and everyone took it up. They called down to
 Madame Gaudron to ask her if she could squeeze her belly through. Just
 think! If she should get stuck there, she would completely block the
 passage, and how would they ever get out? They laughed so at the jokes
 about her belly that the column itself vibrated. Boche was now quite
 carried away and declared that they were growing old climbing up this
 chimney pipe. Was it ever coming to an end, or did it go right up to
 heaven? He tried to frighten the ladies by telling them the structure was
 shaking.
 

 Coupeau, meanwhile, said nothing. He was behind Gervaise, with his arm
 around her waist, and felt that she was everything perfect to him. When
 they suddenly emerged again into the daylight, he was just in the act of
 kissing her on the cheek.
 

 "Well! You're a nice couple; you don't stand on ceremony," said Madame
 Lorilleux with a scandalized air.
 

 Bibi-the-Smoker pretended to be furious. He muttered between his teeth.
 "You made such a noise together! I wasn't even able to count the steps."
 

 But Monsieur Madinier was already up on the platform, pointing out the
 different monuments. Neither Madame Fauconnier nor Mademoiselle Remanjou
 would on any consideration leave the staircase. The thought of the
 pavement below made their blood curdle, and they contented themselves with
 glancing out of the little door. Madame Lerat, who was bolder, went round
 the narrow terrace, keeping close to the bronze dome; but, mon Dieu,
 it gave one a rude emotion to think that one only had to slip off. The men
 were a little paler than usual as they stared down at the square below.
 You would think you were up in mid-air, detached from everything. No, it
 wasn't fun, it froze your very insides.
 

 Monsieur Madinier told them to raise their eyes and look straight into the
 distance to avoid feeling dizzy. He went on pointing out the Invalides,
 the Pantheon, Notre Dame and the Montmartre hill. Madame Lorilleux asked
 if they could see the place where they were to have dinner, the Silver
 Windmill on the Boulevard de la Chapelle. For ten minutes they tried to
 see it, even arguing about it. Everyone had their own idea where it was.
 

 "It wasn't worth while coming up here to bite each other's noses off,"
 said Boche, angrily as he turned to descend the staircase.
 

 The wedding party went down, unspeaking and sulky, awakening no other
 sound beyond that of shoes clanking on the stone steps. When it reached
 the bottom, Monsieur Madinier wished to pay; but Coupeau would not permit
 him, and hastened to place twenty-four sous into the keeper's hand, two
 sous for each person. So they returned by the Boulevards and the Faubourg
 du Poissonniers. Coupeau, however, considered that their outing could not
 end like that. He bundled them all into a wineshop where they took some
 vermouth.
 

 The repast was ordered for six o'clock. At the Silver Windmill, they had
 been waiting for the wedding party for a good twenty minutes. Madame
 Boche, who had got a lady living in the same house to attend to her duties
 for the evening, was conversing with mother Coupeau in the first floor
 room, in front of the table, which was all laid out; and the two
 youngsters, Claude and Etienne, whom she had brought with her, were
 playing about beneath the table and amongst the chairs. When Gervaise, on
 entering caught sight of the little ones, whom she had not seen all the
 day, she took them on her knees, and caressed and kissed them.
 

 "Have they been good?" asked she of Madame Boche. "I hope they haven't
 worried you too much."
 

 And as the latter related the things the little rascals had done during
 the afternoon, and which would make one die with laughing, the mother
 again took them up and pressed them to her breast, seized with an
 overpowering outburst of maternal affection.
 

 "It's not very pleasant for Coupeau, all the same," Madame Lorilleux was
 saying to the other ladies, at the end of the room.
 

 Gervaise had kept her smiling peacefulness from the morning, but after the
 long walk she appeared almost sad at times as she watched her husband and
 the Lorilleuxs in a thoughtful way. She had the feeling that Coupeau was a
 little afraid of his sister. The evening before, he had been talking big,
 swearing he would put them in their places if they didn't behave. However,
 she could see that in their presence he was hanging on their words,
 worrying when he thought they might be displeased. This gave the young
 bride some cause for worry about the future.
 

 They were now only waiting for My-Boots, who had not yet put in an
 appearance.
 

 "Oh! blow him!" cried Coupeau, "let's begin. You'll see, he'll soon turn
 up, he's got a hollow nose, he can scent the grub from afar. I say he must
 be amusing himself, if he's still standing like a post on the Route de
 Saint-Denis!"
 

 Then the wedding party, feeling very lively, sat down making a great noise
 with the chairs. Gervaise was between Lorilleux and Monsieur Madinier, and
 Coupeau between Madame Fauconnier and Madame Lorilleux. The other guests
 seated themselves where they liked, because it always ended with
 jealousies and quarrels, when one settled their places for them. Boche
 glided to a seat beside Madame Lerat. Bibi-the-Smoker had for neighbors
 Mademoiselle Remanjou and Madame Gaudron. As for Madame Boche and mother
 Coupeau, they were right at the end of the table, looking after the
 children, cutting up their meat and giving them something to drink, but
 not much wine.
 

 "Does nobody say grace?" asked Boche, whilst the ladies arranged their
 skirts under the table-cloth, so as not to get them stained.
 

 But Madame Lorilleux paid no attention to such pleasantries. The
 vermicelli soup, which was nearly cold, was gulped down very quickly,
 their lips making a hissing noise against the spoons. Two waiters served
 at table, dressed in little greasy jackets and not over-clean white
 aprons. By the four open windows overlooking the acacias of the courtyard
 there entered the clear light of the close of a stormy day, with the
 atmosphere purified thereby though without sufficiently cooling it. The
 light reflected from the humid corner of trees tinged the haze-filled room
 with green and made leaf shadows dance along the table-cloth, from which
 came a vague aroma of dampness and mildew.
 

 Two large mirrors, one at each end of the room, seemed to stretch out the
 table. The heavy crockery with which it was set was beginning to turn
 yellow and the cutlery was scratched and grimed with grease. Each time a
 waiter came through the swinging doors from the kitchen a whiff of odorous
 burnt lard came with him.
 

 "Don't all talk at once," said Boche, as everyone remained silent with his
 nose in his plate.
 

 They were drinking the first glass of wine as their eyes followed two meat
 pies which the waiters were handing round when My-Boots entered the room.
 

 "Well, you're a scurvy lot, you people!" said he. "I've been wearing my
 pins out for three hours waiting on that road, and a gendarme even came
 and asked me for my papers. It isn't right to play such dirty tricks on a
 friend! You might at least have sent me word by a commissionaire. Ah! no,
 you know, joking apart, it's too bad. And with all that, it rained so hard
 that I got my pickets full of water. Honor bright, you might still catch
 enough fish in 'em for a meal."
 

 The others wriggled with laughter. That animal My-Boots was just a bit on;
 he had certainly already stowed away his two quarts of wine, merely to
 prevent his being bothered by all that frog's liquor with which the storm
 had deluged his limbs.
 

 "Hallo! Count Leg-of-Mutton!" said Coupeau, "just go and sit yourself
 there, beside Madame Gaudron. You see you were expected."
 

 Oh, he did not mind, he would soon catch the others up; and he asked for
 three helpings of soup, platefuls of vermicelli, in which he soaked
 enormous slices of bread. Then, when they had attacked the meat pies, he
 became the profound admiration of everyone at the table. How he stowed it
 away! The bewildered waiters helped each other to pass him bread, thin
 slices which he swallowed at a mouthful. He ended by losing his temper; he
 insisted on having a loaf placed on the table beside him. The landlord,
 very anxious, came for a moment and looked in at the door. The party,
 which was expecting him, again wriggled with laughter. It seemed to upset
 the caterer. What a rum card he was that My-Boots! One day he had eaten a
 dozen hard-boiled eggs and drank a dozen glasses of wine while the clock
 was striking twelve! There are not many who can do that. And Mademoiselle
 Remanjou, deeply moved, watched My-Boots chew whilst Monsieur Madinier,
 seeking for a word to express his almost respectful astonishment, declared
 that such a capacity was extraordinary.
 

 There was a brief silence. A waiter had just placed on the table a ragout
 of rabbits in a vast dish as deep as a salad-bowl. Coupeau, who liked fun,
 started another joke.
 

 "I say, waiter, that rabbit's from the housetops. It still mews."
 

 And in fact, a faint mew perfectly imitated seemed to issue from the dish.
 It was Coupeau who did that with his throat, without opening his lips; a
 talent which at all parties, met with decided success, so much so that he
 never ordered a dinner abroad without having a rabbit ragout. After that
 he purred. The ladies pressed their napkins to their mouths to try and
 stop their laughter. Madame Fauconnier asked for a head, she only liked
 that part. Mademoiselle Remanjou had a weakness for the slices of bacon.
 And as Boche said he preferred the little onions when they were nicely
 broiled, Madame Lerat screwed up her lips, and murmured:
 

 "I can understand that."
 

 She was a dried up stick, living the cloistered life of a hard-working
 woman imprisoned within her daily routine, who had never had a man stick
 his nose into her room since the death of her husband; yet she had an
 obsession with double meanings and indecent allusions that were sometimes
 so far off the mark that only she understood them.
 

 As Boche leaned toward her and, in a whisper, asked for an explanation,
 she resumed:
 

 "Little onions, why of course. That's quite enough, I think."
 

 The general conversation was becoming grave. Each one was talking of his
 trade. Monsieur Madinier raved about the cardboard business. There were
 some real artists. For an example, he mentioned Christmas gift boxes, of
 which he'd seen samples that were marvels of splendor.
 

 Lorilleux sneered at this; he was extremely vain because of working with
 gold, feeling that it gave a sort of sheen to his fingers and his whole
 personality. "In olden times jewelers wore swords like gentlemen." He
 often cited the case of Bernard Palissy, even though he really knew
 nothing about him.
 

 Coupeau told of a masterpiece of a weather vane made by one of his fellow
 workers which included a Greek column, a sheaf of wheat, a basket of
 fruit, and a flag, all beautifully worked out of nothing but strips of
 zinc shaped and soldered together.
 

 Madame Lerat showed Bibi-the-Smoker how to make a rose by rolling the
 handle of her knife between her bony fingers.
 

 All the while, their voices had been rising louder and louder, competing
 for attention. Shrill comments by Madame Fauconnier were heard. She
 complained about the girls who worked for her, especially a little
 apprentice who was nothing but a tart and had badly scorched some sheets
 the evening before.
 

 "You may talk," Lorilleux cried, banging his fist down on the table, "but
 gold is gold."
 

 And, in the midst of the silence caused by the statement of this fact, the
 only sound heard was Mademoiselle Remanjou's shrill voice continuing:
 

 "Then I turn up the skirt and stitch it inside. I stick a pin in the head
 to keep the cap on, and that's all; and they are sold for thirteen sous a
 piece."
 

 She was explaining how she dressed her dolls to My-Boots, whose jaws were
 working slowly like grindstones. He did not listen, though he kept nodding
 his head, but looked after the waiters to prevent them removing any of the
 dishes he had not cleaned out. They had now finished a veal stew with
 green beans. The roast was brought in, two scrawny chickens resting on a
 bed of water cress which was limp from the warming oven.
 

 Outside, only the higher branches of the acacias were touched by the
 setting sun. Inside, the greenish reflected light was thickened by wisps
 of steam rising from the table, now messy with spilled wine and gravy and
 the debris of the dinner. Along the wall were dirty dishes and empty
 bottles which the waiters had piled there like a heap of refuse. It was so
 hot that the men took off their jackets and continued eating in their
 shirt sleeves.
 

 "Madame Boche, please don't spread their butter so thick," said Gervaise,
 who spoke but little, and who was watching Claude and Etienne from a
 distance.
 

 She got up from her seat, and went and talked for a minute while standing
 behind the little ones' chairs. Children did not reason; they would eat
 all day long without refusing a single thing; and then she herself helped
 them to some chicken, a little of the breast. But mother Coupeau said they
 might, just for once in a while, risk an attack of indigestion. Madame
 Boche, in a low voice accused Boche of caressing Madame Lerat's knees. Oh,
 he was a sly one, but he was getting a little too gay. She had certainly
 seen his hand disappear. If he did it again, drat him! she wouldn't
 hesitate throwing a pitcher of water over his head.
 

 In the partial silence, Monsieur Madinier was talking politics. "Their law
 of May 31, is an abominable one. Now you must reside in a place for two
 years. Three millions of citizens are struck off the voting lists. I've
 been told that Bonaparte is, in reality, very much annoyed for he loves
 the people; he has given them proofs."
 

 He was a republican; but he admired the prince on account of his uncle, a
 man the like of whom would never be seen again. Bibi-the-Smoker flew into
 a passion. He had worked at the Elysee; he had seen Bonaparte just as he
 saw My-Boots in front of him over there. Well that muff of a president was
 just like a jackass, that was all! It was said that he was going to travel
 about in the direction of Lyons; it would be a precious good riddance of
 bad rubbish if he fell into some hole and broke his neck. But, as the
 discussion was becoming too heated, Coupeau had to interfere.
 

 "Ah, well! How simple you all are to quarrel about politics. Politics are
 all humbug! Do such things exist for us? Let there be any one as king, it
 won't prevent me earning my five francs a day, and eating and sleeping;
 isn't that so? No, it's too stupid to argue about!"
 

 Lorilleux shook his head. He was born on the same day as the Count of
 Chambord, the 29th of September, 1820. He was greatly struck with this
 coincidence, indulging himself in a vague dream, in which he established a
 connection between the king's return to France and his own private
 fortunes. He never said exactly what he was expecting, but he led people
 to suppose that when that time arrived something extraordinarily agreeable
 would happen to him. So whenever he had a wish too great to be gratified,
 he would put it off to another time, when the king came back.
 

 "Besides," observed he, "I saw the Count de Chambord one evening."
 

 Every face was turned towards him.
 

 "It's quite true. A stout man, in an overcoat, and with a good-natured
 air. I was at Pequignot's, one of my friends who deals in furniture in the
 Grand Rue de la Chapelle. The Count of Chambord had forgotten his umbrella
 there the day before; so he came in, and just simply said, like this:
 'Will you please return me my umbrella?' Well, yes, it was him; Pequignot
 gave me his word of honor it was."
 

 Not one of the guests suggested the smallest doubt. They had now arrived
 at dessert and the waiters were clearing the table with much clattering of
 dishes. Madame Lorilleux, who up to then had been very genteel, very much
 the lady, suddenly let fly with a curse. One of the waiters had spilled
 something wet down her neck while removing a dish. This time her silk
 dress would be stained for sure. Monsieur Madinier had to examine her
 back, but he swore there was nothing to be seen.
 

 Two platters of cheese, two dishes of fruit, and a floating island pudding
 of frosted eggs in a deep salad-bowl had now been placed along the middle
 of the table. The pudding caused a moment of respectful attention even
 though the overdone egg whites had flattened on the yellow custard. It was
 unexpected and seemed very fancy.
 

 My-Boots was still eating. He had asked for another loaf. He finished what
 there was of the cheese; and, as there was some cream left, he had the
 salad-bowl passed to him, into which he sliced some large pieces of bread
 as though for a soup.
 

 "The gentleman is really remarkable," said Monsieur Madinier, again giving
 way to his admiration.
 

 Then the men rose to get their pipes. They stood for a moment behind
 My-Boots, patting him on the back, and asking him if he was feeling
 better. Bibi-the-Smoker lifted him up in his chair; but tonnerre de
 Dieu! the animal had doubled in weight. Coupeau joked that My-Boots
 was only getting started, that now he was going to settle down and really
 eat for the rest of the night. The waiters were startled and quickly
 vanished from sight.
 

 Boche, who had gone downstairs for a moment, came up to report the
 proprietor's reaction. He was standing behind his bar, pale as death. His
 wife, dreadfully upset, was wondering if any bakeries were still open.
 Even the cat seemed deep in despair. This was as funny as could be, really
 worth the price of the dinner. It was impossible to have a proper dinner
 party without My-Boots, the bottomless pit. The other men eyed him with a
 brooding jealousy as they puffed on their pipes. Indeed, to be able to eat
 so much, you had to be very solidly built!
 

 "I wouldn't care to be obliged to support you," said Madame Gaudron. "Ah,
 no; you may take my word for that!"
 

 "I say, little mother, no jokes," replied My-Boots, casting a side glance
 at his neighbor's rotund figure. "You've swallowed more than I have."
 

 The others applauded, shouting "Bravo!"—it was well answered. It was
 now pitch dark outside, three gas-jets were flaring in the room, diffusing
 dim rays in the midst of the tobacco-smoke. The waiters, after serving the
 coffee and the brandy, had removed the last piles of dirty plates. Down
 below, beneath the three acacias, dancing had commenced, a cornet-a-piston
 and two fiddles playing very loud, and mingling in the warm night air with
 the rather hoarse laughter of women.
 

 "We must have a punch!" cried My-Boots; "two quarts of brandy, lots of
 lemon, and a little sugar."
 

 But Coupeau, seeing the anxious look on Gervaise's face in front of him,
 got up from the table, declaring that there should be no more drink. They
 had emptied twenty-five quarts, a quart and a half to each person,
 counting the children as grown-up people; that was already too much. They
 had had a feed together in good fellowship, and without ceremony, because
 they esteemed each other, and wished to celebrate the event of the day
 amongst themselves. Everything had been very nice; they had had lots of
 fun. It wouldn't do to get cockeyed drunk now, out of respect to the
 ladies. That was all he had to say, they had come together to toast a
 marriage and they had done so.
 

 Coupeau delivered the little speech with convincing sincerity and
 punctuated each phrase by placing his hand on his heart. He won
 whole-hearted approval from Lorilleux and Monsieur Madinier; but the other
 four men, especially My-Boots, were already well lit and sneered. They
 declared in hoarse drunken voices that they were thirsty and wanted
 drinks.
 

 "Those who're thirsty are thirsty, and those who aren't thirsty aren't
 thirsty," remarked My-Boots. "Therefore, we'll order the punch. No one
 need take offence. The aristocrats can drink sugar-and-water."
 

 And as the zinc-worker commenced another sermon, the other, who had risen
 on his legs, gave himself a slap, exclaiming:
 

 "Come, let's have no more of that, my boy! Waiter, two quarts of your aged
 stuff!"
 

 So Coupeau said very well, only they would settle for the dinner at once.
 It would prevent any disputes. The well-behaved people did not want to pay
 for the drunkards; and it just happened that My-Boots, after searching in
 his pockets for a long time, could only produce three francs and seven
 sous. Well, why had they made him wait all that time on the Route de
 Saint-Denis? He could not let himself be drowned and so he had broken into
 his five-franc piece. It was the fault of the others, that was all! He
 ended by giving the three francs, keeping the seven sous for the morrow's
 tobacco. Coupeau, who was furious, would have knocked him over had not
 Gervaise, greatly frightened, pulled him by his coat, and begged him to
 keep cool. He decided to borrow the two francs of Lorilleux, who after
 refusing them, lent them on the sly, for his wife would never have
 consented to his doing so.
 

 Monsieur Madinier went round with a plate. The spinster and the ladies who
 were alone—Madame Lerat, Madame Fauconnier, Mademoiselle Remanjou—discreetly
 placed their five-franc pieces in it first. Then the gentlemen went to the
 other end of the room, and made up the accounts. They were fifteen; it
 amounted therefore to seventy-five francs. When the seventy-five francs
 were in the plate, each man added five sous for the waiters. It took a
 quarter of an hour of laborious calculations before everything was settled
 to the general satisfaction.
 

 But when Monsieur Madinier, who wished to deal direct with the landlord,
 had got him to step up, the whole party became lost in astonishment on
 hearing him say with a smile that there was still something due to him.
 There were some extras; and, as the word "extras" was greeted with angry
 exclamations, he entered into details:—Twenty-five quarts of wine,
 instead of twenty, the number agreed upon beforehand; the frosted eggs,
 which he had added, as the dessert was rather scanty; finally, a quarter
 of a bottle of rum, served with the coffee, in case any one preferred rum.
 Then a formidable quarrel ensued. Coupeau, who was appealed to, protested
 against everything; he had never mentioned twenty quarts; as for the
 frosted eggs, they were included in the dessert, so much the worse for the
 landlord if he choose to add them without being asked to do so. There
 remained the rum, a mere nothing, just a mode of increasing the bill by
 putting on the table spirits that no one thought anything about.
 

 "It was on the tray with the coffee," he cried; "therefore it goes with
 the coffee. Go to the deuce! Take your money, and never again will we set
 foot in your den!"
 

 "It's six francs more," repeated the landlord. "Pay me my six francs; and
 with all that I haven't counted the four loaves that gentleman ate!"
 

 The whole party, pressing forward, surrounded him with furious gestures
 and a yelping of voices choking with rage. The women especially threw
 aside all reserve, and refused to add another centime. This was some
 wedding dinner! Mademoiselle Remanjou vowed she would never again attend
 such a party. Madame Fauconnier declared she had had a very disappointing
 meal; at home she could have had a finger-licking dish for only two
 francs. Madame Gaudron bitterly complained that she had been shoved down
 to the worst end of the table next to My-Boots who had ignored her. These
 parties never turned out well, one should be more careful whom one
 invites. Gervaise had taken refuge with mother Coupeau near one of the
 windows, feeling shamed as she realized that all these recriminations
 would fall back upon her.
 

 Monsieur Madinier ended by going down with the landlord. One could hear
 them arguing below. Then, when half an hour had gone by the cardboard box
 manufacturer returned; he had settled the matter by giving three francs.
 But the party continued annoyed and exasperated, constantly returning to
 the question of the extras. And the uproar increased from an act of vigor
 on Madame Boche's part. She had kept an eye on Boche, and at length
 detected him squeezing Madame Lerat round the waist in a corner. Then,
 with all her strength, she flung a water pitcher, which smashed against
 the wall.
 

 "One can easily see that your husband's a tailor, madame," said the tall
 widow, with a curl of the lip, full of a double meaning. "He's a petticoat
 specialist, even though I gave him some pretty hard kicks under the
 table."
 

 The harmony of the evening was altogether upset. Everyone became more and
 more ill-tempered. Monsieur Madinier suggested some singing, but
 Bibi-the-Smoker, who had a fine voice, had disappeared some time before;
 and Mademoiselle Remanjou, who was leaning out of the window, caught sight
 of him under the acacias, swinging round a big girl who was bare-headed.
 The cornet-a-piston and two fiddles were playing "Le Marchand de
 Moutarde." The party now began to break up. My-Boots and the Gaudrons
 went down to the dance with Boche sneaking along after them. The twirling
 couples could be seen from the windows. The night was still as though
 exhausted from the heat of the day. A serious conversation started between
 Lorilleux and Monsieur Madinier. The ladies examined their dresses
 carefully to see if they had been stained.
 

 Madame Lerat's fringe looked as though it had been dipped in the coffee.
 Madame Fauconnier's chintz dress was spotted with gravy. Mother Coupeau's
 green shawl, fallen from off a chair, was discovered in a corner, rolled
 up and trodden upon. But it was Madame Lorilleux especially who became
 more ill-tempered still. She had a stain on the back of her dress; it was
 useless for the others to declare that she had not—she felt it. And,
 by twisting herself about in front of a looking-glass, she ended by
 catching a glimpse of it.
 

 "What did I say?" cried she. "It's gravy from the fowl. The waiter shall
 pay for the dress. I will bring an action against him. Ah! this is a fit
 ending to such a day. I should have done better to have stayed in bed. To
 begin with, I'm off. I've had enough of their wretched wedding!"
 

 And she left the room in a rage, causing the staircase to shake beneath
 her heavy footsteps. Lorilleux ran after her. But all she would consent to
 was that she would wait five minutes on the pavement outside, if he wanted
 them to go off together. She ought to have left directly after the storm,
 as she wished to do. She would make Coupeau sorry for that day. Coupeau
 was dismayed when he heard how angry she was. Gervaise agreed to leave at
 once to avoid embarrassing him any more.
 

 There was a flurry of quick good-night kisses. Monsieur Madinier was to
 escort mother Coupeau home. Madame Boche would take Claude and Etienne
 with her for the bridal night. The children were sound asleep on chairs,
 stuffed full from the dinner. Just as the bridal couple and Lorilleux were
 about to go out the door, a quarrel broke out near the dance floor between
 their group and another group. Boche and My-Boots were kissing a lady and
 wouldn't give her up to her escorts, two soldiers.
 

 It was scarcely eleven o'clock. On the Boulevard de la Chapelle, and in
 the entire neighborhood of the Goutte-d'Or, the fortnight's pay, which
 fell due on that Saturday, produced an enormous drunken uproar. Madame
 Lorilleux was waiting beneath a gas-lamp about twenty paces from the
 Silver Windmill. She took her husband's arm, and walked on in front
 without looking round, at such a rate, that Gervaise and Coupeau got quite
 out of breath in trying to keep up with them. Now and again they stepped
 off the pavement to leave room for some drunkard who had fallen there.
 Lorilleux looked back, endeavoring to make things pleasant.
 

 "We will see you as far as your door," said he.
 

 But Madame Lorilleux, raising her voice, thought it a funny thing to spend
 one's wedding night in such a filthy hole as the Hotel Boncoeur. Ought
 they not to have put their marriage off, and have saved a few sous to buy
 some furniture, so as to have had a home of their own on the first night?
 Ah! they would be comfortable, right up under the roof, packed into a
 little closet, at ten francs a month, where there was not even the
 slightest air.
 

 "I've given notice, we're not going to use the room up at the top of the
 house," timidly interposed Coupeau. "We are keeping Gervaise's room, which
 is larger."
 

 Madame Lorilleux forgot herself. She turned abruptly round.
 

 "That's worse than all!" cried she. "You're going to sleep in
 Clump-clump's room."
 

 Gervaise became quite pale. This nickname, which she received full in the
 face for the first time, fell on her like a blow. And she fully understood
 it, too, her sister-in-law's exclamation: the Clump-clump's room was the
 room in which she had lived for a month with Lantier, where the shreds of
 her past life still hung about. Coupeau did not understand this, but
 merely felt hurt at the harsh nickname.
 

 "You do wrong to christen others," he replied angrily. "You don't know
 perhaps, that in the neighborhood they call you Cow's-Tail, because of
 your hair. There, that doesn't please you, does it? Why should we not keep
 the room on the first floor? To-night the children won't sleep there, and
 we shall be very comfortable."
 

 Madame Lorilleux added nothing further, but retired into her dignity,
 horribly annoyed at being called Cow's-Tail. To cheer up Gervaise, Coupeau
 squeezed her arm softly. He even succeeded in making her smile by
 whispering into her ear that they were setting up housekeeping with the
 grand sum of seven sous, three big two-sou pieces and one little sou,
 which he jingled in his pocket.
 

 When they reached the Hotel Boncoeur, the two couples wished each other
 good-night, with an angry air; and as Coupeau pushed the two women into
 each other's arms, calling them a couple of ninnies, a drunken fellow, who
 seemed to want to go to the right, suddenly slipped to the left and came
 tumbling between them.
 

 "Why, it's old Bazouge!" said Lorilleux. "He's had his fill to-day."
 

 Gervaise, frightened, squeezed up against the door of the hotel. Old
 Bazouge, an undertaker's helper of some fifty years of age, had his black
 trousers all stained with mud, his black cape hooked on to his shoulder,
 and his black feather hat knocked in by some tumble he had taken.
 

 "Don't be afraid, he's harmless," continued Lorilleux. "He's a neighbor of
 ours—the third room in the passage before us. He would find himself
 in a nice mess if his people were to see him like this!"
 

 Old Bazouge, however, felt offended at the young woman's evident terror.
 

 "Well, what!" hiccoughed he, "we ain't going to eat any one. I'm as good
 as another any day, my little woman. No doubt I've had a drop! When work's
 plentiful one must grease the wheels. It's not you, nor your friends, who
 would have carried down the stiff 'un of forty-seven stone whom I and a
 pal brought from the fourth floor to the pavement, and without smashing
 him too. I like jolly people."
 

 But Gervaise retreated further into the doorway, seized with a longing to
 cry, which spoilt her day of sober-minded joy. She no longer thought of
 kissing her sister-in-law, she implored Coupeau to get rid of the
 drunkard. Then Bazouge, as he stumbled about, made a gesture of
 philosophical disdain.
 

 "That won't prevent you passing though our hands, my little woman. You'll
 perhaps be glad to do so, one of these days. Yes, I know some women who'd
 be much obliged if we did carry them off."
 

 And, as Lorilleux led him away, he turned around, and stuttered out a last
 sentence, between two hiccoughs.