# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	I. Zangwill, Dreamers of the Ghetto
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/29875/29875-h/29875-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Only, one thing must first be done. The past must be wiped off. He
must recommence with a clean sheet. True, he had always refused duels.
But now he saw the fineness, the necessity of them. In a world of
chicanery and treachery the sword alone cut clean.
He sent a challenge to the father, a message of goodwill to the lover.
But it was Janko who took up the challenge.
The weapon chosen was the pistol.
Lassalle's friends begged him to practise.
"Useless! I know what is destined."
Never had he been so colossal, so assured. His nerves seemed to have
regained their tone. The night before the duel he slept like a
tranquil child.
In the early morn, on the way to the field outside Geneva, he begged
his second to arrange the duel on the French side of the frontier, so
that he might remain in Geneva and settle his account with the father.
At the word of command, "One!" Janko's shot rang out. Lassalle's was
not a second later, but he had already received his death-wound.
He lay three days, dying in terrible agony, relieved only by copious
opium. Between the spasms, surprise possessed his mind that his Will
should have counted for nothing before the imperturbable march of the
universe. "There will never be Justice for the People," he thought
bitterly. "I was a dreamer. Heine was right. A mad world, my masters."
But sometimes he had a gleam of suspicion that it was he that had
lacked sanity. His Will had become [422]mere wilfulness. In his love as in
his crusade he had shut his eyes to the brute facts; had precipitated
what could only be coaxed. "I die by my own hand," he said. If he had
only married Rosalie Zander, who still lived on, loving him! These
Russian and Bavarian minxes were neurotic, fickle, shifting as sand;
the daughters of Judæa were sane, cheerful, solid. Then he thought of
his own sister married to that vulgarian, Friedland. He saw her, a
rosy-cheeked girl, sitting at the Passover table, with its picturesque
ritual. How happy were those far-off pious days! And then he felt a
cold wind, remembering how Riekchen had hidden her face to laugh at
these mediæval mummeries, and to spit out the bitter herbs, so
meaningless to her.
O terrible tragi-comedy of life, O strange, tangled world, in which
poor, petty man must walk, tripped by endless coils—religion, race,
sex, custom, wealth, poverty! World that from boyhood he had seemed to
see stretching so clearly before him, to be mapped out with lucid
logic, to be bestridden with triumphant foot by men become as gods,
knowing good and evil.
Only one thing was left—to die unbroken.
He had his lawyer brought to his bedside, went through his last
testament again, left money for the Union, recommended it to the
workers as their one sure path of salvation. Moses had only been
permitted to gaze upon the Promised Land, but the Chosen People—the
Germans—should yet luxuriate in its milk and honey.
A month after his meeting with Helene on the Righi—a month after his
glad shout, "By all the gods of Greece, 'tis she!"—he was a corpse,
the magic voice silent for ever; while the woman he had sought was to
give herself to his slayer, and the movement he had all but abandoned
for her was to become a great power in the State, under the
ever-growing glamour of his memory.
[423]The Countess bent over the body. A strange, grim joy mingled with her
rage and despair. None of all these women had the right to share in
her grief. He belonged to her—to her and the People. Yes, she would
bear the body of her cher enfant through the provinces of the
Rhine—he had been murdered by a cunning political plot, the People
who loved him should rise and avenge their martyred Messiah.
And suddenly she remembered with a fresh pang the one woman who had a
right to share her grief, nay, to call him—in no figurative
sense—"enfant"; the wrinkled old Jewess, palsied and deaf and
peevish, who lived on in a world despoiled of his splendid fighting
strength, of his superb fore-visionings.
In the choir of the old-fashioned church of Hughenden, that broods
amid the beautiful peace of English meadows, there stands, on the left
hand of the aisle, a black high-backed stall of polished oak, overhung
by the picturesque insignia of the Order of the Garter.
In the pavement behind it gleams a square slab, dedicated by "his
grateful sovereign and friend" to her great Prime Minister, and heaped
in the spring with primroses.
And on this white memorial is sculptured in bas-relief the profile of
the head of a Semitic Sphinx, round whose mute lips flickers in a
faint sardonic smile the wisdom of the ages.
I see him, methinks, in life, Premier of England, Lord Privy Seal,
Earl Beaconsfield of Beaconsfield, Viscount Hughenden of Hughenden,
sitting in his knightly stall, listening impassibly to the country
parson's sermon. His head droops on his breast, but his coal-black
inscrutable eyes are open.
It is the hour of his star.
He is just back from the Berlin Congress, bringing [425]"Peace with
Honor." The Continent has stood a-tiptoe to see the wonderful English
Earl pass and repass. He has been the lion of a congress that included
Bismarck. The laurels and the Oriental palm placed by his landlord on
the hotel-balcony have but faintly typified the feeling of Europe. His
feverous reception in England, from Dover pier onwards, has recalled
an earlier, a more romantic world. Fathers have brought their little
ones to imprint upon their memories the mortal features of this
immortal figure, who passes through a rain of flowers to his throne in
Downing Street. The London press, with scarce an exception, is in the
dust at his feet—with the proud English nobles and all that has ever
flouted or assailed him.
The sunshine comes floridly through the stained-glass windows, and
lies upon the austere crucifix.
By what devious ways has he wandered hither—from that warm old
Portuguese synagogue in Bevis Marks, whence his father withdrew under
the smart of a fine from "the gentlemen of the Mahamad?"
But hark! The parson—as paradoxically—is reading a Jewish psalm.
The Earl remains impassive.
[426]"Half Christendom worships a Jewess, and the other half a Jew."
Whom does he worship?
"Sensible men never tell."
Yet in that facial mask I seem to read all the tale of the long years
of desperate waiting, only half sweetened by premature triumphs of pen
and person; all the rancorous energies of political strife.
And as I gaze, a sense of something shoddy oppresses me, of tinsel and
glitter and flamboyance: a feeling that here is no true greatness, no
sphinx-like sublimity. A shadow of the world and the flesh falls
across the brooding figure, a Napoleonic vulgarity coarsens the
features, there is a Mephistophelian wrinkle in the corner of the
lips.
I think of his books, of his grandiose style, gorgeous as his early
waistcoats and gold chains, the prose often made up of bad blank
verse, leavings from his long coxcombical strain to be a poet; of his
false-sublime and his false-romantic, of his rococo personages,
monotonously magnificent; of his pseudo-Jewish stories, and his
braggart assertions of blood, played off against the insulting pride
of the proudest aristocracy in the world, and combined with a politic
perseverance to be more English than the English; of his naïve delight
in fine clothes and fine dishes and fine company; of his nice conduct
of a morning and evening cane; of his morbid self-consciousness of his
gifts and his genius; of his unscrupulous chase of personal success
and of Fame—that shadow which great souls cast, and little souls
pursue as substance; of his scrupulous personal rejection of
Love—Love, the one touch of true [427]romance in his novels—and his
pecuniary marriage for his career's sake, after the manner of his
tribe; of his romanesque conception of the British aristocracy, which
he yet dominates, because he is not really rooted in the social
conceptions which give it its prestige, and so is able to manœuvre
it artistically from without, intellect detached from emotion: to play
English politics like a game of chess, moving proud peers like pawns,
with especial skill in handling his Queen; his very imperturbability
under attack, only the mediæval Jew's self-mastery before the
grosser-brained persecutor.
I think these things and the Sphinx yields up his secret—the open
secret of the Ghetto parvenu.
But as I look again upon his strange Eastern face, so deep-lined, so
haggard, something subtler and finer calls to me from the ruins of its
melancholy beauty.
Into this heavy English atmosphere he brings not only the shimmer of
ideas and wit, but—a Heine of action—the fantasy of personal
adventure, and—when audacity has been crowned by empery—of dramatic
surprises of policy. A successful Lassalle, he flutters the stagnant
castes of aristocracy by the supremacy of the individual Will.
To a country that lumbers on from precedent to precedent, and owes its
very constitution to the pinch of practical exigencies, he brings the
Jew's unifying sweep of idea. First, he is the encourager of the Young
England party, for, conceiving himself child of a race of aristocrats
whose mission is to civilize the world, he feels the duty of guidance
to which these young English squires and nobles are born. The
bourgeois he hates—only the pomp of [428]sovereignty and the pathos of
poverty move his soul; his lifelong dream is of a Tory democracy,
wherein the nobles shall make happy the People that is exploited by
the middle classes. Product of a theocratic state, where the rich and
the poor are united in God, he is shocked by "the Two Nations" into
which, by the gradual break-up of the feudal world, this England is
split. The cry of the Chartists does not leave him cold. He is one in
revolt with Byron and Shelley against a Philistine world. And later,
to a mighty empire that has grown fortuitously, piecemeal, by the
individual struggles of independent pioneers or isolated filibusters,
he gives a unifying soul, a spirit, a mission. He perceives with Heine
that as Puritan Britain is already the heir of ancient Palestine, and
its State Church only the guardian of the Semitic principle,
popularized, so is it by its moral and physical energy, the destined
executant of the ideals of Zion; that it is planting the Law like a
great shady tree in the tropic deserts and arid wastes of barbarism.
That grandeur and romance of their empire, of which the English of his
day are only dimly aware, because like their constitution it has
evolved without a conscious principle, he, the outsider, sees. He is
caught by the fascination of its vastness, of its magnificent
possibilities. And in very deed he binds England closer to her
colonies, and restores her dwindled prestige in the Parliament of
Nations. He even proclaims her an Asiatic power.
For his heart is always with his own people—its past glories, its
persistent ubiquitous potency, despite ubiquitous persecution. He sees
himself the appointed scion of a Chosen Race, the only race to which
God has ever spoken, and perhaps the charm of acquired Cyprus is its
propinquity to Palestine, the only soil on which God has ever deigned
to reveal Himself.
[429]And, like his race, he has links with all the human panorama.
He is in touch with the humors and graces of European courts and
cities, has rapport with the rich-dyed, unchanging, double-dealing
East, enjoys the picaresque life of the Spanish mountains: he feels
the tragedy of vanished Rome, the marble appeal of ancient Athens, the
mystery of the Pyramids, the futility of life; his books palpitate
with world-problems.
And, as I think these things, his face is transfigured and he
becomes—beneath all his dazzle of deed—a Dreamer of the Ghetto.
So think I. But what—as the country parson's sermon drones on—thinks
the Sphinx?
Who shall tell?
"By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down; yea, we wept, when we
remembered Zion." By the river of Bâle we sit down, resolved to weep
no more. Not the German Rhine, but the Rhine ere it leaves the land of
liberty; where, sunning itself in a glory of blue sky and white cloud,
and overbrooded by the eternal mountains; it swirls its fresh green
waves and hurries its laden rafts betwixt the quaint old houses and
dreaming spires, and under the busy bridges of the Golden Gate of
Switzerland.
In the shady courtyard of the Town Hall are sundry frescoes testifying
to the predominant impress on the minds of its citizens of the life
and thoughts of a little people that flourished between two and three
thousand years ago in the highlands of Asia Minor. But, amid these
suggestive illustrations of ancient Jewish history, the strangest
surely is that of Moses with a Table of the Law, on which are written
the words: "Who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage."
For here, after all this travail of the centuries, a very modern
Moses—in the abstract-concrete form of a Congress—is again
meditating the deliverance of Israel from the house of bondage.
Not in the Town Hall, however, but in the Casino the Congress meets,
and, where Swiss sweethearts use to dance, [431]are debated the tragic
issues of an outcast nation. An oblong hall, of drab yellow, with cane
chairs neatly parted in the middle, and green-baized tables for
reporters, and a green-baized rostrum, and a green-baized platform,
over which rise the heads and festal shirt-fronts of the leaders.
A strangely assorted set of leaders, but all with that ink-mark on the
brow which is as much on the Continent the badge of action, as it is
in England the symbol of sterility; all believing more or less naïvely
that the pen is mightier than the millionaire's gold.
Only one of them hitherto has really stirred the world with his
pen-point—a prophet of the modern, preaching "Woe, woe" by
psycho-physiology; in himself a breezy, burly undegenerate, with a
great gray head marvellously crammed with facts and languages; now to
prove himself golden-hearted and golden-mouthed, an orator touching
equally to tears or laughter. In striking contrast with this
quasi-Teutonic figure shows the leonine head, with its tossing black
mane and shoulders, of the Russian leader, Apollo turned Berserker,
beautiful, overpowering, from whose resplendent mouth roll in mountain
thunder the barbarous Russian syllables.
And even as no two of the leaders are alike, so do the rank and file
fail to resemble one another. Writers and journalists, poets and
novelists and merchants, professors and men of professions—types that
once sought to slough their Jewish skins, and mimic, on Darwinian
principles, the colors of the environment, but that now, with some
tardy sense of futility or stir of pride, proclaim their brotherhood
in Zion—they are come from many places; from far lands and from near,
from uncouth, unknown villages of Bukowina and the Caucasus, and from
the great European capitals; thickliest from the pales of persecution,
in rare units from the free realms of England and America—a [432]strange
phantasmagoria of faces. A small, sallow Pole, with high cheek-bones;
a blond Hungarian, with a flaxen moustache; a brown, hatchet-faced
Roumanian; a fresh-colored Frenchman, with eye-glasses; a dark,
Marrano-descended Dutchman; a chubby German; a fiery-eyed Russian,
tugging at his own hair with excitement, perhaps in prescience of the
prison awaiting his return; a dusky Egyptian, with the close-cropped,
curly black hair, and all but the nose of a negro; a yellow-bearded
Swede; a courtly Viennese lawyer; a German student, with proud
duel-slashes across his cheek; a Viennese student, first fighter in
the University, with a colored band across his shirt-front; a dandy,
smelling of the best St. Petersburg circles; and one solitary
caftan-Jew, with ear-locks and skull-cap, wafting into the nineteenth
century the cabalistic mysticism of the Carpathian Messiah.
Who speaks of the Jewish type? One can only say negatively that these
faces are not Christian. Is it the stamp of a longer, more complex
heredity? Is it the brand of suffering? Certainly a stern Congress,
the speeches little lightened by humor, the atmosphere of historic
tragedy too overbrooding for intellectual dalliance. Even the presence
of the gayer sex—for there are a few ladies among the delegates, and
more peep down from the crowded spectators' gallery that runs sideways
along the hall—only makes a few shots of visual brightness in the
sober scene. Seriousness is stamped everywhere; on the broad-bulging
temples of the Russian oculist, on the egg-shaped skull and lank white
hair of the Heidelberg professor, on the open countenance of the
Hungarian architect, on the weak, narrow lineaments of the neurotic
Hebrew poet; it gives dignity to red hair and freckles, tones down the
grossness of too-fleshy cheeks, and lends an added beauty to
finely-cut features.
[433]Superficially, then, they have little in common, and if almost all
speak German—the language of the Congress—it is only because they
are all masters of three or four tongues. Yet some subtle instinct
links them each to each; presage, perhaps, of some brotherhood of
mankind, of which ingathered Israel—or even ubiquitous Israel—may
present the type.
Through the closed red-curtained windows comes ever and anon the sharp
ting of the bell of an electric car, and the President, anxiously
steering the course of debate through difficult international
cross-roads, rings his bell almost as frequently.
A majestic Oriental figure, the President's—not so tall as it appears
when he draws himself up and stands dominating the assembly with eyes
that brood and glow—you would say one of the Assyrian Kings, whose
sculptured heads adorn our Museums, the very profile of
Tiglath-Pileser. In sooth, the beautiful sombre face of a kingly
dreamer, but of a Jewish dreamer who faces the fact that flowers are
grown in dung. A Shelley "beats in the air his luminous wings in
vain"; our Jewish dreamer dreams along the lines of life; his dream
but discounts the future, his prophecy is merely fore-speaking, his
vision prevision. He talks agriculture, viticulture, subvention of the
Ottoman Empire, both by direct tribute and indirect enrichment; stocks
and shares, railroads, internal and to India; natural development
under expansion—all the jargon of our iron age. Let not his movement
be confounded with those petty projects for helping Jewish
agriculturists into Palestine. What! Improve the Sultan's land without
any political equivalent guaranteed in advance! Difficulty about the
holy places of Christianity and Islam? Pooh! extra-territorial.
A practised publicist, a trained lawyer, a not [434]unsuccessful comedy
writer, converted to racial self-consciousness by the "Hep, Hep" of
Vienna, and hurried into unforeseen action by his own paper-scheme of
a Jewish State, he has, perhaps, at last—and not unreluctantly—found
himself as a leader of men.
In a Congress of impassioned rhetoricians he remains serene, moderate;
his voice is for the more part subdued; in its most emotional
abandonments there is a dry undertone, almost harsh. He quells
disorder with a look, with a word, with a sharp touch of the bell. The
cloven hoof of the Socialist peeps out from a little group. At once
"The Congress shall be captured by no party!" And the Congress is in
roars of satisfaction.
'Tis the happy faculty of all idealists to overlook the visible—the
price they pay for seeing the unseen. Even our open-eyed Jewish
idealist has been blest with ignorance of the actual. But, in his very
ignorance of the people he would lead and the country he would lead
them to, lies his strength, just as in his admission that his Zionist
fervor is only that second-rate species produced by local
anti-Semitism, lies a powerful answer to the dangerous libel of local
unpatriotism. Of the real political and agricultural conditions of
Palestine he knows only by hearsay. Of Jews he knows still less. Not
for him the paralyzing sense of the humors of his race, the petty feud
of Dutchman and Pole, the mutual superiorities of Sephardi and
Ashkenazi, the grotesque incompatibility of Western and Eastern Jew,
the cynicism and snobbery of the prosperous, the materialism of the
uneducated adventurers in unexploited regions. He stands so high and
aloof that all specific colorings and markings are blurred for him
into the common brotherhood, and, if he is cynic enough to suspect
them, he is philosopher enough to recognize that all nations are
compact of incongruites, vitalized by warring elements. Nor has he any
sympathetic [435]perception of the mystic religious hopes of generations
of zealots, of the great swirling spiritual currents of Ghetto life.
But in a national movement—which appears at first sight hopeless,
because it lacks the great magnetizer, religion—lies a chance denied
to one who should boldly proclaim himself the evangel of a modern
Judaism, the last of the Prophets. Political Zionism alone can
transcend and unite: any religious formula would disturb and dissever.
Along this line may all travel to Jerusalem. And, as the locomotive
from Jaffa draws all alike to the sacred city, and leaves them there
to their several matters, so may the pious concern themselves not at
all with the religion of the engineer.
Not this the visionary figure created by the tear-dimmed yearning of
the Ghetto; no second Sabbataï Zevi, master of celestial secrets,
divine reincarnation, come with signs and wonders to lead back Israel
to the Promised Land. Still less the prophet prefigured by Christian
visionaries, some of whom, fevered nevertheless, press upon the
Congress itself complex collations of texts, or little cards with the
sign of the cross. Palestine, indeed, but an afterthought: an
aspiration of unsuspected strength, to be utilized—like all human
forces—by the maker of history. States are the expression of souls;
in any land the Jewish soul could express itself in characteristic
institutions, could shake off the long oppression of the ages, and
renew its youth in touch with the soil. Yet since there is this
longing for Palestine, let us make capital of it—capital that will
return its safe percentage. A rush to Palestine will mean all that
seething medley of human wants and activities out of which profits are
snatched by the shrewd—gold-rush and God-rush, they are both one in
their economic working. May not the Jews themselves take shares in so
promising a project? May not even their great bankers put their names
to such a prospectus? The shareholders [436]incur no liability beyond the
extent of their shares; there shall be no call upon them to come to
Palestine—let them remain in their snug nests; the Jewish Company,
Limited, seeks a home only for the desolate dove that finds no rest
for the sole of her feet.
And yet beneath all this statesmanlike prose, touched with the special
dryness of the jurist, lurk the romance of the poet and the purposeful
vagueness of the modern evolutionist; the fantasy of the Hungarian,
the dramatic self-consciousness of the literary artist, the heart of
the Jew.
Is one less a poet because he regards the laws of reality, less
religious because he accepts them, less a Jew because he will live in
his own century? Our dreamer will have none of the Mediæval, is
enamoured of the Modern; has lurking admiration of the "over-man" of
Nietzsche, even to be overpassed by the coming Jerusalem Jew; the
psychical Eurasian, the link and interpreter between East and
West—nay, between antiquity and the modern spirit; the synthesis of
mankind, saturated with the culture of the nations, and now at last
turning home again, laden with the spiritual spoils of the world—for
the world's benefit. He shall found an ideal modern state, catholic in
creed, righteous in law, a centre of conscience—even
geographically—in a world relapsing to Pagan chaos. And its flag
shall be a "shield of David," with the Lion of Judah rampant, and
twelve stars for the Tribes. No more of the cringing and the
whispering in dark corners; no surreptitious invasion of Palestine.
The Jew shall demand right, not tolerance. Israel shall walk erect.
And he, Israel's spokesman, will not juggle with diplomatic
combinations—he will play cards on table. He has nothing to say to
the mob, Christian or Jewish, he will not intrigue with political
underlings. He is no demagogue; he will speak with kings in their
palaces, with prime ministers in their cabinets. [437]There is a touch of
the ὕβρις of Lassalle, of the magnificence of Manasseh Bueno
Barzillai Azevedo Da Costa, King of the question-beggars.
Do you object that the poor will be the only ones to immigrate to
Palestine? Why, it is just those that we want. Prithee, how else shall
we make our roads and plant our trees? No mention now of the Eurasian
exemplar, the synthetic "over-man." Perhaps he is only to evolve. Do
you suggest that an inner ennobling of scattered Israel might be the
finer goal, the truer antidote to anti-Semitism? Simple heart, do you
not see it is just for our good—not our bad—qualities that we are
persecuted? A jugglery—specious enough for the moment—with the word
"good"; forceful "struggle-for-life" qualities substituted for
spiritual, for ethical. And yet to doubt that the world would—and
does—respond sympathetically to the finer elements so abundantly in
Israel, is it not to despair of the world, of humanity? In such a
world, what guarantee against the pillage of the Third Temple? And in
such a world were life worth living at all? And, even with Palestine
for ultimate goal, do you counsel delay, a nursing of the Zionist
flame, a gradual education and preparation of the race for a great
conscious historic rôle in the world's future, a forty years'
wandering in the wilderness to organize or kill off the miscellaneous
rabble—then will you, dreamer, turn a deaf ear to the cry of millions
oppressed to-day? Would you ignore the appeals of these hundreds of
telegrams, of these thousands of petitions with myriads of signatures,
for the sake of some visionary perfection of to-morrow? Nay, nay, the
cartoon of the Congress shall bring itself to pass. Against the
picturesque wailers at the ruins of the Temple wall shall be set the
no less picturesque peasants sowing the seed, whose harvest is at once
waving grain and a regenerated Israel. The stains of sordid traffic
shall be [438]cleansed by the dews and the rains. In the Jewish peasant
behold the ideal plebeian of the future; a son of the soil, yet also a
son of the spirit. And what fair floriage of art and literature may
not the world gain from this great purified nation, carrying in its
bosom the experience of the ages?
Not all his own ideas, these; some perhaps only half-consciously
present to him, so that even in this very Congress the note of
jealousy is heard, the claim of an earlier prophet insisted on
fiercely. For a moment the dignified assembly, becomes a prey to
atavism, reproduces the sordid squabbles of the Kahal. As if every
movement was not fed by subterranean fires, heralded by obscure
rumblings, though 'tis only the earthquake or the volcanic jet which
leaps into history!
But the President is finely impersonal. Not he, but the Congress. The
Bulgarians have a tradition that the Messiah will be born on August
29. He shares this belief. To-day the Messiah has been born—the
Congress. "In this Congress we procure for the Jewish people an organ
which till now it did not possess, and of which it was so sadly in
want. Our cause is too great for the ambition and wilfulness of a
single person. It must be lifted up to something impersonal if it is
to succeed. And our Congress shall be lasting, not only until we are
redeemed from the old state, but still more so afterwards ... serious
and lofty, a blessing for the unfortunate, noxious to none, to the
honor of all Jews, and worthy of a past, the glory of which is far
off, but everlasting."
And, as he steps from the tribune, amid the roar of "Hochs," and the
thunder of hands and feet and sticks, and the flutter of
handkerchiefs, with men precipitating themselves to kiss his hand, and
others weeping and embracing, be sure that no private ambition
possesses him, be sure that his heart swells only with the
presentiment of great [439]events and with uplifting thoughts of the
millions who will thrill to the distant echo of this sublime moment.
What European parliament could glow with such a galaxy of intellect?
Is not each man a born orator, master of arts or sciences? Has not the
very caftan-Jew from the Carpathians published his poetry and his
philosophy, gallantly championing "The Master of the Name" against a
Darwinian world? Heine had figured the Jew as a dog, that at the
advent of the Princess Sabbath is changed back to a man. More potent
than the Princess, the Congress has shown the Jew's manhood to the
world. That old painter, whose famous Dance of Death drew for
centuries the curious to Bâle, could not picture the Jew save as the
gaberdined miser, only dropping his money-bag at Death's touch. Well,
here is another sight for him—could Death, that took him too, bring
him back for a moment—these scholars, thinkers, poets, from all the
lands of the Exile, who stand up in honor of the dead pioneers of
Zionism, and, raising their right hands to heaven, cry, "If I forget
thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its cunning!" Yes, the
dream still stirs at the heart of the mummied race, the fire quenched
two thousand years ago sleeps yet in the ashes. And if our President
forgets that the vast bulk of his brethren are unrepresented in his
Congress, that they are content with the civic rights so painfully
won, and have quite other conceptions of their creed's future, who
will grudge him this moment of fine rapture?
Or, when at night, in the students' Kommers, with joyful weeping and
with brotherly kisses, sages and gray-beards join in the gaudeamus
igitur, who shall deny him grounds for his faith that juvenes sumus
yet, that the carking centuries have had no power over our immortal
nation. "Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale her infinite
variety."
[440]The world in which prophecies are uttered cannot be the world in which
prophecies are fulfilled. And yet when—at the wind-up of this
memorable meeting—the Rabbi of Bâle, in the black skull-cap of
sanctity, ascending the tribune amid the deafening applause of a
catholic Congress, expresses the fears of the faithful, lest in the
new Jewish State the religious Jew be under a ban; and when the
President gravely gives the assurance, amid enthusiasm as frantic,
that Judaism has nothing to fear—Judaism, the one cause and
consolation of the ages of isolation and martyrdom—does no sense of
the irony of history intrude upon his exalted mood?
A vast, motley crowd of poor Jews and Jewesses swayed outside the
doors of the great Manchester synagogue, warmed against the winter
afternoon by their desperate squeezing and pushing. They stretched
from the broad-pillared portico down the steps and beyond the iron
railings, far into the street. The wooden benches of the sacred
building were already packed with a perspiring multitude, seated
indiscriminately, women with men, and even men in the women's gallery,
resentfully conscious—for the first time—of the grating. The hour of
the address had already struck, but the body of police strove in vain
to close the doors against the mighty human stream that pressed on and
on, frenzied with the fear of disappointment and the long wait.
A policeman, worming his way in by the caretaker's entrance, bore to
the hero of the afternoon the superintendent's message that unless he
delayed his speech till the bulk of the disappointed could be got
inside, a riot could not be staved off. And so the stream continued to
force itself slowly forward, flowing into every nook and gangway, till
it stood solid and immovable, heaped like the waters of the Red Sea.
And when at last the doors were bolted, and thousands of swarthy
faces, illumined faintly by clusters of pendent gas-globes, were
turned towards the tall pulpit [442]where the speaker stood, dominant,
against the mystic background of the Ark-curtain, it seemed as if the
whole Ghetto of Manchester—the entire population of Strange-ways and
Redbank—had poured itself into this one synagogue in a great tidal
wave, moved by one of those strange celestial influences which have
throughout all history disturbed the torpor of the Jewries.
Of these poverty-stricken thousands, sucked hither by the fame of a
soldier rumored to represent a Messianic millionaire bent on the
restoration and redemption of Israel, Aaron the Pedlar was an
atom—ugly, wan, and stooping, with pious ear-locks, and a long, fusty
coat, little regarded even by those amid whom he surged and squeezed
for hours in patience. Aaron counted for less than nothing in a world
he helped to overcrowd, and of which he perceived very little. For,
although he did not fail to make a profit on his gilded goods, and
knew how to wheedle servants at side-doors, he was far behind his
fellows in that misapprehension of the human hurly-burly which makes
your ordinary Russian Jew a political oracle. Aaron's interest in
politics was limited to the wars of the Kings of Israel and the
misdeeds of Titus and Antiochus Epiphanes. To him the modern world was
composed of Jews and heathen; and society had two simple sections—the
rich and the poor.
"Don't you enjoy travelling?" one of the former section once asked him
affably. "Even if it's disagreeable in winter you must pass through a
good deal of beautiful scenery in summer."
"If I am on business," replied the pedlar, "how can I bother about the
beautiful?"
And, flustered though he was by the condescension of the great person,
his naïve counter-query expressed a truth. He lived, indeed, in a
strange dream-world, and [443]had no eyes for the real except in the shape
of cheap trinkets. He was happier in the squalid streets of
Strange-ways, where strips of Hebrew patched the windows of
cook-shops, and where a synagogue was ever at hand, than when striding
across the purple moors under an open blue sky, or resting with his
pack by the side of purling brooks. Stupid his enemies would have
called him, only he was too unimportant to have enemies, the roughs
and the children who mocked his passage being actuated merely by
impersonal malice. To his friends—if the few who were aware of his
existence could be called friends—he was a Schlemihl (a luckless
fool).
"A man who earns a pound a week live without a wife!" complained the
Shadchan (marriage-broker) to a group of sympathetic cap-makers.
"I suppose he's such a Schlemihl no father would ever look at him!"
said a father, with a bunch of black-eyed daughters.
"Oh, but he was married in Russia," said another; "but just as he
sent his wife the money to come over, she died."
"And yet you call him a Schlemihl!" cried Moshelé, the cynic.
"Ah, but her family stuck to the money!" retorted the narrator, and
captured the laugh.
It was true. After three years of terrible struggle and privation,
Aaron had prepared an English home for his Yenta, but she slept
instead in a Russian grave. Perhaps if his friends had known how he
had thrown away the chance of sending for her earlier, they would have
been still more convinced that he was a born Schlemihl. For within
eighteen months of his landing in London docks, Aaron, through his
rapid mastery of English and ciphering at the evening classes for
Hebrew adults, had found a post as book-keeper to a clothes-store in
Ratcliff Highway. But [444]he soon discovered that he was expected to fake
the invoices, especially when drunken sailors came to rig themselves
up in mufti.
"Well, we'll throw the scarf in," the genial salesman would concede
cheerily. "And the waistcoat? One-and-three—a good waistcoat, as
clean as new, and dirt cheap, so 'elp me."
But when Aaron made out the bill he was nudged to put the
one-and-three in the column for pounds and shillings respectively, and
even, if the buyer were sufficiently in funds and liquor, to set down
the date of the month in the same pecuniary partitions, and to add it
up glibly with the rest, calendar and coin together. But Aaron,
although he was not averse from honestly misrepresenting the value of
goods, drew the line at trickery, and so he was kicked out. It took
him a year of nondescript occupations to amass a little stock of mock
jewellery wherewith to peddle, and Manchester he found a more
profitable centre than the metropolis. Yenta dead, profit and holy
learning divided his thoughts, and few of his fellows achieved less of
the former or more of the latter than our itinerant idealist.
Such was one of the thousands of souls swarming that afternoon in the
synagogue, such was one despised unit of a congregation itself
accounted by the world a pitiable mass of superstitious poverty, and
now tossing with emotion in the dim spaces of the sacred building.
The Oriental imagination of the hearers magnified the simple soldierly
sentences of the orator, touched them with color and haloed them with
mystery, till, as the deep gasps and sobs of the audience struck back
like blows on the speaker's chest, the contagion of their passion
thrilled him to responsive emotion. And, seen through tears, arose for
him and them a picture of Israel again enthroned in Palestine, the
land flowing once more with milk and honey, [445]rustling with corn and
vines planted by their own hands, and Zion—at peace with all the
world—the recognized arbitrator of the nations, making true the word
of the Prophet: "For from Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of
God from Jerusalem."
To Aaron the vision came like a divine intoxication. He stamped his
feet, clapped, cried, shouted. He felt tears streaming down his cheeks
like the rivers that watered Paradise. What! This hope that had
haunted him from boyhood, wafting from the pages of the holy books,
was not then a shadowy splendor on the horizon's rim. It was a
solidity, within sight, almost within touch. He himself might hope to
sit in peace under his own fig-tree, no more the butt of the street
boys. And the vague vision, though in becoming definite it had been
transformed to earthliness, was none the less grand for that. He had
always dimly expected Messianic miracles, but in that magic afternoon
the plain words of the soldier unsealed his eyes, and suddenly he saw
clearly that just as, in Israel, every man was his own priest, needing
no mediator, so every man was his own Messiah.
And as he squeezed out of the synagogue, unconscious of the
chattering, jostling crowd, he saw himself in Zion, worshipping at the
Holy Temple, that rose spacious and splendid as the Manchester
Exchange. Yes; the Jews must return to Palestine, there must be a
great voluntary stream—great, if gradual. Slowly but surely the Jews
must win back their country; they must cease trafficking with the
heathen and return to the soil, sowing and reaping, so that the Feast
of the Ingathering might become a reality instead of a prayer-service.
Then should the atonement of Israel be accomplished, and the morning
stars sing together as at the first day.
As he walked home along the squalid steeps of Fernie [446]Street and
Verdon Street, and gazed in at the uncurtained windows of the
one-story houses, a new sense of their sordidness, as contrasted with
that bright vision, was borne in upon him. Instead of large families
in one ragged room, encumbered with steamy washing, he saw great farms
and broad acres; and all that beauty of the face of earth, to which he
had been half blind, began to appeal to him now that it was mixed up
with religion. In this wise did Aaron become a politician and a
modern.
Passing through the poulterer's on his way to his room—the poulterer
and he divided the house between them, renting a room each—he paused
to talk with the group of women who were plucking the fowls, and told
them glad tidings of great fowl-rearing farms in Palestine. He sat
down on the bed, which occupied half the tiny shop, and became almost
eloquent upon the great colonization movement and the "Society of
Lovers of Zion," which had begun to ramify throughout the world.
"Yes; but if all Israel has farms, who will buy my fowls?" said the
poulterer's wife.
"You will not need to sell fowls," Aaron tried to explain.
The poulterer shook his head. "The whole congregation is gone mad," he
said. "For my part I believe that when the Holy One, blessed be He,
brings us back to Palestine, it will be without any trouble of our
own. As it is written, I will bear thee upon eagles' wings."
Aaron disputed this notion—which he had hitherto accepted as
axiomatic—with all the ardor of the convert. It was galling to find,
as he discussed the thing during the next few weeks, that many even of
those present at the speech read miracle into the designs of
Providence and the millionaire. But Aaron was able to get together a
little band of brother souls bent on emigrating together to
[447]Palestine, there to sow the seeds of the Kingdom, literally as well as
metaphorically. This enthusiasm, however, did not wear well.
Gradually, as the memory of the magnetic meeting faded, the pilgrim
brotherhood disintegrated, till at last only its nucleus—Aaron—was
left in solitary determination.
"You have only yourself," pleaded the backsliders. "We have wife and
children."
"I have more than myself," retorted Aaron bitterly. "I have faith."
And, indeed, his faith in the vision was unshakable. Every man being
his own Messiah, he, at least, would not draw back from the
prospective plough to which he had put his hand. He had been saving up
for the great voyage and a little surplus wherewith to support him in
Palestine while looking about him. Once established in the Holy Land,
how forcibly he would preach by epistle to the men of little faith!
They would come out and join him. He—the despised Aaron—the least of
the House of Israel—would have played a part in the restoration of
his people.
"You will come back," said the poulterer sceptically, when his
fellow-tenant bade him good-bye; and parodying the sacred
aspiration—"Next year in Manchester," he cried, in genial mockery.
The fowl-plucking females laughed heartily, agitating the feathery
fluff in the air.
"Not so," said Aaron. "I cannot come back. I have sold the goodwill of
my round to Joseph Petowski, and have transferred to him all my
customers."
Some of the recreant brotherhood, remorsefully admiring, cheered him
up by appearing on the platform of the station to wish him God-speed.
"Next year in Jerusalem!" he prophesied for them, too, recouping
himself for the poulterer's profane scepticism.
He went overland to Marseilles, thence by ship to Asia [448]Minor. It was
a terrible journey. Piety forebade him to eat or drink with the
heathen, or from their vessels. His portmanteau held a little store of
provisions and crockery, and dry bread was all he bought on the route.
Fleeced and bullied by touts and cabmen, he found himself at last on
board a cheap Mediterranean steamer which pitched and rolled through a
persistent spell of stormy weather. His berth was a snatched corner of
the bare deck, where heaps of earth's failures, of all races and
creeds and colors, grimily picturesque, slept in their clothes upon
such bedding as they had brought with them. There was a spawn of
babies, a litter of animals and fowls in coops, a swarm of human
bundles, scarcely distinguishable from bales except for a protruding
hand or foot. There were Bedouins, Armenians, Spaniards, a Turk with
several wives in an improvised tent, some Greek women, a party of
Syrians from Mount Lebanon. There were also several Jews of both
sexes. But Aaron did not scrape acquaintance with these at first—they
lay yards away, and he was half dead with sea-sickness and want of
food. He had counted on making tea in his own cup with his own little
kettle, but the cook would not trouble to supply him with hot water.
Only the great vision drawing hourly nearer and nearer sustained him.
It was the attempt of a half-crazy Egyptian Jewess to leap overboard
with her new-born child that brought him into relation with the other
Jewish passengers. He learnt her story: the everyday story of a woman
divorced in New York, after the fashion of its Ghetto, and sent back
with scarcely a penny to her native Cairo, while still lightheaded
after childbirth. He heard also the story of the buxom, kind-hearted
Jewess who now shadowed her protectingly; the no less everyday story
of the good-looking girl inveigled by a rascally Jew to a situation in
Marseilles. [449]They contributed with the men, a Russian Jew from
Chicago, and a German from Brindisi, to give Aaron of Manchester a new
objective sense of the tragedy of wandering Israel, interminably
tossed betwixt persecution and poverty, perpetually tempted by both to
be false to themselves: the tragedy that was now—thank God!—to have
its end. Egyptians, Americans, Galicians, Englishmen, Russians,
Dutchmen, they had only one last migration before them—that which he,
Aaron, was now accomplishing. To his joy one of his new
acquaintances—the Russian—shared the dream of a Palestine flowing
once more with milk and honey and holy doctrine, was a member of a
"Lovers of Zion" society. He was a pasty-faced young man with gray
eyes and eyebrows and a reddish beard. He wore frowsy clothes, with an
old billy-cock and a dingy cotton shirt, but he combined all the lore
of the old-fashioned, hard-shell Jew with a living realization of what
his formulæ meant, and so the close of Aaron's voyage—till the
Russian landed at Alexandria—was softened and shortened by sitting
worshipfully at this idealist's feet, drinking in quotations from
Bachja's Duties of the Heart or Saadja Gaon's Book of the Faith.
There was not wanting some one to play Sancho Panza, for the German
Jew, while binding his arm piously with phylacteries in the publicity
of the swarming deck, loved to pose as a man of common sense, free
from superstition.
"The only reason men go to Palestine," he maintained, "is because they
think, as the psalm says, the land forgives sin. And they believe,
too, that those bodies which are not burned in Palestine, when the
Messiah's last trump sounds, will have to roll under lands and seas to
get to Jerusalem. So they go to die there, so as to escape the
underground route. Besides, Maimonides says the Messianic period will
only last forty years. So perhaps they [450]are afraid all the fun will be
over and the Leviathan eaten up before they arrive."
"Fools there are always in the world," replied the Russian, "and their
piety cannot give them brains. These literal folk are the sort who
imagine that the Temple expanded miraculously, because the Talmud says
howsoever great a multitude flocked to worship therein, there was
always room for them. Do you not see what a fine metaphor that is!
Even so the Third Temple will be of the Spirit, not of Fire, as these
literal materialists translate the prophecy. As the prophet Joel says,
'I will pour out my Spirit. Your old men shall dream dreams, your
young men shall see visions,' And this Spirit is working to-day. But
through our own souls. No Messiah will ever come from a split heaven.
If a Christian does anything wrong, it is the individual; if a Jew, it
is the nation. Why? Because we have no country, and hence are set
apart in all countries. But a country we must and shall have. The fact
that we still dream of our land shows that it is to be ours again.
Without a country we are dead. Without us the land is dead. It has
been waiting for us. Why has no other nation possessed it and
cultivated it?"
"Why? Why do the ducks go barefoot?" The German quoted the Yiddish
proverb with a sneer.
"The land waits for us," replied the young Russian fervidly, "so that
we may complete our mission. Jerusalem—whose very name means the
heritage of double Peace—must be the watch-tower of Peace on earth.
The nations shall be taught to compete neither with steel weapons nor
with gold, but with truth and purity. Every man shall be taught that
he exists for another man, else were men as the beasts. And thus at
last 'the knowledge of God shall cover the earth as the waters cover
the sea.'"
"If they would only remain covering the sea!" said the [451]German
irreverently, as the spray of a wave swept over his mattress.
"Those who have lost this faith are no longer Jews," curtly replied
the Russian. "Without this hope the preservation of the Jewish race is
a superstition. Let the Jews be swallowed up in the nations—and me in
the sea. If I thought that Israel's hope was a lie I should jump
overboard."
The German shrugged his shoulders good-humoredly. "You and the
Egyptian woman are a pair."
At Alexandria, where some of the cargo and his Jewish
fellow-passengers were to be landed, Aaron was tantalized for days by
the quarantine, so that he must needs fret amid the musty odors long
after he had thought to tread the sacred streets of Jerusalem. But at
last he found himself making straight for the Holy Land; and one magic
day, the pilgrim, pallid and emaciated, gazed in pious joy upon the
gray line of rocks that changed gradually into terraces of red sloping
roofs overbrooded by a palm-tree. Jaffa! But a cruel, white sea still
rolled and roared betwixt him and these holy shores, guarded by the
rock of Andromeda and tumbling and leaping billows; and the ship lay
to outside the ancient harbor, while heavy boats rowed by stalwart
Arabs and Syrians, in red fez and girdle, clamored for the passengers.
Aaron was thrown unceremoniously over the ship's side at the favorable
moment when the boat leapt up to meet him; he fell into it, soused
with spray, but glowing at heart. As his boat pitched and tossed
along, a delicious smell of orange-blossom wafted from the
orange-groves, and seemed to the worn pilgrim a symbol of the marriage
betwixt him and Zion. The land of his fathers—there it lay at last,
and in a transport of happiness the wanderer had, for the first time
in his life, a sense of the restful dignity of an ancestral home. But
as the boat [452]labored without apparent progress towards the channel
betwixt the black rocks, over which the spray flew skywards, a
foreboding tortured him that some ironic destiny would drown him in
sight of his goal. He prayed silently with shut eyes and his petition
changed to praise as the boat bumped the landing-stage and he opened
them on a motley Eastern crowd and the heaped barrels of a wharf.
Shouldering his portmenteau, which, despite his debilitated condition,
felt as light as the feathers at the poulterer's, he scrambled
ecstatically up some slippery steps on to the stone platform, and had
one foot on the soil of the Holy Land, when a Turkish official in a
shabby black uniform stopped him.
"Your passport," he said, in Arabic. Aaron could not understand.
Somebody interpreted.
"I have no passport," he answered, with a premonitory pang.
"Where are you going?"
"To live in Palestine."
"Where do you come from?"
"England," he replied triumphantly, feeling this was a mighty password
throughout the world.
"You are not an Englishman?"
"No-o," he faltered. "I have lived in England some—many years."
"Naturalized?"
"No," said Aaron, when he understood.
"What countryman are you?"
"Russian."
"And a Jew, of course?"
"Yes."
"No Russian Jews may enter Palestine."
Aaron was hustled back into the boat and restored safely to the
steamer.
The Red Beadle shook his head. "There is nothing but Nature," he said
obstinately, as his hot iron polished the boot between his knees. He
was called the Red Beadle because, though his irreligious opinions had
long since lost him his synagogue appointment and driven him back to
his old work of bootmaking, his beard was still ruddy.
"Yes, but who made Nature?" retorted his new employer, his strange,
scholarly face aglow with argument, and the flame of the lamp
suspended over his bench by strings from the ceiling. The other
clickers and riveters of the Spitalfields workshop, in their shocked
interest in the problem of the origin of Nature, ceased for an instant
breathing in the odors of burnt grease, cobbler's wax, and a coke fire
replenished with scraps of leather.
"Nature makes herself," answered the Red Beadle. It was his
declaration of faith—or of war. Possibly it was the familiarity with
divine things which synagogue beadledom involves that had bred his
contempt for them. At any rate, he was not now to be coerced by
Zussmann Herz, even though he was fully alive to the fact that
Zussmann's unique book-lined workshop was the only one that had opened
to him, when the more pious shoemakers of the [454]Ghetto had professed to
be "full up." He was, indeed, surprised to find Zussmann a believer in
the Supernatural, having heard whispers that the man was as great an
"Epicurean" as himself. Had not Zussmann—ay, and his wigless wife,
Hulda, too—been seen emerging from the mighty Church that stood in
frowsy majesty amid its tall, neglected box-like tombs, and was to the
Ghetto merely a topographical point and the chronometric standard? And
yet, here was Zussmann an assiduous attendant at the synagogue of the
first floor—nay, a scholar so conversant with Hebrew, not to mention
European, lore, that the Red Beadle felt himself a Man-of-the-Earth,
only retaining his superiority by remembering that learning did not
always mean logic.
"Nature make herself!" Zussmann now retorted, with a tolerant smile.
"As well say this boot made itself! The theory of Evolution only puts
the mystery further back, and already in the Talmud we find—"
"Nature made the boot," interrupted the Red Beadle. "Nature made
you, and you made the boot. But nobody made Nature."
"But what is Nature?" cried Zussmann. "The garment of God, as Goethe
says. Call Him Noumenon with Kant or Thought and Extension with
Spinoza—I care not."
The Red Beadle was awed into temporary silence by these unknown names
and ideas, expressed, moreover, in German words foreign to his limited
vocabulary of Yiddish.
The room in which Zussmann thought and worked was one of two that he
rented from the Christian corn-factor who owned the tall house—a
stout Cockney who spent his life book-keeping in a little office on
wheels, but whom the specimens of oats and dog-biscuits in his window
invested [455]with an air of roseate rurality. This personage drew a
little income from the population of his house, whose staircases
exhibited strata of children of different social developments, and to
which the synagogue on the first floor added a large floating
population. Zussmann's attendance thereat was not the only thing in
him that astonished the Red Beadle. There was also a gentle deference
of manner not usual with masters, or with pious persons. His
consideration for his employés amounted, in the Beadle's eyes, to
maladministration, and the grave loss he sustained through one of his
hands selling off a crate of finished goods and flying to America was
deservedly due to confidence in another pious person.
Despite the Red Beadle's Rationalism, which, basing itself on the
facts of life, was not to be crushed by high-flown German words, the
master-shoemaker showed him marked favor and often invited him to stay
on to supper. Although the Beadle felt this was but the due
recognition of one intellect by another, if an inferior intellect, he
was at times irrationally grateful for the privilege of a place to
spend his evenings in. For the Ghetto had cut him—there could be no
doubt of that. The worshippers in his old synagogue whom he had once
dominated as Beadle now passed him by with sour looks—"a dog one does
not treat thus," the Beadle told himself, tugging miserably at his red
beard.
"It is not as if I were a Meshummad—a convert to Christianity." Some
hereditary instinct admitted that as a just excuse for execration.
"I can't make friends with the Christians, and so I am cut off from
both."
[456]When after a thunderstorm two of the hands resigned their places at
Zussmann's benches on the avowed ground that atheism attracts
lightning, Zussmann's loyalty to the freethinker converted the
Beadle's gratitude from fitfulness into a steady glow.
And, other considerations apart, those were enjoyable suppers after
the toil and grime of the day. The Beadle especially admired
Zussmann's hands when the black grease had been washed off them, the
fingers were so long and tapering. Why had his own fingers been made
so stumpy and square-tipped? Since Nature made herself, why was she so
uneven a worker? Nay, why could she not have given him white teeth
like Zussmann's wife? Not that these were ostentatious—you thought
more of the sweetness of the smile of which they were part. Still, as
Nature's irregularity was particularly manifest in his own teeth, he
could not help the reflection.
If the Red Beadle had not been a widower, the unfeigned success of the
Herz union might have turned his own thoughts to that happy state. As
it was, the sight of their happiness occasionally shot through his
breast renewed pangs of vain longing for his Leah, whose death from
cancer had completed his conception of Nature. Lucky Zussmann, to have
found so sympathetic a partner in a pretty female! For Hulda shared
Zussmann's dreams, and was even copying out his great work for the
press, for business was brisk and he would soon have saved up enough
money to print it. The great work, in the secret of which the Red
Beadle came to participate, was written in Hebrew, and the elegant
curves and strokes would have done honor to a Scribe. The Beadle
himself could not understand it, knowing only the formal alphabet such
as appears in books and scrolls, but the first peep at it which the
proud Zussmann permitted him removed his last disrespect for the
[457]intellect of his master, without, however, removing the mystery of
that intellect's aberrations.
"But you dream with the eyes open," he said, when the theme of the
work was explained to him.
"How so?" asked Hulda gently, with that wonderful smile of hers.
"Reconcile the Jews and the Christians! Meshuggas—madness." He
laughed bitterly. "Do you forget what we went through in Poland? And
even here in free England, can you walk in the street without every
little shegetz calling after you and asking, 'Who killed Christ?'"
"Yes, but herein my husband explains that it was not the Jews who
killed Christ, but Herod and Pilate."
"As it says in Corinthians," broke in Zussmann eagerly: "'We speak the
wisdom of God in a mystery, which none of the princes of this world
knew; for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory.'"
"So," said the Red Beadle, visibly impressed.
"Assuredly," affirmed Hulda. "But, as Zussmann explains here, they
threw the guilt upon the Jews, who were too afraid of the Romans to
deny it."
The Beadle pondered.
"Once the Christians understand that," said Zussmann, pursuing his
advantage, "they will stretch out the hand to us."
The Beadle had a flash. "But how will the Christians read you? No
Christian understands Hebrew."
Zussmann was taken momentarily aback. "But it is not so much for the
Christians," he explained. "It is for the Jews—that they should
stretch out the hand to the Christians."
The Red Beadle stared at him in shocked silent amaze. "Still greater
madness!" he gasped at length. "They will treat you worse than they
treat me."
[458]"Not when they read my book."
"Just when they read your book."
Hulda was smiling serenely. "They can do nothing to my husband; he is
his own master, God be thanked; no one can turn him away."
"They can insult him."
Zussmann shook his head gently. "No one can insult me!" he said
simply. "When a dog barks at me I pity it that it does not know I love
it. Now draw to the table. The pickled herring smells well."
But the Red Beadle was unconvinced. "Besides, what should we make it
up with the Christians for—the stupid people?" he asked, as he
received his steaming coffee cup from Frau Herz.
"It is a question of the Future of the World," said Zussmann gravely,
as he shared out the herring, which had already been cut into many
thin slices by the vendor and pickler. "This antagonism is a
perversion of the principles of both religions. Shall we allow it to
continue for ever?"
"It will continue till they both understand that Nature makes
herself," said the Red Beadle.
"It will continue till they both understand my husband's book,"
corrected Hulda.
"Not while Jews live among Christians. Even here they say we take the
bread out of the mouths of the Christian shoemakers. If we had our own
country now—"
"Hush!" said Zussmann. "Do you share that materialistic dream? Our
realm is spiritual. Nationality—the world stinks with it! Germany for
the Germans, Russia for the Russians. Foreigners to the devil—pah!
Egomania posing as patriotism. Human brotherhood is what we stand for.
Have you forgotten how the Midrash explains the verse in the Song of
Solomon: 'I charge you, O ye [459]daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and
by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till
he please'?"
The Red Beadle, who had never read a line of the Midrash, did not deny
that he had forgotten the explanation, but persisted: "And even if we
didn't kill Christ, what good will it do to tell the Jews so? It will
only make them angry."
"Why so?" said Zussmann, puzzled.
"They will be annoyed to have been punished for nothing."
"But they have not been punished for nothing!" cried Zussmann, setting
down his fork in excitement. "They have denied their greatest son.
For, as He said in Matthew, 'I come to fulfil the Law of Moses,' Did
not all the Prophets, His predecessors, cry out likewise against mere
form and sacrifice? Did not the teachers in Israel who followed Him
likewise insist on a pure heart and a sinless soul? Jesus must be
restored to His true place in the glorious chain of Hebrew Prophets.
As I explain in my chapter on the Philosophy of Religion, which I have
founded on Immanuel Kant, the ground-work of Reason is—"
But here the Red Beadle, whose coffee had with difficulty got itself
sucked into the right channel, gasped—"You have put that into your
book?"
The wife touched the manuscript with reverent pride. "It all stands
here," she said.
"What! Quotations from the New Testament?"
"From our Jewish Apostles!" said Zussmann. "Naturally! On every page!"
"Then God help you!" said the Red Beadle.
The Brotherhood of the Peoples was published. Though the bill was
far heavier than the Hebrew printer's estimate—there being all sorts
of mysterious charges for corrections, which took away the last
Groschen of their savings, Hulda and her husband were happy. They
had sown the seed, and waited in serene faith the ingathering, the
reconciliation of Israel with the Gentiles.
The book, which was in paper covers, was published at a shilling; five
hundred copies had been struck off for the edition. After six months
the account stood thus: Sales, eighty-four copies; press notices, two
in the jargon papers (printed in the same office as his book and thus
amenable to backstairs influence). The Jewish papers written in
English, which loomed before Zussmann's vision as world-shaking, did
not even mention its appearance; perhaps it had been better if the
jargon papers had been equally silent, for, though less than one
hundred copies of The Brotherhood of the Peoples were in
circulation, the book was in everybody's mouth—like a piece of pork
to be spat out again shudderingly. The Red Beadle's instinct had been
only too sound. The Ghetto, accustomed by this time to insidious
attacks on its spiritual citadel, feared writers even bringing Hebrew.
Despite the Oriental sandal which the cunning shoemaker had fashioned,
his fellow-Jews saw the cloven hoof. They were not to be deceived by
the specious sanctity which Darwin and Schopenhauer—probably Bishops
of the Established Church—borrowed from their Hebrew lettering. Why,
that was the very trick of the Satans who sprinkled the sacred tongue
freely about handbills inviting souls that sought for light to come
and find it in the Whitechapel Road between three and seven. [461]It had
been abandoned as hopeless even by the thin-nosed gentlewomen who had
begun by painting a Hebrew designation over their bureau of
beneficence. But the fact that the Ghetto was perspicacious did not
mitigate the author's treachery to his race and faith. Zussmann was
given violently to understand that his presence in the little
synagogue would lead to disturbances in the service. "The Jew needs no
house of prayer," he said; "his life is a prayer, his workshop a
temple."
His workmen deserted him one by one as vacancies occurred elsewhere.
"We will get Christians," he said.
But the work itself began to fail. He was dependent upon a large firm
whose head was Parnass of a North London congregation, and when one of
Zussmann's workers, anxious to set up for himself, went to him with
the tale, the contract was transferred to him, and Zussmann's
security-deposit returned. But far heavier than all these blows was
Hulda's sudden illness, and though the returned trust-money came in
handy to defray the expense of doctors, the outlook was not cheerful.
But "I will become a hand myself," said Zussmann cheerfully. "The
annoyance of my brethren will pass away when they really understand my
Idea; meantime it is working in them, for even to hate an Idea is to
meditate upon it."
The Red Beadle grunted angrily. He could hear Hulda coughing in the
next room, and that hurt his chest.
But it was summer now, and quite a considerable strip of blue sky
could be seen from the window, and the mote-laden sun-rays that
streamed in encouraged Hulda to grow better. She was soon up and about
again, but the doctor said her system was thoroughly upset and she
aught to have sea air. But that, of course, was impossible now. Hulda
herself declared there was much better air to be got higher up, [462]in
the garret, which was fortunately "to let." It is true there was only
one room there. Still, it was much cheaper. The Red Beadle's heart was
heavier than the furniture he helped to carry upstairs. But the
unsympathetic couple did not share his gloom. They jested and laughed,
as light of heart as the excited children on the staircases who
assisted at the function. "My Idea has raised me nearer heaven," said
Zussmann. That night, after the Red Beadle had screwed up the
four-poster, he allowed himself to be persuaded to stay to supper. He
had given up the habit as soon as Zussmann's finances began to fail.
By way of house-warming, Hulda had ordered in baked potatoes and liver
from the cook-shop, and there were also three tepid slices of
plum-pudding.
"Plum-pudding!" cried Zussmann in delight, as his nostrils scented the
dainty. "What a good omen for the Idea!"
"How an omen?" inquired the Red Beadle.
"Is not plum-pudding associated with Christmas, with peace on earth?"
Hulda's eyes flashed. "Yes, it is a sign—the Brotherhood of the
Peoples! The Jew will be the peace-messenger of the world." The Red
Beadle ate on sceptically. He had studied The Brotherhood of the
Peoples to the great improvement of his Hebrew but with little
edification. He had even studied it in Hulda's original manuscript,
which he had borrowed and never intended to return. But still he could
not share his friends' belief in the perfectibility of mankind.
Perhaps if they had known how he had tippled away his savings after
his wife's death, they might have thought less well of humanity and
its potentialities of perfection. After all, Huldas were too rare to
make the world sober, much less fraternal. And, charming as they were,
honesty demanded one should not curry favor with them by fostering
their delusions.
[463]"What put such an idea into your head, Zussmann!" he cried
unsympathetically. Zussmann answered naïvely, as if to a question—
"I have had the idea from a boy. I remember sitting stocking-footed on
the floor of the synagogue in Poland on the Fast of Ab, wondering why
we should weep so over the destruction of Jerusalem, which scattered
us among the nations as fertilizing seeds. How else should the mission
of Israel be fulfilled? I remember"—and here he smiled pensively—"I
was awakened from my day-dream by a Patsch (smack) in the face from
my poor old father, who was angry because I wasn't saying the
prayers."
"There will be always somebody to give you that Patsch," said the
Red Beadle gloomily. "But in what way is Israel dispersed? It seems to
me our life is everywhere as hidden from the nations as if we were all
together in Palestine."
"You touch a great truth! Oh, if I could only write in English! But
though I read it almost as easily as the German, I can write it as
little. You know how one has to learn German in Poland—by
stealth—the Christians jealous on one hand, the Jews suspicious on
the other. I could not risk the Christians laughing at my bad
German—that would hurt my Idea. And English is a language like the
Vale of Siddim—full of pits."
"We ought to have it translated," said Hulda. "Not only for the
Christians, but for the rich Jews, who are more liberal-minded than
those who live in our quarter."
"But we cannot afford to pay for the translating now," said Zussmann.
"Nonsense; one has always a jewel left," said Hulda.
Zussmann's eyes grew wet. "Yes," he said, drawing her to his breast,
"one has always a jewel left."
"More meshuggas!" cried the Red Beadle huskily. [464]"Much the English
Jews care about ideas! Did they even acknowledge your book in their
journals? But probably they couldn't read it," he added with a laugh.
"A fat lot of Hebrew little Sampson knows! You know little Sampson—he
came to report the boot-strike for The Flag of Judah. I got into
conversation with him—a rank pork-gorger. He believes with me that
Nature makes herself."
But Zussmann was scarcely eating, much less listening.
"You have given me a new scheme, Hulda," he said, with exaltation. "I
will send my book to the leading English Jews—yes, especially to the
ministers. They will see my Idea, they will spread it abroad, they
will convert first the Jews and then the Christians."
"Yes, but they will give it as their own Idea," said Hulda.
"And what then? He who has faith in an Idea, his Idea it is. How great
for me to have had the Idea first! Is not that enough to thank God
for? If only my Idea gets spread in English! English! Have you ever
thought what that means, Hulda? The language of the future! Already
the language of the greatest nations, and the most on the lips of men
everywhere—in a century it will cover the world." He murmured in
Hebrew, uplifting his eyes to the rain-streaked sloping ceiling. "And
in that day God shall be One and His name One."
"Your supper is getting cold," said Hulda gently.
He began to wield his knife and fork as hypnotized by her suggestion,
but his vision was inwards.
Fifty copies of The Brotherhood of the Peoples went off by post the
next day to the clergy and gentry of the larger Jewry. In the course
of the next fortnight seventeen of the recipients acknowledged the
receipt with formal thanks, four sent the shilling mentioned on the
cover, and one sent five shillings. This last depressed Zussmann more
than all the others. "Does he take me for a Schnorrer?" he said,
almost angrily, as he returned the postal order.
He did not forsee the day when, a Schnorrer indeed, he would have
taken five shillings from anybody who could afford it: had no
prophetic intuition of that long, slow progression of penurious days
which was to break down his spirit. For though he managed for a time
to secure enough work to keep himself and the Red Beadle going, his
ruin was only delayed. Little by little his apparatus was sold off,
his benches and polishing-irons vanished from the garret, only one
indispensable set remaining, and master and man must needs quest each
for himself for work elsewhere. The Red Beadle dropped out of the
ménage, and was reduced to semi-starvation. Zussmann and Hulda, by the
gradual disposition of their bits of jewellery and their Sabbath
garments, held out a little longer, and Hulda also got some sewing of
children's under-garments. But with the return of winter, Hulda's
illness returned, and then the beloved books began to leave bare the
nakedness of the plastered walls. At first, Hulda, refusing to be
visited by doctors who charged, struggled out bravely through rain and
fog to a free dispensary, where she was jostled by a crowd of
head-shawled Polish crones, and where a harassed Christian physician,
tired of jargon-speaking Jewesses, bawled and bullied. But at last
Hulda grew too ill to stir [466]out, and Zussmann, still out of
employment, was driven to look about him for help. Charities enough
there were in the Ghetto, but to charity, as to work, one requires an
apprenticeship. He knew vaguely that there were persons who had the
luck to be ill and to get broths and jellies. To others, also, a board
of guardian angels doled out payments, though some one had once told
him you had scant chance unless you were a Dutchman. But the
inexperienced in begging are naturally not so successful as those
always at it. 'Twas vain for Zussmann to kick his heels among the
dismal crowd in the corridor, the whisper of his misdeeds had been
before him, borne by some competitor in the fierce struggle for
assistance. What! help a hypocrite to sit on the twin stools of
Christendom and Judaism, fed by the bounty of both! In this dark hour
he was approached by the thin-nosed gentlewomen, who had got wind of
his book and who scented souls. Zussmann wavered. Why, indeed, should
he refuse their assistance? He knew their self-sacrificing days, their
genuine joy in salvation. On their generosities he was far better
posted than on Jewish—the lurid legend of these Mephistophelian
matrons included blankets, clothes, port wine, and all the delicacies
of the season. He admitted that Hulda had indeed been brought low, and
permitted them to call. Then he went home to cut dry bread for the
bedridden, emaciated creature who had once been beautiful, and to
comfort her—for it was Friday evening—by reading the Sabbath
prayers; winding up, "A virtuous woman who can find? For her price is
far above rubies."
On the forenoon of the next day arrived a basket, scenting the air
with delicious odors of exquisite edibles.
Zussmann received it with delight from the boy who bore it. "God bless
them!" he said. "A chicken—grapes—wine. Look, Hulda!"
[467]Hulda raised herself in bed; her eyes sparkled, a flush of color
returned to the wan cheeks.
"Where do these come from?" she asked.
Zussmann hesitated. Then he told her they were the harbingers of a
visit from the good sisters.
The flush in her cheek deepened to scarlet.
"My poor Zussmann!" she cried reproachfully. "Give them back—give
them back at once! Call after the boy."
"Why?" stammered Zussmann.
"Call after the boy!" she repeated imperatively. "Good God! If the
ladies were to be seen coming up here, it would be all over with your
Idea. And on the Sabbath, too! People already look upon you as a tool
of the missionaries. Quick! quick!"
His heart aching with mingled love and pain, he took up the basket and
hurried after the boy. Hulda sank back on her pillow with a sigh of
relief.
"Dear heart!" she thought, as she took advantage of his absence to
cough freely. "For me he does what he would starve rather than do for
himself. A nice thing to imperil his Idea—the dream of his life! When
the Jews see he makes no profit by it, they will begin to consider it.
If he did not have the burden of me he would not be tempted. He could
go out more and find work farther afield. This must end—I must die or
be on my feet again soon."
Zussmann came back, empty-handed and heavy-hearted.
"Kiss me, my own life!" she cried. "I shall be better soon."
He bent down and touched her hot, dry lips. "Now I see," she
whispered, "why God did not send us children. We thought it was an
affliction, but lo! it is that your Idea shall not be hindered."
[468]"The English Rabbis have not yet drawn attention to it," said Zussmann
huskily.
"All the better," replied Hulda. "One day it will be translated into
English—I know it, I feel it here." She touched her chest, and the
action made her cough.
Going out later for a little fresh air, at Hulda's insistence, he was
stopped in the broad hall on which the stairs debouched by Cohen, the
ground-floor tenant, a black-bearded Russian Jew, pompous in Sabbath
broadcloth.
"What's the matter with my milk?" abruptly asked Cohen, who supplied
the local trade besides selling retail. "You might have complained,
instead of taking your custom out of the house. Believe me, I don't
make a treasure heap out of it. One has to be up at Euston to meet the
trains in the middle of the night, and the competition is so
cut-throat that one has to sell at eighteen pence a barn gallon. And
on Sabbath one earns nothing at all. And then the analyst comes poking
his nose into the milk."
"You see—my wife—my wife—is ill," stammered Zussmann. "So she
doesn't drink it."
"Hum!" said Cohen. "Well, you might oblige me then. I have so much
left over every day, it makes my reputation turn quite sour. Do, do me
a favor and let me send you up a can of the leavings every night. For
nothing, of course; would I talk business on the Sabbath? I don't like
to be seen pouring it away. It would pay me to pay you a penny a
pint," he wound up emphatically.
Zussmann accepted unsuspiciously, grateful to Providence for enabling
him to benefit at once himself and his neighbor. He bore a can
upstairs now and explained the situation to the shrewder Hulda, who,
however, said nothing but, "You see the Idea commences to work. When
the book first came out, didn't he—though he sells secretly to the
trade on Sabbath mornings—call you an Epicurean?"
[469]"Worse," said Zussmann joyously, with a flash of recollection.
He went out again, lightened and exalted. "Yes, the Idea works," he
said, as he came out into the gray street. "The Brotherhood of the
Peoples will come, not in my time, but it will come." And he murmured
again the Hebrew aspiration: "In that day shall God be One and His
name One."
"Whoa, where's your —— eyes?"
Awakened by the oath, he just got out of the way of a huge Flemish
dray-horse dragging a brewer's cart. Three ragged Irish urchins, who
had been buffeting each other with whirling hats knotted into the ends
of dingy handkerchiefs, relaxed their enmities in a common rush for
the projecting ladder behind the dray and collided with Zussmann on
the way. A one-legged, misery-eyed hunchback offered him penny
diaries. He shook his head in impotent pity, and passed on, pondering.
"In time God will make the crooked straight," he thought.
Jews with tall black hats and badly made frock-coats slouched along,
their shoulders bent. Wives stood at the open doors of the old houses,
some in Sabbath finery, some flaunting irreligiously their every-day
shabbiness, without troubling even to arrange their one dress
differently, as a pious Rabbi recommended. They looked used-up and
haggard, all these mothers in Israel. But there were dark-eyed damsels
still gay and fresh, with artistic bodices of violet and green picked
out with gold arabesque.
He turned a corner and came into a narrow street that throbbed with
the joyous melody of a piano-organ. His heart leapt up. The roadway
bubbled with Jewish children, mainly girls, footing it gleefully in
the graying light, inventing complex steps with a grace and an abandon
that [470]lit their eyes with sparkles and painted deeper flushes on their
olive cheeks. A bounding little bow-legged girl seemed unconscious of
her deformity; her toes met each other as though in merry dexterity.
Zussmann's eyes were full of tears. "Dance on, dance on," he murmured.
"God shall indeed make the crooked straight."
Fixed to one side of the piano-organ on the level of the handle he saw
a little box, in which lay, as in a cradle, what looked like a monkey,
then like a doll, but on closer inspection turned into a tiny live
child, flaxen-haired, staring with wide gray eyes from under a blue
cap, and sucking at a milk-bottle with preternatural placidity,
regardless of the music throbbing through its resting-place.
"Even so shall humanity live," thought Zussmann, "peaceful as a babe,
cradled in music. God hath sent me a sign."
He returned home, comforted, and told Hulda of the sign.
"Was it an Italian child?" she asked.
"An English child," he answered. "Fair-eyed and fair-haired."
"Then it is a sign that through the English tongue shall the Idea move
the world. Your book will be translated into English—I shall live to
see it."
A few afternoons later the Red Beadle, his patched garments
pathetically spruced up, came to see his friends, goaded by the news
of Hulda's illness. There was no ruddiness in his face, the lips of
which were pressed together in defiance of a cruel and credulous
world. That [471]Nature in making herself should have produced creatures
who attributed their creation elsewhere, and who refused to allow her
one acknowledger to make boots, was indeed a proof, albeit vexatious,
of her blind workings.
When he saw what she had done to Hulda and to Zussmann, his lips were
pressed tighter, but as much to keep back a sob as to express extra
resentment.
But on parting he could not help saying to Zussmann, who accompanied
him to the dark spider-webbed landing, "Your God has forgotten you."
"Do you mean that men have forgotten Him?" replied Zussmann. "If I am
come to poverty, my suffering is in the scheme of things. Do you not
remember what the Almighty says to Eleazar ben Pedos, in the Talmud,
when the Rabbi complains of poverty? 'Wilt thou be satisfied if I
overthrow the universe, so that perhaps thou mayest be created again
in a time of plenty?' No, no, my friend, we must trust the scheme."
"But the fools enjoy prosperity," said the Red Beadle.
"It is only a fool who would enjoy prosperity," replied Zussmann.
"If the righteous sometimes suffer and the wicked sometimes flourish,
that is just the very condition of virtue. What! would you have
righteousness always pay and wickedness always fail! Where then would
be the virtue in virtue? It would be a mere branch of commerce. Do you
forget what the Chassid said of the man who foreknew in his lifetime
that for him there was to be no heaven? 'What a unique and enviable
chance that man had of doing right without fear of reward!'"
The Red Beadle, as usual, acquiesced in the idea that he had forgotten
these quotations from the Hebrew, but to acquiesce in their teachings
was another matter. "A man who had no hope of heaven would be a fool
not to enjoy himself," he said doggedly, and went downstairs, his
[472]heart almost bursting. He went straight to his old synagogue, where he
knew a Hesped or funeral service on a famous Maggid (preacher) was
to be held. He could scarcely get in, so dense was the throng. Not a
few eyes, wet with tears, were turned angrily on him as on a mocker
come to gloat, but he hastened to weep too, which was easy when he
thought of Hulda coughing in her bed in the garret. So violently did
he weep that the Gabbai or treasurer—one of the most pious
master-bootmakers—gave him the "Peace" salutation after the service.
"I did not expect to see you weeping," said he.
"Alas!" answered the Red Beadle. "It is not only the fallen Prince in
Israel that I weep; it is my own transgressions that are brought home
to me by his sudden end. How often have I heard him thunder and
lighten from this very pulpit!" He heaved a deep sigh at his own
hypocrisy, and the Gabbai sighed in response. "Even from the grave
the Tsaddik (saint) works good," said the pious master-bootmaker.
"May my latter end be like his!"
"Mine, too!" suspired the Red Beadle. "How blessed am I not to have
been cut off in my sin, denying the Maker of Nature!" They walked
along the street together.
The next morning, at the luncheon-hour, a breathless Beadle, with a
red beard and a very red face, knocked joyously at the door of the
Herz garret.
"I am in work again," he explained.
"Mazzeltov!" Zussmann gave him the Hebrew congratulation, but
softly, with finger on lip, to indicate Hulda was asleep. "With whom?"
"Harris the Gabbai."
"Harris! What, despite your opinions?"
The Red Beadle looked away.
"So it seems!"
"Thank God!" said Hulda. "The Idea works."
[473]Both men turned to the bed, startled to see her sitting up with a rapt
smile.
"How so?" said the Red Beadle uneasily. "I am not a Goy (Christian)
befriended by a Gabbai."
"No, but it is the brotherhood of humanity."
"Bother the brotherhood of humanity, Frau Herz!" said the Red Beadle
gruffly. He glanced round the denuded room. "The important thing is
that you will now be able to have a few delicacies."
"I?" Hulda opened her eyes wide.
"Who else? What I earn is for all of us."
"God bless you!" said Zussmann; "but you have enough to do to keep
yourself."
"Indeed he has!" said Hulda. "We couldn't dream of taking a farthing!"
But her eyes were wet.
"I insist!" said the Red Beadle.
She thanked him sweetly, but held firm.
"I will advance the money on loan till Zussmann gets work."
Zussmann wavered, his eyes beseeching her, but she was inflexible.
The Red Beadle lost his temper. "And this is what you call the
brotherhood of humanity!"
"He is right, Hulda. Why should we not take from one another? Pride
perverts brotherhood."
"Dear husband," said Hulda, "it is not pride to refuse to rob the
poor. Besides, what delicacies do I need? Is not this a land flowing
with milk?"
"You take Cohen's milk and refuse my honey!" shouted the Red Beadle
unappeased.
"Give me of the honey of your tongue and I shall not refuse it," said
Hulda, with that wonderful smile of hers which showed the white teeth
Nature had made; the smile which, as always, melted the Beadle's mood.
That smile [474]could repair all the ravages of disease and give back her
memoried face.
After the Beadle had been at work a day or two in the Gabbai's
workshop, he broached the matter of a fellow-penitent, one Zussmann
Herz, with no work and a bedridden wife.
"That Meshummad!" (apostate) cried the Gabbai." He deserves all
that God has sent him."
Undaunted, the Red Beadle demonstrated that the man could not be of
the missionary camp, else had he not been left to starve, one
converted Jew being worth a thousand pounds of fresh subscriptions.
Moreover he, the Red Beadle, had now convinced the man of his
spiritual errors, and The Brotherhood of the Peoples was no longer
on sale. Also, being unable to leave his wife's bedside, Zussmann
would do the work at home below the Union rates prevalent in public.
So, trade being brisk, the Gabbai relented and bargained, and the
Red Beadle sped to his friend's abode and flew up the four flights of
stairs.
"Good news!" he cried. "The Gabbai wants another hand, and he is
ready to take you."
"Me?" Zussmann was paralyzed with joy and surprise.
"Now will you deny that the Idea works?" cried Hulda, her face flushed
and her eyes glittering. And she fell a-coughing.
"You are right, Hulda; you are always right," cried Zussmann, in
responsive radiance. "Thank God! Thank God!"
"God forgive me," muttered the Red Beadle.
"Go at once, Zussmann," said Hulda. "I shall do very well here—this
has given me strength. I shall be up in a day or two."
"No, no, Zussmann," said the Beadle hurriedly. "There is no need to
leave your wife. I have arranged it all. The [475]Gabbai does not want
you to come there or to speak to him, because, though the Idea works
in him, the other 'hands' are not yet so large-minded: I am to bring
you the orders, and I shall come here to fetch them."
The set of tools to which Zussmann clung in desperate hope made the
plan both feasible and pleasant.
And so the Red Beadle's visits resumed their ancient frequency even as
his Sabbath clothes resumed their ancient gloss, and every week's-end
he paid over Zussmann's wages to him—full Union rate.
But Hulda, although she now accepted illogically the Red Beadle's
honey in various shapes, did not appear to progress as much as the
Idea, or as the new book which she stimulated Zussmann to start for
its further propagation.
One Friday evening of December, when miry snow underfoot and grayish
fog all around combined to make Spitalfields a malarious marsh, the
Red Beadle, coming in with the week's wages, found to his horror a
doctor hovering over Hulda's bed like the shadow of death.
From the look that Zussmann gave him he saw a sudden change for the
worse had set in. The cold of the weather seemed to strike right to
his heart. He took the sufferer's limp chill hand.
"How goes it?" he said cheerily.
"A trifle weak. But I shall be better soon."
He turned away. Zussmann whispered to him that the doctor who had been
called in that morning had found the crisis so threatening that he was
come again in the evening.
The Red Beadle, grown very white, accompanied the [476]doctor downstairs,
and learned that with care the patient might pull through.
The Beadle felt like tearing out his red beard. "And to think that I
have not yet arranged the matter!" he thought distractedly.
He ran through the gray bleak night to the office of The Flag of
Judah; but as he was crossing the threshold he remembered that it was
the eve of the Sabbath, and that neither little Sampson nor anybody
else would be there. But little Sampson was there, working busily.
"Hullo! Come in," he said, astonished.
The Red Beadle had already struck up a drinking acquaintanceship with
the little journalist, in view of the great negotiation he was
plotting. Not in vain did the proverbial wisdom of the Ghetto bid one
beware of the red-haired.
"I won't keep you five minutes," apologized little Sampson. "But, you
see, Christmas comes next week, and the compositors won't work. So I
have to invent the news in advance."
Presently little Sampson, lighting an unhallowed cigarette by way of
Sabbath lamp, and slinging on his shabby cloak, repaired with the Red
Beadle to a restaurant, where he ordered "forbidden" food for himself
and drinks for both.
The Red Beadle felt his way so cautiously and cunningly that the
negotiation was unduly prolonged. After an hour or two, however, all
was settled. For five pounds, paid in five monthly instalments, little
Sampson would translate The Brotherhood of the Peoples into English,
provided the Beadle would tell him what the Hebrew meant. This the
Beadle, from his loving study of Hulda's manuscript, was now prepared
for. Little Sampson also promised to run the translation through The
Flag of Judah, and [477]thus the Beadle could buy the plates cheap for
book purposes, with only the extra cost of printing such passages, if
any, as were too dangerous for The Flag of Judah. This unexpected
generosity, coupled with the new audience it offered the Idea,
enchanted the Red Beadle. He did not see that the journalist was
getting gratuitous "copy," he saw only the bliss of Hulda and
Zussmann, and in some strange exaltation, compact of whisky and
affection, he shared in their vision of the miraculous spread of the
Idea, once it had got into the dominant language of the world.
In his gratitude to little Sampson he plied him with fresh whisky; in
his excitement he drew the paper-covered book from his pocket, and
insisted that the journalist must translate the first page then and
there, as a hansel. By the time it was done it was near eleven
o'clock. Vaguely the Red Beadle felt that it was too late to return to
Zussmann's to-night. Besides, he was liking little Sampson very much.
They did not separate till the restaurant closed at midnight.
Quite drunk, the Red Beadle staggered towards Zussmann's house. He
held the page of the translation tightly in his hand. The Hebrew
original he had forgotten on the restaurant table, but he knew in some
troubled nightmare way that Zussmann and Hulda must see that paper at
once, that he had been charged to deliver it safely, and must die
sooner than disobey.
The fog had lifted, but the heaps of snow were a terrible hindrance to
his erratic progression. The cold air and the shock of a fall lessened
his inebriety, but the imperative impulse of his imaginary mission
still hypnotized him. It was past one before he reached the tall
house. He did not think it at all curious that the great outer portals
should be open; nor, though he saw the milk-cart at the door, and
noted Cohen's uncomfortable look, did he remember [478]that he had
discovered the milk-purveyor nocturnally infringing the Sabbath. He
stumbled up the stairs and knocked at the garret door, through the
chinks of which light streamed. The thought of Hulda smote him almost
sober. Zussmann's face, when the door opened, restored him completely
to his senses. It was years older.
"She is not dead?" the visitor whispered hoarsely.
"She is dying, I fear—she cannot rouse herself." Zussmann's voice
broke in a sob.
"But she must not die—I bring great news—The Flag of Judah has
read your book—it will translate it into English—it will print it in
its own paper—and then it will make a book of it for you. See, here
is the beginning!"
"Into English!" breathed Zussmann, taking the little journalist's
scrawl. His whole face grew crimson, his eye shone as with madness.
"Hulda! Hulda!" he cried, "the Idea works! God be thanked! English!
Through the world! Hulda! Hulda!" He was bending over her, raising her
head.
She opened her eyes.
"Hulda! the Idea wins. The book is coming out in English. The great
English paper will print it. In that day God shall be One and His name
One. Do you understand?" Her lips twitched faintly, but only her eyes
spoke with the light of love and joy. His own look met hers, and for a
moment husband and wife were one in a spiritual ecstasy.
Then the light in Hulda's eyes went out, and the two men were left in
darkness.
The Red Beadle turned away and left Zussmann to his dead, and, with
scalding tears running down his cheek, pulled up the cotton window
blind and gazed out unseeing into the night.
Presently his vision cleared: he found himself watching [479]the milk-cart
drive off, and, following it towards the frowsy avenue of Brick Lane,
he beheld what seemed to be a drunken fight in progress. He saw a
policeman, gesticulating females, the nondescript nocturnal crowd of
the sleepless city. The old dull hopelessness came over him. "Nature
makes herself," he murmured in despairing resignation.
Suddenly he became aware that Zussmann was beside him, looking up at
the stars.
"Well, what are you gaping at? Why the devil don't you say something?"
And all the impatience of the rapt artist at being interrupted by
anything but praise was in the outburst.
"Holy Moses!" I gasped. "Give a man a chance to get his breath. I fall
through a dark antechamber over a bicycle, stumble round a screen,
and—smack! a glare of Oriental sunlight from a gigantic canvas, the
vibration and glow of a group of joyous figures, reeking with life and
sweat! You the Idealist, the seeker after Nature's beautiful moods and
Art's beautiful patterns!"
"Beautiful moods!" he echoed angrily. "And why isn't this a beautiful
mood? And what more beautiful pattern than this—look! this line, this
sweep, this group here, this clinging of the children round this
mass—all in a glow—balanced by this mass of cool shadow. The meaning
doesn't interfere with the pattern, you chump!"
"Oh, so there is a meaning! You've become an anecdotal painter."
"Adjectives be hanged! I can't talk theory in the precious daylight.
If you can't see—!"
"I can see that you are painting something you haven't seen. You
haven't been in the East, have you?"
"If I had, I haven't got time to jaw about it now. Come [481]and have an
absinthe at the Café Victor—in memory of old Paris days—Sixth
Avenue—any of the boys will tell you. Let me see, daylight till
six—half-past six. Au 'voir, au 'voir."
As I went down the steep, dark stairs, "Same old Dan," I thought. "Who
would imagine I was a stranger in New York looking up an old
fellow-struggler on his native heath? If I didn't know better, I might
fancy his tremendous success had given him the same opinion of himself
that America has of him. But no, nothing will change him; the same
furious devotion to his canvas once he has quietly planned his
picture, the same obstinate conviction that he is seeing something in
the only right way. And yet something has changed him. Why has his
brush suddenly gone East? Why this new kind of composition crowded
with figures—ancient Jews, too? Has he been taken with piety, and is
he going henceforward ostentatiously to proclaim his race? And who is
the cheerful central figure with the fine, open face? I don't
recollect any such scene in Jewish history, or anything so joyous.
Perhaps it's a study of modern Jerusalem Jews, to show their life is
not all Wailing Wall and Jeremiah. Or perhaps it's only decorative.
America is great on decoration just now. No; he said the picture had a
meaning. Well, I shall know all about it to-night. Anyhow, it's a
beautiful thing."
"Same old Dan!" I thought even more decisively as, when I opened the
door of the little café, a burly, black-bearded figure with audacious
eyes came at me with a grip and a slap and a roar of welcome, and
dragged me to the quiet corner behind the billiard tables.
"I've just been opalizing your absinthe for you," he laughed, as we
sat down. "But what's the matter? You look kind o' scared."
"It's your Inferno of a city. As I turned the corner of [482]Sixth Avenue,
an elevated train came shrieking and rumbling, and a swirl of wind
swept screeching round and round, enveloping me in a whirlpool of
smoke and steam, until, dazed and choked in what seemed the scalding
effervescence of a collision, I had given up all hope of ever learning
what your confounded picture meant."
"Aha!" He took a complacent sip. "It stayed with you, did it?" And the
light of triumph, flushing for an instant his rugged features, showed
when it waned how pale and drawn they were by the feverish tension of
his long day's work.
"Yes it did, old fellow," I said affectionately. "The joy and the glow
of it, and yet also some strange antique simplicity and restfulness
you have got into it, I know not how, have been with me all day,
comforting me in the midst of the tearing, grinding life of this
closing nineteenth century after Christ."
A curious smile flitted across Dan's face. He tilted his chair back,
and rested his head against the wall.
"There's nothing that takes me so much out of the nineteenth century
after Christ," he said dreamily, "as this little French café. It wafts
me back to my early student days, that lie somewhere amid the
enchanted mists of the youth of the world; to the zestful toil of the
studios, to the careless trips in quaint, gray Holland or flaming,
devil-may-care Spain. Ah! what scenes shift and shuffle in the twinkle
of the gas-jet in this opalescent liquid; the hot shimmer of the arena
at the Seville bull-fight, with its swirl of color and movement; the
torchlight procession of pilgrims round the church at Lourdes, with
the one black nun praying by herself in a shadowy corner; the lovely
valley of the Tauba, where the tinkle of the sheep-bells mingles with
the Lutheran hymn blown to the four winds from the old church tower;
wines that were red—sunshine [483]that was warm—mandolines—!" His voice
died away as in exquisite reverie.
"And the East?" I said slily.
A good-natured smile dissipated his delicious dream.
"Ah, yes," he said. "My East was the Tyrol."
"The Tyrol? How do you mean?"
"I see you won't let me out of that story."
"Oh, there's a story, is there?"
"Oh, well, perhaps not what you literary chaps would call a story! No
love-making in it, you know."
"Then it can wait. Tell me about your picture."
"But that's mixed up with the story."
"Didn't I say you had become an anecdotal artist?"
"It's no laughing matter," he said gravely. "You remember when we
parted at Munich, a year ago last spring, you to go on to Vienna and I
to go back to America. Well, I had a sudden fancy to take one last
European trip all by myself, and started south through the Tyrol, with
a pack on my back. The third day out I fell and bruised my thigh
severely, and could not make my little mountain town till moonlight.
And I tell you I was mighty glad when I limped across the bridge over
the rushing river and dropped on the hotel sofa. Next morning I was
stiff as a poker, but I struggled up the four rickety flights to the
local physician, and being assured I only wanted rest, I resolved to
take it with book and pipe and mug in a shady beer-garden on the
river. I had been reading for about an hour when five or six Tyrolese,
old men and young, in their gray and green costumes and their little
hats, trooped in and occupied the large table near the inn-door.
Presently I was startled by the sound of the zither; they began to
sing songs; the pretty daughter of the house came and joined in the
singing. I put down my book.
"The old lady who served me with my Maass of beer, [484]seeing my
interest, came over and chatted about her guests. Oh no, they were not
villagers; they came from four hours away. The slim one was a
school-teacher, and the dicker was a tenor, and sang in the chorus
of the Passion-Spiel; the good-looking young man was to be the St.
John. Passion play! I pricked up my ears. When? Where? In their own
village, three days hence; only given once every ten years—for
hundreds and hundreds of years. Could strangers see it? What should
strangers want to see it for? But could they see it? Gewiss. This
was indeed a stroke of luck. I had always rather wanted to see the
Passion play, but the thought of the fashionable Ober-Ammergau made me
sick. Would I like to be vorgestellt? Rather! It was not ten minutes
after this introduction before I had settled to stay with St. John,
and clouds of good American tobacco were rising from six Tyrolese
pipes, and many an "Auf Ihr Wohl" was busying the pretty Kellnerin.
They trotted out all their repertory of quaint local songs for my
benefit. It sounded bully, I tell you, out there with the sunlight,
and the green leaves, and the rush of the river; and in this aroma of
beer and brotherhood I blessed my damaged thigh. Three days hence!
Just time for it to heal. A providential world, after all.
"And it was indeed with a buoyant step and a gay heart that I set out
over the hills at sunrise on that memorable morning. The play was to
begin at ten, and I should just be on time. What a walk! Imagine it!
Clear coolness of dawn, fresh green, sparkling dew, the road winding
up and down, round hills, up cliffs, along valleys, through woods,
where the green branches swayed in the morning wind and dappled the
grass fantastically with dancing sunlight. And as fresh as the
morning, was, I felt, the artistic sensation awaiting me. I swung
round the last hill-shoulder; saw the quaint gables of the first house
peeping [485]through the trees, and the church spire rising beyond, then
groups of Tyrolese converging from all the roads; dipped down the
valley, past the quiet lake, up the hills beyond; found myself caught
in a stream of peasants, and, presto! was sucked from the radiant day
into the deep gloom of the barn-like theatre.
"I don't know how it is done in Ober-Ammergau, but this Tyrolese thing
was a strange jumble of art and naïveté, of talent and stupidity.
There was a full-fledged stage and footlights, and the scenery, some
one said, was painted by a man from Munich. But the players were badly
made up; the costumes, if correct, were ill-fitting; the stage was
badly lighted, and the flats didn't 'jine.' Some of the actors had
gleams of artistic perception. St. Mark was beautiful to look on,
Caiaphas had a sense of elocution, the Virgin was tender and sweet,
and Judas rose powerfully to his great twenty minutes' soliloquy. But
the bulk of the players, though all were earnest and fervent, were
clumsy or self-conscious. The crowds were stiff and awkward, painfully
symmetrical, like school children at drill. A chorus of ten or twelve
ushered in each episode with song, and a man further explained it in
bald narrative. The acts of the play proper were interrupted by
tableaux vivants of Old Testament scenes, from Adam and Eve onwards.
There was much, you see, that was puerile, even ridiculous; and every
now and then some one would open the door of the dusky auditorium, and
a shaft of sunshine would fly in from the outside world to remind me
further how unreal was all this gloomy make-believe. Nay, during the
entr'acte I went out, like everybody else, and lunched off sausages
and beer.
"And yet, beneath all this critical consciousness, beneath even the
artistic consciousness that could not resist jotting down a face or a
scene in my sketch-book, [486]something curious was happening in the
depths of my being. The play exercised from the very first a strange
magnetic effect on me; despite all the primitive humors of the
players, the simple, sublime tragedy that disengaged itself from their
uncouth but earnest goings-on, began to move and even oppress my soul.
Christ had been to me merely a theme for artists; my studies and
travels had familiarized me with every possible conception of the Man
of Sorrows. I had seen myriads of Madonnas nursing Him, miles of
Magdalens bewailing Him. Yet the sorrows I had never felt. Perhaps it
was my Jewish training, perhaps it was that none of the Christians I
lived with had ever believed in Him. At any rate, here for the first
time the Christ story came home to me as a real, living
fact—something that had actually happened. I saw this simple son of
the people—made more simple by my knowledge that His representative
was a baker—moving amid the ancient peasant and fisher life of
Galilee; I saw Him draw men and women, saints and sinners, by the
magic of His love, the simple sweetness of His inner sunshine; I saw
the sunshine change to lightning as He drove the money-changers from
the Temple; I watched the clouds deepen as the tragedy drew on; I saw
Him bid farewell to His mother; I heard suppressed sobs all around me.
Then the heavens were overcast, and it seemed as if earth held its
breath waiting for the supreme moment. They dragged Him before Pilate;
they clothed Him in scarlet robe, and plaited His crown of thorns, and
spat on Him; they gave Him vinegar to drink mixed with gall; and He so
divinely sweet and forgiving through all. A horrible oppression hung
over the world. I felt choking; my ribs pressed inwards, my heart
seemed contracted. He was dying for the sins of the world, He summed
up the whole world's woe and pitifulness—the two ideas throbbed [487]and
fused in my troubled soul. And I, a Jew, had hitherto ignored Him.
What would they say, these simple peasants sobbing all around, if they
knew that I was of that hated race? Then something broke in me, and I
sobbed too—sobbed with bitter tears that soon turned sweet in strange
relief and glad sympathy with my rough brothers and sisters." He
paused a moment, and sipped silently at his absinthe. I did not break
the silence. I was moved and interested, though what all this had to
do with his glowing, joyous picture I could only dimly surmise. He
went on—
"When it was all over, and I went out into the open air, I did not see
the sunlight. I carried the dusk of the theatre with me, and the gloom
of Golgotha brooded over the sunny afternoon. I heard the nails driven
in; I saw the blood spurting from the wounds—there was realism in the
thing, I tell you. The peasants, accustomed to the painful story, had
quickly recovered their gaiety, and were pouring boisterously down the
hill-side, like a glad, turbulent mountain stream, unloosed from the
dead hand of frost. But I was still ice-bound and fog-wrapped. Outside
the Gasthaus where I went to dine, gay groups assembled, an organ
played, some strolling Italian girls danced gracefully, and my
artistic self was aware of a warmth and a rush. But the inmost Me was
neck-deep in gloom, with which the terribly pounded steak they gave
me, fraudulently overlaid with two showy fried eggs, seemed only in
keeping. St. John came in, and Christ and the schoolmaster—who had
conducted the choir—and the thick tenor and some supers, and I
congratulated them one and all with a gloomy sense of dishonesty.
When, as evening fell, I walked home with St. John, I was gloomily
glad to find the valley shrouded in mist and a starless heaven sagging
over a blank earth. It seemed an endless [488]uphill drag to my lodging,
and though my bedroom was unexpectedly dainty, and a dear old
woman—St. John's mother—metaphorically tucked me in, I slept ill
that night. Formless dreams tortured me with impalpable tragedies and
apprehensions of horror. In the morning—after a cold sponging—the
oppression lifted a little from my spirit, though the weather still
seemed rather gray. St. John had already gone off to his field-work,
his mother told me. She was so lovely, and the room in which I ate
breakfast so neat and demure with its whitewashed walls—pure and
stainless like country snow—that I managed to swallow everything but
the coffee. O that coffee! I had to nibble at a bit of chocolate I
carried to get the taste of it out of my mouth. I tried hard not to
let the blues get the upper hand again. I filled my pipe and pulled
out my sketch-book. My notes of yesterday seemed so faint, and the
morning to be growing so dark, that I could scarcely see them. I
thought I would go and sit on the little bench outside. As I was
sauntering through the doorway, my head bending broodingly over the
sketch-book, I caught sight out of the corner of my eye of a little
white match-stand fixed up on the wall. Mechanically I put out my left
hand to take a light for my pipe. A queer, cold wetness in my fingers
and a little splash woke me to the sense of some odd mistake, and in
another instant I realized with horror that I had dipped my fingers
into holy water and splashed it over that neat, demure, spotless,
whitewashed wall."
I could not help smiling. "Ah, I know; one of those porcelain things
with a crucified Saviour over a little font. Fancy taking heaven for
brimstone!"
"It didn't seem the least bit funny at the time. I just felt awful.
What would the dear old woman say to this profanation? Why the dickens
did people have [489]whitewashed walls on which sacrilegious stains were
luridly visible? I looked up and down the hall like Moses when he slew
that Egyptian, trembling lest the old woman should come in. How could
I make her understand I was so ignorant of Christian custom as to
mistake a font for a matchbox? And if I said I was a Jew, good
heavens! she might think I had done it of fell design. What a wound to
the gentle old creature who had been so sweet to me! I could not stay
in sight of that accusing streak, I must walk off my uneasiness. I
threw open the outer door; then I stood still, paralyzed. Monstrous
evil-looking gray mists were clumped at the very threshold. Sinister
formless vapors blotted out the mountain; everywhere vague, drifting
hulks of malarious mist. I sought to pierce them, to find the
landscape, the cheerful village, the warm human life nesting under
God's heaven, but saw only—way below—as through a tunnel cut betwixt
mist and mountain, a dead, inverted world of houses and trees in a
chill, gray lake. I shuddered. An indefinable apprehension possessed
me, something like the vague discomfort of my dreams; then, almost
instantly, it crystallized into the blood-curdling suggestion: What if
this were divine chastisement? what if all the outer and inner
dreariness that had so steadily enveloped me since I had witnessed the
tragedy were punishment for my disbelief? what if this water were
really holy, and my sacrilege had brought some grisly Nemesis?"
"You believed that?"
"Not really, of course. But you, as an artist, must understand how one
dallies with an idea, plays with a mood, works oneself up
imaginatively into a dramatic situation. I let it grow upon me till,
like a man alone in the dark, afraid of the ghosts he doesn't believe
in, I grew horribly nervous."
[490]"I daresay you hadn't wholly recovered from your fall, and your nerves
were unstrung by the blood and the nails, and that steak had disagreed
with you, and you had had a bad night, and you were morbidly uneasy
about annoying the old woman, and all those chunks of mist got into
your spirits. You are a child of the sun!"
"Of course I knew all that, down in the cellars of my being, but
upstairs, all the same, I had this sense of guilt and expiation, this
anxious doubt that perhaps all that great, gloomy, mediæval business
of saints and nuns, and bones, and relics, and miracles, and icons,
and calvaries, and cells, and celibacy, and horsehair shirts, and
blood, and dirt, and tears, was true after all! What if the world of
beauty I had been content to live in was a Satanic show, and the real
thing was that dead, topsy-turvy world down there in the cold, gray
lake under the reeking mists? I sneaked back into the house to see if
the streak hadn't dried yet; but no! it loomed in tell-tale
ghastliness, a sort of writing on the wall announcing the wrath and
visitation of heaven. I went outside again and smoked miserably on the
little bench. Gradually I began to feel warmer, the mists seemed
clearing. I rose and stretched myself with an ache of luxurious
languor. Encouraged, I stole within again to peep at the streak. It
was dry—a virgin wall, innocently white, met my delighted gaze. I
opened the window; the draggling vapors were still rising, rising, the
bleakness was merging in a mild warmth. I refilled my pipe, and
plunged down the yet gray hill. I strode past the old saw-mill,
skirted the swampy border of the lake, came out on the firm green,
when bing! zim! br-r-r! a heavenly bolt of sunshine smashed through
the raw mists, scattering them like a bomb to the horizon's rim; then
with sovereign calm the sun came out full, flooding hill and dale with
luminous joy; the lake shimmered and [491]flashed into radiant life, and
gave back a great white cloud-island on a stretch of glorious blue,
and all that golden warmth stole into my veins like wine. A little
goat came skipping along with tinkling bell, a horse at grass threw up
its heels in ecstasy, an ox lowed, a dog barked. Tears of exquisite
emotion came into my eyes; the beautiful soft warm light that lay over
all the happy valley seemed to get into them and melt something. How
unlike those tears of yesterday, wrung out of me as by some serpent
coiled round my ribs! Now my ribs seemed expanding—to hold my
heart—and all the divine joy of existence thrilled me to a religious
rapture. And with the lifting of the mists all that ghastly mediæval
nightmare was lifted from my soul; in that sacred moment all the lurid
tragedy of the crucified Christ vanished, and only Christ was left,
the simple fellowship with man and beast and nature, the love of life,
the love of love, the love of God. And in that yearning ecstasy my
picture came to me—The Joyous Comrade. Christ—not the tortured God,
but the joyous comrade, the friend of all simple souls; the joyous
comrade, with the children clinging to him, and peasants and fishers
listening to his chat; not the theologian spinning barren subtleties,
but the man of genius protesting against all forms and dogmas that
would replace the direct vision and the living ecstasy; not the man of
sorrows loving the blankness of underground cells and scourged backs
and sexless skeletons, but the lover of warm life, and warm sunlight,
and all that is fresh and simple and pure and beautiful."
"Every man makes his God in his own image," I thought, too touched to
jar him by saying it aloud.
"And so—ever since—off and on—I have worked at this human picture
of him—The Joyous Comrade—to restore the true Christ to the world."
[492]"Which you hope to convert?"
"My business is with work, not with results. 'Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do with all thy might.' What can any single hand, even
the mightiest, do in this great weltering world? Yet, without the hope
and the dream, who would work at all? And so, not without hope, yet
with no expectation of a miracle, I give the Jews a Christ they can
now accept, the Christians a Christ they have forgotten. I rebuild for
my beloved America a type of simple manhood, unfretted by the feverish
lust for wealth or power, a simple lover of the quiet moment, a sweet
human soul never dispossessed of itself, always at one with the
essence of existence. Who knows but I may suggest the great question:
What shall it profit a nation to gain the whole world and lose its own
soul?"
His voice died away solemnly, and I heard only the click of the
billiard-balls and the rumble and roar of New York.
"And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come,
saying: What is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength
of hand the Lord brought us out from Egypt, from the house of
bondage. And ... the Lord slew all the first-born in the land of
Egypt, ... but all the first-born of my children I
redeem."—Exodus xiii. 14, 15.
Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya! One only kid of the goat.
At last the Passover family service was drawing to an end. His father
had started on the curious Chaldaic recitative that wound it up:
One only kid, one only kid, which my father bought for two zuzim.
Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya!
The young man smiled faintly at the quaintness of an old gentleman in
a frock-coat, a director of the steamboat company in modern Venice,
talking Chaldaic, wholly unconscious of the incongruity, rolling out
the sonorous syllables with unction, propped up on the prescribed
pillows.
And a cat came and devoured the kid which my father bought for two
zuzim. Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya!
He wondered vaguely what his father would say to him when the service
was over. He had only come in during the second part, arriving from
Vienna with his usual unquestioned unexpectedness, and was quite
startled to find it was Passover night, and that the immemorial
service was going on just as when he was a boy. The rarity of his
[494]visits to the old folks made it a strange coincidence to have stumbled
upon them at this juncture, and, as he took his seat silently in the
family circle without interrupting the prayers by greetings, he had a
vivid artistic perception of the possibilities of existence—the witty
French novel that had so amused him in the train, making him feel
that, in providing raw matter for esprit, human life had its joyous
justification; the red-gold sunset over the mountains; the floating
homewards down the Grand Canal in the moonlight, the well-known
palaces as dreamful and mysterious to him as if he had not been born
in the city of the sea; the gay reminiscences of Goldmark's new opera
last night at the Operntheater that had haunted his ear as he ascended
the great staircase; and then this abrupt transition to the East, and
the dead centuries, and Jehovah bringing out His chosen people from
Egypt, and bidding them celebrate with unleavened bread throughout the
generations their hurried journey to the desert.
Probably his father was distressed at this glaring instance of his
son's indifference to the traditions he himself held so dear; though
indeed the old man had realized long ago the bitter truth that his
ways were not his son's ways, nor his son's thoughts his thoughts. He
had long since known that his first-born was a sinner in Israel, an
"Epikouros," a scoffer, a selfish sensualist, a lover of bachelor
quarters and the feverish life of the European capitals, a scorner of
the dietary laws and tabus, an adept in the forbidden. The son thought
of himself through his father's spectacles, and the faint smile
playing about the sensitive lips became bitterer. His long white
fingers worked nervously.
And yet he thought kindly enough of his father; admired the
perseverance that had brought him wealth, the generosity with which he
expended it, the fidelity that [495]resisted its temptations and made this
Seder service, this family reunion, as homely and as piously simple
as in the past when the Ghetto Vecchio, and not this palace on the
Grand Canal, had meant home. The beaker of wine for the prophet Elijah
stood as naïvely expectant as ever. His mother's face, too, shone with
love and goodwill. Brothers and sisters—shafts from a full
quiver—sat around the table variously happy and content with
existence. An atmosphere of peace and restfulness and faith and piety
pervaded the table.
And a dog came and bit the cat which had devoured the kid which my
father bought for two zuzim. Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya!
And suddenly the contrast of all these quietudes with his own restless
life overwhelmed him in a great flood of hopelessness. His eyes filled
with salt tears. He would never sit at the head of his own table,
carrying on the chain of piety that linked the generations each to
each; never would his soul be lapped in this atmosphere of faith and
trust; no woman's love would ever be his; no children would rest their
little hands in his; he would pass through existence like a wraith,
gazing in at the warm firesides with hopeless eyes, and sweeping
on—the wandering Jew of the world of soul. How he had suffered—he,
modern of moderns, dreamer of dreams, and ponderer of problems!
Vanitas Vanitatum! Omnia Vanitas! Modern of the moderns? But it was
an ancient Jew who had said that, and another who had said "Better is
the day of a man's death than the day of a man's birth." Verily an
ironical proof of the Preacher's own maxim that there is nothing new
under the sun. And he recalled the great sentences:
"Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all
is vanity.
[496]"One generation passeth away and another generation cometh: but
the earth abideth for ever.
"All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto
the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return
again.
"The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that
which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new
thing under the sun.
"That which is crooked cannot be made straight; and that which
is wanting cannot be numbered.
"For in much wisdom is much grief; and he that increaseth
knowledge increaseth sorrow."
Yes, it was all true, all true. How the Jewish genius had gone to the
heart of things, so that the races that hated it found comfort in its
Psalms. No sense of form, the end of Ecclesiastes a confusion and a
weak repetition like the last disordered spasms of a prophetic
seizure. No care for art, only for reality. And yet he had once
thought he loved the Greeks better, had from childhood yearned after
forbidden gods, thrilled by that solitary marble figure of a girl that
looked in on the Ghetto alley from a boundary wall. Yes; he had
worshipped at the shrine of the Beautiful; he had prated of the
Renaissance. He had written—with the multiform adaptiveness of his
race—French poems with Hellenic inspiration, and erotic lyrics—half
felt, half feigned, delicately chiselled. He saw now with a sudden
intuition that he had never really expressed himself in art, save
perhaps in that one brutal Italian novel written under the influence
of Zola, which had been so denounced by a world with no perception of
the love and the tears that prompted the relentless unmasking of life.
And a staff came and smote the dog which had bitten the cat, which
had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim. Chad
Gadya! Chad Gadya!
Yes, he was a Jew at heart. The childhood in the Ghetto, the long
heredity, had bound him in emotions and [497]impulses as with
phylacteries. Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya! The very melody awakened
associations innumerable. He saw in a swift panorama the intense inner
life of a curly-headed child roaming in the narrow cincture of the
Ghetto, amid the picturesque high houses. A reflex of the child's old
joy in the Festivals glowed in his soul. How charming this quaint
sequence of Passover and Pentecost, New Year and Tabernacles; this
survival of the ancient Orient in modern Europe, this living in the
souls of one's ancestors, even as on Tabernacles one lived in their
booths. A sudden craving seized him to sing with his father, to wrap
himself in a fringed shawl, to sway with the rhythmic passion of
prayer, to prostrate himself in the synagogue. Why had his brethren
ever sought to emerge from the joyous slavery of the Ghetto? His
imagination conjured it up as it was ere he was born: the one campo,
bordered with a colonnade of shops, the black-bearded Hebrew merchants
in their long robes, the iron gates barred at midnight, the keepers
rowing round and round the open canal-sides in their barca. The yellow
cap? The yellow O on their breasts? Badges of honor; since to be
persecuted is nobler than to persecute. Why had they wished for
emancipation? Their life was self-centred, self-complete. But no; they
were restless, doomed to wander. He saw the earliest streams pouring
into Venice at the commencement of the thirteenth century, German
merchants, then Levantines, helping to build up the commercial capital
of the fifteenth century. He saw the later accession of Peninsular
refugees from the Inquisition, their shelter beneath the lion's wing
negotiated through their fellow-Jew, Daniel Rodrigues, Consul of the
Republic in Dalmatia. His mind halted a moment on this Daniel
Rodrigues, an important skeleton. He thought of the endless shifts of
the Jews to evade the harsher [498]prescriptions, their subtle, passive
refusal to live at Mestre, their final relegation to the Ghetto. What
well-springs of energy, seething in those paradoxical progenitors of
his, who united the calm of the East with the fever of the West; those
idealists dealing always with the practical, those lovers of ideas,
those princes of combination, mastering their environment because they
never dealt in ideas except as embodied in real concrete things.
Reality! Reality!
That was the note of Jewish genius, which had this affinity at least
with the Greek. And he, though to him his father's real world was a
shadow, had yet this instinctive hatred of the cloud-spinners, the
word-jugglers, his idealisms needed solid substance to play around.
Perhaps if he had been persecuted, or even poor, if his father had not
smoothed his passage to a not unprosperous career in letters, he might
have escaped this haunting sense of the emptiness and futility of
existence. He, too, would have found a joy in outwitting the Christian
persecutor, in piling ducat on ducat. Ay, even now he chuckled to
think how these strazzaroli—these forced vendors of second-hand
wares—had lived to purchase the faded purple wrappings of Venetian
glory.
He remembered reading in the results of an ancient census: Men, women,
children, monks, nuns—and Jews! Well, the Doges were done with,
Venice was a melancholy ruin, and the Jew—the Jew lived sumptuously
in the palaces of her proud nobles. He looked round the magnificent
long-stretching dining-room, with its rugs, oil-paintings, frescoed
ceiling, palms; remembered the ancient scutcheon over the stone
portal—a lion rampant with an angel volant—and thought of the old
Latin statute forbidding the Jews to keep schools of any kind in
Venice, or to teach anything in the city, under penalty of fifty
ducats' fine and six [499]months' imprisonment. Well, the Jews had taught
the Venetians something after all—that the only abiding wealth is
human energy. All other nations had had their flowering time and had
faded out. But Israel went on with unabated strength and courage. It
was very wonderful. Nay, was it not miraculous? Perhaps there was,
indeed, "a mission of Israel," perhaps they were indeed God's "chosen
people." The Venetians had built and painted marvellous things and
died out and left them for tourists to gaze at. The Jews had created
nothing for ages, save a few poems and a few yearning synagogue
melodies; yet here they were, strong and solid, a creation in flesh
and blood more miraculous and enduring than anything in stone and
bronze. And what was the secret of this persistence and strength? What
but a spiritual? What but their inner certainty of God, their
unquestioning trust in Him, that He would send His Messiah to rebuild
the Temple, to raise them to the sovereignty of the peoples? How
typical his own father—thus serenely singing Chaldaic—a modern of
moderns without, a student and saint at home! Ah, would that he, too,
could lay hold on this solid faith! Yes, his soul was in sympathy with
the brooding immovable East; even with the mysticisms of the
Cabalists, with the trance of the ascetic, nay, with the fantastic
frenzy-begotten ecstasy of the Dervishes he had seen dancing in
Turkish mosques,—that intoxicating sense of a satisfying meaning in
things, of a unity with the essence of existence, which men had
doubtless sought in the ancient Eleusinian mysteries, which the
Mahatmas of India had perhaps found, the tradition of which ran down
through the ages, misconceived by the Western races, and for lack of
which he could often have battered his head against a wall, as in
literal beating against the baffling mystery of existence. Ah! there
was the hell of it! His soul was of [500]the Orient, but his brain was of
the Occident. His intellect had been nourished at the breast of
Science, that classified everything and explained nothing. But
explanation! The very word was futile! Things were. To explain things
was to state A in terms of B, and B in terms of A. Who should explain
the explanation? Perhaps only by ecstasy could one understand what lay
behind the phenomena. But even so the essence had to be judged by its
manifestations, and the manifestations were often absurd, unrighteous,
and meaningless. No, he could not believe. His intellect was
remorseless. What if Israel was preserved? Why should the empire of
Venice be destroyed?
And a fire came and burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which
had bitten the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought
for two zuzim. Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya!
He thought of the energy that had gone to build this wonderful city;
the deep sea-soaked wooden piles hidden beneath; the exhaustless art
treasures—churches, pictures, sculptures—no less built on obscure
human labor, though a few of the innumerable dead hands had signed
names. What measureless energy petrified in these palaces! Carpaccio's
pictures floated before him, and Tintoretto's—record of dead
generations; and then, by the link of size, those even vaster
paintings—in gouache—of Vermayen in Vienna: old land-fights with
crossbow, spear, and arquebus, old sea-fights with inter-grappling
galleys. He thought of galley-slaves chained to their oar—the sweat,
the blood that had stained history. "So I returned and considered all
the oppressions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of
such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter." And then he
thought of a modern picture with a beautiful nude female figure that
had cost the happiness of a family; the artist now dead and immortal,
the [501]woman, once rich and fashionable, on the streets. The futility of
things—love, fame, immortality! All roads lead nowhere! What profit
shall a man have from all his labor which he hath done under the sun?
No; it was all a flux—there was nothing but flux.
Πάντα ῥεῖ. The wisest had always seen that. The cat which devoured the
kid, and the dog which bit the cat, and the staff which smote the dog,
and the fire which burnt the staff, and so on endlessly. Did not the
commentators say that that was the meaning of this very parable—the
passing of the ancient empires, Egypt, Assyria, Persia, Greece, Rome?
Commentators! what curious people! What a making of books to which
there was no end! What a wilderness of waste logic the Jewish
intellect had wandered in for ages! The endless volumes of the Talmud
and its parasites! The countless codes, now obsolescent, over which
dead eyes had grown dim! As great a patience and industry as had gone
to build Venetian art, and with less result. The chosen people,
indeed! And were they so strong and sane? A fine thought in his brain,
forsooth!
He, worn out by the great stress of the centuries, such long
in-breeding, so many ages of persecution, so many manners and
languages adopted, so many nationalities taken on! His soul must be
like a palimpsest with the record of nation on nation. It was uncanny,
this clinging to life; a race should be content to die out. And in him
it had perhaps grown thus content. He foreshadowed its despair. He
stood for latter-day Israel, the race that always ran to extremes,
which, having been first in faith, was also first in scepticism,
keenest to pierce to the empty heart of things; like an orphan wind,
homeless, wailing about the lost places of the universe. To know all
to be illusion, cheat—itself the most cheated of races; lured on to a
career of sacrifice and contempt. If he could only keep the [502]hope that
had hallowed its sufferings. But now it was a viper—not a divine
hope—it had nourished in its bosom. He felt so lonely; a great
stretch of blackness, a barren mere, a gaunt cliff on a frozen sea, a
pine on a mountain. To be done with it all—the sighs and the sobs and
the tears, the heart-sinking, the dull dragging days of wretchedness
and the nights of pain. How often he had turned his face to the wall,
willing to die.
Perhaps it was this dead city of stones and the sea that wrought so on
his spirit. Tourgénieff was right; only the young should come here,
not those who had seen with Virgil the tears of things. And then he
recalled the lines of Catullus—the sad, stately plaint of the classic
world, like the suppressed sob of a strong man:
And then he thought again of Virgil, and called up a Tuscan landscape
that expressed him, and lines of cypresses that moved on majestic like
hexameters. He saw the terrace of an ancient palace, and the grotesque
animals carven on the balustrade; the green flicker of lizards on the
drowsy garden-wall; the old-world sun-dial and the grotto and the
marble fountain, and the cool green gloom of the cypress-grove with
its delicious dapple of shadows. An invisible blackbird fluted
overhead. He walked along the great walk under the stone eyes of
sculptured gods, and looked out upon the hot landscape taking its
siesta under the ardent blue sky—the green sunlit hills, the white
nestling villas, the gray olive-trees. Who had paced these cloistral
terraces? Mediæval princesses, passionate and scornful, treading
delicately, with trailing silks and faint perfumes. He would make a
poem of it. Oh, the loveliness of life! [503]What was it a local singer
had carolled in that dear soft Venetian dialect?
Yes, the world was indeed most beautiful and most varied. Terence was
right: the comedy and pathos of things was enough. We are a sufficient
spectacle to one another. A glow came over him; for a moment he
grasped hold on life, and the infinite tentacles of things threw
themselves out to entwine him.
And a water came and extinguished the fire, which had burnt the
staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bitten the cat, which had
devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim. Chad Gadya!
Chad Gadya!
But the glow faded, and he drew back sad and hopeless. For he knew now
what he wanted. Paganism would not suffice. He wanted—he hungered
after—God. The God of his fathers. The three thousand years of belief
could not be shaken off. It was atavism that gave him those sudden
strange intuitions of God at the scent of a rose, the sound of a
child's laughter, the sight of a sleeping city; that sent a warmth to
his heart and tears to his eyes, and a sense of the infinite beauty
and sacredness of life. But he could not have the God of his fathers.
And his own God was distant and dubious, and nothing that modern
science had taught him was yet registered in his organism. Could he
even transmit it to descendants? What was it Weismann said about
acquired characteristics? No, certain races put forth certain beliefs,
and till you killed off the races, you could never kill off the
beliefs. Oh, it was a cruel tragedy, this Western culture grafted on
an Eastern [504]stock, untuning the chords of life, setting heart and
brain asunder. But then Nature was cruel. He thought of last year's
grape-harvest ruined by a thunderstorm, the frightful poverty of the
peasants under the thumb of the padrones. And then the vision came up
of a captured cuttle-fish he had seen gasping, almost with a human
cough, on the sands of the Lido. It had spoilt the sublimity of that
barren stretch of sand and sea, and the curious charm of the white
sails that seemed to glide along the very stones of the great
breakwater. His soul demanded justice for the uncouth cuttle-fish. He
did not understand how people could live in a self-centred spiritual
world that shut out the larger part of creation. If suffering
purified, what purification did overdriven horses undergo, or starved
cats? The miracle of creation—why was it wrought for puppies doomed
to drown? No; man had imposed morality on a non-moral universe,
anthropomorphizing everything, transferring into the great remorseless
mechanism the ethical ideals that governed the conduct of man to man.
Religion, like art, focussed the universe round man, an unimportant
by-product: it was bad science turned into good art. And it was his
own race that had started the delusion! "And Abraham said unto God:
'Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?'" Formerly the gods
had meant might, but man's soul had come to crave for right. From the
welter of human existence man had abstracted the idea of goodness and
made a god of it, and then foolishly turned round and asked why it
permitted the bad without which the idea of it could never have been
formed. And because God was goodness, therefore He was oneness—he
remembered the acute analysis of Kuenen. No, the moral law was no more
the central secret of the universe than color or music. Religion was
made for man, not man for religion. Even justice was a meaningless
concept in the last analysis: What [505]was, was. The artist's view of
life was the only true one: the artist who believes in everything and
in nothing.
The religions unconsciously distorted everything. Life itself was
simple enough: a biological phenomenon that had its growth, its
maturity, its decay. Death was no mystery, pain no punishment, nor sin
anything but the survival of lower attributes from a prior phase of
evolution, or not infrequently the legitimate protest of the natural
self against artificial social ethics. It was the creeds that tortured
things out of their elemental simplicity. But for him the old craving
persisted. That alone would do. God, God—he was God-intoxicated,
without Spinoza's calm or Spinoza's certainty. Justice, Pity,
Love—something that understood. He knew it was sheer blind heredity
that spoilt his life for him—oh, the irony of it—and that, if he
could forget his sense of futility, he could live beautifully unto
himself. The wheels of chance had ground well for him. But his soul
rejected all the solutions and self-equations of his friends—the
all-sufficiency of science, of art, of pleasure, of the human
spectacle; saw with inexorable insight through the phantasmal
optimisms, refused to blind itself with Platonisms and Hegelisms,
refused the positions of æsthetes and artists and self-satisfied
German savants, equally with the positions of conventional preachers,
demanded justice for the individual down to the sparrow, two of which
were sold in the market-place for a farthing, and a significance and a
purpose in the secular sweep of destiny; yet knew all the while that
Purpose was as anthropomorphic a conception of the essence of things
as justice or goodness. But the world without God was a beautiful,
heartless woman—cold, irresponsive. He needed the flash of soul. He
had experimented in Nature—as color, form, mystery—what had he not
experimented in? But there was a want, a void. He had loved [506]Nature,
had come very near finding peace in the earth-passion, in the
intoxicating smell of grass and flowers, in the scent and sound of the
sea, in the rapture of striking through the cold, salt waves, tossing
green and white-flecked; ill exchanged for any heaven. But the passion
always faded and the old hunger for God came back.
He had found temporary peace with Spinoza's God: the eternal
infinite-sided Being, of whom all the starry infinities were but one
poor expression, and to love whom did not imply being loved in return.
'Twas magnificent to be lifted up in worship of that supernal
splendor. But the splendor froze, not scorched. He wanted the eternal
Being to be conscious of his existence; nay, to send him a whisper
that He was not a metaphysical figment. Otherwise he found himself
saying what Voltaire has made Spinoza say: "Je crois, entre nous, que
vous n'existez pas." Obedience? Worship? He could have prostrated
himself for hours on the flags, worn out his knees in prayer. O
Luther, O Galileo, enemies of the human race! How wise of the Church
to burn infidels, who would burn down the spirit's home—the home warm
with the love and treasures of the generations—and leave the poor
human soul naked and shivering amid the cold countless worlds. O
Napoleon, arch-fiend, who, opening the Ghettos, where the Jews
crouched in narrow joy over the Sabbath fire, let in upon them the
weight of the universe.
And an ox came and drank the water, which had extinguished the fire,
which had burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bitten
the cat, which had devoured the kid, which my father bought for two
zuzim. Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya!
In Vienna, whence he had come, an Israelite, on whom the modern
universe pressed, yet dreamed the old dream of a Jewish State—a
modern State, incarnation of all the [507]great principles won by the
travail of the ages. The chameleon of races should show a specific
color: a Jewish art, a Jewish architecture would be born, who knew?
But he, who had worked for Mazzini, who had seen his hero achieve that
greatest of all defeats, victory, he knew. He knew what would come
of it, even if it came. He understood the fate of Christ and of all
idealists, doomed to see themselves worshipped and their ideas
rejected in a religion or a State founded like a national monument to
perpetuate their defeat. But the Jewish State would not even come. He
had met his Viennese brethren but yesterday; in the Leopoldstadt,
frowsy with the gaberdines and side-curls of Galicia; in the Prater,
arrogantly radiant in gleaming carriages with spick-and-span
footmen—that strange race that could build up cities for others but
never for itself; that professed to be both a religion and a
nationality, and was often neither. The grotesquerie of history!
Moses, Sinai, Palestine, Isaiah, Ezra, the Temple, Christ, the Exile,
the Ghettos, the Martyrdoms—all this to give the Austrian comic
papers jokes about stockbrokers with noses big enough to support
unheld opera—glasses. And even supposing another miraculous link came
to add itself to that wonderful chain, the happier Jews of the new
State would be born into it as children to an enriched man,
unconscious of the struggles, accepting the luxuries, growing
big-bellied and narrow-souled. The Temple would be rebuilt. Et
après? The architect would send in the bill. People would dine and
dig one another in the ribs and tell the old smoking-room stories.
There would be fashionable dressmakers. The synagogue would persecute
those who were larger than it, the professional priests would prate of
spiritualities to an applausive animal world, the press would be run
in the interests of capitalists and politicians, the little writers
would grow spiteful against those who did not call them [508]great, the
managers of the national theatre would advance their mistresses to
leading parts. Yes, the ox would come and drink the water, and
Jeshurun would wax fat and kick. "For that which is crooked cannot be
made straight." Menander's comedies were fresh from the mint, the Book
of Proverbs as new as the morning paper. No, he could not dream. Let
the younger races dream; the oldest of races knew better. The race
that was first to dream the beautiful dream of a Millennium was the
first to discard it. Nay, was it even a beautiful dream? Every man
under his own fig-tree, forsooth, obese and somnolent, the spirit
disintegrated! Omnia Vanitas, this too was vanity.
And the slaughterer came and slaughtered the ox, which had drunk the
water, which had extinguished the fire, which had burnt the staff,
which had smitten the dog, which had bitten the cat, which had
devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim. Chad Gadya!
Chad Gadya!
Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya! He had never thought of the meaning of the
words, always connected them with the finish of the ceremony. "All
over! All over!" they seemed to wail, and in the quaint music there
seemed a sense of infinite disillusion, of infinite rest; a
winding-up, a conclusion, things over and done with, a fever subsided,
a toil completed, a clamor abated, a farewell knell, a little folding
of the hands to sleep.
Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya! It was a wail over the struggle for existence,
the purposeless procession of the ages, the passing of the ancient
empires—as the commentators had pointed out—and of the modern
empires that would pass on to join them, till the earth itself—as the
scientists had pointed out—passed away in cold and darkness. Flux and
reflux, the fire and the water, the water and the fire! He thought of
the imperturbable skeletons [509]that still awaited exhumation in Pompeii,
the swaddled mummies of the Pharaohs, the undiminished ashes of
forgotten lovers in old Etruscan tombs. He had a flashing sense of the
great pageant of the Mediæval—popes, kings, crusaders, friars,
beggars, peasants, flagellants, schoolmen; of the vast modern life in
Paris, Vienna, Rome, London, Berlin, New York, Chicago; the brilliant
life of the fashionable quarters, the babble of the Bohemias, the poor
in their slums, the sick on their beds of pain, the soldiers, the
prostitutes, the slaveys in lodging-houses, the criminals, the
lunatics; the vast hordes of Russia, the life pullulating in the
swarming boats on Chinese rivers, the merry butterfly life of Japan,
the unknown savages of mid-Africa with their fetishes and war-dances,
the tribes of the East sleeping in tents or turning uneasily on the
hot terraces of their houses, the negro races growing into such a
terrible problem in the United States, and each of all these peoples,
nay, each unit of any people, thinking itself the centre of the
universe, and of its love and care; the destiny of the races no
clearer than the destiny of the individuals and no diviner than the
life of insects, and all the vast sweep of history nothing but a spasm
in the life of one of the meanest of an obscure group of worlds, in an
infinity of vaster constellations. Oh, it was too great! He could not
look on the face of his own God and live. Without the stereoscopic
illusions which made his father's life solid, he could not continue to
exist. His point of view was hopelessly cosmic. All was equally great
and mysterious? Yes; but all was equally small and commonplace. Kant's
Starry Infinite Without? Bah! Mere lumps of mud going round in a
tee-totum dance, and getting hot over it; no more than the spinning of
specks in a drop of dirty water. Size was nothing in itself. There
were mountains and seas in a morsel of wet mud, picturesque [510]enough
for microscopic tourists. A billion billion morsels of wet mud were no
more imposing than one. Geology, chemistry, astronomy—they were all
in the splashes of mud from a passing carriage. Everywhere one law and
one futility. The human race? Strange marine monsters crawling about
in the bed of an air-ocean, unable to swim upwards, oddly tricked out
in the stolen skins of other creatures. As absurd, impartially
considered, as the strange creatures quaintly adapted to curious
environments one saw in aquaria. Kant's Moral Law Within! Dissoluble
by a cholera germ, a curious blue network under the microscope, not
unlike a map of Venice. Yes, the cosmic and the comic were one. Why be
bullied into the Spinozistic awe? Perhaps Heine—that other Jew—saw
more truly, and man's last word on the universe into which he had been
projected unasked, might be a mockery of that which had mocked him, a
laugh with tears in it.
And he, he foreshadowed the future of all races, as well as of his
own. They would all go on struggling, till they became self-conscious;
then, like children grown to men, the scales falling from their eyes,
they would suddenly ask themselves what it was all about, and,
realizing that they were being driven along by blind forces to labor
and struggle and strive, they too would pass away; the gross childish
races would sweep them up, Nature pouring out new energies from her
inexhaustible fount. For strength was in the unconscious, and when a
nation paused to ask of itself its right to Empire, its Empire was
already over. The old Palestine Hebrew, sacrificing his sheep to
Yahweh, what a granite figure compared with himself, infinitely subtle
and mobile! For a century or two the modern world would take pleasure
in seeing itself reflected in literature and art by its most decadent
spirits, in vibrating to the pathos and picturesqueness of all the
periods of man's mysterious [511]existence on this queer little planet;
while the old geocentric ethics, oddly clinging on to the changed
cosmogony, would keep life clean. But all that would pall—and then
the deluge!
There was a waft of merry music from without. He rose and went
noiselessly to the window and looked out into the night. A full moon
hung in the heavens, perpendicularly and low, so that it seemed a
terrestrial object in comparison with the stars scattered above, glory
beyond glory, and in that lucent Italian atmosphere making him feel
himself of their shining company, whirling through the infinite void
on one of the innumerable spheres. A broad silver green patch of
moonlight lay on the dark water, dwindling into a string of dancing
gold pieces. Adown the canal the black gondolas clustered round a
barca lighted by gaily colored lanterns, whence the music came.
Funiculi, Funicula—it seemed to dance with the very spirit of
joyousness. He saw a young couple holding hands. He knew they were
English, that strange, happy, solid, conquering race. Something
vibrated in him. He thought of bridegrooms, youth, strength; but it
was as the hollow echo of a far-off regret, some vague sunrise of gold
over hills of dream. Then a beautiful tenor voice began to sing
Schubert's Serenade. It was as the very voice of hopeless passion; the
desire of the moth for the star, of man for God. Death, death, at any
cost, death to end this long ghastly creeping about the purlieus of
life. Life even for a single instant longer, life without God, seemed
intolerable. He would find peace in the bosom of that black water. He
would glide downstairs now, speaking no word.
And the Angel of Death came and slew the slaughterer, which had
slaughtered the ox, which had drunk the water, which had extinguished
the fire, which had burnt the staff, which had smitten the dog, which
had bitten the cat, which [512]had devoured the kid, which my father
bought for two zuzim. Chad Gadya! Chad Gadya!
When they should find him accidentally drowned, for how could the
world understand, the world which yet had never been backward to judge
him, that a man with youth, health, wealth, and a measure of fame
should take his own life; his people would think, perhaps, that it was
a ghost that had sat at the Seder table so silent and noiseless.
And, indeed, what but a ghost? One need not die to hover outside the
warm circle of life, stretching vain arms. A ghost? He had always been
a ghost. From childhood those strange solid people had come and talked
and walked with him, and he had glided among them, an unreal spirit,
to which they gave flesh-and-blood motives like their own. As a child
death had seemed horrible to him; red worms crawling over white flesh.
Now his thoughts always stopped at the glad moment of giving up the
ghost. More lives beyond the grave? Why, the world was not large
enough for one life. It had to repeat itself incessantly. Books,
newspapers, what tedium! A few ideas deftly re-combined. For there was
nothing new under the sun. Life like a tale told by an idiot, full of
sound and fury, and signifying nothing. Shakespeare had found the
supreme expression for it as for everything in it.
He stole out softly through the half-open door, went through the vast
antechamber, full of tapestry and figures of old Venetians in armor,
down the wide staircase, into the great courtyard that looked strange
and sepulchral when he struck a match to find the water-portal, and
saw his shadow curving monstrous along the ribbed roof, and leering at
the spacious gloom. He opened the great doors gently, and came out
into the soft spring night air. All was silent now. The narrow
side-canal had a glimmer of moonlight, the opposite palace was black,
with one spot of [513]light where a window shone: overhead in the narrow
rift of dark-blue sky a flock of stars flew like bright birds through
the soft velvet gloom. The water lapped mournfully against the marble
steps, and a gondola lay moored to the posts, gently nodding to its
black shadow in the water.
He walked to where the water-alley met the deeper Grand Canal, and let
himself slide down with a soft, subdued splash. He found himself
struggling, but he conquered the instinctive will to live.
But as he sank for the last time, the mystery of the night and the
stars and death mingled with a strange whirl of childish memories
instinct with the wonder of life, and the immemorial Hebrew words of
the dying Jew beat outwards to his gurgling throat: "Hear, O Israel,
the Lord our God, the Lord is One."
Through the open doorway floated down the last words of the hymn and
the service:—
And the Holy One came, blessed be He, and slew the Angel of Death,
who had slain the slaughterer, who had slaughtered the ox, which had
drunk the water, which had extinguished the fire, which had burnt the
staff, which had smitten the dog, which had bitten the cat, which had
devoured the kid, which my father bought for two zuzim. Chad Gadya!
Chad Gadya!
Outside the walls of Jerusalem, on the bleak roadless way to the Mount
of Olives, within sight of the domes and minarets of the sacred city,
and looking towards the mosque of Omar—arrogantly a-glitter on the
site of Solomon's Temple—there perches among black, barren rocks a
colony of Arabian Jews from Yemen.
These all but cave-dwellers, grimy caftaned figures, with swarthy
faces, coal-black ringlets, and hungry eyes, have for sole public
treasure a synagogue, consisting of a small room, furnished only with
an Ark, and bare even of seats.
In this room a Scribe of to-day, humblest in Israel, yet with the gift
of vision, stood turning over the few old books that lay about,
strange flotsam and jetsam of the great world-currents that have
drifted Israel to and fro. And to him bending over a copy of the
mystic Zohar,—that thirteenth century Cabalistic classic, forged in
Chaldaic by a Jew of Spain, which paved the way for the Turkish
Messiah—was brought a little child.
A little boy in his father's arms, his image in miniature, with a
miniature grimy caftan and miniature coal-black [515]ringlets beneath his
little black skull-cap. A human curiosity brought to interest the
stranger and increase his bakhshísh.
For lo! the little boy had six fingers on his right hand! The child
held it shyly clenched, but the father forcibly parted the fingers to
exhibit them.
And the child lifted up his voice and wept bitterly.
And so, often in after days when the Scribe thought of Jerusalem, it
was not of what he had been told he would think; not of Prophets and
Angels and Crusaders—only of the crying of that little six-fingered
Jewish child, washed by the great tides of human history on to the
black rocks near the foot of the Mount of Olives.
Jerusalem—centre of pilgrimage to three great religions—unholiest
city under the sun!
"For from Zion the Law shall go forth and the Word of God from
Jerusalem." Gone forth of a sooth, thought the Scribe, leaving in
Jerusalem itself only the swarming of sects about the corpse of
Religion.
No prophetic centre, this Zion, even for Israel; only the stagnant,
stereotyped activity of excommunicating Rabbis, and the capricious
distribution of the paralyzing Chalukah, leaving an appalling
multitudinous poverty agonizing in the steep refuse-laden alleys. The
faint stirrings of new life, the dim desires of young Israel to
regenerate at once itself and the soil of Palestine, the lofty
patriotism of immigrant Dreamers as yet unable to overcome the long
lethargy of holy study and of prayers for rain. A city where men go to
die, but not to live.
An accursèd city, priest-ridden and pauperized, with [516]cripples
dragging about its shrines and lepers burrowing at the Zion gate; but
a city infinitely pathetic, infinitely romantic withal, a centre
through which pass all the great threads of history, ancient and
mediæval, and now at last quivering with the telegraphic thread of the
modern, yet only the more charged with the pathos of the past and the
tears of things; symbol not only of the tragedy of the Christ, but of
the tragedy of his people, nay of the great world-tragedy.
On the Eve of the Passover and Easter, the Scribe arrived at the outer
fringe of the rainbow-robed, fur-capped throng that shook in
passionate lamentation before that Titanic fragment of Temple Wall,
which is the sole relic of Israel's national glories. Roaring billows
of hysterical prayer beat against the monstrous, symmetric blocks,
quarried by King Solomon's servants and smoothed by the kisses of the
generations. A Fatherland lost eighteen hundred years ago, and still
this strange indomitable race hoped on!
"Hasten, hasten, O Redeemer of Zion."
And from amid the mourners, one tall, stately figure, robed in purple
velvet, turned his face to the Scribe, saying, with out-stretched hand
and in a voice of ineffable love—
"Shalom Aleichem."
And the Scribe was shaken, for lo! it was the face of the Christ.
Did he haunt the Wailing Wall, then, sharing the woe of his brethren?
For in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre the Scribe found him not.
The Scribe had slipt in half disguised: no Jew being allowed even in
the courtyard or the precincts of the sacred place. His first open
attempt had been frustrated by the Turkish soldiers who kept the
narrow approach to the courtyard. "Rüh! Emshi!" they had shouted
fiercely, and the Scribe recklessly refusing to turn back had been
expelled by violence. A blessing in disguise, his friends had told
him, for should the Greek-Church fanatics have become aware of him, he
might have perished in a miniature Holy War. And as he fought his way
through the crowd to gain the shelter of a balcony, he felt indeed
that one ugly rush would suffice to crush him.
In the sepulchral incense-laden dusk of the uncouth Church, in the
religious gloom punctuated by the pervasive twinkle of a thousand
hanging lamps of silver, was wedged and blent a suffocating mass of
palm-bearing humanity of all nations and races, the sumptuously
clothed and the ragged, the hale and the unsightly; the rainbow colors
of the East relieved by the white of the shrouded females, toned down
by the sombre shabbiness of the Russian moujiks and peasant-women,
and pierced by a vivid circular line of red fezzes on the unbared,
unreverential heads of the Turkish regiment keeping order among the
jostling jealousies of Christendom, whose rival churches swarm around
the strange, glittering, candle-illumined Rotunda that covers the tomb
of Christ. Not an inch of free space anywhere under this shadow of
Golgotha: a [518]perpetual sway to and fro of the human tides, seething
with sobs and quarrels; flowing into the planless maze of chapels and
churches of all ages and architectures, that, perched on rocks or hewn
into their mouldy darkness, magnificent with untold
church-treasure—Armenian, Syrian, Coptic, Latin, Greek,
Abyssinian—add the resonance of their special sanctities and the
oppression of their individual glories of vestment and ceremonial to
the surcharged atmosphere palpitant with exaltation and prayer and
mystic bell-tinklings; overspreading the thirty-seven sacred spots,
and oozing into the holy of holies itself, towards that impassive
marble stone, goal of the world's desire in the blaze of the ever
burning lamps; and overflowing into the screaming courtyard, amid the
flagstone stalls of chaplets and crosses and carven-shells, and the
rapacious rabble of cripples and vendors.
And amid the frenzied squeezing and squabbling, way was miraculously
made for a dazzling procession of the Only Orthodox Church, moving
statelily round and round, to the melting strains of unseen singing
boys and preceded by an upborne olive-tree; seventy priests in
flowering damask, carrying palms or swinging censers, boys in green,
uplifting silken banners richly broidered with sacred scenes,
archimandrites attended by deacons, and bearing symbolic trinitarian
candlesticks, bishops with mitres, and last and most gorgeous of all,
the sceptred Patriarch bowing to the tiny Coptic Church in the corner,
as his priests wheel and swing their censers towards it—all the
elaborately jewelled ritual evolved by alien races from the simple
life and teaching of Jesus of Nazareth.
"O Jesus, brother in Israel, perhaps only those excluded from this
sanctuary of thine can understand thee!"
So thought the Scribe, as from the comparative safety of an upper
monastery where no Jewish foot had ever trod, he looked down upon the
glowing, heaving mass. The right emotion did not come to him. He was
irritated; the thought of entering so historic and so Jewish a shrine
only at peril of his life, recalled the long intolerance of mediæval
Christendom, the Dark Ages of the Ghettos. His imagination conjured up
an ironic vision of himself as the sport of that seething mob, saw
himself seeking a last refuge in the Sepulchre, and falling dead
across the holy tomb. And then the close air charged with all those
breaths and candles and censers, the jewelled pageantry flaunted in
that city of squalor and starvation, the military line of contemptuous
Mussulmen complicating the mutual contempt of the Christian sects, and
reminding him of the obligation on a new Jewish State, if it ever
came, to safeguard these divine curios; the grotesque incongruity of
all this around the tomb of the Prince of Peace, the tomb itself of
very dubious authenticity, to say nothing of the thirty-six
parasitical sanctities!...
He thought of the even more tumultuous scene about to be enacted here
on the day of the Greek fire: when in the awful darkness of
extinguished lamps, through a rift in the Holy Sepulchre within which
the Patriarch prayed in solitude and darkness, a tongue of heavenly
flame would shoot, God's annual witness to the exclusive rightness of
the Greek Church, and the poor foot-sore pilgrims, mad with ecstasy,
would leap over one another to kindle their candles and torches at it,
while a vessel now riding at anchor would haste with its freight of
sacred flame to kindle the church-lamps of Holy Russia.
[520]And then the long historic tragi-comedy of warring sects swept before
him, the Greek Church regarding the Roman as astray in the sacraments
of Baptism and the Lord's Supper; at one with the Protestant only in
not praying to the Virgin; every new misreading of human texts
sufficing to start a new heresy.
He hated Palestine: the Jordan, the Mount of Olives, the holy bazaars,
the geographical sanctity of shrines and soils, the long torture of
prophetic texts and apocalyptic interpretations, all the devotional
maunderings of the fool and the Philistine. He would have had the
Bible prohibited for a century or two, till mankind should be able to
read it with fresh vision and true profit. He wished that Christ had
crucified the Jews and defeated the plan for the world's salvation. O
happy Christ, to have died without foresight of the Crusades or the
Inquisition!
Irritation passed into an immense pity for humanity, crucified upon
the cross whose limbs are Time and Space. Those poor Russian pilgrims
faring foot-sore across the great frozen plains, lured on by this
mirage of blessedness, sleeping by the wayside, and sometimes never
waking again! Poor humanity, like a blind Oriental beggar on the
deserted roadway crying Bakhshísh to vain skies, from whose hollow
and futile spaces floats the lone word, Mâfísh—"there is nothing."
At least let it be ours to cover the poorest life with that human love
and pity which is God's vicegerent on earth, and to pass it gently
into the unknown.
But since Christianity already covered these poor lives with love and
pity, let them live in the beautiful illusion, so long as the ugly
facts did not break through! What mattered if these sites were true or
false—the believing soul had made them true. All these stones were
holy, if only with the tears of the generations. The Greek fire might
be a shameless fraud, but the true heavenly flame was the faith in it.
The Christ story might be false, but it had idealized the basal
things—love, pity, self-sacrifice, purity, motherhood. And if any
divine force worked through history, then must the great common
illusions of mankind also be divine. And in a world—itself an
illusion—what truths could there be save working truths, established
by natural selection in the spiritual world, varying for different
races, and maintaining themselves by correspondence with the changing
needs of the spirit?
Absolute religious truth? How could there be such a thing? As well say
German was truer than French, or that Greek was more final than
Arabic. Its religion like its speech was the way the deepest instincts
of a race found expression, and like a language a religion was dead
when it ceased to change. Each religion gave the human soul something
great to love, to live by, and to die for. And whosoever lived in
joyous surrender to some greatness outside himself had religion, even
though the world called him atheist. The finest souls too easily
abandoned the best words to the stupidest people.
[522]The time had come for a new religious expression, a new language for
the old everlasting emotions, in terms of the modern cosmos; a
religion that should contradict no fact and check no inquiry; so that
children should grow up again with no distracting divorce from their
parents and their past, with no break in the sweet sanctities of
childhood, which carry on to old age something of the freshness of
early sensation, and are a fount of tears in the desert of life.
The ever-living, darkly-laboring Hebraic spirit of love and righteous
aspiration, the Holy Ghost that had inspired Judaism and Christianity,
and moved equally in Mohammedanism and Protestantism, must now quicken
and inform the new learning, which still lay dead and foreign, outside
humanity.
If Evolution was a truth, what mystic force working in life! From the
devil-fish skulking towards his prey to the Christian laying down his
life for his fellow, refusing the reward of the stronger; from the
palpitating sac—all stomach—of embryonic life to the poet, the
musician, the great thinker. The animality of average humanity made
for hope rather than for despair, when one remembered from what it had
developed. It was for man in this laboring cosmos to unite himself
with the stream that made for goodness and beauty.
A song came to him of the true God, whose name is one with Past,
Present, and Future.
PERLYCROSS. A Novel. 12mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 75.
Told with delicate and delightful art. Its pictures of rural
English scenes and characters will woo and solace the reader....
It is charming company in charming surroundings. Its pathos, its
humor, and its array of natural incidents are all satisfying.
One must feel thankful for so finished and exquisite a story....
Not often do we find a more impressive piece of work.—N.Y.
Sun.
A new novel from the pen of R.D. Blackmore is as great a treat
to the fastidious and discriminating novel-reader as a new and
rare dish is to an epicure.... A story to be lingered over with
delight.—Boston Beacon.
SPRINGHAVEN. Illustrated, 12mo, Cloth, $1 50; 4to, Paper, 25
cents.
LORNA DOONE. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1 00; 8vo, Paper, 40
cents.
KIT AND KITTY. 12mo, Cloth, $1 25; Paper, 35 cents.
CHRISTOWELL. 4to, Paper, 20 cents.
CRADOCK NOWELL. 8vo, Paper, 60 cents.
EREMA; or, My Father's Sin. 8vo, Paper, 50 cents.
MARY ANERLEY. 16mo, Cloth, $1 00; 4to, Paper, 15 cents.
TOMMY UPMORE. 16mo, Cloth, 50 cents; Paper, 35 cents; 4to, Paper,
20 cents.
His descriptions are wonderfully vivid and natural. His pages
are brightened everywhere with great humor; the quaint, dry
turns of thought remind you occasionally of Fielding.—London
Times.
His tales, all of them, are pre-eminently meritorious. They are
remarkable for their careful elaboration, the conscientious
finish of their workmanship, their affluence of striking
dramatic and narrative incident, their close observation and
general interpretation of nature, their profusion of picturesque
description, and their quiet and sustained humor.—Christian
Intelligencer, N.Y.
 The above works are for sale by all booksellers, or will be
sent by the publishers, postage prepaid, to any part of the United
States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price.
A DAUGHTER OF HETH.
A PRINCESS OF THULE.
DONALD ROSS OF HEIMRA.
GREEN PASTURES AND PICCADILLY.
IN FAR LOCHABER.
IN SILK ATTIRE.
JUDITH SHAKESPEARE. Illustrated by Abbey.
KILMENY.
MACLEOD OF DARE. Illustrated.
MADCAP VIOLET.
PRINCE FORTUNATUS. Ill'd.
SABINA ZEMBRA.
SHANDON BELLS. Illustrated.
STAND FAST, CRAIG-ROYSTON! Illustrated.
SUNRISE.
THAT BEAUTIFUL WRETCH. Illustrated.
THE MAGIC INK, AND OTHER STORIES. Illustrated.
THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF A HOUSE-BOAT. Ill'd.
THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF A PHAETON.
THREE FEATHERS.
WHITE HEATHER.
WHITE WINGS. Illustrated.
YOLANDE. Illustrated.
12mo, Cloth, $1 25 per volume.

WOLFENBERG.—THE HANDSOME HUMES.
Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1 50 each.

BRISEIS.—HIGHLAND COUSINS.
Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 75 each.
Complete Sets, 27 Volumes, Cloth, $31 50; Half Calf, $60 00.
EDITIONS IN PAPER COVERS:
Donald Ross of Heimra. 8vo, 50 cents.—Sabina Zembra. 4to,
20 cents.—Judith Shakespeare. 4to, 20 cents.—That Beautiful
Wretch. Illustrated. 4to, 20 cents.—Sunrise. 4to, 20
cents.—Macleod of Dare. Illustrated. 8vo, 60 cents.
Illustrated. 4to, 15 cents.—Green Pastures and Piccadilly.
8vo, 50 cents.—Madcap Violet. 8vo, 50 cents.—A Daughter of
Heth.—8vo, 35 cents.—An Adventure in Thule. 4to, 10
cents.—In Silk Attire. 8vo, 35 cents.—Kilmeny. 8vo, 35
cents.—The Strange Adventures of a Phaeton. 8vo, 50
cents.—The Maid of Killeena, the Marriage of Moira Fergus, and
Other Stories. 8vo, 40 cents.—The Monarch of Mincing-Lane.
Illustrated. 8vo, 50 cents.—The Strange Adventures of a
House-Boat. Illustrated. 8vo, 50 cents.—In Far Lochâber.
8vo, 40 cents.—Prince Fortunatus. Illustrated. 8vo, 50
cents.-Stand Fast, Craig-Royston! 8vo, 50 cents.
 The above works are for sale by all booksellers, or will be
sent by the publishers, postage prepaid, on receipt of the price.
Hardy has an exquisite vein of humor. His style is so lucid that
the outlines of a character in one of his books are unmistakable
from first to last. He has a reserve force, so to speak, of
imagination, of invention, which keeps the interest undiminished
always, though the personages in the drama may be few and their
adventures unremarkable. But most of all he has shown the pity
and the beauty of human life, most of all he has enlarged the
boundaries of sympathy and charity. His has been no barren
labor, for he makes his reader think less of himself and more of
mankind, he teaches the glory of renunciation, the dignity of
pain, and the transfiguring power of unblemished love.—N.Y.
Tribune.
UNIFORM EDITION:
The Well-Beloved.     $1 50.
Jude the Obscure. Illustrated.     $1 50.
Under the Greenwood-Tree.     $1 50.
Wessex Tales.     $1 50.
Desperate Remedies.     $1 50.
A Laodicean.     $1 50.
The Hand of Ethelberta.     $1 50.
The Woodlanders.     $1 50.
The Trumpet-Major.     $1 50.
Far from the Madding Crowd.     $1 50.
The Mayor of Casterbridge.     $1 50.
A Pair of Blue Eyes.     $1 50.
Two on a Tower.     $1 50.
Return of the Native.     $1 50.
Tess of the D'Urbervilles. Illustrated.     $1 50.
Life's Little Ironies. A Set of Tales; with some
Colloquial Sketches entitled A Few Crusted Characters. Post
8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 25.
A Group of Noble Dames. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth,
Ornamental, $1 25; Post 8vo, Paper, 75 cents.
The Woodlanders. 16mo, Cloth, 75 cents.
Fellow-Townsmen. 32mo, Paper, 20 cents.
 The above works are for sale by all booksellers, or will be
sent by the publishers, postage prepaid, on receipt of the price.
Mr. Christie Murray is a kindly satirist who evidently delights
in the analysis of character, and who deals shrewdly but gently
with the frailties of our nature.... The pages are perpetually
brightened by quaintly humorous touches. Often in describing
some character or something that is commonplace enough, a droll
fancy seems to strike the author, and forthwith he gives us the
benefit of it. Consequently there is a spontaneity in his pen
which is extremely fascinating.... We can only say generally
that Mr. Murray's plot is sufficiently original and worked up
with enough of skill to satisfy any but the most exacting
readers. We found ourselves getting duly excited before the
denouement.... Readers of Mr. Christie Murray's novels will
know that he belongs to the school of Mr. Charles Reade. And it
is no small praise to say that he has caught a fair share of the
vigor and rapidity of that romancer. His characters, too, belong
to the same category as those that figure in Mr. Reade's
stories. They are drawn with a sufficient resemblance to nature
to take a complete appearance of vitality so long as we are in
the whirl of the plot, which is also what we feel about the
characters of a good modern drama while we are watching its
representation.... There is a certain alertness and vigor in the
author's portraits which make them pleasant to meet
with.—Saturday Review, London.
THE MARTYRED FOOL. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 25.
IN DIREST PERIL. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 25.
TIME'S REVENGES. Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 25.
A DANGEROUS CATSPAW. 8vo, Paper, 30 cents.
A LIFE'S ATONEMENT. 4to, Paper, 20 cents.
VAL STRANGE. 4to, Paper, 20 cents.
A MODEL FATHER. 4to, Paper, 10 cents.
HEARTS. 4to, Paper, 20 cents.
A WASTED CRIME. 8vo, Paper, 50 cents.
THE WEAKER VESSEL. 8vo, Paper, 50 cents.
BY THE GATE OF THE SEA. 4to, Paper, 15 cents; 12mo, Paper, 20 cents.
THE WAY OF THE WORLD. 4to, Paper, 20 cents.
CYNIC FORTUNE. 12mo, Paper, 25 cents.
AUNT RACHEL. 12mo, Paper, 25 cents.
RAINBOW GOLD. 4to, Paper, 20 cents.
 The above works are for sale by all booksellers, or will be
sent by the publishers, postage prepaid, to any part of the United
States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price.
Typographical errors corrected in text:
Unusual words:

Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has been preserved.
Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.
For a complete list, please see the end of this document.
THE MASTER. A Novel. Illustrated by T. de Thulstrup.
Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental, $1 75.
He who begins "The Master" will find a charm which will lure him
through adventures which are lifelike and full of human
interest.... A strong and an enduring book.—Chicago Tribune.
To those who do not know his splendid imagery, keen dissection
of character, subtle views of humor, and enthralling power of
narration, this work of Mr. Zangwill's should prove momentous
and important.—Boston Traveller.
"The Master" is the best novel of the year.—Daily Chronicle,
London.
This is a Chronicle of Dreamers, who have arisen in the Ghetto from
its establishment in the sixteenth century to its slow breaking-up in
our own day. Some have become historic in Jewry, others have
penetrated to the ken of the greater world and afforded models to
illustrious artists in letters, and but for the exigencies of my theme
and the faint hope of throwing some new light upon them, I should not
have ventured to treat them afresh; the rest are personally known to
me or are, like "Joseph the Dreamer," the artistic typification of
many souls through which the great Ghetto dream has passed. Artistic
truth is for me literally the highest truth: art may seize the essence
of persons and movements no less truly, and certainly far more
vitally, than a scientific generalization unifies a chaos of
phenomena. Time and Space are only the conditions through which
spiritual facts straggle. Hence I have here and there permitted myself
liberties with these categories. Have I, for instance, misplaced the
moment of Spinoza's obscure love-episode—I have only followed his own
principle, to see things sub specie æternitatis, and even were his
latest Dutch editor correct in denying the episode altogether, I
should still hold it true as summarizing the emotions with which even
the philosopher must reckon. Of Heine I have attempted a sort of
composite conversation-photograph, blending, too, the real heroine of
the little episode with "La Mouche." His own words will be recognized
by all students of him—I can only hope the joins with mine are not
too obvious. My other sources, too, lie sometimes as plainly on the
surface, but I have often delved at less accessible quarries. For
instance, I owe the celestial vision of "The Master of the Name" to a
Hebrew original kindly shown me by my friend Dr. S. Schechter, Reader
in Talmudic at Cambridge, to whose luminous essay on the Chassidim, in
his Studies in Judaism, I have a further indebtedness. My account of
"Maimon the Fool" is based on his own (not always reliable)
autobiography, of which I have extracted the dramatic essence, though
in the supplementary part of the story I have had to antedate slightly
the publication of Mendelssohn's "Jerusalem" and the fame of Kant. In
fine, I have never hesitated to take as an historian or to focus and
interpret as an imaginative artist.
I have placed "A Child of the Ghetto" first, not only because the
Venetian Jewry first bore the name of Ghetto, but because this chapter
may be regarded as a prelude to all the others. Though the Dream pass
through Smyrna or Amsterdam, through Rome or Cairo, through Jerusalem
or the Carpathians, through London or Berlin or New York, almost all
the Dreamers had some such childhood, and it may serve to explain
them. It is the early environment from which they all more or less
emerged.
And there is a sense in which the stories all lead on to that which I
have placed last. The "Child of the Ghetto" may be considered "father
to the man" of "Chad Gadya" in that same city of the sea.
For this book is the story of a Dream that has not come true.
I.Z.
The first thing the child remembered was looking down from a window
and seeing, ever so far below, green water flowing, and on it gondolas
plying, and fishing-boats with colored sails, the men in them looking
as small as children. For he was born in the Ghetto of Venice, on the
seventh story of an ancient house. There were two more stories, up
which he never went, and which remained strange regions, leading
towards the blue sky. A dusky staircase, with gaunt whitewashed walls,
led down and down—past doors whose lintels all bore little tin cases
containing holy Hebrew words—into the narrow court of the oldest
Ghetto in the world. A few yards to the right was a portico leading to
the bank of a canal, but a grim iron gate barred the way. The water of
another canal came right up to the back of the Ghetto, and cut off all
egress that way; and the other porticoes leading to the outer world
were likewise provided with gates, guarded by Venetian watchmen. These
gates were closed at midnight and opened in the morning, unless it was
the Sabbath or a Christian holiday, when they remained shut all day,
so that no Jew could go in or out of the court, the street, the big
and little square, and the one or two tiny alleys that made up the
Ghetto. There were no roads in the Ghetto, any more than in the rest
of Venice; [2]nothing but pavements ever echoing the tramp of feet. At
night the watchmen rowed round and round its canals in large barcas,
which the Jews had to pay for. But the child did not feel a prisoner.
As he had no wish to go outside the gates, he did not feel the chain
that would have drawn him back again, like a dog to a kennel; and
although all the men and women he knew wore yellow hats and large O's
on their breasts when they went into the world beyond, yet for a long
time the child scarcely realized that there were people in the world
who were not Jews, still less that these hats and these rounds of
yellow cloth were badges of shame to mark off the Jews from the other
people. He did not even know that all little boys did not wear under
their waistcoats "Four-corners," colored shoulder-straps with squares
of stuff at each end, and white fringes at each corner, and that they
did not say, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our God, the Lord is One,"
as they kissed the fringes. No, the Ghetto was all his world, and a
mighty universe it was, full of everything that the heart of a child
could desire. What an eager swarm of life in the great sunny square
where the Venetian mast towered skywards, and pigeons sometimes
strutted among the crowd that hovered about the countless shops under
the encircling colonnade—pawnshops, old-clo' shops, butcher-shops,
wherein black-bearded men with yellow turbans bargained in Hebrew!
What a fascination in the tall, many-windowed houses, with their
peeling plastered fronts and patches of bald red brick, their green
and brown shutters, their rusty balconies, their splashes of
many-colored washing! In the morning and evening, when the padlocked
well was opened, what delight to watch the women drawing water, or
even to help tug at the chain that turned the axle. And on the bridge
that led from the Old Ghetto to the New, where the canal, though the
view was brief, disappeared round two corners, how absorbing to [3]stand
and speculate on what might be coming round either corner, and which
would yield a vision first! Perhaps there would come along a sandolo
rowed by a man standing at the back, his two oars crossed gracefully;
perhaps a floating raft with barefooted boys bestriding it; perhaps a
barca punted by men in blue blouses, one at front and two at the back,
with a load of golden hay, or with provisions for the Ghetto—glowing
fruit and picturesque vegetables, or bleating sheep and bellowing
bulls, coming to be killed by the Jewish method. The canal that
bounded the Ghetto at the back offered a much more extended view, but
one hardly dared to stand there, because the other shore was foreign,
and the strange folk called Venetians lived there, and some of these
heathen roughs might throw stones across if they saw you. Still, at
night one could creep there and look along the moonlit water and up at
the stars. Of the world that lay on the other side of the water, he
only knew that it was large and hostile and cruel, though from his
high window he loved to look out towards its great unknown spaces,
mysterious with the domes and spires of mighty buildings, or towards
those strange mountains that rose seawards, white and misty, like the
hills of dream, and which he thought must be like Mount Sinai, where
God spake to Moses. He never thought that fairies might live in them,
or gnomes or pixies, for he had never heard of such creatures. There
were good spirits and bad spirits in the world, but they floated
invisibly in the air, trying to make little boys good or sinful. They
were always fighting with one another for little boys' souls. But on
the Sabbath your bad angel had no power, and your guardian Sabbath
angel hovered triumphantly around, assisting your every-day good
angel, as you might tell by noticing how you cast two shadows instead
of one when the two Sabbath candles were lighted. How beautiful were
those [4]Friday evenings, how snowy the table-cloth, how sweet
everything tasted, and how restful the atmosphere! Such delicious
peace for father and mother after the labors of the week!
It was the Sabbath Fire-woman who forced clearly upon the child's
understanding—what was long but a dim idea in the background of his
mind—that the world was not all Jews. For while the people who lived
inside the gates had been chosen and consecrated to the service of the
God of Israel, who had brought them out of Egyptian bondage and made
them slaves to Himself, outside the gates were people who were not
expected to obey the law of Moses; so that while he might not touch
the fire—nor even the candlesticks which had held fire—from Friday
evening to Saturday night, the Fire-woman could poke and poke at the
logs to her heart's content. She poked her way up from the
ground-floor through all the seven stories, and went on higher, a sort
of fire-spirit poking her way skywards. She had other strange
privileges, this little old woman with the shawl over her head, as the
child discovered gradually. For she could eat pig-flesh or shell-fish
or fowls or cattle killed anyhow; she could even eat butter directly
after meat, instead of having to wait six hours—nay, she could have
butter and meat on the same plate, whereas the child's mother had
quite a different set of pots and dishes for meat things or butter
things. Yes, the Fire-woman was indeed an inferior creature, existing
mainly to boil the Ghetto's tea-kettles and snuff its candles, and was
well rewarded by the copper coin which she gathered from every hearth
as soon as one might touch money. For when three stars appeared in the
sky the Fire-woman sank back into her primitive insignificance, and
the child's father made the Habdalah, or ceremony of division
between week-day and Sabbath, thanking God who divideth holiday from
working-day, and light [5]from darkness. Over a brimming wine-cup he
made the blessing, holding his bent fingers to a wax taper to make a
symbolical appearance of shine and shadow, and passing round a box of
sweet-smelling spices. And, when the chanting was over, the child was
given to sip of the wine. Many delicious mouthfuls of wine were
associated in his mind with religion. He had them in the synagogue
itself on Friday nights and on Festival nights, and at home as well,
particularly at Passover, on the first two evenings of which his
little wine-glass was replenished no less than four times with mild,
sweet liquid. A large glass also stood ready for Elijah the Prophet,
which the invisible visitor drank, though the wine never got any
lower. It was a delightful period altogether, this feast of Passover,
from the day before it, when the last crumbs of bread and leavened
matter were solemnly burnt (for no one might eat bread for eight days)
till the very last moment of the eighth day, when the long-forbidden
bread tasted as sweet and strange as cake. The mere change of kitchen
vessels had a charm: new saucepans, new plates, new dishes, new
spoons, new everything, in harmony with the Passover cakes that took
the place of bread—large thick biscuits, baked without yeast, full of
holes, or speckled and spotted. And when the evening table was laid
for the Seder service, looking oh! so quaint and picturesque, with
wine-cups and strange dishes, the roasted shank-bone of a lamb, bitter
herbs, sweet spices, and what not, and with everybody lolling around
it on white pillows, the child's soul was full of a tender poetry, and
it was a joy to him to ask in Hebrew:—"Wherein doth this night differ
from all other nights? For on all other nights we may eat leavened and
unleavened, but to-night only unleavened?" He asked the question out
of a large thin book, gay with pictures of the Ten Plagues of Egypt
and the wicked Pharaoh sitting with a hard heart [6]on a hard throne.
His father's reply, which was also in Hebrew, lasted some two or three
hours, being mixed up with eating and drinking the nice things and the
strange dishes; which was the only part of the reply the child really
understood, for the Hebrew itself was very difficult. But he knew
generally what the Feast was about, and his question was only a matter
of form, for he grew up asking it year after year, with a feigned
surprise. Nor, though he learned to understand Hebrew well, and could
even translate his daily prayers into bad Italian, a corruption of the
Venetian dialect finding its way into the Ghetto through the mouths of
the people who did business with the outside world, did he ever really
think of the sense of his prayers as he gabbled them off, morning,
noon, and night. There was so much to say—whole books full. It was a
great temptation to skip the driest pages, but he never yielded to it,
conscientiously scampering even through the passages in the tiniest
type that had a diffident air of expecting attention from only
able-bodied adults. Part of the joy of Sabbaths and Festivals was the
change of prayer-diet. Even the Grace—that long prayer chanted after
bodily diet—had refreshing little variations. For, just as the child
put on his best clothes for Festivals, so did his prayers seem to
clothe themselves in more beautiful words, and to be said out of more
beautiful books, and with more beautiful tunes to them. Melody played
a large part in the synagogue services, so that, although he did not
think of the meaning of the prayers, they lived in his mind as music,
and, sorrowful or joyous, they often sang themselves in his brain in
after years. There were three consecutive "Amens" in the afternoon
service of the three Festivals—Passover, Pentecost, Tabernacles—that
had a quaint charm for him. The first two were sounded staccato, the
last rounded off the theme, and died away, slow and lingering. Nor,
though [7]there were double prayers to say on these occasions, did they
weigh upon him as a burden, for the extra bits were insinuated between
the familiar bits, like hills or flowers suddenly sprung up in
unexpected places to relieve the monotony of a much-travelled road.
And then these extra prayers were printed so prettily, they rhymed so
profusely. Many were clever acrostics, going right through the
alphabet from Aleph, which is A, to Tau, which is T, for Z comes near
the beginning of the Hebrew alphabet. These acrostics, written in the
Middle Ages by pious rabbis, permeated the Festival prayer-books, and
even when the child had to confess his sins—or rather those of the
whole community, for each member of the brotherhood of Israel was
responsible for the rest—he sinned his sin with an "A," he sinned his
sin with a "B," and so on till he could sin no longer. And, when the
prayers rhymed, how exhilarating it was to lay stress on each rhyme
and double rhyme, shouting them fervidly. And sometimes, instead of
rhyming, they ended with the same phrase, like the refrain of a
ballad, or the chorus of a song, and then what a joyful relief, after
a long breathless helter-skelter through a strange stanza, to come out
on the old familiar ground, and to shout exultantly, "For His mercy
endureth for ever," or "The appearance of the priest!" Sometimes the
run was briefer—through one line only—and ended on a single word
like "water" or "fire." And what pious fun it was to come down sharp
upon fire or water! They stood out friendly and simple, the rest
was such curious and involved Hebrew that sometimes, in an audacious
moment, the child wondered whether even his father understood it all,
despite that he wept freely and bitterly over certain acrostics,
especially on the Judgment Days. It was awe-inspiring to think that
the angels, who were listening up in heaven, understood every word of
it. And he inclined to think that the Cantor, [8]or minister who led the
praying, also understood; he sang with such feeling and such fervid
roulades. Many solos did the Cantor troll forth, to which the
congregation listened in silent rapture. The only time the public
prayers bored the child was on the Sabbath, when the minister read the
Portion of the Week; the Five Books of Moses being read through once a
year, week by week, in a strange sing-song with only occasional
flights of melody. The chant was determined by curious signs printed
under the words, and the signs that made nice music were rather rare,
and the nicest sign of all, which spun out the word with endless turns
and trills, like the carol of a bird, occurred only a few times in the
whole Pentateuch. The child, as he listened to the interminable
incantation, thought he would have sprinkled the Code with bird-songs,
and made the Scroll of the Law warble. But he knew this could not be.
For the Scroll was stern and severe and dignified, like the high
members of the congregation who bore it aloft, or furled it, and
adjusted its wrapper and its tinkling silver bells. Even the soberest
musical signs were not marked on it, nay, it was bare of punctuation,
and even of vowels. Only the Hebrew consonants were to be seen on the
sacred parchment, and they were written, not printed, for the
printing-press is not like the reverent hand of the scribe. The child
thought it was a marvellous feat to read it, much less know precisely
how to chant it. Seven men—first a man of the tribe of Aaron the High
Priest, then a Levite, and then five ordinary Israelites—were called
up to the platform to stand by while the Scroll was being intoned, and
their arrivals and departures broke the monotony of the recitative.
After the Law came the Prophets, which revived the child's interest,
for they had another and a quainter melody, in the minor mode, full of
half tones and delicious [9]sadness that ended in a peal of exultation.
For the Prophets, though they thundered against the iniquities of
Israel, and preached "Woe, woe," also foretold comfort when the period
of captivity and contempt should be over, and the Messiah would come
and gather His people from the four corners of the earth, and the
Temple should be rebuilt in Jerusalem, and all the nations would
worship the God who had given His law to the Jews on Mount Sinai. In
the meantime, only Israel was bound to obey it in every letter,
because only the Jews—born or unborn—had agreed to do so amid the
thunders and lightnings of Sinai. Even the child's unborn soul had
been present and accepted the yoke of the Torah. He often tried to
recall the episode, but although he could picture the scene quite
well, and see the souls curling over the mountains like white clouds,
he could not remember being among them. No doubt he had forgotten it,
with his other pre-natal experiences—like the two Angels who had
taught him Torah and shown him Paradise of a morning and Hell every
evening—when at the moment of his birth the Angel's finger had struck
him on the upper lip and sent him into the world crying at the pain,
and with that dent under the nostrils which, in every human face, is
the seal of oblivion of the celestial spheres. But on the anniversary
of the great Day of the Decalogue—on the Feast of Pentecost—the
synagogue was dressed with flowers. Flowers were not easy to get in
Venice—that city of stones and the sea—yet every synagogue (and
there were seven of them in that narrow Ghetto, some old and
beautiful, some poor and humble) had its pillars or its balconies
twined with roses, narcissi, lilies, and pansies. Prettier still were
the customs of "Tabernacles," when the wooden booths were erected in
the square or the courtyards of the synagogues in commemoration of the
days when the Children of Israel lived [10]in tents in the wilderness.
The child's father, being particularly pious, had a booth all to
himself, thatched with green boughs, and hung with fruit, and
furnished with chairs and a table at which the child sat, with the
blue sky playing peep-bo through the leaves, and the white table-cloth
astir with quivering shadows and glinting sunbeams. And towards the
last days of the Festival he began to eat away the roof, consuming the
dangling apples and oranges, and the tempting grapes. And throughout
this beautiful Festival the synagogue rustled with palm branches, tied
with boughs of willows of the brook and branches of other pleasant
trees—as commanded in Leviticus—which the men waved and shook,
pointing them east and west and north and south, and then heavenwards,
and smelling also of citron kept in boxes lined with white wool. As
one could not breakfast before blessing the branches and the citron, a
man carried them round to such of the women-folk as household duties
kept at home—and indeed, home was a woman's first place, and to light
the Sabbath lamp a woman's holiest duty, and even at synagogue she sat
in a grated gallery away from the men downstairs. On the seventh day
of Tabernacles the child had a little bundle of leafy boughs styled
"Hosannas," which he whipped on the synagogue bench, his sins falling
away with the leaves that flew to the ground as he cried, "Hosanna,
save us now!" All through the night his father prayed in the
synagogue, but the child went home to bed, after a gallant struggle
with his closing eyelids, hoping not to see his headless shadow on the
stones, for that was a sign of death. But the ninth day of Tabernacles
was the best, "The Rejoicing of the Law," when the fifty-second
portion of the Pentateuch was finished and the first portion begun
immediately all over again, to show that the "rejoicing" was not
because the congregation was glad to be done [11]with it. The man called
up to the last portion was termed "The Bridegroom of the Law," and to
the first portion "The Bridegroom of the Beginning," and they made a
wedding-feast to which everybody was invited. The boys scrambled for
sweets on the synagogue floor. The Scrolls of the Law were carried
round and round seven times, and the boys were in the procession with
flags and wax tapers in candlesticks of hollow carrots, joining
lustily in the poem with its alternative refrain of "Save us, we pray
Thee," "Prosper us, we pray Thee." So gay was the minister that he
could scarcely refrain from dancing, and certainly his voice danced as
it sang. There was no other time so gay, except it was Purim—the
feast to celebrate Queen Esther's redemption of her people from the
wicked Haman—when everybody sent presents to everybody else, and the
men wore comic masks or dressed up as women and performed little plays.
The child went about with a great false nose, and when the name of
"Haman" came up in the reading of the Book of Esther, which was intoned
in a refreshingly new way, he tapped vengefully with a little hammer or
turned the handle of a little toy that made a grinding noise. The other
feast in celebration of a Jewish redemption—Chanukah, or Dedication—was
almost as impressive, for in memory of the miracle of the oil that kept
the perpetual light burning in the Temple when Judas Maccabæus
reconquered it from the Greek gods, the Ghetto lighted candles, one on
the first night and two on the second, and so on till there were eight
burning in a row, to say nothing of the candle that kindled the others
and was called "The Beadle," and the child sang hymns of praise to the
Rock of Salvation as he watched the serried flames. And so, in this
inner world of dreams the child lived and grew, his vision turned back
towards ancient Palestine and forwards towards some vague Restoration,
his days engirdled with prayer and ceremony, [12]his very games of ball or
nuts sanctified by Sandalphon, the boy-angel, to whom he prayed: "O
Sandalphon, Lord of the Forest, protect us from pain."
There were two things in the Ghetto that had a strange attraction for
the child: one was a large marble slab on the wall near his house,
which he gradually made out to be a decree that Jews converted to
Christianity should never return to the Ghetto nor consort with its
inhabitants, under penalty of the cord, the gallows, the prison, the
scourge, or the pillory; the other was a marble figure of a beautiful
girl with falling draperies that lay on the extreme wall of the
Ghetto, surveying it with serene eyes.
Relic and emblem of an earlier era, she co-operated with the slab to
remind the child of the strange vague world outside, where people of
forbidden faith carved forbidden images. But he never went outside; at
least never more than a few streets, for what should he do in Venice?
As he grew old enough to be useful, his father employed him in his
pawn-shop, and for recreation there was always the synagogue and the
study of the Bible with its commentaries, and the endless volumes of
the Talmud, that chaos of Rabbinical lore and legislation. And when he
approached his thirteenth year, he began to prepare to become a "Son
of the Commandment." For at thirteen the child was considered a man.
His sins, the responsibility of which had hitherto been upon his
father's shoulders, would now fall upon his own, and from counting for
as little as a woman in the congregation, he would become a full unit
in making up the minimum of ten men, without which public worship
could not be held. And so, not only did he come [13]to own a man's
blue-striped praying-shawl to wrap himself in, but he began to "lay
phylacteries," winding the first leather strap round his left arm and
its fingers, so that the little cubical case containing the holy words
sat upon the fleshy part of the upper arm, and binding the second
strap round his forehead with the black cube in the centre like the
stump of a unicorn's horn, and thinking the while of God's Unity and
the Exodus from Egypt, according to the words of Deuteronomy xi. 18,
"And these my words ... ye shall bind for a sign upon your hand, and
they shall be as frontlets between your eyes." Also he began to study
his "Portion," for on the first Sabbath of his thirteenth year he
would be summoned, as a man, to the recitation of the Sacred Scroll,
only instead of listening, he would have to intone a section from the
parchment manuscript, bare of vowels and musical signs. The boy was
shy, and the thought of appearing brazenly on the platform before the
whole congregation was terrifying. Besides, he might make mistakes in
the words or the tunes. It was an anxious time, scarcely redeemed by
the thought of new clothes, "Son-of-the-Commandment" presents, and
merry-makings. Sometimes he woke up in the middle of the night in a
cold sweat, having dreamed that he stood on the platform in forgetful
dumbness, every eye fixed upon him. Then he would sing his "Portion"
softly to himself to reassure himself. And, curiously enough, it
began, "And it was in the middle of the night." In verity he knew it
as glibly as the alphabet, for he was infinitely painstaking. Never a
lesson unlearnt, nor a duty undone, and his eager eyes looked forward
to a life of truth and obedience. And as for Hebrew without vowels,
that had long since lost its terrors; vowels were only for children
and fools, and he was an adept in Talmud, cunning in dispute and the
dovetailing of texts—quite a little Rabbi, they said in the [14]Ghetto!
And when the great moment actually came, after a few timid twists and
turns of melody he found his voice soaring aloft triumphantly, and
then it became to him a subtle pleasure to hold and dominate all the
listening crowd. Afterwards his father and mother received many
congratulations on the way he had "said his Portion."
And now that he was a man other parts of Judaism came into prominence
in his life. He became a member of the "Holy Society," which washed
and watched the bodies of the dead ere they were put to rest in the
little island cemetery, which was called "The House of Life" because
there is no death in the universe, for, as he sang triumphantly on
Friday evenings, "God will make the dead alive in the abundance of His
kindness." And now, too, he could take a man's part in the death
services of the mourners, who sat for seven days upon the ground and
said prayers for the souls of the deceased. The boy wondered what
became of these souls; some, he feared, went to perdition, for he knew
their owners had done and eaten forbidden things. It was a comfort to
think that even in hell there is no fire on the Sabbath, and no
Fire-woman. When the Messiah came, perhaps they would all be forgiven.
Did not the Talmud say that all Israel—with the good men of all
nations—would have a part in the world to come?
There were many fasts in the Ghetto calendar, most of them twelve
hours long, but some twenty-four. Not a morsel of food nor a drop of
water must pass the lips from the sunset of one day to nightfall on
the next. The child had only been allowed to keep a few fasts, and
these only partially, but now it was for his own soul to settle how
[15]long and how often it would afflict itself, and it determined to do so
at every opportunity. And the great opportunity came soon. Not the
Black Fast when the congregation sat shoeless on the floor of the
synagogue, weeping and wailing for the destruction of Jerusalem, but
the great White Fast, the terrible Day of Atonement commanded in the
Bible. It was preceded by a long month of solemn prayer, ushering in
the New Year. The New Year itself was the most sacred of the
Festivals, provided with prayers half a day long, and made terrible by
peals on the ram's horn. There were three kinds of calls on this
primitive trumpet—plain, trembling, wailing; and they were all
sounded in curious mystic combinations, interpolated with passionate
bursts of prayer. The sinner was warned to repent, for the New Year
marked the Day of Judgment. For nine days God judged the souls of the
living, and decided on their fate for the coming year—who should live
and who should die, who should grow rich and who poor, who should be
in sickness and who in health. But at the end of the tenth day, the
day of the great White Fast, the judgment books were closed, to open
no more for the rest of the year. Up till twilight there was yet time,
but then what was written was finally sealed, and he who had not truly
repented had missed his last chance of forgiveness. What wonder if
early in the ten penitential days, the population of the Ghetto
flocked towards the canal bridge to pray that its sins might be cast
into the waters and swept away seawards!
'Twas the tenth day, and an awful sense of sacred doom hung over the
Ghetto. In every house a gigantic wax taper had burnt, white and
solemn, all through the night, and fowls or coins had been waved round
the heads of the people in atonement for their iniquities. The morning
dawned gray and cold, but with the dawn the population [16]was astir, for
the services began at six in the morning and lasted without
intermission till seven at night. Many of the male worshippers were
clad in their grave-clothes, and the extreme zealots remained standing
all day long, swaying to and fro and beating their breasts at the
confessions of sin. For a long time the boy wished to stand too, but
the crowded synagogue reeked with heavy odors, and at last, towards
mid-day, faint and feeble, he had to sit. But to fast till nightfall
he was resolved. Hitherto he had always broken his fast at some point
in the services, going home round the corner to delicious bread and
fish. When he was seven or eight this breakfast came at mid-day, but
the older he grew the longer he fasted, and it became a point of honor
to beat his record every successive year. Last time he had brought his
breakfast down till late in the afternoon, and now it would be
unforgivable if he could not see the fast out and go home, proud and
sinless, to drink wine with the men. He turned so pale, as the
afternoon service dragged itself along, that his father begged him
again and again to go home and eat. But the boy was set on a full
penance. And every now and again he forgot his headache and the
gnawing at his stomach in the fervor of passionate prayer and in the
fascination of the ghostly figures weeping and wailing in the gloomy
synagogue, and once in imagination he saw the heavens open overhead
and God sitting on the judgment throne, invisible by excess of
dazzling light, and round him the four-winged cherubim and the fiery
wheels and the sacred creatures singing "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord
of Hosts, the whole earth is full of His glory." Then a great awe
brooded over the synagogue, and the vast forces of the universe seemed
concentred about it, as if all creation was awaiting in tense silence
for the terrible words of judgment. And then he felt some cool, sweet
scent sprinkled on his [17]forehead, and, as from the far ends of the
world, he heard a voice that sounded like his father's asking him if
he felt better. He opened his eyes and smiled faintly, and said
nothing was the matter, but now his father insisted that he must go
home to eat. So, still dazed by the glories he had seen, he dragged
himself dreamily through the press of swaying, weeping worshippers,
over whom there still seemed to brood some vast, solemn awe, and came
outside into the little square and drew in a delicious breath of fresh
air, his eyes blinking at the sudden glare of sunlight and blue sky.
But the sense of awe was still with him, for the Ghetto was deserted,
the shops were shut, and a sacred hush of silence was over the stones
and the houses, only accentuated by the thunder of ceaseless prayer
from the synagogues. He walked towards the tall house with the nine
stories, then a great shame came over him. Surely he had given in too
early. He was already better, the air had revived him. No, he would
not break his fast; he would while away a little time by walking,
and then he would go back to the synagogue. Yes, a brisk walk would
complete his recovery. There was no warder at the open gate; the
keepers of the Ghetto had taken a surreptitious holiday, aware that on
this day of days no watching was needed. The guardian barca lay moored
to a post unmanned. All was in keeping with the boy's sense of solemn
strangeness. But as he walked along the Cannaregio bank, and further
and further into the unknown city, a curious uneasiness and surprise
began to invade his soul. Everywhere, despite the vast awe
overbrooding the world, shops were open and people were going about
unconcernedly in the quaint alleys; babies laughed in their nurses'
arms, the gondoliers were poised as usual on the stern of their
beautiful black boats, rowing imperturbably. The water sparkled and
danced in the afternoon sun. In the market-place the [18]tanned old women
chattered briskly with their customers. He wandered on and on in
growing wonder and perturbation. Suddenly his trouble ceased, a burst
of wonderful melody came to him; there was not only a joyful tune, but
other tunes seemed to blend with it, melting his heart with
unimaginable rapture; he gave chase to the strange sounds, drawing
nearer and nearer, and at last he emerged unexpectedly upon an immense
square bordered by colonnades, under which beautifully dressed signori
and signore sat drinking at little tables, and listening to men in red
with great black cockades in their hats who were ranged on a central
platform, blowing large shining horns; a square so vast and so crowded
with happy chattering people and fluttering pigeons that he gazed
about in blinking bewilderment. And then, uplifting his eyes, he saw a
sight that took his breath away—a glorious building like his dream of
the Temple of Zion, glowing with gold and rising in marvellous domes
and spires, and crowned by four bronze animals, which he felt sure
must be the creatures called horses with which Pharaoh had pursued the
Israelites to the Red Sea. And hard by rose a gigantic tower, like the
Tower of Babel, leading the eye up and up. His breast filled with a
strange pleasure that was almost pain. The enchanted temple drew him
across the square; he saw a poor bare-headed woman going in, and he
followed her. Then a wonderful golden gloom fell upon him, and a sense
of arches and pillars and soaring roofs and curved walls beautiful
with many-colored pictures; and the pleasure, that was almost pain,
swelled at his heart till it seemed as if it must burst his breast.
Then he saw the poor bare-headed woman kneel down, and in a flash he
understood that she was praying—ay, and in the men's quarter—and
that this was no Temple, but one of those forbidden places called
churches, into which the abhorred deserters went who were spoken of on
that marble [19]slab in the Ghetto. And, while he was wrestling with the
confusion of his thoughts, a splendid glittering being, with a cocked
hat and a sword, marched terrifyingly towards him, and sternly bade
him take off his hat. He ran out of the wonderful building in a great
fright, jostling against the innumerable promenaders in the square,
and not pausing till the merry music of the big shining horns had died
away behind him. And even then he walked quickly, as if pursued by the
strange vast world into which he had penetrated for the first time.
And suddenly he found himself in a blind alley, and knew that he could
not find his way back to the Ghetto. He was about to ask of a woman
who looked kind, when he remembered, with a chill down his spine, that
he was not wearing a yellow O, as a man should, and that, as he was
now a "Son of the Commandment," the Venetians would consider him a
man. For one forlorn moment it seemed to him that he would never find
himself back in the Ghetto again; but at last he bethought himself of
asking for the Cannaregio, and so gradually, cold at heart and
trembling, he reached the familiar iron gate and slipped in. All was
as before in the Ghetto. The same sacred hush in court and square,
accentuated by the rumble of prayer from the synagogues, the gathering
dusk lending a touch of added solemnity.
"Well, have you eaten?" asked the father. The boy nodded "Yes." A
faint flush of exultation leapt into his pale cheek. He would see the
fast out after all. The men were beating their breasts at the
confession of sin. "For the sin we have committed by lying," chimed in
the boy. But although in his attention to the wailful melody of the
words he scarcely noticed the meaning, something of the old passion
and fervor had gone out of his voice. Twilight fell; the shadows
deepened, the white figures, wailing and weeping in their
grave-clothes, grew mystic; the [20]time for sealing the Books of
Judgment drew nigh. The figures threw themselves forward full length,
their foreheads to the floor, proclaiming passionately again and
again, "The Lord He is God; the Lord He is God!" It was the hour in
which the boy's sense of overbrooding awe had always been tensest. But
he could not shake off the thought of the gay piazza and the wonderful
church where other people prayed other prayers. For something larger
had come into his life, a sense of a vaster universe without, and its
spaciousness and strangeness filled his soul with a nameless trouble
and a vague unrest. He was no longer a child of the Ghetto.
"We must not wait longer, Rachel," said Manasseh in low, grave, but
unfaltering accents. "Midnight approaches."
Rachel checked her sobs and assumed an attitude of reverence as her
husband began to intone the benedictions, but her heart felt no
religious joy in the remembrance of how the God of her fathers had
saved them and their Temple from Hellenic pollution. It was torn by
anxiety as to the fate of her boy, her scholar son, unaccountably
absent for the first time from the household ceremonies of the Feast
of Dedication. What was he doing—outside the Ghetto gates—in that
great, dark, narrow-meshed city of Rome, defying the Papal law, and of
all nights in the year on that sinister night when, by a coincidence
of chronology, the Christian persecutor celebrated the birth of his
Saviour? Through misty eyes she saw her husband's face, stern and
rugged, yet made venerable by the flowing white of his locks and
beard, as with the supernumerary taper he prepared to light the wax
candles in the nine-branched candlestick of silver. He wore a long,
hooded mantle reaching to the feet, and showing where it fell back in
front a brown gaberdine clasped by a girdle. These sombre-colored
robes were second-hand, as the austere simplicity [22]of the Pragmatic
required. The Jewish Council of Sixty did not permit its subjects to
ruffle it like the Romans of those days of purple pageantry. The young
bloods, forbidden by Christendom to style themselves signori, were
forbidden by Judea to vie with signori in luxury.
"Blessed art Thou, O Lord, our God," chanted the old man. "King of the
Universe, who hast sanctified us with Thy commandments, and commanded
us to kindle the light of Chanukah."
It was with a quavering voice that Rachel joined in the ancient hymn
that wound up the rite. "O Fortress, Rock of my salvation," the old
woman sang. "Unto Thee it is becoming to give praise; let my house of
prayer be restored, and I will there offer Thee thanksgivings; when
Thou shalt have prepared a slaughter of the blaspheming foe, I will
complete with song and psalm the dedication of the altar."
But her imagination was roving in the dim oil-lit streets of the
tenebrous city, striving for the clairvoyance of love. Arrest by the
sbirri was certain; other dangers threatened. Brawls and bravos
abounded. True, this city of Rome was safer than many another for its
Jews, who, by a miracle, more undeniable than that which they were now
celebrating, had from the birth of Christ dwelt in the very heart of
Christendom, the Eternal People in the Eternal City. The Ghetto had
witnessed no such sights as Barcelona or Frankfort or Prague. The
bloody orgies of the Crusaders had raged far away from the Capital of
the Cross. In England, in France, in Germany, the Jew, that scapegoat
of the nations, had poisoned the wells and brought on the Black Death,
had pierced the host, killed children for their blood, blasphemed the
saints, and done all that the imagination of defalcating debtors could
suggest. But the Roman Jews were merely pestilent heretics. Perhaps
it [23]was the comparative poverty of the Ghetto that made its tragedy
one of steady degradation rather than of fitful massacre. Nevertheless
bloodshed was not unknown, and the song died on Rachel's lips, though
the sterner Manasseh still chanted on.
"The Grecians were gathered against me in the days of the Hasmoneans;
they broke down the walls of my towers and defiled all the oils; but
from one of the last remaining flasks a miracle was wrought for Thy
lily, Israel; and the men of understanding appointed these eight days
for songs and praises."
They were well-to-do people, and Rachel's dress betokened the limit of
the luxury allowed by the Pragmatic—a second-hand silk dress with a
pin at the throat set with only a single pearl, a bracelet on one arm,
a ring without a bezel on one finger, a single-stringed necklace round
her neck, her hair done in a cheap net.
She looked at the nine-branched candlestick, and a mystical sadness
filled her. Would she had nine scions of her house like Miriam's
mother, a true mother in Israel; but, lo! she had only one candle—one
little candle. A puff and it was gone, and life would be dark.
That Joseph was not in the Ghetto was certain. He would never have
caused her such anxiety wilfully, and, indeed, she and her husband and
Miriam had already run to all the likely places in the quarter, even
to those marshy alleys where every overflow of the Tiber left deposits
of malarious mud, where families harbored, ten in a house, where
stunted men and wrinkled women slouched through the streets, and a
sickly spawn of half-naked babies swarmed under the feet. They had had
trouble enough, but never such a trouble as this. Manasseh and Rachel,
with this queer offspring of theirs, this Joseph the Dreamer, as he
had been nicknamed, this handsome, reckless [24]black-eyed son of theirs,
with his fine oval face, his delicate olive features; this young man,
who could not settle down to the restricted forms of commerce possible
in the Ghetto, who was to be Rabbi of the community one day, albeit
his brilliance was occasionally dazzling to the sober tutors upon whom
he flashed his sudden thought, which stirred up that which had better
been left asleep. Why was he not as other sons, why did he pace the
street with unobservant eyes, why did he weep over the profane Hebrew
of the Spanish love-singers as if their songs were Selichoth or
Penitential Verses? Why did he not marry Miriam, as one could see the
girl wished? Why did he set at naught the custom of the Ghetto, in
silently refraining from so obvious a match between the children of
two old friends, equally well-to-do, and both possessing the Jus
Gazzaga or leasehold of the houses in which they lived; tall, quaint
houses, separated only by an ancient building with a carved porch, and
standing at the end of the great Via Rua where it adjoined the narrow
little street, Delle Azzimelle, in which the Passover cakes were made.
Miriam's family, being large, had their house to themselves, but a
good deal of Manasseh's was let out; for room was more and more
precious in the Ghetto, which was a fixed space for an ever-expanding
population.
They went to bed. Manasseh insisted upon that. They could not possibly
expect Joseph till the morning. Accustomed as Rachel was to lean upon
her husband's strength, at this moment his strength seemed harshness.
The night was long. A hundred horrid visions passed before her
sleepless eyes. The sun rose upon the Ghetto, striving to [25]slip its
rays between the high, close-pressed tops of opposite houses. The five
Ghetto gates were thrown open, but Joseph did not come through any.
The Jewish pedlars issued, adjusting their yellow hats, and pushing
before them little barrows laden with special Christmas wares. "Heb,
heb," they shouted as they passed through the streets of Rome. Some
sold simples and philtres, and amulets in the shape of miniature
mandores or four-stringed lutes to preserve children from maladies.
Manasseh, his rugged countenance grown harder, went to his place of
business. He had forbidden any inquiries to be made outside the pale
till later in the day; it would be but to betray to the enemy Joseph's
breach of the law. In the meantime, perhaps, the wanderer would
return. Manasseh's establishment was in the Piazza Giudea. Numerous
shops encumbered the approaches, mainly devoted to the sale of
cast-off raiment, the traffic in new things being prohibited to Jews
by Papal Bull, but anything second-hand might be had here from the
rough costume of a shepherd of Abruzzo to the faded fripperies of a
gentleman of the Court. In the centre a new fountain with two dragons
supplied the Ghetto with water from the Aqueduct of Paul the Fifth in
lieu of the loathly Tiber water, and bore a grateful Latin
inscription. About the edges of the square a few buildings rose in
dilapidated splendor to break the monotony of the Ghetto barracks; the
ancient palace of the Boccapaduli, and a mansion with a high tower and
three abandoned churches. A monumental but forbidding gate, closed at
sundown, gave access to a second Piazza Giudea, where Christians
congregated to bargain with Jews—it was almost a suburb of the
Ghetto. Manasseh had not far to go, for his end of the Via Rua
debouched on the Piazza Giudea; the other end, after running parallel
to the Via Pescheria and the river, bent suddenly near the [26]Gate of
Octavius, and finished on the bridge Quattro Capi. Such was the Ghetto
in the sixteen hundreds.
Soon after Manasseh had left the house, Miriam came in with anxious
face to inquire if Joseph had returned. It was a beautiful Oriental
face, in whose eyes brooded the light of love and pity, a face of the
type which painters have given to the Madonna when they have
remembered that the Holy Mother was a Jewess. She was clad in a simple
woollen gown, without lace or broidery, her only ornament a silver
bracelet. Rachel wept to tell her the lack of news, but Miriam did not
join in her tears. She besought her to be of good courage.
And very soon indeed Joseph appeared, with an expression at once
haggard and ecstatic, his black hair and beard unkempt, his eyes
glittering strangely in his flushed olive face, a curious poetic
figure in his reddish-brown mantle and dark yellow cap.
"Pax vobiscum," he cried, in shrill, jubilant accents.
"Joseph, what drunken folly is this?" faltered Rachel.
"Gloria in altissimis Deo and peace on earth to all men of
goodwill," persisted Joseph. "It is Christmas morning, mother." And he
began to troll out the stave of a carol, "Simeon, that good saint of
old—"
Rachel's hand was clapped rudely over her son's mouth.
"Blasphemer!" she cried, an ashen gray overspreading her face.
Joseph gently removed her hand. "It is thou who blasphemest, mother,"
he cried. "Rejoice, rejoice, this day the dear Lord Christ was
born—He who was to die for the sins of the world."
Rachel burst into fresh tears. "Our boy is mad—our boy is mad. What
have they done to him?" All her anticipations of horror were outpassed
by this.
[27]Pain shadowed the sweet silence of Miriam's face as she stood in the
recess of the window.
"Mad! Oh, my mother, I am as one awakened. Rejoice, rejoice with me.
Let us sink ourselves in the universal joy, let us be at one with the
human race."
Rachel smiled tentatively through her tears. "Enough of this foolery,"
she said pleadingly. "It is the feast of Dedication, not of Lots.
There needs no masquerading to-day."
"Joseph, what ails thee?" interposed the sweet voice of Miriam. "What
hast thou done? Where hast thou been?"
"Art thou here, Miriam?" His eyes became conscious of her for the
first time. "Would thou hadst been there with me!"
"Where?"
"At St. Peter's. Oh, the heavenly music!"
"At St. Peter's!" repeated Rachel hoarsely. "Thou, my son Joseph, the
student of God's Law, hast defiled thyself thus?"
"Nay, it is no defilement," interposed Miriam soothingly. "Hast thou
not told us how our fathers went to the Sistine Chapel on Sabbath
afternoons?"
"Ay, but that was when Michel Angelo Buonarotti was painting his
frescoes of the deliverances of Israel. And they went likewise to see
the figure of our Lawgiver in the Pope's mausoleum. And I have even
heard of Jews who have stolen into St. Peter's itself to gaze on that
twisted pillar from Solomon's temple, which these infidels hold for
our sins. But it is the midnight mass that this Epicurean has been to
hear."
"Even so," said Joseph in dreamy undertones, "the midnight
mass—incense and lights and the figures of saints, and wonderful
painted windows, and a great multitude of weeping worshippers and
music that wept with them, now [28]shrill like the passionate cry of
martyrs, now breathing the peace of the Holy Ghost."
"How didst thou dare show thyself in the cathedral?" whimpered Rachel.
"Who should dream of a Jew in the immense throng? Outside it was dark,
within it was dim. I hid my face and wept. They looked at the
cardinals in their splendid robes, at the Pope, at the altar. Who had
eyes for me?"
"But thy yellow cap, Joseph!"
"One wears not the cap in church, mother."
"Thou didst blasphemously bare thy head, and in worship?"
"I did not mean to worship, mother mine. A great curiosity drew me—I
desired to see with my own eyes, and hear with mine own ears, this
adoration of the Christ, at which my teachers scoff. But I was caught
up in a mighty wave of organ-music that surged from this low earth
heavenwards to break against the footstool of God in the crystal
firmament. And suddenly I knew what my soul was pining for. I knew the
meaning of that restless craving that has always devoured me, though I
spake not thereof, those strange hauntings, those dim perceptions—in
a flash I understood the secret of peace."
"And that is—Joseph?" asked Miriam gently, for Rachel drew such
laboring breath she could not speak.
"Sacrifice," said Joseph softly, with rapt gaze. "To suffer, to give
one's self freely to the world; to die to myself in delicious pain,
like the last tremulous notes of the sweet boy-voice that had soared
to God in the Magnificat. Oh, Miriam, if I could lead our brethren out
of the Ghetto, if I could die to bring them happiness, to make them
free sons of Rome."
"A goodly wish, my son, but to be fulfilled by God alone."
[29]"Even so. Let us pray for faith. When we are Christians the gates of
the Ghetto will fall."
"Christians!" echoed Rachel and Miriam in simultaneous horror.
"Ay, Christians," said Joseph unflinchingly.
Rachel ran to the door and closed it more tightly. Her limbs shook.
"Hush!" she breathed. "Let thy madness go no further. God of Abraham,
suppose some one should overhear thee and carry thy talk to thy
father." She began to wring her hands.
"Joseph, bethink thyself," pleaded Miriam, stricken to the heart. "I
am no scholar, I am only a woman. But thou—thou with thy
learning—surely thou hast not been befooled by these jugglers with
the sacred text? Surely thou art able to answer their word-twistings
of our prophets?"
"Ah, Miriam," replied Joseph tenderly. "Art thou, too, like our
brethren? They do not understand. It is a question of the heart, not
of texts. What is it I feel is the highest, divinest in me? Sacrifice!
Wherefore He who was all sacrifice, all martyrdom, must be divine."
"Bandy not words with him, Miriam," cried his mother. "Oh, thou
infidel, whom I have begotten for my sins. Why doth not Heaven's fire
blast thee as thou standest there?"
"Thou talkest of martyrdom, Joseph," cried Miriam, disregarding her.
"It is we Jews who are martyrs, not the Christians. We are penned here
like cattle. We are marked with shameful badges. Our Talmud is burnt.
Our possessions are taxed away from us. We are barred from every
reputable calling. We may not even bury our dead with honor or carve
an epitaph over their graves." The passion in her face matched his.
Her sweetness was exchanged for fire. She had the air of a Judith or a
Jael.
[30]"It is our own cowardice that invites the spittle, Miriam. Where is
the spirit of the Maccabæans whom we hymn on this feast of Chanukah?
The Pope issues Bulls, and we submit—outwardly. Our resistance is
silent, sinuous. He ordains yellow hats; we wear yellow hats, but
gradually the yellow darkens; it becomes orange, then ochre, till at
last we go capped in red like so many cardinals, provoking the edict
afresh. We are restricted to one synagogue. We have five for our
different country-folk, but we build them under one roof and call four
of them schools."
"Hush, thou Jew-hater," cried his mother. "Say not such things aloud.
My God! my God! how have I sinned before Thee?"
"What wouldst thou have, Joseph?" said Miriam. "One cannot argue with
wolves. We are so few—we must meet them by cunning."
"Ah, but we set up to be God's witnesses, Miriam. Our creed is naught
but prayer-mumbling and pious mummeries. The Christian Apostles went
through the world testifying. Better a brief heroism than this long
ignominy." He burst into sudden tears and sank into a chair
overwrought.
Instantly his mother was at his side, bending down, her wet face to
his.
"Thank Heaven! thank Heaven!" she sobbed. "The madness is over."
He did not answer her. He had no strength to argue more. There was a
long, strained silence. Presently the mother asked—
"And where didst thou find shelter for the night?"
"At the palace of Annibale de' Franchi."
Miriam started. "The father of the beautiful Helena de' Franchi?" she
asked.
[31]"The same," said Joseph flushing.
"And how camest thou to find protection there, in so noble a house,
under the roof of a familiar of the Pope?"
"Did I not tell thee, mother, how I did some slight service to his
daughter at the last Carnival, when, adventuring herself masked among
the crowd in the Corso, she was nigh trampled upon by the buffaloes
stampeding from the race-course?"
"Nay, I remember naught thereof," said Rachel, shaking her head. "But
thou mindest me how these Christians make us race like the beasts."
He ignored the implied reproach.
"Signor de' Franchi would have done much for me," he went on. "But I
only begged the run of his great library. Thou knowest how hard it is
for me that the Christians deny us books. And there many a day have I
sat reading till the vesper bell warned me that I must hasten back to
the Ghetto."
"Ah! 'twas but to pervert thee."
"Nay, mother, we talked not of religion."
"And last night thou wast too absorbed in thy reading?" put in Miriam.
"That is how it came to pass, Miriam."
"But why did not Helena warn thee?"
This time it was Joseph that started. But he replied simply—
"We were reading in Tasso. She hath rare parts. Sometimes she renders
Plato and Sophocles to me."
"And thou, our future Rabbi, didst listen?" cried Rachel.
"There is no word of Christianity in these, mother, nor do they
satisfy the soul. Wisely sang Jehudah Halevi, 'Go not near the Grecian
wisdom.'"
"Didst thou sit near her at the mass?" inquired Miriam.
[32]He turned his candid gaze towards her.
"She did not go," he said.
Miriam made a sudden movement to the door.
"Now that thou art safe, Joseph, I have naught further to do here. God
keep thee."
Her bosom heaved. She hurried out.
"Poor Miriam!" sighed Rachel. "She is a loving, trustworthy maiden.
She will not breathe a whisper of thy blasphemies."
Joseph sprang from his feet as if galvanized.
"Not breathe a whisper! But, mother, I shall shout them from the
housetops."
"Hush! hush!" breathed his mother in a frenzy of alarm. "The neighbors
will hear thee."
"It is what I desire."
"Thy father may come in at any moment to know if thou art safe."
"I will go allay his anxiety."
"Nay." She caught him by the mantle. "I will not let thee go. Swear to
me thou wilt spare him thy blasphemies, or he may strike thee dead at
his feet."
"Wouldst have me lie to him? He must know what I have told thee."
"No, no; tell him thou wast shut out, that thou didst remain in
hiding."
"Truth alone is great, mother. I go to bring him the Truth." He tore
his garment from her grasp and rushed without.
She sat on the floor and rocked to and fro in an agony of
apprehension. The leaden hours crept along. No one came, neither son
nor husband. Terrible images of what was passing between them tortured
her. Towards mid-day she rose and began mechanically preparing her
husband's meal. At the precise minute of year-long habit he came. [33]To
her anxious eye his stern face seemed more pallid than usual, but it
revealed nothing. He washed his hands in ritual silence, made the
blessing, and drew chair to table. A hundred times the question
hovered about Rachel's lips, but it was not till near the end of the
meal that she ventured to say, "Our son is back. Hast thou not seen
him?"
"Son? What son? We have no son." He finished his meal.
The scholarly apostle, thus disowned by his kith and kin, was eagerly
welcomed by Holy Church, the more warmly that he had come of his own
inward grace and refused the tribute of annual crowns with which the
Popes often rewarded true religion—at the expense of the Ghetto,
which had to pay these incomes to its recreants. It was the fashion to
baptize converted Jews in batches—for the greater glory—procuring
them from without when home-made catechumens were scarce, sometimes
serving them up with a proselyte Turk. But in view of the importance
of the accession, and likewise of the closeness of Epiphany, it was
resolved to give Joseph ben Manasseh the honor of a solitary baptism.
The intervening days he passed in a monastery, studying his new faith,
unable to communicate with his parents or his fellow Jews, even had he
or they wished. A cardinal's edict forbade him to return to the
Ghetto, to eat, drink, sleep, or speak with his race during the period
of probation; the whip, the cord, awaited its violation. By day Rachel
and Miriam walked in the precincts of the monastery, hoping to catch
sight of him; nearer than ninety cubits they durst not approach under
pain of bastinado and exile. A word to him, a message [34]that might have
softened him, a plea that might have turned him back—and the offender
was condemned to the galleys for life.
Epiphany arrived. A great concourse filled the Basilica di Latran. The
Pope himself was present, and amidst scarlet pomp and swelling music,
Joseph, thrilled to the depths of his being, received the sacraments.
Annibale de' Franchi, whose proud surname was henceforth to be
Joseph's, stood sponsor. The presiding cardinal in his solemn sermon
congratulated the congregants on the miracle which had taken place
under their very eyes, and then, attired in white satin, the neophyte
was slowly driven through the streets of Rome that all might witness
how a soul had been saved for the true faith. And in the ecstasy of
this union with the human brotherhood and the divine fatherhood, and
with Christ, its symbol, Giuseppe de' Franchi saw not the dark,
haggard faces of his brethren in the crowd, the hate that smouldered
in their dusky eyes as the festal procession passed by. Nor while he
knelt before crucifix and image that night, did he dream of that other
ceremonial in the Synagogue of the Piazza of the Temple, half-way from
the river; a scene more impressive in its sombreness than all the
splendor of the church pageant.
The synagogue was a hidden building, indistinguishable externally from
the neighboring houses; within, gold and silver glistened in the
pomegranates and bells of the Scrolls of the Law or in the broidery of
the curtain that covered the Ark; the glass of one of the windows,
blazing with a dozen colors for the Twelve Tribes, represented the
Urim and the Thummim. In the courtyard stood a model of the ancient
Temple of Jerusalem, furnished with marvellous detail, memorial of
lost glories.
The Council of Sixty had spoken. Joseph ben Manasseh was to suffer the
last extremity of the Jewish law. All [35]Israel was called together to
the Temple. An awful air of dread hung over the assemblage; in a
silence as of the grave each man upheld a black torch that flared
weirdly in the shadows of the synagogue. A ram's horn sounded shrill
and terrible, and to its elemental music the anathema was launched,
the appalling curse withdrawing every human right from the outlaw,
living or dead, and the congregants, extinguishing their torches,
cried, "Amen." And in a spiritual darkness as black, Manasseh tottered
home to sit with his wife on the floor and bewail the death of their
Joseph, while a death-light glimmering faintly swam on a bowl of oil,
and the prayers for the repose of the soul of the deceased rose
passionately on the tainted Ghetto air. And Miriam, her Madonna-like
face wet with hot tears, burnt the praying-shawl she was weaving in
secret love for the man who might one day have loved her, and went to
condole with the mourners, holding Rachel's rugged hand in those soft,
sweet fingers that no lover would ever clasp.
But Rachel wept for her child, and would not be comforted.
Helena de' Franchi gave the news of the ban to Giuseppe de' Franchi.
She had learned it from one of her damsels, who had had it from
Shloumi the Droll, a graceless, humorous rogue, steering betwixt Jews
and Christians his shifty way to profit.
Giuseppe smiled a sweet smile that hovered on the brink of tears.
"They know not what they do," he said.
"Thy parents mourn thee as dead."
"They mourn the dead Jew; the living Christian's love shall comfort
them."
[36]"But thou mayst not approach them, nor they thee."
"By faith are mountains moved; my spirit embraces theirs. We shall yet
rejoice together in the light of the Saviour, for weeping may endure
for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." His pale face gleamed
with celestial radiance.
Helena surveyed him in wondering compassion. "Thou art strangely
possessed, Ser Giuseppe," she said.
"It is not strange, Signora, it is all simple—like a child's
thought," he said, meeting her limpid eyes with his profound mystic
gaze.
She was tall and fair, more like those Greek statues which the
sculptors of her day imitated than like a Roman maiden. A simple dress
of white silk revealed the beautiful curves of her figure. Through the
great oriel window near which they stood the cold sunshine touched her
hair and made spots of glory on the striped beast-skins that covered
the floor, and on the hanging tapestries. The pictures and ivories,
the manuscripts and the busts all contributed to make the apartment a
harmonious setting for her noble figure. As he looked at her he
trembled.
"And what is thy life to be henceforward?" she asked.
"Surrender, sacrifice," he said half in a whisper. "My parents are
right. Joseph is dead. His will is God's, his heart is Christ's. There
is no life for me but service."
"And whom wilt thou serve?"
"My brethren, Signora."
"They reject thee."
"I do not reject them."
She was silent for a moment. Then more passionately she cried: "But,
Ser Giuseppe, thou wilt achieve nothing. A hundred generations have
failed to move them. The Bulls of all the Popes have left them
stubborn."
"No one has tried Love, Signora."
[37]"Thou wilt throw away thy life."
He smiled wistfully. "Thou forgettest I am dead."
"Thou art not dead—the sap is in thy veins. The spring-time of the
year comes. See how the sun shines already in the blue sky. Thou shalt
not die—it is thine to be glad in the sun and in the fairness of
things."
"The sunshine is but a symbol of the Divine Love, the pushing buds but
prefigure the Resurrection and the Life."
"Thou dreamest, Giuseppe mio. Thou dreamest with those wonderful eyes
of thine open. I do not understand this Love of thine that turns from
things earthly, that rends thy father's and mother's heart in twain."
His eyes filled with tears. "Pazienza! earthly things are but as
shadows that pass. It is thou that dreamest, Signora. Dost thou not
feel the transitoriness of it all—yea, even of this solid-seeming
terrestrial plain and yon overhanging roof and the beautiful lights
set therein for our passing pleasure! This sun which swims daily
through the firmament is but a painted phantasm compared with the
eternal rock of Christ's Love."
"Thy words are tinkling cymbals to me, Ser Giuseppe."
"They are those of thy faith, Signora."
"Nay, not of my faith," she cried vehemently. "Thou knowest I am no
Christian at heart. Nay, nor are any of our house, though they
perceive it not. My father fasts at Lent, but it is the Pagan
Aristotle that nourishes his thought. Rome counts her beads and
mumbles her paternosters, but she has outgrown the primitive faith in
Renunciation. Our pageants and processions, our splendid feasts, our
gorgeous costumes, what have these to do with the pale Christ, whom
thou wouldst foolishly emulate?"
"Then there is work for me to do, even among the Christians," he said
mildly.
[38]"Nay, it is but mischief thou wouldst do, with thy passionless ghost
of a creed. It is the artists who have brought back joy to the world,
who have perceived the soul of beauty in all things. And though they
have feigned to paint the Holy Family and the Crucifixion and the Dead
Christ and the Last Supper, it is the loveliness of life that has
inspired their art. Yea, even from the prayerful Giotto downwards, it
is the pride of life, it is the glory of the human form, it is the joy
of color, it is the dignity of man, it is the adoration of the Muses.
Ay, and have not our nobles had themselves painted as Apostles, have
they not intruded their faces into sacred scenes, have they not
understood for what this religious art was a pretext? Is not Rome full
of Pagan art? Were not the Laocoon and the Cleopatra and the Venus
placed in the very orange garden of the Vatican?"
"Natheless it is the Madonna and the Child that your painters have
loved best to paint."
"'Tis but Venus and Cupid over again."
"Nay, these sneers belie the noble Signora de' Franchi. Thou canst not
be blind to the divine aspiration that lay behind a Madonna of Sandro
Botticelli."
"Thou hast not seen his frescoes in the Villa Lemmi, outside Firenze,
the dainty grace of his forms, the charming color, else thou wouldst
understand that it was not spiritual beauty alone that his soul
coveted."
"But Raffaello da Urbino, but Leonardo—"
"Leonardo," she repeated. "Hast thou seen his Bacchus, or his
battle-fresco? Knowest thou the later work of Raffaello? And what
sayest thou to our Fra Lippo Lippi? A Christian monk he, forsooth!
What sayest thou to Giorgione of Venice and his pupils, to this
efflorescence of loveliness, to our statuaries and our builders, to
our goldsmiths and musicians? Ah, we have [39]rediscovered the secret of
Greece. It is Homer that we love, it is Plato, it is the noble
simplicity of Sophocles; our Dante lied when he said it was Virgil who
was his guide. The poet of Mantua never led mortal to those dolorous
regions. He sings of flocks and bees, of birds and running brooks, and
the simple loves of shepherds; and we listen to him again and breathe
the sweet country air, the sweeter for the memory of those hell-fumes
which have poisoned life for centuries. Apollo is Lord, not Christ."
"It is Apollyon who tempts Rome thus with the world and the flesh."
"Thou hast dethroned thy reason, Messer Giuseppe. Thou knowest these
things dignify, not degrade our souls. Hast thou not thrilled with me
at the fairness of a pictured face, at the glow of luminous color, at
the white radiance of a statue?"
"I sinned if I loved beauty for itself alone, and—forgive me if I
wound thee, lady—this worship of beauty is for the rich, the
well-fed, the few. What of the poor and the down-trodden who weep in
darkness? What comfort holds thy creed for such? All these wonders of
the human hand and the human brain are as straws weighed against a
pure heart, a righteous deed. The ages of Art have always been the
ages of abomination, Signora. It is not in cunning but in simplicity
that our Lord is revealed. Unless ye become as little children, ye
shall not enter the Kingdom of Heaven."
"Heaven is here." Her eyes gleamed. Her bosom heaved. The fire of her
glance passed to his. Her loveliness troubled him, the matchless face
and form that now blent the purity of a statue with the warmth of
living woman.
"Verily, where Christ is Heaven is. Thou hast moved in such splendor
of light, Signora de' Franchi, thou dost [40]not realize thy privilege.
But I, who have always walked in darkness, am as a blind man restored
to sight. I was ambitious, lustful, torn by doubts and questionings;
now I am bathed in the divine peace, all my questions answered, my
riotous blood assuaged. Love, love, that is all; the surrender of
one's will to the love that moves the sun and all the stars, as your
Dante says. And sun and stars do but move to this end, Signora—that
human souls may be born and die to live, in oneness with Love. Oh, my
brethren"—he stretched out his arms yearningly, and his eyes and his
voice were full of tears—"why do ye haggle in the market-place? Why
do ye lay up store of gold and silver? Why do ye chase the futile
shadows of earthly joy? This, this is the true ecstasy, to give
yourself up to God, all in all, to ask only to be the channel of His
holy will."
Helena's face was full of a grave wonder; for a moment an answering
light was reflected on it as though she yearned for the strange
raptures she could not understand.
"All this is sheer folly. Thy brethren hear thee now as little as they
will ever hear thee."
"I shall pray night and day that my lips may be touched with the
sacred fire."
"Love, too, is a sacred fire. Dost thou purpose to live without that?"
She drew nearer. Her breath stirred the black lock on his forehead. He
moved back a pace, thrilling.
"I shall have divine Love, Signora."
"Thou art bent on becoming a Dominican?"
"I am fixed."
"The cloister will content thee?"
"It will be Heaven."
"Ay, where there is no marrying nor giving in marriage. What
Samson-creed is this that pulls down the pillars of human society?"
[41]"Nay, marriage is in the scheme. 'Tis the symbol of a diviner union.
But it is not for all men. It is not for those who symbolize divine
things otherwise, who typify to their fellow-men the flesh crucified,
the soul sublimed. It is not for priests."
"But thou art not a priest."
"'Tis a question of days. But were I even refused orders I should
still remain celibate."
"Still remain celibate! Wherefore?"
"Because mine own people are cut off from me. And were I to marry a
Christian, like so many Jewish converts, the power of my example would
be lost. They would say of me, as they say of them, that it was not
the light of Christ but a Christian maiden's eyes that dazzled and
drew. They are hard; they do not believe in the possibility of a true
conversion. Others have enriched themselves by apostasy, or, being
rich, have avoided impoverishing mulcts and taxes. But I have lost all
my patrimony, and I will accept nothing. That is why I refused thy
father's kind offices, the place in the Seal-office, or even the
humbler position of mace-bearer to his Holiness. When my brethren see,
moreover, that I force from them no pension nor moneys, not even a
white farthing, that I even preach to them without wage, verily for
the love of Heaven, as your idiom hath it, when they see that I live
pure and lonely, then they will listen to me. Perchance their hearts
will be touched and their eyes opened." His face shone with wan
radiance. That was, indeed, the want, he felt sure. No Jew had ever
stood before his brethren an unimpeachable Christian, above suspicion,
without fear, and without reproach. Oh, happy privilege to fill this
apostolic rôle!
"But suppose—" Helena hesitated; then lifting her lovely eyes to meet
his in fearless candor, "she whom you loved were no Christian."
[42]He trembled, clenching his hands to drive back the mad wave of earthly
emotion that flooded him, as the tide swells to the moon, under the
fervor of her eyes.
"I should kill my love all the same," he said hoarsely. "The Jews are
hard. They will not make fine distinctions. They know none but Jews
and Christians."
"Methinks I see my father galloping up the street," said Helena,
turning to the oriel window. "That should be his feather and his brown
Turkey horse. But the sun dazzles my eyes! I will leave thee."
She passed to the door without looking at him. Then turning suddenly
so that his own eyes were dazzled, she said—
"My heart is with thee whatsoever thou choosest. Only bethink thee
well, ere thou donnest cowl and gown, that unlovely costume which, to
speak after thine own pattern, symbolizes all that is unlovely.
Addio!"
He followed her and took her hand, and, bending down, kissed it
reverently. She did not withdraw it.
"Hast thou the strength for the serge and the cord, Giuseppe mio?" she
asked softly.
He drew himself up, holding her hand in his.
"Yes," he said. "Thou shalt inspire me, Helena. The thought of thy
radiant purity shall keep me pure and unfaltering."
A fathomless expression crossed Helena's face. She drew away her hand.
"I cannot inspire to death," she said. "I can only inspire to life."
He closed his eyes in ecstatic vision. "'Tis not death. He is the
Resurrection and the Life," he murmured.
When he opened his eyes she was gone. He fell on his knees in a
passion of prayer, in the agony of the crucifixion of the flesh.
During his novitiate, before he had been admitted to monastic vows, he
preached a trial "Sermon to the Jews" in a large oratory near the
Ghetto. A church would have been contaminated by the presence of
heretics, and even from the Oratory any religious objects that lay
about had been removed. There was a goodly array of fashionable
Christians, resplendent in gold-fringed mantles and silk-ribboned
hats; for he was rumored eloquent, and Annibale de' Franchi was there
in pompous presidency. One Jew came—Shloumi the Droll, relying on his
ability to wriggle out of the infraction of the ban, and earn a meal
or two by reporting the proceedings to the fattori and the other
dignitaries of the Ghetto, whose human curiosity might be safely
counted upon. Shloumi was rich in devices. Had he not even for months
flaunted a crimson cap in the eye of Christendom, and had he not when
at last brought before the Caporioni, pleaded that this was merely an
ostensive sample of the hats he was selling, his true yellow hat being
unintentionally hidden beneath? But Giuseppe de' Franchi rejoiced at
the sight of him now.
"He is a gossip, he will scatter the seed," he thought.
Late in the afternoon of the next day the preacher was walking in the
Via Lepida, near the Monastery of St. Dominic. There was a touch on
his mantle. He turned. "Miriam!" he cried, shrinking back.
"Why shrinkest thou from me, Joseph?"
"Knowest thou not I am under the ban? Look, is not that a Jew yonder
who regards us?"
"I care not. I have a word to say to thee."
"But thou wilt be accursed."
[44]"I have a word to say to thee."
His eyes lit up. "Ah, thou believest!" he cried exultantly. "Thou hast
found grace."
"Nay, Joseph, that will never be. I love our fathers' faith. Methinks
I have understood it better than thou, though I have not dived like
thee into holy lore. It is by the heart alone that I understand."
"Then why dost thou come? Let us turn down towards the Coliseum. 'Tis
quieter, and less frequented of our brethren."
They left the busy street with its bustle of coaches, and
water-carriers with their asses, and porters, and mounted nobles with
trains of followers, and swash-buckling swordsmen, any of whom might
have insulted Miriam, conspicuous by her beauty and by the square of
yellow cloth, a palm and a half wide, set above her coiffure. They
walked on in silence till they came to the Arch of Titus.
Involuntarily both stopped, for by reason of the Temple candlestick
that figured as spoil in the carving of the Triumph of Titus, no Jew
would pass under it. Titus and his empire had vanished, but the Jew
still hugged his memories and his dreams.
An angry sulphur sunset, streaked with green, hung over the ruined
temples of the ancient gods and the grass-grown fora of the Romans. It
touched with a glow as of blood the highest fragment of the Coliseum
wall, behind which beasts and men had made sport for the Masters of
the World. The rest of the Titanic ruin seemed in shadow.
"Is it well with my parents?" said Joseph at last.
"Hast thou the face to ask? Thy mother weeps all day, save when thy
father is at home. Then she makes herself as stony as he. He—an elder
of the synagogue!—thou hast brought down his gray hairs in sorrow to
the grave."
[45]He swallowed a sob. Then, with something of his father's stoniness,
"Suffering chastens, Miriam," he said. "It is God's weapon."
"Accuse not God of thy cruelty. I hate thee." She went on rapidly, "It
is rumored in the Ghetto thou art to be a friar of St. Dominic.
Shloumi the Droll brought the news."
"It is so, Miriam. I am to take the vows at once."
"But how canst thou become a priest? Thou lovest a woman."
He stopped in his walk, startled.
"What sayest thou, Miriam?"
"Nay, this is no time for denials. I know her. I know thy love for
her. It is Helena de' Franchi."
He was white and agitated. "Nay, I love no woman."
"Thou lovest Helena."
"How knowest thou that?"
"I am a woman."
They walked on silently.
"And this is what thou camest to say?"
"Nay, this. Thou must marry her and be happy."
"I—I cannot, Miriam. Thou dost not understand."
"Not understand! I can read thee as thou readest the Law—without
vowels. Thou thinkest we Jews will point the finger of scorn at thee,
that we will say it was Helena thou didst love, not the Crucified One,
that we will not listen to thy gospel."
"But is it not so?"
"It is so."
"Then—"
"But it will be so, do what thou wilt. Cut thyself into little pieces
and we would not believe in thee or thy gospel. I alone have faith in
thy sincerity, and to me thou art as one mad with over-study. Joseph,
thy dream is [46]vain. The Jews hate thee. They call thee Haman.
Willingly would they see thee hanged on a high tree. Thy memory will
be an execration to the third and fourth generation. Thou wilt no more
move them than the seven hills of Rome. They have stood too long."
"Ay, they have stood like stones. I will melt them. I will save them."
"Thou wilt destroy them. Save rather thyself—wed this woman and be
happy."
He looked at her.
"Be happy," she repeated. "Do not throw away thy life for a vain
shadow. Be happy. It is my last word to thee. Henceforth, as a true
daughter of Judah, I obey the ban, and were I a mother in Israel my
children should be taught to hate thee even as I do. Peace be with
thee!"
He caught at her gown. "Go not without my thanks, though I must reject
thy counsel. To-morrow I am admitted into the Brotherhood of
Righteousness." In the fading light his face shone weird and unearthly
amid the raven hair. "But why didst thou risk thy good name to tell me
thou hatest me?"
"Because I love thee. Farewell."
She sped away.
He stretched out his arms after her. His eyes were blind with mist.
"Miriam, Miriam!" he cried. "Come back, thou too art a Christian! Come
back, my sweet sister in Christ!"
A drunken Dominican lurched into his open arms.
The Jews would not come to hear Fra Giuseppe. All his impassioned
spirituality was wasted on an audience of Christians and oft-converted
converts. Baffled, he fell back on scholastic argumentation, but in
vain did he turn the weapons of Talmudic dialectic against the
Talmudists themselves. Not even his discovery by cabbalistic
calculations that the Pope's name and office were predicted in the Old
Testament availed to draw the Jews, and it was only in the streets
that he came upon the scowling faces of his brethren. For months he
preached in patient sweetness, then one day, desperate and unstrung,
he sought an interview with the Pope, to petition that the Jews might
be commanded to come to his sermons; he found the Pontiff in bed,
unwell, but chatting blithely with the Bishop of Salamanca and the
Procurator of the Exchequer, apparently of a droll mishap that had
befallen the French Legate. It was a pale scholarly face that lay back
on the white pillow under the purple skull-cap, but it was not devoid
of the stronger lines of action. Giuseppe stood timidly at the door,
till the Wardrobe-Keeper, a gentleman of noble family, told him to
advance. He moved forward reverently, and kneeling down kissed the
Pope's feet. Then he rose and proffered his request. But the ruler of
Christendom frowned. He was a scholar and a gentleman, a great patron
of letters and the arts. Wiser than that of temporal kings, his Jewish
policy had always been comparatively mild. It was his foreign policy
that absorbed his zeal, considerably to the prejudice of his
popularity at home. While Giuseppe de' Franchi was pleading
desperately to a bored Prelate, explaining how he could solve the
Jewish question, how he could play upon his brethren as [48]David upon
the harp, if he could only get them under the spell of his voice, a
gentleman of the bed-chamber brought in a refection on a silver tray,
the Preguste tasted of the food to ensure its freedom from poison,
though it came from the Papal kitchen, and at a sign from his
Holiness, Giuseppe had to stand aside. And ere the Pope had finished
there were other interruptions; the chief of his band of musicians
came for instructions for the concert at his Ferragosto on the first
of August; and—most vexatious of all—a couple of goldsmiths came
with their work, and with rival models of a button for the Pontifical
cope. Giuseppe fumed and fretted while the Holy Father put on his
spectacles to examine the great silver vase which was to receive the
droppings from his table, its richly chased handles and its festoons
of acanthus leaves, and its ingenious masks; and its fellow which was
to stand in his cupboard and hold water, and had a beautiful design
representing St. Ambrogio on horseback routing the Arians. And when
one of the jewellers had been dismissed, laden with ducats by the
Pope's datary, the other remained an intolerable time, for it appeared
his Holiness was mightily pleased with his wax model, marvelling how
cunningly the artist had represented God the Father in bas-relief,
sitting in an easy attitude, and how elegantly he had set the fine
edge of the biggest diamond exactly in the centre. "Speed the work, my
son," said His Holiness, dismissing him at last, "for I would wear the
button myself before I die." Then, raising a beaming face, "Wouldst
thou aught further with me, Fra Giuseppe? Ah, I recall! Thou yearnest
to preach to thy stiff-necked kinsmen. Ebbene, 'tis a worthy
ambition. Luigi, remember me to-morrow to issue a Bull."
With sudden-streaming eyes the Friar fell at the Pontiff's feet again,
kissing them and murmuring incoherent thanks. [49]Then he bowed his way
out, and hastened back joyfully to the convent.
The Bull duly appeared. The Jews were to attend his next sermon. He
awaited the Sabbath afternoon in a frenzy of spiritual ecstasy. He
prepared a wonderful sermon. The Jews would not dare to disobey the
Edict. It was too definite. It could not be evaded. And their
apathetic resistance never came till later, after an obedient start.
The days passed. The Bull had not been countermanded, although he was
aware backstairs influence had been tried by the bankers of the
community; it had not even been modified under the pretence of
defining it, as was the manner of Popes with too rigorous Bulls. No,
nothing could save the Jews from his sermon.
On the Thursday a plague broke out in the Ghetto; on the Friday a
tenth of the population was dead. Another overflow of the Tiber had
co-operated with the malarious effluvia of those congested alleys,
those strictly limited houses swarming with multiplying broods. On the
Saturday the gates of the Ghetto were officially closed. The plague
was shut in. For three months the outcasts of humanity were pent in
their pestiferous prison day and night to live or die as they chose.
When at length the Ghetto was opened and disinfected, it was the dead,
not the living, that were crowded.
Joseph the Dreamer was half stunned by this second blow to his dreams.
An earthly anxiety he would not avow to himself consumed him during
the progress of the plague, which in spite of all efforts escaped from
the Ghetto as if to punish those who had produced the [50]conditions of
its existence. But his anxiety was not for himself—it was for his
mother and father, it was for the noble Miriam. When he was not in
fearless attendance upon plague-stricken Christians he walked near the
city of the dead, whence no news could come. When at last he learned
that his dear ones were alive, another blow fell. The Bull was still
to be enforced, but the Pope's ear was tenderer to the survivors. He
respected their hatred of Fra Giuseppe, their protest that they would
more willingly hear any other preacher. The duty was to be undertaken
by his brother Dominicans in turn. Giuseppe alone was forbidden to
preach. In vain he sought to approach his Holiness; he was denied
access. Thus began that strange institution, the Predica Coattiva, the
forced sermon.
Every Sabbath after their own synagogue sermon, a third of the
population of the Ghetto, including all children above the age of
twelve, had to repair in turn to receive the Antidote at the Church of
San Benedetto Alla Regola, specially set apart for them, where a friar
gave a true interpretation of the Old Testament portion read by their
own cantor. His Holiness, ever more considerate than his inferiors,
had enjoined the preachers to avoid the names of Jesus and the Holy
Virgin, so offensive to Jewish ears, or to pronounce them in low
tones; but the spirit of these recommendations was forgotten by the
occupants of the pulpit with a congregation at their mercy to bully
and denounce with all the savage resources of rhetoric. Many Jews
lagged reluctant on the road churchwards. A posse of police with whips
drove them into the holy fold. This novel church procession of men,
women, and children grew to be one of the spectacles of Rome. A new
pleasure had been invented for the mob. These compulsory services
involved no small expense. By a refinement of humor the Jews had to
pay for their own conversion. Evasion of the [51]sermon was impossible; a
register placed at the door of the church kept account of the
absentees, whom fine and imprisonment chastised. To keep this register
a neophyte was needed, one who knew each individual personally and
could expose substitutes. What better man than the new brother? In
vain Giuseppe protested. The Prior would not hearken. And so in lieu
of offering the sublime spectacle of an unpaid apostleship, the
powerless instigator of the mischief, bent over his desk, certified
the identity of the listless arrivals by sidelong peeps, conscious
that he was adding the pain of contact with an excommunicated Jew to
the sufferings of his brethren, for whose Sabbath his writing-pen was
shamelessly expressing his contempt. Many a Sabbath he saw his father,
a tragic, white-haired wreck, touched up with a playful whip to urge
him faster towards the church door. It was Joseph whom that whip stung
most. When the official who was charged to see that the congregants
paid attention, and especially that they did not evade the sermon by
slumber, stirred up Rachel with an iron rod, her unhappy son broke
into a cold sweat. When, every third Sabbath, Miriam passed before his
desk with steadfast eyes of scorn, he was in an ague, a fever of hot
and cold. His only consolation was to see rows of devout faces
listening for the first time in their life to the gospel. At least he
had achieved something. Even Shloumi the Droll had grown regenerate;
he listened to the preachers with sober reverence.
Joseph the Dreamer did not know that, adopting the whimsical device
hit on by Shloumi, all these devout Jews had wadding stuffed deep into
their ears.
But, meanwhile, in other pulpits, Fra Giuseppe was gaining great fame.
Christians came from far and near to hear him. He went about among the
people and they grew to love him. He preached at executions, his black
mantle [52]and white scapulary were welcomed in loathsome dungeons, he
absolved the dying, he exorcised demons. But there was one sinner he
could not absolve, neither by hair-shirt nor flagellation, and that
was himself. And there was one demon he could not exorcise—that in
his own breast, the tribulation of his own soul, bruising itself
perpetually against the realities of life and as torn now by the
shortcomings of Christendom as formerly by those of the Ghetto.
It was the Carnival week again—the mad blaspheming week of revelry
and devilry. The streets were rainbow with motley wear and thunderous
with the roar and laughter of the crowd, recruited by a vast inflow of
strangers; from the windows and roofs, black with heads, frolicsome
hands threw honey, dirty water, rotten eggs, and even boiling oil upon
the pedestrians and cavaliers below. Bloody tumults broke out,
sacrilegious masqueraders invaded the churches. They lampooned all
things human and divine; the whip and the gallows liberally applied
availed naught to check the popular licence. Every prohibitory edict
became a dead letter. In such a season the Jews might well tremble,
made over to the facetious Christian; always excellent whetstones for
wit, they afforded peculiar diversion in Carnival times. On the first
day a deputation of the chief Jews, including the three gonfaloniers
and the rabbis, headed the senatorial cortége, and, attired in a
parti-colored costume of red and yellow, marched across the whole
city, from the Piazza of the People to the Capitol, through a double
fire of scurrilities. Arrived at the Capitol, the procession marched
into the Hall of the Throne, where the three Conservators and the
[53]Prior of the Caporioni sat on crimson velvet seats with the fiscal
advocate of the Capitol in his black toga and velvet cap. The Chief
Rabbi knelt upon the first step of the throne, and, bending his
venerable head to the ground, pronounced a traditional formula: "Full
of respect and of devotion for the Roman people, we, chiefs and rabbis
of the humble Jewish community, present ourselves before the exalted
throne of Your Eminences to offer them respectfully fidelity and
homage in the name of our co-religionists, and to implore their
benevolent commiseration. For us, we shall not fail to supplicate the
Most High to accord peace and a long tranquillity to the Sovereign
Pontiff, who reigns for the happiness of all; to the Apostolic Holy
Seat, as well as to Your Eminences, to the most illustrious Senate,
and to the Roman people."
To which the Chief of the Conservators replied: "We accept with
pleasure the homage of fidelity, of vassalage, and of respect, the
expression of which you renew to-day in the name of the entire Jewish
community, and, assured that you will respect the laws and orders of
the Senate, and that you will pay, as in the past, the tribute and the
dues which are incumbent upon you, we accord you our protection in the
hope that you will know how to make yourself worthy of it." Then,
placing his foot upon the Rabbi's neck, he cried: "Andate!" (Begone!)
Rising, the Rabbi presented the Conservators with a bouquet and a cup
containing twenty crowns, and offered to decorate the platform of the
Senator on the Piazza of the People. And then the deputation passed
again in its motley gear through the swarming streets of buffoons,
through the avenue of scurrilities, to renew its hypocritical
protestations before the throne of the Senator.
Mock processions parodied this march of Jews. The fishmongers, who,
from their proximity to the Ghetto, were [54]aware of its customs,
enriched the Carnival with divers other parodies; now it was a
travesty of a rabbi's funeral, now a long cavalcade of Jews galloping
upon asses, preceded by a mock rabbi on horseback, with his head to
the steed's tail, which he grasped with one hand, while with the other
he offered an imitation Scroll of the Law to the derision of the mob.
Truly, the baiting of the Jews added rare spice to the fun of the
Carnival; their hats were torn off, filth was thrown in their faces.
This year the Governor of Rome had interfered, forbidding anything to
be thrown at them except fruit. A noble marquis won facetious fame by
pelting them with pineapples. But it was not till the third day, after
the asses and buffaloes had raced, that the Jews touched the extreme
of indignity, for this was the day of the Jew races.
The morning dawned blue and cold; but soon the clouds gathered, and
the jostling revellers scented with joy the prospect of rain. At the
Arch of San Lorenza, in Lucina, in the long narrow street of the Via
Corso, where doorways and casements and roofs and footways were agrin
with faces, half a dozen Jews or so were assembled pell-mell. They had
just been given a hearty meal, but they did not look grateful. Almost
naked, save for a white cloak of the meagrest dimensions, comically
indecent, covered with tinsel and decorated with laurels, they stood
shivering, awaiting the command to "Go!" to run the gauntlet of all
this sinister crowd, overwelling with long-repressed venom, seething
with taunts and lewdness. At last a mounted officer gave the word,
and, amid a colossal shout of glee from the mob, the half-naked,
grotesque figures, with their strange Oriental faces of sorrow,
started at a wild run down the Corso. The goal was the Castle of St.
Angelo. Originally the race-course ended with the Corso, but it had
been considerably lengthened to gratify a recent Pope who [55]wished to
have the finish under his windows as he sat in his semi-secret Castle
chamber amid the frescoed nudes of Giulio Romano. Fast, fast flew the
racers, for the sooner the goal was reached the sooner would they find
respite from this hail of sarcasm mixed with weightier stones, and
these frequent proddings from the lively sticks of the bystanders, or
of the fine folk obstructing the course in coaches in defiance of
edict. And to accelerate their pace still further, the mounted
officer, with a squad of soldiers armed cap-à-pie, galloped at their
heels, ever threatening to ride them down. They ran, ran, puffing,
panting, sweating, apoplectic; for to the end that they might nigh
burst with stitches in the side had a brilliant organizer of the
fête stuffed them full with preliminary meat. Oh, droll! oh,
delicious! oh, rare for Antony! And now a young man noticeable by his
emaciated face and his premature baldness was drawing to the front
amid ironic cheers. When the grotesque racers had passed by, noble
cavaliers displayed their dexterity at the quintain, and beautiful
ladies at the balconies—not masked, as in France, but radiantly
revealed—changed their broad smiles to the subtler smiles of
dalliance. And then suddenly the storm broke—happy ally of the
fête—jocosely drenching the semi-nude runners. On, on they sped,
breathless, blind, gasping, befouled by mud, and bruised by missiles,
with the horses' hoofs grazing their heels; on, on along the thousand
yards of the endless course; on, on, sodden and dripping and
stumbling. They were nearing the goal. They had already passed San
Marco, the old goal. The young Jew was still leading, but a fat old
Jew pressed him close. The excitement of the crowd redoubled. A
thousand mocking voices encouraged the rivals. They were on the
bridge. The Castle of St. Angelo, whose bastions were named after the
Apostles, was in sight. The fat old Jew drew closer, anxious, now
that [56]he was come so far, to secure the thirty-six crowns that the
prize might be sold for. But the favorite made a mighty spurt. He
passed the Pope's window, and the day was his. The firmament rang with
laughter as the other candidates panted up. A great yell greeted the
fall of the fat old man in the roadway, where he lay prostrate.
An official tendered the winner the pallio which was the prize—a
piece of red Venetian cloth. The young Jew took it, surveying it with
a strange, unfathomable gaze, but the Judge interposed.
"The captain of the soldiers tells me they did not start fair at the
Arch. They must run again to-morrow." This was a favorite device for
prolonging the fun. But the winner's eyes blazed ominously.
"Nay, but we started as balls shot from a falconet."
"Peace, peace, return him the pallio," whispered a racer behind him,
tugging apprehensively at his one garment.
"They always adjudge it again to the first winner." But the young man
was reckless.
"Why did not the captain stop us, then?" he asked.
"Keep thy tongue between thy dog's teeth," retorted the Judge. "In any
event the race must be run again, for the law ordains eight runners as
a minimum."
"We are eight," replied the young Jew.
The Judge glared at the rebel; then, striking each rueful object with
a stick, he counted out, "One—two—three—four—five—six—seven!"
"Eight," persisted the young man, perceiving for the first time the
old Jew on the ground behind him, and stooping to raise him.
"That creature! Basta! He does not count. He is drunk."
"Thou hell-begotten hound!" and straightening himself suddenly, the
young Jew drew a crucifix from within his [57]cloak. "Thou art right!" he
cried in a voice of thunder. "There are only seven Jews, for I—I am
no Jew. I am Fra Giuseppe!" And the crucifix whirled round, clearing a
space of awe about him.
The Judge cowered back in surprise and apprehension. The soldiers sat
their horses in stony amazement, the seething crowd was stilled for a
moment, struck to silent attention. The shower had ceased and a ray of
watery sunlight glistened on the crucifix.
"In the name of Christ I denounce this devil's mockery of the Lord's
chosen people," thundered the Dominican. "Stand back all. Will no one
bring this poor old man a cup of cold water?"
"Hasn't Heaven given him enough cold water?" asked a jester in the
crowd. But no one stirred.
"Then may you all burn eternally," said the Friar. He bent down again
and raised the old man's head tenderly. Then his face grew sterner and
whiter. "He is dead," he said. "The Christ he denied receive him into
His mercy." And he let the corpse fall gently back and closed the
glassy eyes. The bystanders had a momentary thrill. Death had lent
dignity even to the old Jew. He lay there, felled by an apoplectic
stroke, due to the forced heavy meal, the tinsel gleaming grotesquely
on his white sodden cloak, his naked legs rigid and cold. From afar
the rumors of revelry, the brouhaha of a mad population, saluted his
deaf ears, the distant music of lutes and viols. The captain of the
soldiers went hot and cold. He had harried the heels of the rotund
runner in special amusement, but he had not designed murder. A wave of
compunction traversed the spectators. But the Judge recovered himself.
"Seize this recreant priest!" he cried. "He is a backslider. He has
gone back to his people. He is become a Jew again—he shall be flayed
alive."
[58]"Back, in the name of Holy Church!" cried Fra Giuseppe, veering round
to face the captain, who, however, had sat his horse without moving.
"I am no Jew. I am as good a Christian as his Holiness, who but just
now sat at yon jalousie, feasting his eyes on these heathen
saturnalia."
"Then why didst thou race with the Jews? It is contamination. Thou
hast defiled thy cloth."
"Nay, I wore not my cloth. Am I not half naked? Is this the cloth I
should respect—this gaudy frippery, which your citizens have made a
target for filth and abuse?"
"Thou hast brought it on thyself," put in the captain mildly.
"Wherefore didst thou race with this pestilent people?"
The Dominican bowed his head. "It is my penance," he said in tremulous
tones. "I have sinned against my brethren. I have aggravated their
griefs. Therefore would I be of them at the moment of their extremest
humiliation, and that I might share their martyrdom did I beg his
place from one of the runners. But penance is not all my motive." And
he lifted up his eyes and they blazed terribly, and his tones became
again a thunder that rolled through the crowd and far down the bridge.
"Ye who know me, faithful sons and daughters of Holy Church, ye who
have so often listened to my voice, ye into whose houses I have
brought the comfort of the Word, join with me now in ending the long
martyrdom of the Jews, your brethren. It is by love, not hate, that
Christ rules the world. I deemed that it would move your hearts to see
me, whom I know ye love, covered with filth, which ye had never thrown
had ye known me in this strange guise. But lo, this poor old man
pleadeth more eloquently than I. His dead lips shake your souls. Go
home, go home from this Pagan mirth, and sit on the ground in
sackcloth and ashes, and pray God He make you better Christians."
[59]There was an uneasy stir in the crowd: the fantastic mud-stained
tinsel cloak, the bare legs of the speaker, did but add to his
impressiveness; he seemed some strange antique prophet, come from the
far ends of the world and time.
"Be silent, blasphemer," said the Judge. "The sports have the
countenance of the Holy Father. Heaven itself hath cursed these
stinking heretics. Pah!" he spurned the dead Jew with his foot. The
Friar's bosom swelled. His head was hot with blood.
"Not Heaven but the Pope hath cursed them," he retorted vehemently.
"Why doth he not banish them from his dominions? Nay, he knows how
needful they are to the State. When he exiled them from all save the
three cities of refuge, and when the Jewish merchants of the seaports
of the East put our port of Ancona under a ban, so that we could not
provision ourselves, did not his Holiness hastily recall the Jews,
confessing their value? Which being so, it is love we should offer
them, not hatred and a hundred degrading edicts."
"Thou shalt burn in the Forum for this," spluttered the Judge. "Who
art thou to set thyself up against God's Vicar?"
"He God's Vicar? Nay, I am sooner God's Vicar. God speaks through me."
His wan, emaciated face had grown rapt and shining; to the awed mob he
loomed gigantic.
"This is treason and blasphemy. Arrest him!" cried the Judge.
The Friar faced the soldiers unflinchingly, though only the body of
the old Jew divided him from their prancing horses.
"Nay," he said softly, and a sweet smile mingled with the mystery of
his look. "God is with me. He hath set [60]this bulwark of death between
you and my life. Ye will not fight under the banner of the
Anti-Christ."
"Death to the renegade!" cried a voice in the crowd. "He calls the
Pope Anti-Christ."
"Ay, he who is not for us is against us. Is it for Christ that he
rules Rome? Is it only the Jews whom he vexes? Hath not his rage for
power brought the enemy to the gates of Rome? Have not his companies
of foreign auxiliaries flouted our citizens? Ye know how Rome hath
suffered through the machinations of his bastard son, with his
swaggering troop of cut-throats. Is it for Christ that he hath
begotten this terror of our streets?"
"Down with Baccio Valori!" cried a stentorian voice, and a dozen
enthusiastic throats echoed the shout.
"Ay, down with Baccio Valori!" cried the Dominican.
"Down with Baccio Valori!" repeated the ductile crowd, its holiday
humor subtly passing into another form of recklessness. Some who loved
the Friar were genuinely worked upon, others in mad, vicious mood were
ready for any diversion. A few, and these the loudest, were
swashbucklers and cutpurses.
"Ay, but not Baccio Valori alone!" thundered Fra Giuseppe. "Down with
all those bastard growths that flourish in the capital of Christendom.
Down with all that hell-spawn, which is the denial of Christ; down
with the Pardoner! God is no tradesman that he should chaffer for the
forgiveness of sins. Still less—oh blasphemy!—of sins undone. Our
Lady wants none of your wax candles. It is a white heart, it is the
flame of a pure soul that the Virgin Mother asks for. Away with your
beads and mummeries, your paternosters and genuflections! Away with
your Carnivals, your godless farewells to meat! Ye are all foul. This
is no city of God, it is a city of hired bravos and adulterous
abominations and gluttonous feasts, and the [61]lust of the eye, and the
pride of the flesh. Down with the foul-blooded Cardinal, who gossips
at the altar, and borrows money of the despised Jews for his secret
sins! Down with the monk whose missal is Boccaccio! Down with God's
Vicegerent who traffics in Cardinals' hats, who dare not take the
Eucharist without a Pretaster, who is all absorbed in profane Greek
texts, in cunning jewel-work, in political manœuvres and domestic
intrigues, who comes caracoling in crimson and velvet upon his proud
Neapolitan barb, with his bareheaded Cardinals and his hundred
glittering horsemen. He the representative of the meek Christ who rode
upon an ass, and said, 'Sell that thou hast and give to the poor, and
come follow me'! Nay," and the passion of righteousness tore his frame
and thralled his listeners, "though he inhabit the Vatican, though a
hundred gorgeous bishops abase themselves to kiss his toe, yet I
proclaim here that he is a lie, a snare, a whited sepulchre, no
protector of the poor, no loving father to the fatherless, no