# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Gutenberg Project, English
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/39664/39664-h/39664-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

But after Edward had reigned a few years he lent
willing ear to the requests of the Merchant Adventurers,
all the more readily that their petitions were
supported by Sir Thomas Gresham, the honoured
founder of the London Exchange. This man made
clear to the young king and his guardian, the Duke
of Northumberland, that unless the Steelyard were
destroyed, the price of exchange could not rise,
because the fiscal privileges accorded to the Hansa
weighed too heavily upon the English. Besides this,
the men of the Steelyard were subjects of the emperor,
whom the young Protestant king hated as a persecutor
of his fellows in the purer faith.
Still the Hansa suspected no real danger from
King Edward, and the less so, as they had completely
acceded to his desire that they should abstain
from all trade with Scotland. In April, 1551, a plot
laid against the hated and envied strangers by the
London burghers was discovered. In the course of
the inquiry into the plot, it was needful to examine
the Hansa's claims. Confiding in the goodwill of
the king's councillors, the "New Hansa," as Sir
Thomas Gresham called the Merchant Adventurers,
poured forth a long catalogue of grievances against
the League. It was stated that English merchants
had been ill-treated in various Hansa cities, notably
in Danzig and Stralsund; that the commerce of the
English was hindered in all possible ways; and that
serious loss was incurred by the royal treasury from
the circumstance, suspected to be true, that the Hansa
permitted persons foreign to their association to
enjoy with them the benefit of their privileges.
329
In the list of complaints retailed before the king by
the discontented burghers and merchants of London,
and by the Merchant Adventurers who found themselves
less favoured than these foreigners, an attempt
was evident on the part of the English to place on
one footing and to consider as equally prohibited,
the fraudulent importation by the Germans of merchandise
belonging to non-Hanseatics, and the importation
by them of merchandise which belonged
to them, but was not produced in their territory.
The fact was urged that, since the Hansa paid
only the usual custom dues, even for the foreign
products they imported, and for their exportation of
English goods to lands outside the rule of the Hanseatic
League, they were thus able to paralyse with
the greatest facility all English competition in these
different lands.
Certainly nothing better justifies the murmurs of
the islanders against the foreigners than a comparison
of their various commercial transactions.
From these it appears that the English themselves,
in 1551, exported 1,100 pieces of native cloth as compared
with 44,000 pieces exported by the Hansa
League in the same year.
It is true that all these complaints were not new.
But this time they fell upon more fruitful soil. The
government were perhaps all the more ready to give
an attentive ear, as of late the national commerce
had taken a very vigorous start, so that the royal
treasury might hope for considerable receipts, even if
the Crown should lose the duties paid to it by the
members of the League.
330
In consequence the representative members of the
Steelyard were cited before the Privy Council, which
after a very brief examination of the claims brought
forward by the Hansa, decided hastily (February 23,
1552) "that the Hansa, an illegal body, the names
and origin of whose members were unknown, had by
importation and adulteration of foreign goods forfeited
the privileges accorded them by Edward VI."
The following day, also in Privy Council, the suppression
of all the old Hanseatic privileges was decreed
and the League placed on an equality with all
other foreigners, none of whom had special favours
granted them. This decision seemed to promise that
at last the English would gain pre-eminence over their
redoubtable rivals.
Meantime, the Hanseatic Diet, informed of this
step on the part of the English Government, sent
over an ambassador to treat with the king and
Council. The result of his efforts was that, in July
of the same year, the Hansa's privileges were re-established
provisionally "as far as was reconcilable
with the justice, fairness, and honour of the king"—so
ran the clause.
Of all the negotiations a detailed and interesting
account has been preserved to posterity in the Diary
of the young King Edward, one of the most interesting
documents for the knowledge of his short reign.
The concession granted to them made the members
of the Steelyard think, and very rightly, that it would
be well for them to put their own house in order, and
of their own accord to initiate various reforms in their
body, reforms much needed, for complaints against
331
them had been loud and long. They secretly hoped
to be in this wise restored to their former favoured
position.
The disorders, however, in the body of the Steelyard
were not, on the whole, those from which other
foreign factories suffered. The taxes and other
enforced contributions, both from residents and from
the towns trading with England, were punctually
paid, and the finances of the establishment were
flourishing. The complaints, moreover, addressed to
the Diet, that the members of the Steelyard loved
luxury, wine, women, and gambling too well, and
that they rebelled against their semi-monastic life,
were not more frequent from England than elsewhere.
The difficulties were chiefly that trade regulations
were not faithfully observed; that rules of the
strictest nature, on which largely depended the
Hansa's success, were circumvented and disregarded.
For instance, no man who had not attained his
majority was by statute allowed to become a member
of the League and trade on his own account; nor
was one who had not learnt English for at least six
months. This latter precaution was the more requisite,
as past experience had taught that, by ignorance of
the native language, these men were apt to compromise
the interests of the factory. Then there were
other abuses that led to grave results, such as trading
illicitly with natives and then absconding with their
debts unpaid; the whole factory in such cases becoming
responsible for the debts.
In 1553, therefore, the members of the Steelyard
drew up a series of new statutes which they proposed
332
to lay before the King of England for approval. If
these minutes are well considered it will be seen that
whatever else was dead or moribund, Hanseatic astuteness
was not. The new laws, it is true, tended to
abolish the abuses that had crept into the use of their
privileges, but they did not make the least sacrifice
of the liberties that the Hansa had acquired in the
course of years.
King Edward, however, seemed little inclined to
consider these statutes, or to revoke permanently his
somewhat arbitrary decision—a decision undoubtedly
just towards his subjects. Then happily for the
Hanseatic League, though not for his country, he
died in this same year, and the crown passed to his
sister, the fanatical persecutor of Protestants, Bloody
Queen Mary, as the popular mouth has named her.
The new sovereign speedily made it evident that
she meant in all respects to pursue a different policy
from that of her predecessor. The first to fall
was the Duke of Northumberland, the pronounced
enemy of the Hansa. Immediately after, the queen
showed by various signs that she was graciously
disposed towards these strangers, who had boldly
greeted her proclamation as queen against her rival,
Lady Jane Grey, by draughts of Rhenish wine
liberally bestowed upon the populace at the gates of
her capital. On the occasion of her triumphal entry
into London they were foremost in welcoming her
with pomp and splendour, as we have already
mentioned in a former chapter.
Scarcely was the queen firmly seated on her throne,
than the Syndic General of the Hansa, Dr. Sudermann,
333
waited upon her, attended by councillors from some
of the chief Hansa cities. The result of their representations
was that one of the first acts of the new
queen's reign was to annul the royal statute of
Edward VI. that so grievously threatened the League.
This almost unexpected good result was, it is whispered,
not due merely to Queen Mary's reactionary
policy, but also to the corrupting influence of Hanseatic
gold, judiciously distributed.
Our League thus recovered its entire liberties and
rights in the matter of export and import, notwithstanding
the opposition of Parliament, of the Lord
Mayor of London, and of the citizens. It is therefore
not astonishing that they were willing to show themselves
liberal on the occasion of King Philip's entry
as husband of the English queen; and that in order
to maintain the favour of this couple, various cities,
especially Lübeck, showed themselves far from
friendly to Protestant refugees who sought protection
in their precincts.
A valuable memorandum, drawn up by the Syndic
Sudermann and happily preserved to our times, gives
a vivid picture of what was implied by the Hanseatic
privileges in England.
Taking merely into account one article of their
commerce, English cloth, it appears from this report
that from the month of January to the month of
November, 1554, the Hansa had exported from
England 36,000 pieces of cloth, as against 1,100
exported by the English themselves, a third dyed
and two-thirds in the rough; that they only paid for
the right of exit threepence each piece, while other
334
foreigners paid five shillings and ninepence; that
they could use their own servants for packing and
expediting merchandise, and so were relieved of
various custom dues; that had they not possessed
these privileges they would have had to buy this cloth
on the Antwerp market, paying about £1 sterling
more for the same; that they further gained £1 on
each undyed piece, which they alone were allowed to
export in this state, and which they resold after
having had it dyed. If it be further considered that
in reality they paid less than threepence a piece in the
pound as custom duties, because the price of goods,
fixed in ancient statutes, had gone up, while the
Hansa still paid at the old figure; if, in short, this and
various other matters be taken into account, it is no
wonder that Syndic Sudermann could prove that on
English cloth alone the Hansa earned, above that
made by other foreigners who traded in this branch,
a sum of about £61,000 sterling.
Small wonder, therefore, that the trade was as much
coveted as it was prosperous, and that the mayor and
municipal council of London did not cease from laying
their complaints before the queen. They literally
pestered her with petitions and demands on this
subject.
For some months the Hansa succeeded in averting
the storm from their heads, but finally the leading
members of the Steelyard found themselves suddenly
cited to appear before the Queen's Privy Council,
and had to listen to a long catalogue of grievances
drawn up by their accusers.
The sum total of these grievances was, that the
335
Hansa did not contribute sufficiently to the resources
of the English Crown; that it was prejudicial to the
English navy, because it refused to employ any
vessels but its own; that it harmed the very quality
of English cloth, for the makers, seeing the Hansa
would be sure to buy, presented them often with
inferior qualities. An amusing complaint is the
following: Whereas, say the memorialists, the Hanseatics
are all bachelors, they greatly injure English
trade at Antwerp, because the increased leisure this
state gives them, allows of their trading more extensively
and actively. Further, they once more
brought forward the time-honoured objection that
the Hansa would permit of no reciprocity, and while
nominally allowing the English to settle in their
towns, crippled their trade by heavy taxation and
vexatious regulations.
That these assertions were not without foundation,
not even the Hansa could deny. They could but
point to ancient charters to justify them in a measure.
The result of this last formal complaint was,
however, that the Privy Council decided that henceforth
the Hansa should abstain from importing
English cloth into the Netherlands, and that the
quantity of undyed goods they might export be reduced
by two-thirds. They further added that any
infraction of these orders would result in entire suppression
of all privileges.
The Hansa, who did not easily own themselves
beaten, and who desired at all costs to hinder their
rivals from supplanting them, sent various embassies
in the course of the next few years to the Court of
336
England. They also once more attempted the
agency of bribery and corruption by means of Hansa
gold, to attain their ends. In vain. Embassies,
seductions, led to no result; not even a letter which
King Philip of Spain was induced to indite to his
wife, the Queen of England, on their behalf, could
modify by one iota the decision taken by the Privy
Council.
Despairing of a good result from these measures,
the League resolved to have recourse to its ancient
mode of exerting pressure upon obstinate peoples,
by threatening to break off all intercourse with them.
The measure was, however, likely to have brought
destruction to them in England; that it did not
was due to the circumstance that the towns were no
longer, as in past days, blindly obedient to the orders
issued by the Hanseatic Diet. The Hansa, issuing
such an order, forgot that they were no longer the
exclusive masters of the North and East.
Such was the state of things when Queen Mary
died, and Elizabeth, the Virgin Queen, took into her
firm and able hands the reins of the English government
(1558). It is true that she gave a gracious
reception to the Hanseatic embassy that waited on
her in May, 1560; but between a gracious reception
and a confirmation of the ancient privileges of the
League the Hansa were to learn that there lay an
abyss she would never bridge over.
That the Hansa's power was effectually broken in
England ultimately was due to that queen and to her
wise statesman, Lord Burleigh.
It was soon felt by the nation at large that, with
337
the advent to power of Elizabeth, a new spirit was
infused into English life and enterprise. After a
hundred years of weakness, England awoke to renewed
life and vigour, and with vigour awoke ambition.
The Merchant Adventurers, encouraged by Gresham,
put forward their desires; and they, too, asked that
the Hansa should be kept down. These desires were
listened to by the patriotic sovereign. She reconfirmed
all the new tariffs with which the Hansa had
been charged by Edward VI., and she further made
various demands which the Hansa were most unwilling
to concede; for they implied a strict investigation
of the affairs of their factory—an investigation that
they had no wish to provoke.
In the following years an active correspondence
took place between the English queen and the Hansa
cities, which made it most emphatically manifest to
the latter that they must renounce all their antiquated
pretensions; but that, on the other hand, the English
queen was willing to place them in the category of
the most-favoured nation clause, so that they would
still pay less than other foreigners.
The Steelyard authorities, being on the spot and
better able, therefore, to estimate the bearings and
value of Elizabeth's letters and threats, strongly
advised the Hansa towns to conform to the queen's
concessions and demands. They foresaw that worse
things were in store were this not done. But the
League—to whom the smallest and most equitable
sacrifice always seemed an enormity—resolved, before
yielding, to try as a last resource what could be
338
effected by endeavouring to obtain the intervention
of the emperor.
It is strange that, after the lapse of so many years,
experience should not have taught the Hanseatics
that from the German emperor no effective help
could be obtained. In this case, as in many previous
ones, the reigning sovereign contented himself by
writing a letter of remonstrance—a letter so worded
that it was easily manifest to the recipient that words
would not be followed by deeds. Both the Hansa
and the emperor involuntarily revealed that, even
after the ancient special privileges were withdrawn,
the League would still enjoy great favour in England.
The emperor's letter was presented to Elizabeth by
the aldermen and councillors of the Steelyard. The
queen's privy councillors, and especially the trusty
William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, in reply, made it very
clear to the deputation that they had nothing to hope
for beyond the last concessions offered.
Burleigh was the special object of the Hansa's
hate. This arose, perhaps, from the fact that he had,
according to a contemporary reporter, insulted one of
their ambassadors by accosting him "with almost
indecent rough speech." But Burleigh's speech can
scarcely deserve these epithets, if the complaints and
remarks are founded on his saying, that it was a
bad shepherd who desired to pasture the cattle of
strangers more richly than his own flocks; nor could
they complain that they were excluded, so long as
they might trade as freely as the English, and more
freely than the French, Flemings, Dutch, Scotch, and
other nations.
339
The Hansa, blind, unwise, stuck to its old policy,
and like Shylock demanded the very letter of its
ancient bond. It is true that Elizabeth insisted, on
her side, that her subjects should be favoured in the
Hansa towns; that this reciprocity should be granted
was already a clause in the Treaty of Utrecht, concluded,
it will be remembered, in 1474, but it had
never been carried into effect.
It must be admitted that, all things considered,
Queen Elizabeth treated the Hanseatics with a good
deal of consideration and long-suffering, and demanded
from them no more than what she had a right
to demand. When they refused the offer to be placed
on an equal footing with the English the queen issued
an order that their export of English cloth should
in future not exceed five thousand pieces. Cologne
tried to retaliate by putting on an import tax, but it
was an isolated measure, and had no effect.
In a word, the victory remained in the end with the
English Government, on the side of which fought,
not only its own vigorous organization, but also the
disunion among the Hansa towns, which grew more
serious daily, and the grave disorders that existed in
the Steelyard itself.
For some time past serious complaints had been
heard against the alderman of the factory, Peter
Eiffler, a man who filled this high post for several
consecutive years. He was accused among other
things, of having tampered with the funds of the
establishment, of having administered the factory
without the help, or advice of the council; and of
having divided unfairly among the Hanseatic merchants,
340
the five thousand pieces of cloth permitted
to them for export. Further, he was reproached for
having in 1563 made a journey, leaving the Steelyard
and the care of the treasury to young men
incapable of so high a trust, who had done great
damage to the factory.
After all these accusations had been duly sifted,
this unfaithful servant of the Hansa was of course
deposed from his post of trust, but his dismissal
brought no fresh order into the shattered condition
of things. As is frequently the case in the face of
a public calamity, public spirit was extinct. Each
individual thought only of himself, and of what he
could rescue from the impending general ruin. On
the one hand, there was the selfishness of the individual
towns; on the other, the selfishness of the
foreign factories. The London Steelyard, seeing that
the fabric of the League was tottering, tried to save
its individual existence out of the general wreck.
It thought to acquire an independent life, and act
and trade on its own account. Hence when the
League knocked at the doors of its strong-room, to
obtain the funds that should prolong or, as they
hoped, even dispel the death agonies of the other
foreign factories, whether by bribing nobles and
kings, or by sending embassies to foreign courts,
the Steelyard was careful not to listen to these
demands, thinking of the future, when it might need
all funds for itself. It was thus that in 1567, the
London factory, in reply to a reprimand sent it by
Syndic Sudermann for delaying to pay a sum of
over one thousand florins into the public fund, made
341
known to the town of Lübeck that this delay must
not be imputed to it as a fault, that the times were
not favourable to saving, that the annual expenses
of the Steelyard amounted to eight hundred pounds
sterling, and that other sums no less high had to
be expended by it, in maintaining the factories at
Lynn and Boston. The memorandum went on to
explain that, if the English establishments were not
kept in good repair, they would become forfeit to
the English Crown. Then, again, the Hansa taxes
had grown so heavy that no one could bear them.
If the Diet wished, the Steelyard would be quite
ready annually to send its accounts to Lübeck for
revision, in accordance with the ancient usage, which
however did not seem very firmly established; but,
on the other hand, they would prefer not to act thus,
since they feared lest their account-books should fall
into the hands of their enemies, who by inspecting
them, would gain an undesirable insight into Hanseatic
commerce, and might thus perchance despoil
them of their last privileges. The memorandum
winds up by saying, that the Steelyard would feel
greatly obliged if the League would refrain in future
from making demands for pecuniary help in times
of public difficulty.
If this was not the language of insubordination,
it is difficult to say what else would be. Whither
had vanished the blind obedience which the League
had ever exacted, and till now obtained from all its
members, and which was the source of its greatness
and strength?
Whether all that was stated by the Steelyard in
342
this memorandum was true, it is difficult to decide.
Substantially no doubt it was so, but in the reports
of the Hansa Diets during these years, we come
across frequent complaints of the prevarication
practised by the aldermen of the London factory.
Perhaps we must not blame either the towns, or
the factories too much for yielding to the all-powerful
instinct of self-preservation. When the Hanseatic
towns as a whole recognized that they were impotent
to demolish the rising commerce of England, or to
break the firm will of its lady sovereign, they were
almost forced to desert a cause which was a losing one,
and to work each for their own separate advantage.
Hamburg was the first among the confederate
cities to recognize whither matters were tending, and
to adjust its policy with a due regard to the new
spirit of the age. It concluded a convention on its
own account with England. Matters came about in
this wise. The chief foreign trade of England was
gradually passing into the hands of the Merchant
Adventurers. Now to this company the Netherlands
were closed, owing to the conflict raging between
Elizabeth and King Philip of Spain. Hence these
merchants had to seek elsewhere the depôt which
they had found in the Low Countries for their English
merchandise. Owing to its situation and its excellent
harbour the town of Embden, which did not belong
to the Hanseatic League, seemed to unite in itself
all requisite conditions, and it was indeed towards
this place that English commerce was directed. In
consequence Embden, within a brief space, grew most
prosperous.
343
This prosperity, however, speedily proved noxious
to the city of Hamburg, till then one of the great
staple towns for the traffic in English woollens.
Seeing its gains passing thus into the hands of
strangers, the city deliberated whether the situation
could not be changed, and whether it would not be
wiser, more lucrative, and altogether better, to open
its own gates to the Merchant Adventurers, conceding
to them a factory, various privileges, and great commercial
liberties. Thus it would secure the double
profits arising from their sojourn, and from the commerce
that passed through.
In 1567, Hamburg put this project into execution,
concluding a formal treaty with the Merchant Adventurers
for the space of ten years. It was cautious
at first not to name a longer term. The experiment
was but tentative, as it assured those of its burghers,
who, clinging to the old Hanseatic ideas, opposed the
scheme.
That the project was also opposed by the Hansa
Diet will be easily inferred. Bitter reproaches were
addressed to Hamburg by the Diet held at Lübeck
in 1572. They were told that they had been guilty
of treason to the common cause. Their delegates
replied with warmth, rejecting this reproach. They
recalled to the memory of their hearers the treaty
of Utrecht which stipulated reciprocity for England,
and they endeavoured to prove that their townsmen
had acted, not only in no spirit of narrow egoism,
but in the interests of the entire League, since in
consequence of their treaty with the Merchant
Adventurers, the export of undyed cloths from
344
England had been permitted in larger quantities, and
that the German waters were freed from British
pirates. Further they contended that every town
had a right to think also of its own interests.
Embden had received the Merchant Adventurers,
and had extracted profit from them; why then
should such profit be grudged to a town that was
a portion of the Hansa?
The delegates were able to point also to the
tangible fact, that in the short space of the first
two years, the factory of the Merchant Adventurers
had turned over in Hamburg, the sum of three and
a half million of dollars.
This was all well and good for Hamburg, but
beyond question the treaty still further disturbed the
relations of the cities towards each other, and helped
on the pending catastrophe. And the worst of all
was that Elizabeth could not be induced to reconfer
the old Hanseatic privileges, even after her subjects
had been received by Hamburg.
Still, for the moment, nothing was changed with
regard to the new position taken up by Hamburg,
though the agitation on the subject within the League
itself continued unabated. When the ten years of
treaty were ended, and the Hansa was desirous of renewing
the convention, then the storm broke forth with
fresh fury. Appeal was even made by the Hanseatic
League to the Emperor Maximilian II., who decreed
solemnly that no town might treat with England
without the consent of its allies.
Still the Queen of England did not at once break
off all relations with the Hanseatic League. She
345
temporized, not being willing to lose for her subjects
the advantages gained at Hamburg which she hoped
to see further extended. The Hansa, on its part,
demanded that the queen should re-confirm its
privileges; then it would accord a factory to the
English. The queen replied that she wished first to
see the factory accorded; then it would be time
enough to speak of the privileges.
In this wise the negotiations did not progress.
Each of the parties was rolling the stone of Sisyphus,
as Elizabeth herself remarked. It was quite evident
that at that moment the queen was resolved not to
resort to extreme measures, and though she threatened,
she did not carry out her threat of putting the
Hanseatics on the same footing with other strangers.
The moment had not yet come. It came later, when
she could do without certain of her imports, such as
raw materials for ship-building and for stores of war,
among which latter gunpowder took a great place.
Then, too, before the defeat of the Spanish Armada
had occurred, England did not feel her maritime
power great enough to venture a coup de force.
Meanwhile, each new meeting of the Hansa Diet
put in a stronger light the radical difference between
the policy pursued respectively by the towns of
Lübeck and Hamburg. This difference may be said
to form the tame epilogue to the great tragedy of
Wullenweber's failure and death.
The Lübeckers wanted the old privileges, the whole
privileges, nothing but the privileges. What cared
they for the changed condition of the world's affairs?
Syndic Sudermann's ideal was the restoration of the
346
good old customs in the factories, the continuance of
every measure that in the past had made the Hansa
great. But Sudermann was no military hero, who
could win back privileges at the point of the sword,
or "hold down foreign nations under his thumb," as
the secretary of the Steelyard expressed himself. He
was a learned, well-nourished, well-paid Hanseatic
Syndic, thorough, pedantic, earnest, long-winded. It
is on record that one of his memoranda destined for
the Imperial Diet was so long, that a hundred and
fifty dollars had to be paid in the Imperial Chancery
for having it transcribed—an enormous sum in those
days of cheap labour—and that the imperial councillors
roundly declared that they would not read it at
all, if it were not shortened. He it was who on all
occasions represented Lübeck as her spokesman, and
the ideas he expressed were those of the city.
Hamburg, on the other hand, could not refrain at
times from remarking that the kingdom of England,
like other kingdoms, no longer presented the same
aspect as two or three hundred years ago, and that
hence account must be taken of modifications, and
actions be regulated accordingly. Its delegates
cited the case of Antwerp, pointing out that that
town's prosperity dated from the days it had opened
its gates to the English Merchant Adventurers. Till
then the houses had been thatched with straw, and
the inhabitants had subsisted on the profits accruing
from agriculture and fishing. And now what commercial
activity, what a busy life was to be seen in the
marts of Antwerp, what wealth was found among all
classes of its burghers! To cite one instance alone:
347
dwellings that fifty years ago were taxed at a rental
of forty to sixty dollars, now cost eight hundred
dollars.
But Lübeck would not recede from its old standpoint,
and would not relinquish its old conservative ideas.
It seemed to have none of that elasticity of mind that
can adapt itself to changed conditions, and profit by
them. It could but plead repeatedly—how far it was
in earnest it is hard to tell—that the government of
the League might be taken from off its shoulders, for
the burden had grown too heavy. As a substitute it
proposed either Cologne or Bremen. It could not
find words to express the sorrow which Hamburg
and other cities had caused by relinquishing the
general weal for their own private good. It said it
would itself retire from the League, in which the old
sentiments no longer lived, were it not held to its
duty, or what it deemed its duty, by the force of old
memories. It could not realize that its system was
antiquated, its ideas played out. Like some old
people, it could neither give way gracefully, nor
assimilate intelligently the new thoughts that sway
the younger and rising generation. Like the old, too,
it overlooked the fact that the young must win, time
being in their favour.
In a great Diet held in 1591 the following resolution
was actually put forward, namely, "that each
town present should declare whether it intended to
remain Hanseatic." This question was indeed significant.
It should be mentioned that during the sitting
of this Diet Syndic Sudermann died—a man who
deserved well of the League, even if his opinions were
348
sometimes narrow and mistaken, and not up to the
level of the current ideas. Like Wullenweber, he had
reaped nothing but ingratitude in return for his ardent
and patriotic labours.
It is remarkable that Cologne was the first of the
cities to reply in the affirmative, that she wished to
remain in the League, Cologne ever so insubordinate
and stubborn. Bremen also acquiesced, provided
twenty more cities sided with Cologne. They stated
that they decided thus for the sake of their posterity,
since, having once acted, they must go through with
it at all costs.
While all these dissensions were going on in the
heart of the League itself, England continued in its
onward path, evincing that feverish activity of commercial
enterprise that has ever distinguished it.
Elizabeth sent ambassadors in all directions, courted
and bribed the German princelings, distributed her
gold everywhere, and by means of her spies neglected
no means of making herself feared or beloved, or
both.
The League meanwhile had to look on with impotence,
for it lacked resources to do otherwise. Day
by day it was losing its influence. It is true that both
the Hanseatic and the Imperial Diet tried to prevent
the English from settling in Germany; but the towns
that saw their profit in receiving them either openly
or secretly disobeyed commands which neither party
could enforce. As a sample of the replies given to
the Diet by the Hanseatic cities may be cited the
case of Stade, which, when called to account, answered
"That Almighty God had put the English in their
349
way, and thus sent them some means of subsistence,
in order that the citizens might get a bit of bread,
and keep off the pangs of hunger."
Thus year by year England's influence increased
and that of the Hansa declined. Then occurred a
further cruel blow to the League. In consequence of
the strained relations between England and Spain,
Hanseatic trade in that country and in Portugal had
risen to some importance. The Hansa supplied those
countries with grain, munitions of war, and shipbuilding
materials. Queen Elizabeth naturally looked
on all this trade with an evil eye, and regarded it as
so much support accorded to her enemies. She did
not fail to make the League acquainted with her displeasure,
even threatening to treat its cargoes as
contraband of war. The Hansa in its turn pleaded
that it merely exercised the right of neutrals, and
persisted in not abandoning a lucrative trade.
Then came the defeat of the invincible Armada
which left to England the empire of the seas, and
gave her a boldness and self-confidence which she
has happily never since lost. Sixty Hanseatic vessels
were encountered by Norris and Sir Francis Drake
about to enter the mouth of the Tagus. They were
laden with grain to provision the Spaniards. These
were seized, and no subsequent negotiations ever
succeeded in causing Elizabeth to release her hold
either on the vessels or their cargo.
Needless to say, that this proved the last straw in
the load of Hanseatic grievances against the queen.
Meanwhile the King of Spain, to compensate the
League, and to win it to his side, offered to enter into
350
a firm alliance with it. But they would not break
with the Netherlands, now in full revolt against King
Philip. There remained only the last and almost
hopeless resort, to appeal once more to the empire.
On August 1, 1597, after fifteen years of nearly
useless solicitation, and when it was quite too late to
remedy matters, the Emperor Rudolph caused an
imperial mandate to be issued at Prague, which
enjoined the English to quit the Empire within
the space of three months. This mandate was
couched in proud and fierce terms against the English
queen, and menaced with severe punishment those
Germans who, on German soil, should put themselves
into communication with the hated Merchant Adventurers
of England.
Great was the joy of Lübeck and of several other
towns at this order, and they kept strict watch that
the imperial mandate should be obeyed. They hoped
from it the most salutary effects in modifying the
resolutions of Elizabeth.
They had reckoned without their host, or rather
they had not duly judged the character of their
opponents. Driven from Germany, the English
found a refuge in the Dutch town of Middleburgh,
whence they conducted a lucrative trade with the
empire, awaiting some happy chance that would be
sure to arise from the now ever active discord in the
League, and that might reinstate them on the shores
of the Elbe and the Rhine.
Elizabeth meanwhile, in 1598, driven to yet further
exasperation by a Hanseatic attempt to hinder the
export of grain to England and Holland, sent word
351
to the merchants residing at the Steelyard that
they must depart out of these premises and quit England
within the space of fourteen days. The Mayor
of London, attended by the Sheriffs, formally presented
to the authorities of the Steelyard this decree,
which authorized them to take possession of the
building and all that pertained to it.
Ten days after this compulsory taking of possession
the Germans filed out of the Steelyard in orderly
procession. The authorities wrote to the Hanseatic
Diet, stating that, after duly protesting against this
forcible act, they "marched out of the gate, the
alderman at the head, and we following him, sad in
our souls, and the gate was closed behind us; nor
should we have cared to have remained another night
within the walls. God be pitiful."
Thus the last sacrifice was consummated, which had
been long demanded by Sir Thomas Gresham and
his friends, and which the now flourishing condition
of English trade required. In order that the English
merchant might thrive unchecked, he had to drive
away from his midst his old masters, the Hansa, the
men who had taught him how to trade, a lesson the
pupil had learnt too well. Such was the mournful end
of the German Guildhall on the banks of the Thames;
an institution older than the Hanseatic League itself;
the most honourable monument which Germany could
point to abroad of her strength and enterprise. Yet
it is, perhaps, rather the fact that it endured so long,
than that it perished, that should surprise us. It is
certainly wonderful, and much to the credit of the
English, that musty parchments sealed with the seals
352
of the Plantagenets, should have been honoured so
late, honoured when England's commerce and navy
could boast men such as Sir Thomas Gresham, Sir
Francis Drake, and Sir Walter Raleigh.
Of course the Hanseatic League did not at once
give up all for lost. They intrigued, they negotiated,
they even flattered themselves with hopes of success.
Then suddenly the news of Elizabeth's death broke
up a congress held with this end in view. The
Hanseatics at once cast glances full of hope at her
successor. They trusted he might prove less inexorable.
Experience had often shown them that with a
change of ruler came a change of policy.
But they proved greatly mistaken. The reply
received by the first embassy they addressed to
James I. rudely shattered all their hopes. They
resumed their intrigues at home, trying to stir up the
emperor to hinder the export of wool from Germany,
and to encourage the manufacture of woollen goods
at home.
It was the great De Witt who wisely said that the
one weak point in the German Hansa was that it
was not backed by manufacturing interests. They
were merely carriers and intermediaries, and this
made itself felt in the days of their decline.
Negotiations, entreaties leading to nothing, and
the Germans being impotent to hinder, the English
soon found their way again into the empire with
their persons and their goods, and once more Hamburg
was the first to receive them formally and to
conclude a treaty with them. This time neither the
emperor nor the League protested. It is true the
353
Steelyard in London was ultimately restored to the
Germans, but the old privileges enjoyed with it were
gone for ever. Nor was it, when restored, regarded
any longer as the property of the Hanseatic League
such as we have known it—a compact body, willing
and able to defend its rights. It was rather the property
of the Germans living in England, and this
it remained. In 1853 the Steelyard property was
sold to an English company for building purposes for
the sum of £72,500, by the cities of Lübeck, Bremen,
and Hamburg, the sole heirs of the once powerful
Hanseatic League. The present Cannon Street
Station stands on part of the site.
With the death of Elizabeth the history of the
Hanseatic League as such practically comes to an
end in England. Then followed, quickly afterwards,
the Thirty Years' War, which gave the League a
mortal blow, from which it never recovered.
Even before the last stroke fell, John Wheeler, a
secretary of the association of Merchant Adventurers,
had declared regarding the Hanseatic cities (1601),
"Most of their teeth have fallen out, the rest sit but
loosely in their head." His judgment was verified all
too soon.

VII.
John Wheeler's diagnosis of the condition of
the League was too correct. It is true that an
ostensibly official document enumerates fifty towns
as forming part of the Hansa League in 1603, but we
know that at the same time only fourteen had a seat
and voice in the Diet and duly paid their fees.
Indeed, the more we examine the internal condition
of the League at this period the more we wonder,
not that it fell asunder, but that it endured so long.
It had become utterly disorganized and was decaying
fast.
In 1606, the Emperor Rudolph II. evoked a feeling
of alarm among all the towns by suddenly demanding
to see their charters, and to know whence they
derived their privileges and statutes. Thus the results
of appealing to imperial aid, in the English complications,
bore their inevitable and unpleasant fruit. The
emperor's ulterior aim was of course to extract
money from the cities, this time in aid of his Hungarian
wars. As in the days of their glory, the cities
knew how to protect themselves, and how to escape
undesirable inquiries by means of subterfuges and
355
evasive answers. Still the first attempt at supervision
had been made, and was to bear fruit later.
While matters were in this uncomfortable state,
there broke forth the long, terrible strife known to
history as the Thirty Years' War. Its causes are to
be sought for in those most unhappy differences of
doctrinal opinions, which, being rooted in mutual
intolerance, a want of fairness of spirit, and of
dramatic insight into the needs of divergent mental
constitutions, make one man wish forcibly to impose
his point of view upon his neighbour, under the
conviction that it is the only point of view, and
hence the true one. This intolerant and narrow
spirit, which more fatally divides individuals and
nations than any other form of human folly, had
reached its climax in the century of the Reformation,
when not only were Protestant and Catholic opposed
to one another, but Protestants were also divided
among themselves, Calvinist and Lutheran persecuting
each other with an acrimony quite out of proportion
to the gravity of the questions at stake.
The details of this most deplorable war fall outside
our province, and belong to the history of Germany
proper. We can but touch on it as it concerns our
League. When hostilities commenced, the Hansa
were to realize what even the shadow of a great name
implies. Power after power made overtures to the
League to make common cause with them. Gustavus
Adolphus of Sweden, was the first. As early as
1621, he sought an alliance with the cities, and he
counted the more on an affirmative reply, that his
enmity to Denmark was shared by the League. But
356
they refused his offer, saying they wished to enter
into no unequal bond, assuring the king however,
at the same time, that they desired to remain good
friends with him, and to continue their commercial
intercourse.
The fact was that, seeing the agitated and disordered
condition of affairs in Germany, the Hanseatic League
hardly felt it wise to take any definite step at this
juncture.
Gustavus Adolphus, however, was the more disappointed
at their refusal, since he had been led to
expect different treatment from them. Since the time
he had ascended the throne, his relations with the
League had been friendly. An old chronicler tells
us how some time before the king's marriage, the
"honourable Hansa towns" sent ambassadors to
Sweden to conclude a treaty with Gustavus Adolphus
about the Protestant religion, and also to treat with
him concerning trade privileges. Indeed, the latter
seems to have been their chief aim. But as they wanted
to keep it secret, says the writer, they professed that
they had been sent to congratulate the king upon
his marriage. Gustavus Adolphus received them in
solemn audience, standing and with uncovered head;
no small honour to pay to a confederation of trading
towns. Beside him stood his mighty Chancellor,
Oxenstjerna. After the king had accorded them a
cordial and formal reception, he gave them the
traditional presents, usually only awarded to nobles.
Further, he accorded them free board at the cost of the
city of Stockholm, as often as they did not eat at his
royal table. In order that no mistake might arise
357
regarding quantity, he informed them that in the
matter of meat alone, they could count on six oxen,
twenty-one fat sheep, one reindeer; and as to drink,
on four barrels of good wine, and three hundred and
sixty Swedish dollars to cover their other expenses.
"This royal treatment mightily pleased the honourable
delegates," writes our chronicler, and no wonder,
when we remember that the men of the Hansa
were famed for the amount they could eat and drink.
No wonder, too, that Gustavus Adolphus thought to
find in them ready allies, if only in return for his good
hospitality.
That the King of Denmark, their old foe, should also
have courted their alliance, seems yet stranger. He
too, was refused. So was France, who, in 1625, sent
delegates to the Hanseatic Diet to sound the members
as to her chances of success, in forming an offensive
and defensive alliance with these once so powerful
merchants.
The most important and strangest offer of all was
the wooing of the imperial delegates in the name of
Spain, at the Diet held at Lübeck, in 1627. It appears
that Spain stood in need of a friendly commercial
navy in order to carry on her colonial trade, as
well as of a friendly maritime power with which to
meet the Netherlands. This idea was in accord with
Duke Wallenstein's project to gain empire over the
Baltic by means of an imperial navy, thus to surround
the imperial crown with a new lustre, and the more
surely to hold within bounds the recalcitrant inland
princes. It was not from pure ill will or haughtiness
that Wallenstein so terrified Stralsund, the town which
358
he besieged so long and mercilessly, nor from pure
love of well-sounding titles, that he styled himself
"General and Admiral of the Baltic and North
Seas."
The two imperial delegates, who appeared before
the Hanseatic Diet at Lübeck deigned to speak the
quaint formal language that was traditional with the
Hansa League. They were begging for a favour, and
so deemed it wise to assume no masterful tones. The
emperor's word was said to be addressed "to the
honourable councillors and other members of the
worthy city of Lübeck, regarding it as the head of the
most ancient Hansa League." The ambassadors put
before the assembled Hanseatic deputies, that the
Holy Roman Empire, in its entirety, and the venerable
German Hansa towns in particular, had suffered
grievously from the restraint on free navigation which
had been imposed on them by foreign potentates;
and that the German nation had thus the bread
taken out of their very mouths. Therefore it was
the emperor's earnest and ardent desire to befriend
the towns, and to restore the nation to its former
reputation and grandeur. A most useful alliance
would be proposed to them, and this proposal did
not come from a foreign power, but was put forward
under the emperor's patronage and protection. The
facts were these,—Spain had for some time past
declared itself willing to enter into an agreement,
that all the merchandise, whether exported from or
imported into the Spanish dominions, should only
pertain to the natives of the German Empire or to
Spanish subjects.
359
The emperor through his ambassadors admitted
that this proposal had at first sight seemed to him
somewhat grave, and requiring consideration, but
those competent to judge had demonstrated to him,
that such direct importation of Spanish and Indian
wares into Germany would benefit, not alone the
Hansa towns, but the whole of Germany, and would
serve to compensate for the privations and sacrifices
imposed by the most unhappy war.
The emperor went on to add, that he had ever
noted in Lübeck a very true and German frankness
and fidelity, and that he did not doubt that Lübeck
would carefully consider this proposal, in concert with
the sister towns, in order that, after the compact had
been duly concluded between the emperor and the
King of Spain, it might be openly confirmed with the
help and advice of the Hansa towns.
This was the smooth speaking in which the Hansa's
imperial masters chose to indulge when it suited their
imperial purpose. But decrepit, weakened though
the Hansa was, it was not easy to catch it napping.
Our wary merchants felt convinced there was some
ulterior motive at the bottom of this sudden graciousness,
and considered the imperial proposal very
carefully and thoroughly. What could it mean, that
of a sudden these jealous Spaniards were willing to
share the monopoly of their whole colonial trade with
the Hansa towns? Our cities feared the Spaniards,
even when they came laden with gifts. When
we recall, said these traders, the incessant and
endless annoyances which our merchants have endured
during two centuries while doing business
360
with Spain and Portugal, the arrogant demands, the
petty frauds and meanness of the Spanish consuls
in the Hanseatic towns, we must confess that this
previous knowledge of the character of our would-be
allies does not lead us to trust their new, gracious,
and friendly offers. They remembered, further, how
a certain consul, called De Roy, was never named in
their minutes, other than as the "arch enemy of the
Hansa towns." They recalled, too, the project of a
maritime commercial company (an Amirantazgo),
proposed some time back by Spain between the Low
Germans and Netherlands, which had revealed to the
acute Hanseatics that Spain was deficient in ships and
in capital, and that its real purpose was to obtain a
fleet for itself on terms as cheap as possible. No,
decidedly, the Spanish offers were not to be thought of.
Moreover, the Hanseatics very naturally feared an
inevitable breach with their Scandinavian neighbours
if they accepted. They foresaw, too, that their adhesion
to the plan would give the emperor a sort of
right to interfere in their commerce and internal
arrangements. They had a wholesome fear, not without
cause, of being placed under the most Catholic
protectorate of Spain, and, looking ahead, thought
they beheld, hidden beneath these velvet offers, the
claws of the terrible, abominable Inquisition.
The whole project was therefore allowed to remain
a project. To the imperial spokesmen were presented
respectively four thousand and two thousand
dollars, and the Diet resolved to place the proposal
ad referendum. This meant that it was shelved once
and for ever.
361
Nor did the Diet have cause to regret its decision,
for soon after the King of Denmark, at that moment
trying to ingratiate himself with them, sent for their
perusal letters which he had intercepted. These
communications were from the emperor, authorizing
Count Tilly to secure the cities of Lübeck, Hamburg,
Bremen, Stade, &c. So much for the sincerity
of this monarch's vaunted friendship.
And now the war storm long brewing broke over
Northern Europe. Germany was to pay heavily for
her want of religious unity, or at least the want of
mutual forbearance among her people. At first the
Hansa towns had hoped that as usual their claims
for neutrality would be regarded, but Tilly refused
to listen to this, probably owing to his secret
instructions from the emperor. All the northern
towns had to suffer the full horrors of the war-curse,
and they suffered hardly less at the hands of their
friends than at those of their enemies. Both proved
equally merciless. In order to escape having a
military occupation within its walls, Rostock had once
to pay 100,000 dollars, and another time 150,000
dollars, Wismar was taxed to the sum of 200,000
dollars; and Hamburg a sum yet higher. Magdeburg's
fate was even more sad; it was besieged by
the imperial army, pillaged, and given to the flames.
Imperial authority had never appeared so redoubtable
to these free cities, or so injurious to their
religious liberties and their political integrity.
Wallenstein and Count Schwarzenberg even went
the length of demanding the Hansa's ships, in
order to use them for pursuing the foes of their
362
imperial master upon the high seas, and it is easy
to understand how, in presence of an armed force
of a hundred thousand men, it was vain for the
Hanseatic Diet to object that their deputies had
received no instructions which could warrant them
in acceding to such a proposal.
The ports of Rostock, Warnemunde, and the
town of Wismar were all occupied by the Imperialists,
who were also engaged in besieging
Stralsund.
The history of this siege and the heroism displayed
by this city are among the most notable
features in the Thirty Years' War. Wallenstein had
rightly judged it as most important for his purpose
from its geographical position, and had determined it
should be his. As Schiller says in his play Wallenstein's
Lager, he had sworn—

"Rühmt sich mit seinem gottlosen Mund
Er müsse haben die Stadt Stralsund,
Und wär' sie mit Ketten an den Himmel geschlossen."
This town which, thanks to some succour from
outside, succeeded in wearing out the enemy, proved
what bravery can do even under the most unfavourable
conditions. At the same time the episode throws
a fierce light on the low condition into which the
League had fallen. In vain did the city of Stralsund
appeal to the Diet and to the sister cities for
help. It was only after long reflection and many
debates that it was decided to advance to this unlucky
friend the meagre sum of fifteen thousand
dollars, and this at interest of 5 per cent.

RATH-HAUS, MÜNSTER.
364
These merchants, once princely and noble, at least
in their dealings among themselves, had sunk to
shopkeepers even in the domestic circle. The fact
is, that defeat and terror had paralysed and prostrated
them. Instead of making such a firm resistance
as they would have done in the past, they
had now recourse only to the feeble weapons of tears
and entreaties in order to procure some gentler
treatment for those of their members who had fallen
into the enemy's hands. Most frequently, too, these
humiliating steps proved quite futile, and were
answered according to the temperaments of the
generals-in-chief—brusquely and rudely by Tilly,
politely and cunningly by Duke Wallenstein.
Meanwhile matters went from bad to worse for
the Hansa towns and for Germany. Even when
the empire achieved victories, the people had grown
too impoverished and too enervated to profit by
them. The story of this long-confused conflict of
thirty years' duration is one of the saddest and most
depressing in European history.
When in 1648 the peace of Westphalia was at
last concluded, it nominally restored calm to the
whole northern world, including the Hansa towns.
But the League to all intents and purposes was at an
end. The peace could restore neither its power, nor
its union, and the confederation which seemed to
have sunk in deep sleep during the war, awoke from
its long repose only to find itself deprived of nearly
all its members, and powerless to continue any longer
its enfeebled existence.

VIII.
Although the peace of Westphalia found the
Hansa hopelessly broken, yet it was not until after
this event that the various members fully realized
their condition. Until then they had anticipated a
resuscitation with the advent of political calm. When
the Hanseatic deputies had assembled at the Diet of
1628, the last of which an official record exists, they
had voted to postpone to a more convenient season
all proposals that were brought forward for consideration.
This Diet revealed the confusion into which
the Hanseatic accounts had fallen. Still even on
this occasion various cities pleaded for re-admission
into the union. It throws a sad light upon the
character of the delegates to read that those of
Brunswick, reporting to that city the history of this
Diet, should lay great and detailed stress upon the
fact that they had not been regaled with the customary
wine of honour and the wonted supply of cakes!
All that was achieved on this occasion was that
the cities of Lübeck, Bremen, and Hamburg, were
charged with the protection of the Hanseatic interests,
in the name of all the other cities, so far as such
interests could at present be said to be at stake.
366
Yet another Diet was summoned in February,
1630, at Lübeck. On this occasion there occurred
what of late had not been unusual, namely, that no
Hanseatic delegates appeared, with the exception of
those of Bremen and Lübeck.
It is a picturesque historical invention, but, unfortunately,
like most picturesque legends, quite
untrue, that on this occasion all the members of the
most ancient German Hansa put in an appearance,
and in Lübeck's Hansa Saal decreed, in all solemnity,
its own dissolution; that, in short, the Hansa
was present at its own funeral. As the Hansa never
had an actual foundation day, so it had no day of
dissolution. As its growth had been gradual, the
result of time and circumstance, so was its decay. It
had been built up imperceptibly, it passed away
almost as imperceptibly.
After the Diet of 1630, and again in 1641, the
three cities above named—Lübeck, Bremen, and
Hamburg—made still closer their friendly alliance,
erecting a species of new Hansa upon the ruins of
the old. With great modifications this compact survived
down to our own times, and was not dissolved
until forcibly rent asunder, as disturbing to Prussian
ambition and to Prussian ideas of protective trade.
For these cities kept up a species of free trade, while
all the rest of Germany was protective, and to this
day, though despoiled and shorn of their honour, the
cities call themselves proudly the Hanseatic towns.
In those days their main endeavour was to save as
much as possible from the general wreck, and to try
and keep alive the spirit of the League, of which
368
most ambitiously they retained the name. They
believed, indeed the other cities believed too, that
with the restoration of peace they could establish
themselves upon the old foundations.
RATH-HAUS, LÜBECK.
This vain, daring hope, so common to all who suffer
from incurable disease, did not quit them till the conclusion
of the peace so ardently desired. This peace
inaugurated a state of things incompatible with the
commercial tendencies of the Hanseatics, and showed
indisputably the futility of their hopes.
Yet with that doggedness or obtuseness which prevents
a man from knowing when he is beaten, and
which was at all times both the strength and weakness
of the Hansa, even after facts had been made
plain to them, they still refused absolutely to accept
them. They still hoped against hope, to shape the
course of events, and as usual Lübeck the energetic
was to the front in these endeavours.
After the peace of Westphalia, this city tried
repeatedly to organize a Hanseatic Diet in the old
style. It was not until 1669 that a number of cities
could be found willing to send deputies sufficient to
qualify the assembly with the name of a Diet. But
many of these deputies came only to announce that
their towns would not in future pay contributions to
the League, putting forward as their reason either
that the war had impoverished them too much, or
that the changed manner and course of trade made
them doubt as to the continued utility of their union.
The discussions on this occasion were most animated.
It was a stormy sitting, but it produced no
real result. Too many different and absolutely conflicting
369
opinions were advanced. The only conclusion
that was arrived at was the choice of a certain Dr.
Brauer, of Lübeck, to fill the honoured post of Hanseatic
Syndic.
Vain honour truly, a very sinecure. For our poor
old League, already in its death throes, did not survive
this Diet. After eighteen sittings had been held
it was made manifest that no accord could be arrived
at, and the city of Lübeck even doubted if it were
worth while to draw up an official report of the
proceedings. Respect for ancient usages, however,
prevailed, and the minutes were therefore drawn up in
all due form. But they had no fact to record, except
that the assembly had not been able to arrive at a
unanimous opinion on any one point put forward.
Speaking of this final moment, the eminent historian
of the League, Sartorius, writes—
"The constituent elements of the League had been
united together in silence, and it was also without
noise that they were decomposed. No one could
be astonished at this end, which for some time past
have been foreseen by any intelligent person."
"Sic transit gloria mundi" might have been
written on its tomb. Its glory had been great and
real indeed.
No less a person than the eminent philosopher,
Leibnitz, in 1670, advised the imperial authorities, of
course without result, to revive German trade by the
re-establishment of the Hanseatic towns. The profound
indifference of the empire was a fact too great
to be overcome. The Emperor Charles VI. even
went the length of formally forbidding his subjects to
370
trade with the two Indies by way of England and
Holland. At no single princely court of the whole
realm was there to be found a sound view of commerce
and commercial requirements. In the midst
of such apathy and ignorance it was a real piece of
good fortune for Germany that, at any rate, the three
cities of Lübeck, Bremen, and Hamburg, were allowed
to keep their independence.
It was in these cities, then, gradually as trade
revived and the disastrous effects of the Thirty Years'
War were somewhat overcome, that wealth concentrated
itself. Here too was still to be found commercial
knowledge, activity, and enterprise, while the
old name of Hansa was discovered to have sufficient
power left to conjure with. That German industry
still found foreign outlet, that it still survived, and
proved profitable, was henceforward due solely to the
three remaining Hansa towns.
The empire, meanwhile, whenever it did not harry
them by attempts at futile restrictions or by foolish
criticism of their policy, ignored them entirely. This
was always for the cities the happiest course, allowing
them free room to act as they, with their commercial
knowledge and insight, thought fittest.
But as time went on, and the political state of
Germany grew more and more abject, it naturally
came about that the Germans grew less and less
respected and feared in the foreign markets, the
foreign people with whom they had to deal knowing
full well that there was no real power to back them.
They had to see all other strangers preferred before
them and the name of German become a by-word.
371
Indeed they would be scornfully asked what was meant
by German, seeing there was no land really so styled,
and that the country which once bore that name was
split up into a vast number of small principalities.
No wonder that this condition of things did not help
on German trade. No wonder that under these circumstances
the foreign policy of the new League, or
rather of the union of the three towns, for league it
could not be called, was a policy of weakness, almost
of cringing, far different indeed from that of their predecessors,
who had played with thrones and deposed
kings. Where once they commanded they had now
to plead or flatter, and if these methods failed they
were driven to observe the mores mundi, to use their
own phrase, and let fly silver balls, unlike the heavy
balls used in olden times, that is to say, they had to
bribe.
After the French Revolution and the European disorders
of that time, the Hansa towns by common
accord of Russia and France were declared to be
perpetually neutral, a gift of doubtful value. The
cities were soon made to feel what was meant by
owing their existence to aliens.
A little later Napoleon the Great was frequently on
the point of giving away the Hansa cities, even before
he had appropriated them to himself. In 1806 he
offered them as compensation for Sicily, and, according
to Lord Yarmouth, would have given them to
Hanover if thereby he could have procured the peace
with England. Sometime after they were destined
by him to serve as the footstool of the throne he
designed for his brother Louis in North Germany.
372
While he was making up his mind they were held
by his soldiers, and these days of French occupation
were spoken of to their dying days by the burghers
in accents of terror. At last, in 1810, quite suddenly
and without previous warning, "without due regard
and courtesy," as was pleaded afterwards at the Congress
of Vienna, Napoleon incorporated the Hansa
towns with the empire.
It was well for them that this period was of short
duration, for trade was in those days a matter of no
small difficulty. Napoleon's mania regarding the
continental system had reached its culminating point.
Commerce was carried on either by submitting to
grave sacrifices owing to the blockade, or by smuggling
on a colossal scale. Neither method brought
with it prosperity or calm.
Then dawned the memorable year of 1813, and
with it came the first check in Napoleon's victorious
path. The citizens of the three Hansa towns were
among the first in Germany to put on armour and
draw the sword for the liberation of themselves and
of their suffering fellow-countrymen. Great oppression,
happily for mankind and progress, often produces
a strong recoil. Enthusiasm knew no bounds;
German courage, which seemed dead, was revived.
Alas! it was a false hope. Reaction once more
got the upper hand after Germany was liberated from
Napoleon's yoke, and it is a question whether the
yoke of the native rulers was not even heavier to bear
than that of the foreign usurper. It was certainly
less liberal.
RATH-HAUS, BREMEN (From a print in the British Museum).
The three Hansa towns, however, fortunately for
374
them, managed to secure their independence, though
not without a struggle. There were not lacking
neighbours who gazed at them with covetous eyes,
nor others who would have looked the other way had
some power appropriated them.
At the Congress of Vienna Lübeck was all but
given away to Denmark. But this was more than the
Hanseatic delegates present in the assembly could
stand. Accustomed of old to lift up their voices
boldly, and not to fear crowned or anointed heads,
they fiercely denounced this project as a deed of
darkness, and appealed so strongly to the consciences
of those present, reminding them of the everlasting
shame attending a broken word or promise, that they
actually succeeded in bringing them round to their
point of view. The project was abandoned.
Thus the towns remained virtually free, while
nominally attached to Germany, and continued, as
of old, as willing, as they were able, to serve their
country with the talents that had been entrusted
to their keeping. Their flag again appeared on all
the seas, their commerce extended in all lands, they
even succeeded in concluding favourable trade alliances
in virtue of the old Hanseatic firm of "the
Merchants of the German Empire."
But, as ever before, they were not backed by the
nation or by any real power at home, and now that
they were only three towns they could not act as in
the days of old, when their number extended across
Europe.
But since the many hundred little states of which
Germany consisted have been all absorbed by Prussia,
375
and incorporated under the collective name of
Germany, even the three Hansa towns, the last to
resist and to stand out for their autonomy, have had
to succumb to the iron hand of Prince Bismarck and
the Prussian spiked helmet. Hamburg still keeps
up a semblance of independence, but it is but a
shadow, and even that shadow is rapidly vanishing
from its grasp. Military, protectionist Germany
does not care to have in its confines a town where
free trade and burgher independence are inherited
possessions. The name of Hansa towns, the title of
Hanseatic League, is but a proud memory, one, however,
to which modern Germany may well look back
with satisfaction, and from the story of the "common
German Hansa" it can still, if it chooses, learn many
a useful lesson.
NOTE.

Since writing the foregoing, the event, long anticipated as
inevitable, has taken place, and the last two cities to uphold the
name and traditions of the Hanseatic League, Hamburg and
Bremen, have been incorporated into the German Zoll Verein,
thus finally surrendering their old historical privileges as free
ports. Lübeck took this step some twenty-two years ago, Hamburg
and Bremen not till October, 1888—so long had they
resisted Prince Bismarck's more or less gentle suasions to enter
his Protection League. But they foresaw what the end must
be; that his motto was that of the Erl King in Goethe's
famous ballad:

"Und bist Du nicht willig, so brauch ich Gewalt."
("And if thou be not willing, I shall use force.")
Still they, and Hamburg in particular, held out nobly, jealous,
and rightly jealous, of the curtailment of those privileges which
376
distinguished them from the other cities of the German Empire.
It was after the foundation of this empire that the claim of the
two cities to remain free ports was conceded and ratified in the
Imperial Constitution of April, 1871, though the privilege, in
the case of Hamburg, was restricted to the city and port, and
withdrawn from the rest of the State, which extends to the
mouth of the Elbe and embraces about one hundred and sixty
square miles, while the free-port territory was reduced to twenty-eight
square miles. This was the first serious interference with
the city's liberty, and others followed, perhaps rather of a petty,
annoying, than of a seriously aggressive, character, but enough
to show the direction in which the wind was blowing.
It was in 1880 that the proposal to include Hamburg in the
Customs Union was first politically discussed. It met, not
unnaturally, with much opposition among the citizens, and
especially among the merchant class, of whom these citizens
are so largely composed. Not only did it wound the Hamburgers'
pride to see an old and honourable distinction abolished,
but they feared, and not without reason, that their trade
would be seriously affected by such a step. They were afraid
that their city would cease to be the great international distributing
centre which it had been so long. Hot and animated
were the discussions in the Senate, the House of Burgesses,
the press, on docks and quays, in public and in private. But
the pressure exercised from Berlin, though in appearance
gentle, was firm and decided. How could a single city stand
against a strong military empire? In May, 1881, therefore,
was drafted a proposal to the effect that the whole of the city
and port of Hamburg should be included in the Zoll Verein.
This was laid before the Senate, who passed a resolution that
the treaty should be accepted, stating its conviction that the
inclusion of the free ports in the Zoll Verein would not only
be beneficial for the empire, most of whose foreign commerce
passed through them, but also would increase the prosperity of
the cities themselves. Whether the Senate really held this
belief, or whether they thought it wise to profess this opinion,
does not appear. The proposal was then sent down to the
House of Burgesses. Here it did not find such facile acceptance
as among the more aristocratic senators; here no real or
professed illusions reigned. For seven hours did the fathers of
377
the city discuss the resolution of the Senate in a sitting that
will ever be famous among the annals of the town. The speech
made by Dr. Petersen, the Commissioner for the Senate, was
most impressive, and it touched the hearts of all his hearers.
He reminded the Assembly that their thousand years' history
testified to the fact that the Hamburgers were ever an active,
practical, patriotic people, who took life earnestly, caring not
only for business and family, but for the common weal. Every
good Hamburger has always been ready to sacrifice his feelings
and his personal interests for the good of the Fatherland. Let
all of them, he urged, even those who could not do it heartily,
vote for the measure, in the sure and certain conviction that the
"Father City" would flourish and prosper, and increase
through the skill, the energy, and, above all, the public spirit of
its citizens. Hamburg would still remain the emporium, for
the wide world, of the German Fatherland, to which she would
be more closely united than ever.
This speech was followed by much and earnest discussion,
after which the proposal of the Senate was at last agreed to as
an inevitable measure, and Hamburg was included in the Zoll
Verein by one hundred and six votes against forty-six.
The details for carrying into effect this conclusion have
occupied seven years, and the event was finally celebrated with
great pomp, the Emperor William II. coming in person to
enhance the solemnity of the sacrifice brought by the burghers
of the erst free city for the common weal of the German
Fatherland.
As we have said, the step was inevitable sooner or later, and
the Hamburgers knew it. The German Empire, so long
a fiction, had arisen stronger than ever. It was natural,
very necessary, that an anomaly should be abolished which
placed the great gateway of foreign commerce outside the
customs regulations of the rest of the empire. It was natural
for the imperial authorities to desire that their two great commercial
ports should be at one with the empire in all respects;
that as far as their trade is concerned they should not be in the
position of foreign countries, jealously watched by imperial
officers lest they might seek to injure the financial interests of
the country of which they form a part.
It is too early to know what effect this step will have upon the
378
trade of the two cities, whether it will check or increase their
prosperity. The gain to Germany is certain. The gain to the
two cities, but in especial to Hamburg, is something less than
problematical. Meantime the last and only privilege the three
once powerful Hanseatic cities retain is that of being entitled,
like the greatest States in the empire, to send their own representatives
to the Bundesrath and to the Reichstag.


The once proud and mighty Hanseatic League is
dead now, quite dead. There remains of it only a
noble memory, the record of a high and fearless spirit
which resisted tyrants petty and great, a spirit which
recognized the value of independence, and strove
with all its strength to attain and to maintain this boon.
We have traced it from its earliest dawn to its recent
complete demise; there but remains for us to speak
its funeral oration. This is soon accomplished, since
whether for men, for nations or associations, if their
deeds speak not for them more eloquently than human
words, the latter shall avail them little.
The chief title of the Hanseatic League to remembrance
is that it was the means of spreading higher
culture throughout wide tracts of the European continent,
many of them, in those early times, still sunk
in utter barbarism; that it introduced Western
customs and civilization into all domains of private
and social life for millions upon millions of people.
This association is a bright spot that strikes the eye,
as it looks back across the long, dark abyss of ages
past, and we welcome it the more gladly because the
bond that held this League together was neither
force nor fear, but free will and clear insight into the
380
advantages and necessity of mutual help. To quote
the pertinent words of Mrs. Sinnett: "These free
cities of Germany rise like happy islands amidst the
wide-wasting ocean of violence and anarchy. Not
by war and spoil, but by industry, enterprise, and
prudent economy, did they accumulate the wealth
that enabled them to heal so many of the wounds
inflicted on their country by the iron hands beneath
whose grasp art, science, even agriculture, by which
they subsisted, was perishing. By the unions which
the cities formed amongst themselves they stemmed
the torrent of violence and anarchy that was threatening
to turn their country into a desert peopled by
hordes of robbers and slaves; they lent the most
effectual aid to the Church in her efforts for the peace
and civilization of Europe; yet they held the balance
most firmly against the too great preponderance of
her power, and rescued the human mind from the
injurious subjection which she sometimes claimed as
the price of her benefits when society had outgrown
the leading strings that guarded its infancy, and felt
as a galling restraint what had once been a needed
protection. The cities built asylums for the widows
and orphans whom the nobles and warriors had made
desolate; they stretched out often a helping hand to
the poor knight, who was regarding them with envy,
hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness, taking
him into their pay as a soldier, and enabling him to
get a comparatively honest living, instead of wringing
'from the hard hands of peasants their vile trash,' or
filling some menial office at the court of a prince, and
picking up the crumbs that fell from the great man's
381
table. Behind their walls and bastions the young
tree of civil liberty, which was perishing in the open
country, took root and flourished; there, even whilst
striving only at first for riches and their peaceful
enjoyment, did men learn to prize the blessings of
social order, justice, and peace. These cities were
not mere aggregations of men within a narrow space,
such as may have existed among the most barbarous
nations; they were organic bodies animated by a
living spirit—a spirit of enlightened intelligence,
courage, and self-reliance, which best supplied what
was defective in the religious system of the time, and
gave a more healthy and manly tone to the character
both of individuals and of society. The Church, it
cannot be denied, sometimes taught men, in the pursuit
of an imagined perfection, to trample on the
impulses, and violate the duties of nature; in these
little republics, on the contrary, though originally
they had only the attainment of temporal good in
view, they rose insensibly to higher objects, and not
only cultivated the social virtues more effectually, but
in their struggle to maintain their place in the world,
fought in many instances a more successful fight
against the sins of the flesh, through the discipline
of the manifold cares of an active life, than the
recluse of the cloister, with all his fastings and
flagellations. Among the happy influences belonging
to these miniature states was the ardent attachment
of the free citizens of the Middle Ages to the little
spot which they had hedged in from the wide wilderness
of slavery around, where the individual, if not
of noble birth, was usually the mere helpless victim
382
of arbitrary power. Freedom and honour, the respect
of his fellows, the happiness of domestic life, the interest
and excitement of active business, the joviality
of social intercourse, a thousand ties entwined around
him, connected him closely with the city, and even
the house of his birth; for in those days it was common
for men to live and die beneath the same roof
under which they had been born. The merchant regarded
his native town with a pride fully equal to that
of birth and chivalry in the privileged classes, and little
envied, we may suppose, the life of the solitary feudal
lord in his castle, or the anxious and dependent
position of the courtier. The citizen of a humbler
class showed, by parading on all occasions the tools
and emblems of his trade with the same complacency
with which a soldier displays his sword, or the noble
his armorial bearings, that he knew his position and
was content with it, and felt none of that weak
shrinking from his appointed place in society or uneasy
longing after another, which has since been the
epidemic malady of the middle classes."
For two centuries and more this guild of merchants
made the German name respected in European lands,
the German flag respected in European waters. When
the empire had fallen to pieces and there was no
union, no cohesion left, the Hanseatics remained German
and held together staunchly and nobly. Though
the time of their existence was brief, yet it was all-important,
not only for their own land, but for all
Europe.
To appreciate to its full extent the influence exercised
upon Europe in general by the Hanseatic
383
League, we must carry our minds back, and compare
Europe as it was when the League took its rise, with
Europe as it was when the League declined. The
Hansa made its appearance in history at a time when
barbarism, violence, religious fanaticism, political
and civil slavery, and dire intellectual darkness overspread
the whole continent, when liberty and industry,
as we understand them, were unknown. The constant
and active communication kept up by the
cities of the Hansa, not only among themselves and
with all parts of Germany, but with the most distant
countries, awoke and kept alive the intelligence of the
people. To the Hanseatics, as to the Italians of the
same epoch, was reserved the honour of dispelling
the obscurity that reigned in the mental and material
world. The Hansa's glory only pales before that of
the rival Italian mercantile associations from the
fact that its energies were somewhat too exclusively
confined to money-getting. Had these communities
arisen in a period of literary culture, or among the
glorious relics of the art of a brighter age, these cities
would have presented several more salient points of
resemblance to the republics of Greece and Italy. It
cannot, however, be denied that in many of their
institutions they improved on the model set by the
Italian cities, and this more especially in all matters
relating to morality and rectitude. But they were
less grand and large in their policy than their Trans-Alpine
brethren, and unfortunately for themselves,
their commercial maxims were always narrow and
selfish. Monopoly was their watchword, their grand
aim. And it was largely in consequence of this
384
narrow policy that their ruin overtook them. They
perished of that disease whereof corporations are apt
to perish, namely, egotism, the centrifugal force which
is perpetually tending to rend asunder all human
society, and must inevitably do so, when not restrained
by some powerful antagonistic action.
It is strange that, while so rich commercially, the
Hanseatic League lacked political ambition. Had
they possessed it, there is little doubt they might
have made themselves independent masters of all
Northern Germany. But they seem never to have
forgotten that they were merchants. They were held
down by petty motives, smallness of views. Here,
again, they were unlike the Italians, among whom
the trader could develop into the aristocrat, as is
abundantly proved by the history of the Medici and
other famous great houses. The reason must be
sought, no doubt, in the different native temperament
of the two nations—the one innately refined, the
other rougher and more boorish. Though the civic
pride of the Hanseatics was highly flattered when
the kings of the North and the princes of Germany
trembled before them, they confined their ambitions
entirely to gaining commercial advantages.
Certain it is that the two powers—the Hanseatic
and the Italian Republics—each in their respective
sphere of action, helped on the progress that has
changed the entire face of this hemisphere, and that
they did this by no other means than that of their
commercial activity.
For this is the great power of commerce, if practised
in its best and highest spirit, that it is able to
385
work veritable miracles, bringing into contact the
extremes of civilization, enlarging and disseminating
ideas, and helping forward towards that universal
brotherhood of man, that universal peace and goodwill,
which is, and must be, the highest ideal of
humanity. Not till war is really rooted out from
among us, not till what is for the benefit of one is
held for the benefit of all, not until a generous
altruism reigns supreme, can mankind be said to be
thoroughly civilized. Trade and commerce, though
apparently egotistic factors, work strongly towards
this end, even though their action proceed merely
from motives of self-seeking. War is so serious an
interruption to trade that men will seek to avert it,
even out of a simple regard for their own pockets.
By fair smiling peace, not only traders, but all the
world is benefited and made happier. Once let
nations fully understand and recognize its incalculable
benefits, and even the lowest and most squalid
souls will struggle to uproot this remnant of a barbaric
spirit which can never evince itself as aught but
an evil.
The Hansa uprose in a rough age, and hence
had to work with the rough-made methods of its
time; but in its time and in its way it did a good
work, and posterity cannot withhold from it either
gratitude or admiration. Its policy, its laws, its constitution,
its commerce, its immense credit, the sway
which it once exercised, the able magistrates, merchants,
and mariners whom it produced—all these
have vanished, unable to resist the torrent of
time that engulfs good and bad alike. But its influence
386
and example have remained, while much
of its spirit, like many of its ideas and rules, have
become incorporated into the general stock of the
ideas of humanity.
Of the League itself, it is true there remains only
an illustrious name. For Germany, which gave it
birth, there remain memories both of pride and regret—memories
that should serve as a spur to noble and
useful emulation.
"The History of Commerce," says Montesquieu,
"is the history of the intercommunication of peoples."
The story of the Hanseatic League is an eloquent
testimony to the truth of these words.


[1]ἡ θάλασσα ἁγιάζεται.
[2]Julin in Danish, Wolin in Sclavonic, Winetha in Saxon. A learned
author, pointing out the community of origin of the Venetians of the
Adriatic, and the Venedes or Vends of the Baltic, draws a parallel between
the Venice of the Adriatic, and the Venice (Winetha) of the
north. "Singular destiny," he writes, "this of the two commercial
cities, which seem the issue of one trunk, that grew up at the same time
in the Adriatic and the Baltic, almost under the same name, the one to
arrive at the greatest splendour, enriched by the trade of the East, the
other to serve as a starting-point for the commerce of the north."
[3]Under the term of Greeks, Adam, and other writers of the period,
include the Russians, on account of their adhesion to the Greek form of
the Catholic Church.
[4]It is worth mentioning that on the coast of Scania, once so rich in
herring fishery, this industry is now almost extinct. The fish rarely
come into these waters, owing perhaps to the increase of traffic in the
Sound (for herrings, as is well known, dislike noise and movement and
seek out quiet seas); or because the great whale fisheries of Greenland
have altered their course, for whales now pursue less often than formerly
the shoals of herrings that were thus forced to take refuge in the Sound;
or this may be simply due to the diminution of the crustacean called
Astacus harengum, on which the fish so largely feeds—the fact in any
case remains.
[5]"Othello," act i. sc. 3.
[6]Some writers reckon Waldemar as the fourth of his name, counting
as the third Waldemar the impostor, who for some years ruled over
the land under that name. I have preferred to follow the more generally
adopted reckoning.—H. Z.
[7]"Ante portas Wisby in manibus Danorum ceciderunt Gutenses."
[8]Modern, disintegrating criticism, casts doubts on this story, and
tries to prove that this gate was walled up before Charles' visit, and
that he did not depart by it. This objection, however, is not fully
proved, and the contrary tradition so powerfully rooted, and so entirely
in keeping with the spirit of the age, that I have preferred to reproduce
it as characteristic, even if untrue.—H. Z.
[9]Rambaub, in his "History of Russia," says that Novgorod was
founded by Slavs, but that in the ninth century a castle and fort were
built there by Rurik the Norman.
[10]"Lydgate's Minor Poems," Percy Society, p. 4.
 
 
 
 
Transcriber's Note:
Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.
Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation in the original
document have been preserved.
Page 312: formerly possibly should be formally
Page 160: Ivan II. possibly should be Ivan IV.
Footnote 1: ἡ θαλασσα ἁγιάζεται
changed to ἡ θάλασσα ἁγιάζεται
***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HANSA TOWNS***
******* This file should be named 39664-h.txt or 39664-h.zip *******
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/6/6/39664

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and
the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
For additional contact information:
 Dr. Gregory B. Newby
 Chief Executive and Director
 gbnewby@pglaf.org
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
www.gutenberg.org
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Title: The Hansa Towns
Author: Helen Zimmern
Release Date: May 10, 2012 [eBook #39664]
Language: English
Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1
***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HANSA TOWNS***
 
 
 
 
 
The Story of the Nations.
THE HANSA TOWNS.
THE STORY OF THE NATIONS.
Large Crown 8vo, Cloth, Illustrated, 5s.
Presentation Edition, Gilt Edges, 5s. 6d.
1. ROME. Arthur Gilman, M.A.
2. THE JEWS. Prof. J. K. Hosmer.
3. GERMANY. Rev. S. Baring-Gould,
M.A.
4. CARTHAGE. Prof. A. J. Church.
5. ALEXANDER'S EMPIRE. Prof.
J. P. Mahaffy.
6. THE MOORS IN SPAIN. Stanley
Lane-Poole.
7. ANCIENT EGYPT. Canon Rawlinson.
8. HUNGARY. Prof. A. Vambéry.
9. THE SARACENS. A. Gilman, M.A.
10. IRELAND. Hon. Emily Lawless.
11. CHALDÆA. Z. A. Ragozin.
12. THE GOTHS. Henry Bradley.
13. ASSYRIA. Z. A. Ragozin.
14. TURKEY. Stanley Lane-Poole.
15. HOLLAND. Prof. J. E. Thorold
Rogers.
16. MEDIÆVAL FRANCE. Prof.
Gustave Masson.
17. PERSIA. S. G. W. Benjamin.
18. PHŒNICIA. Canon Rawlinson.
19. MEDIA. Z. A. Ragozin.
20. THE HANSA TOWNS. By Helen
Zimmern.

London:
T. FISHER UNWIN, 26, Paternoster Square, E.C.
VIEW OF HAMBURG.
BY
HELEN ZIMMERN
AUTHOR OF "A LIFE OF LESSING," "HEROIC TALES FROM FIRDUSI," ETC.
 
 
London
T. FISHER UNWIN
26 PATERNOSTER SQUARE
NEW YORK: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS
MDCCCLXXXIX

Entered at Stationers' Hall
By T. FISHER UNWIN
Copyright by G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1889
(For the United States of America).

In bringing before the public what I believe to be
the first History of the Hanseatic League, it gives
me pleasure to think that the impetus to write it
came from the United States. The work was suggested
to me by my valued friend, Mr. G. H. Putnam,
of New York, a citizen of the country in which the
principle of federation is best understood and most
thoroughly carried out. The Hansa was one of the
earliest representatives of that federal spirit which
will, beyond doubt, some day help to solve many
of the heavy and grievous problems with which we
of the Old World are struggling; but that day is
not yet, and meantime we have much to learn both
from the successes and failures of the past.
I have, of course, assumed in my readers some
knowledge of German History, such as they can
derive from Professor Bryce's inimitable "Holy
Roman Empire," or from Baring-Gould's "Story of
Germany," one of the earlier volumes of this series.
In conclusion, I desire to express my very cordial
thanks to Dr. Otto Benecke, Keeper of the State
Archives of the city of Hamburg, and to my uncle,
viii
Dr. Carl Leo, Syndic of the same town, for the
generosity with which they have accorded me valuable
assistance in the preparation of this volume. I
have further to thank Miss L. Toulmin Smith for
help in revision of the MS., and for many useful
suggestions. To my sister, Miss Alice Zimmern,
and to Dr. Richard Garnett, of the British Museum,
I am indebted for aid in proof-reading.
HELEN ZIMMERN.
Florence,
March 1, 1889.

xv

[Of the architectural views reproduced in this volume some have been
copied from prints in the British Museum, others from drawings and
photographs in possession of the authoress, and the remainder from
various German authorities. The illustrations of German life and
manners are taken from Otto Henne am Rhyn's "Cultur Geschichte des
deutschen Volkes," to the publisher of which volume our best thanks
are due.

T. Fisher Unwin,
G. P. Putnam's Sons.]

Dominion of the Hansa
XIII-XV Centuries
T. FISHER UNWIN, 26, PATERNOSTER SQUARE, LONDON, E.C.

There is scarcely a more remarkable chapter in
history than that which deals with the trading alliance
or association known as the Hanseatic League. The
League has long since passed away, having served its
time and fulfilled its purpose. The needs and circumstances
of mankind have changed, and new
methods and new instruments have been devised for
carrying on the commerce of the world. Yet, if
the League has disappeared, the beneficial results
of its action survive to Europe, though they have
become so completely a part of our daily life that we
accept them as matters of course, and do not stop to
inquire into their origin. To us moderns it seems
but natural that there should be security of intercourse
between civilized nations, that highways should
be free from robbers, and the ocean from pirates.
The mere notion of a different state of things appears
strange to us, and yet things were very different not
so many hundred years ago.
In the feudal times the conditions of life on the
continent of Europe seem little short of barbarous.
The lands were owned not only by the kings who
2
ruled them with an iron despotism, but were possessed
besides by innumerable petty lordlings and
princelets, who on their part again exercised a rule
so severe and extortionate that the poor people who
groaned under it were in a condition little removed
from slavery. Nay, they were often not even treated
with the consideration that men give their slaves, upon
whom, as their absolute goods and chattels, they set a
certain value. And it was difficult for the people to
revolt and assert themselves, for however disunited
might be their various lords, in case of a danger that
threatened their universal power, they became friends
closer than brothers, and would aid each other faithfully
in keeping down the common folk. Hand in
hand with princes and lords went the priests, themselves
often worldly potentates as well as spiritual
rulers, and hence the very religion of the carpenter's
son, which had overspread the civilized world in
order to emancipate the people and make men of all
nations and degrees into one brotherhood, was—not
for the first time in its history—turned from its
appointed course and used as an instrument of
coercion and repression.
Such briefly was the celebrated feudal system—a
system whose initial idea that the rich man should
protect the poor, that the lord should be as a father
to his vassals, is wise and good, but which in practice
proved itself untenable. Even to-day, after many
centuries and generations, the only European nations
that have wholly succeeded in casting off the feudal
yoke are those in whose history an entirely subversive
revolution, like the French, has taken place. In
3
others, notwithstanding years of struggle and revolt,
not only its memory, but some of its customs, still
survive; for systems and institutions die hard, and
continue to exercise mischievous power long after their
original force is spent. To this survival can be traced
a large number of the evils that are agitating contemporary
Europe; for example, the wretched state of
Ireland.
That the people of Germany, the country with
which we have chiefly to deal in treating of the
Hanseatic League, was not wholly enslaved and
crushed out of all individual existence by the state
of things that reigned from the Baltic to the Alps in
the early years of its history is due to the two great
factors of memory and heredity. Memory, because
when Tacitus, that most dramatic of historians,
wrote his famous book on Germany, one of the chief
points he noted in this land was that there existed an
equality among the freeborn, an absence of rank and
concentration of power. Heredity, because a love of
individual freedom appears as an inherent quality in
the Teutonic race from their first appearance in historic
legend.
"Though the mills of God grind slowly
Yet they grind exceeding small,"
sings the poet, and all the ages have confirmed the
experience that might is not suffered to be right for
ever, that vengeance falls and justice asserts itself,
even though the wrong be not righted, or the evil
avenged for many a long year after the sin has
been committed.
"Whom the gods would destroy they first strike
4
with madness," says the Latin proverb. It was so
with the ambitious rulers of Germany. They were
not content to be sovereigns of their own empire,
they desired also to hold in their hand the reins
of Italy; the bestowal of the title Holy Roman
Emperor by the Pope Leo III. upon Charlemagne
moved their longing and cupidity, so that gradually
they grew more occupied with the business of the fair
peninsula, "the garden of the Empire," as Dante calls
it, than with the condition of their own ruder and
sterner fatherland. Added to this they took to fighting
among themselves, being
divided into two rival factions
which elected opposing
rulers, the result being that
often no one knew who was
head or who was subject.
IMPERIAL CROWN OF GERMANY.
Frederick Barbarossa was
the last to uphold the real
authority and power of Germany.
He was a true hero
of romance, one of the
noblest expressions of the mediæval character. When
he died the real empire fell. What remained was but a
semblance and a ruin, and it is little wonder that Germany
plunged henceforth into yet greater anarchy, invented
the legend that peace and prosperity would not
return to her until Frederick Red Beard should come
back to rule, that giant among men, falsely reported
dead, but who, in truth, was merely resting, sunk in
enchanted sleep among the mountains of Bavaria.
There he was waiting the hour when the ravens
5
should cease to hover around the cloud-capped peak
to emerge surrounded by the trusty Crusaders who
shared his slumbers and restore to Germany the
golden age of peace and strength.
It is claimed by some that Barbarossa has so returned,
that he came back as recently as 1870, but
whether this be fact or no does not concern us here.
What does concern us is, that in the reign of Frederick
Barbarossa we find mentioned, for the first time as a
power in the State, a few of the many German cities
that had arisen under the fostering protection of
Henry the Fowler. Barbarossa found it useful to
encourage the growth of that third estate so needful
to the healthy existence of the body politic. Thus
he could pit them against the nobles when it pleased
him to harass his sometime allies; he could also
draw from them the moneys that are the sinews of
war. In return for such loyal aid the emperor freely
granted municipal institutions, rights and privileges,
exemptions and favours, little realizing that in so
doing he was creating in his own land that very spirit
of independence, that breath of modern individual
freedom, to quench which he was spending his best
years and strength beyond the barrier Alps.
The policy therefore of the "imperial knights" and
"knightly emperors" who preceded and followed
Frederick, while in one way it tended to destroy the
unity of Germany as a political state, in the other
was the means by which the cities of Germany, as
well as those of Northern Italy, acquired that remarkable
independence, that rapid, splendid commercial
and intellectual development that raised them to the
6
condition of almost autonomous communities, and
made them the wonder, glory, and pride of the
Middle Ages. Citizens and burghers became freemen,
and enjoyed the privileges that fell to this lot.
Hence men loved to crowd into the towns, and these
grew up and flourished apace, until they acquired
such power and assumed such proportions as their
first promoters little contemplated.
It was the Lombard league of cities that broke the
might of the Holy Roman Emperors, as the rulers
of Germany loved to style themselves, as they styled
themselves, indeed, long after the Empire, to quote
Voltaire, was neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an
Empire.
Ignominiously driven forth from Italy, the German
kings at last turned their steps homeward, where they
looked to reign with their old strength and might,
even though the range of their rule had been circumscribed.
They came back to find that long absences,
internal and external feuds, pretenders and usurpers,
had so weakened their prestige that their subjects had
learnt to trust to themselves rather than to their
sovereign heads. And when they did return, at last,
it was to find themselves confronted with such
another league of cities, as had wrecked their power
abroad, a federation founded for mutual protection
and defence, under whose ægis alone could peace or
shelter be found.
This was the irony of fate indeed. To be sovereigns
of the world, the German emperors had staked
their national existence; staked and lost.
On a murky and disturbed horizon had arisen a brilliant
7
star, the star of municipal liberty, helping men
to hope for and aspire towards those better things, to
which it alone could lead them. The political anarchy
of Germany, increased by forty years' interregnum,
not only had given birth but strength to the confederation
of cities directed against the brigandage of the
princes and nobles, which we first meet with under the
name of Hansa, in the year 1241, at a time when both
the Papal and Imperial thrones were vacant, when in
France St. Louis wielded the sceptre and was strengthening
the power of nobles and the church; when in
England Henry III. had enraged the barons by his
fondness for foreign favourites, and when that outburst
was preparing which led to the formation of a popular
faction and upraised the patriot, Simon de Montfort;
a time, in short, when the long struggle even now
waging between the people and their rulers was first
begun in modern Europe.
COIN OF CHARLEMAGNE.


I.
Whether it be that our forefathers were not so
prompt to put pen to paper as we are, or that they
purposely avoided written words and inclined to
silence from motives of that combined prudence and
love of mystery-making that distinguished the Middle
Ages, the fact remains that of the real origin and
founding of that great federation of industry and
intelligence known to after-years as the Hanseatic
League, we have no accurate knowledge.
We see the tree in full growth, with its widespreading
boughs and branches; of the modest seedling
whence it sprung we are in ignorance. We only know
most surely that some such seed there must have been,
and in this case may with certainty infer that the main
causes of this unique combination were the alliance of
the North German cities among themselves, and the
protective and social alliances formed by German
merchants who met in foreign parts.
It is obvious that there must have been much commerce,
and that it must have played an important part
12
before either of these circumstances could have arisen.
Therefore in order fully to understand the importance
and bearing of the League we must begin our story
earlier than its history proper would seem to warrant;
only thus can we thoroughly comprehend why the
Hanseatic alliance in fostering its own interests, in
aggrandizing and enriching itself, was working also
for all humanity, since it created and enlarged the
idea of public right, and thus sowed the seeds of
principles then novel, but on which our modern
civilization is largely founded and with which we
are now so familiar that it is difficult to realize how
matters could ever have been otherwise. Can we
grasp, for example, a state of things when wrecking
was considered a legitimate occupation; when the
merchandise thus thrown on land became the possession
of the strand dwellers and the ship's crew their
legitimate slaves; when barons who deemed themselves
noblemen lay in wait within their strong castles
to pounce on luckless traders, and either deprived them
wholly of their wares or levied black mail under the
name of toll; in short, when humanity towards the
weak and unfortunate was a word of empty sound?
Yet so strongly is the love of enterprise implanted in
the Northman's breast that even these obstacles did
not deter him from the desire to enlarge his experience
and to widen the field of his energies. He
was the kinsman of those adventurous Angles and
Saxons who had not feared to cross the boisterous
German Ocean and to subjugate Great Britain to
themselves; in his veins ran the blood of those
Normans, the scourge and terror of European coasts,
14
against whom the peoples knew no better protection
than the prayer addressed to Heaven in their despair—"A
furore Normanrorum libera nos Domine," a clause
that survived in their litanies some time after the
cause was no longer to be feared.
PIRATES.
Indeed it is not easy to distinguish the earliest
traders from corsairs. It would seem that as occasion
served they employed their long narrow rowing
ships to scour the ocean or to carry the produce of
the north, above all the much prized amber. It is
thought that they bore it down even to the Bay of
Biscay, nay, perhaps yet further within the Roman
Empire.
Under the intelligent rule of Charles the Great the
activity of the Northman assumed a more pacific
character, and we meet with the idea of merchant
and trade guilds, though the latter were not much
encouraged by the emperor, who feared lest they
should contain in themselves elements of corporate
union and political revolt. But he fostered the
growth of cities; and in those days trade and commerce
filled up even more than at the present day the
daily life of a citizen. In the Middle Ages the expression
"merchant" (mercator, negotiator) was on
the Continent actually held as identical with townsman.
It is curious that the early Teuton regarded
manual labour as unworthy a free man, but did not
extend this feeling to commerce, and trading became
more and more the occupation of the third estate.
We find them on horseback or in ships traversing
many regions to bring their wares to market and to
15
enlarge their sphere of action, and gradually as their
numbers increased they would meet each other at the
various foreign ports, exchange news, perhaps even
wares, and hold together in that brotherly spirit that
men of one nation and one tongue are wont to feel
towards each other on foreign soil. Disputes and
difficulties with the natives must also have been of
frequent occurrence, for though the merchant, as
bringer of news and novelties, was usually a welcome
visitor at a time when intercourse between nations
can hardly be said to have existed, yet, on the other
hand, he had to reckon with the prejudice that regards
what is strange as equivalent to what is hostile.
Hence the merchants very naturally combined among
themselves at the different ports to protect their common
interests, and endeavoured by all means in their
power to enlist in their favour their own sovereigns
and those of the lands they visited.
Thus in the lawbook of London, under the reign
of Ethelred II. the Unready (978), we come across
the phrase, "the people of the Emperor have been
judged worthy of the good laws, like to ourselves."
This phrase meant that, in cases of wrong done to the
foreigner by the native, the foreigner should enjoy
the protection of the native laws as though he were
a citizen, instead of being treated as heretofore like
an alien. "The people of the Emperor" meant in
this case the Teutonic merchants who traded on the
banks of the Thames long before the German cities
had combined to form their famous league, long
before they had founded their factories in Russia,
Scandinavia, and Flanders.
16
London was their earliest foreign settlement, and
already in the tenth century we find that the Germans
enjoyed the same rights when their ships entered
British ports as those possessed by the English. In
return for this they had at Easter and Christmas to
make a donation of two pieces of grey and one of
brown cloth, ten pounds of pepper, five pairs of
men's gloves, and two barrels of vinegar. The fact
that they thus paid toll in kind and not in money is
entirely in accordance with the ancient usage of
guilds and corporations, and the conditions of mediæval
tenures. Gloves as tokens of good faith and
submission, and pepper, probably because of its
rarity as an Eastern product, were forms of payment
frequent in early days.
After this first mention we find that year by year
the privileges of the German were extended in
England. The kings desired that they should be
treated as subjects and friends, and after Henry the
Lion had married a daughter of Henry II. of
England, the alliance grew yet closer. Thus special
privileges were accorded to them with regard to the
sale of Rhine wine, of the importation of which into
Great Britain we now hear for the first time. It is
evident that the commerce of England was largely in
the hands of these foreigners, a circumstance the
more remarkable when we consider that the English
have now for some centuries been the great traders of
the world.
What hindered the rise of the British in early days
was the feudal system against which the Germans
had rebelled. It was a system incompatible with
17
burgher life, with independent industry and enterprise.
For many years the English trade was practically
restricted to the exportation of wool, skins, lead, and
tin. For where there is no middle class there can be
no real commerce, and this fact explains the widespread
power of the German merchants in England.
The lessons they learnt here they carried farther afield;
appearing now as the vanguard of civilization, now
as the pioneers of Christianity, everywhere as traders
desirous to fill their coffers, bearing in mind the
maxim that "union is strength," and clinging closely
to one another for mutual protection and defence.
We must remember that travelling in the tenth,
eleventh, and twelfth centuries was not what it is to-day.
Dangers lurked on all sides for the bold mariner
who ventured forth in ships of small size devoid of
compass, load-line, chart, and chronometer. It was
slow work to make headway under the difficulties put
in the mariner's path by the elements alone, such as
the darkness of night, fogs and storms, shoals, quicksands,
and rocks, to say nothing of the peril from
pirates. The fact, too, that, owing to the want of
maps, they kept as close as possible to land, increased
the risks they ran. Arrived at his destination, the
trader would often have to wait long ere he could find
a purchaser for his wares, for in those days the merchant
himself carried his wares to market; there
were no commission agents at the various ports; there
were no posts, nor was the art of remitting money
understood. In the stormy winter-time, moreover,
neither sailors nor merchants cared to venture upon
the ocean; and owing to the brevity of the northern
18
summer it often became needful for them to pass the
bad season at whatever place they happened to be.
Indeed the hazards connected with a winter voyage
were so great, that in the very earliest days of union
it was determined by common consent that no merchants
should send their ships to sea after St. Martin's
Day (November 11th), and that they should endeavour
as far as possible to be in port by Michaelmas
(September 29th). "To sail after Martinmas is
to tempt God," writes an old chronicler. With the
11th of November the winter season commenced for
the Baltic trading fleet.
Curiously enough a similar custom obtains in
Greece to this day. The Greek coasters do not sail
on the seas from December 6th till after the New
Year; during this time the ocean is hallowed for new
trips.[1] The Hanseatics, of course, had to extend the
time of exemption in the northern seas. In the
year 1391 a Hanseatic Diet ordained that no Hanseatic
merchant should sail forth from a western to
an eastern, or from an eastern to a western harbour
between Martinmas and Candlemas (November 11th-February
2nd). The climatic conditions of certain
ports obliged this rule to be extended to St. Peter
in Cathedra (February 22nd), if they were carrying
"precious goods."
It is amusing, however, to find in the older records
an exceptional clause to the effect that herrings and
beer, two of the most important exports of the coast
towns, could not possibly be subjected to these restrictions.
The herring, that much prized fasting dish,
19
to the preparation and distribution of which the Hansa
attached such value, had necessarily to be despatched
before February 22nd in order that it might arrive at
its destination before Lent. A no less important
reason determined the transport of beer, which was
brewed in most of the export towns, and which might
easily spoil in a more advanced season of the year.
These reasons caused the cities to decide that a ship
laden with beer, herrings, or dried cod, might go to
sea on St. Nicholas Day (December 6th) if it were
ready laden by that date.
But this was the exception. The rule was for the
trader to winter wherever he happened to be. In
the long, cheerless evenings men liked to associate
with compatriots who spoke the same tongue, and
had the same interests and customs. These men
of the Middle Ages were specially distinguished
by their social instincts. They were bound together
also by the element of a common religion, by the
desire to worship together, to fulfil, perchance, some
holy vow made in an hour of great danger, to
bury, with the familiar rites of his own Church and
country, some less fortunate comrade who had expired
on foreign soil. Thus were formed those Guilds, or
Hanse, as they were called, of merchants on alien
soil, clustering, as a rule, around a church erected by
them, and having besides a general living and storehouse
for the safe custody of their goods. There is
nothing strange in the fact that such settlements should
have been formed; what is strange is the power they
acquired in the course of time, until at last, in some
places, they dictated terms to the natives of the country;
20
nay, they even made and unmade their rulers, until
in the end their sway extended from Bergen in the
north to Venice in the south, from Novgorod and
Smolensk in the east to York and London in the
west.
NORMAN VESSEL FROM BAYEUX TAPESTRY.

II.
The free ocean, owned by no king or ruler, has
from earliest times been the highroad of nations, and
in the life and movement of the last eighteen hundred
years the Baltic takes a scarcely less important place
than the lovelier, more poetical, and oft-sung Mediterranean.
Even to-day it is more frequented than most
of the seas; the traffic through the Sound being second
to that of no other strait.
The Baltic has had its singers too. We need only
turn to the strong, rugged Norse Saga to find that sea
extolled as the nurse of mighty heroes, or the scene of
giant combats; and the wilder element that pervades
these heroic tales is in keeping with the rugged iron-bound
coasts that skirt its waters, which do not invite
the cooing of idyls, nor lap the fantasy in luscious
dreams. Here all is stern life and movement; here
man must fight hand to hand with nature if he would
extort from her even the bare necessities for his daily
nourishment.
The contrast between the North and the South is
nowhere more strikingly seen than in the different
characteristics of the two seas, and the races they have
produced. Nor could these characteristics be better
22
illustrated than by a comparison between the great
commercial Republics of Italy and the Hanseatic
federation of Germany. The former, though individually
great, never became a corporate body.
Jealousy and rivalry were ever rife among them,
and in the end they destroyed themselves. Where
nature is kind men can better afford to be cruel, and
need not hold together in such close union. Thus it
was here.
But if the Baltic is at a disadvantage compared with
the Mediterranean in climate as well as in size, it
is not inferior in wealth and variety of its produce.
Mighty rivers, watering many lands discharge themselves
into its bosom, and produce upon their banks
rich and needful products, such as wheat and wool.
In the earth are hidden costly metallic treasures, while
the sea itself is a well of opulence from the number
and diversity of the fish that breed in its waters.
It has been well said that since the days of the
Hansa, possession of the Baltic and dominion of the
sea are synonymous terms. The Hansa, the Dutch,
and the English have necessarily played the first rôle
in the Baltic trade. But the trade dates from an
even earlier time. Thanks to coins accidently
dropped, and after long years unearthed, we learn
that by way of the Volga the Northmen brought
to their distant home the treasures of the far East—spices,
pearls, silks, furs, and linen garments; and
that following the course of the Dwina, the Dnieper,
and the Oder, they found their way to Constantinople,
the Black Sea, and even the Caspian.
Canon Adam, of Bremen, a chronicler of the eleventh
23
century, in one of those farragoes of fact and fiction
in which our forefathers read history, tells of a great
trading city at the month of the Oder, "Julin, the
greatest town of heathen Europe."[2] "It is a famed
meeting-place for the barbarians and Greeks[3] of the
neighbourhood, inhabited by Slavs and other barbarians.
Saxons, too, may live there if they do not
declare themselves Christians; for the town is rich in
the wares of all Eastern peoples, and contains much
that is charming and precious."
This town of Winetha, of whose exact site we
are no longer sure, since it has been destroyed by the
encroachment of the Baltic, was, and is still, a favourite
theme of song and legend with German writers. It is
fabled that it was destroyed like Sodom and Gomorrha,
because of its sins; for its inhabitants had grown hard
and proud and disdainful, trusting in wealth, and despising
God. On fine and calm days mariners can, it
is said, behold the city, with its silver ramparts, its
marble columns, its stirring, richly-dressed population,
leading, beneath the ocean, the life which they led
while their city was still on firm ground. Every Good
24
Friday this splendid city, with its towers, palaces, and
walls, is permitted to rise from the ocean, and sun
itself in the daylight, to be again submerged on Easter
Day, by this annual fall recalling to all who might else
forget it the severe justice of God.
The extract given above from the old writer impresses
on us a fact we must bear well in mind, namely,
that the Baltic mainland littoral at the time the
Teutonic merchants began to ply their trade upon its
coast was not a German possession, but inhabited
and owned by a Slavonic people, who clung to their
pagan creed long after their neighbours in the East
and West had become converted to the new religion.
And, as usual to this day, it was the trader who preceded
the missionary, and gave the natives the first
idea of a different code of ethics and morality. In
the missionary's track, as at this day, followed the
soldier, enforcing by the sword the arguments that
reason had failed to inculcate. It was thus that German
merchants had founded on Slavonic soil the
various cities and ports that were later to be the pride
and strength of the Hanseatic Union. Nor did they
rest content with the coast that bounded their own
lands. They traversed the narrow ocean, touching
Finland, Sweden, and Russia, and they established on
the isle of Gothland an emporium, which, in the first
Christian centuries, became the centre of the Baltic
trade, and in which "people of divers tongues," as an
old writer calls these visitors, met to exchange their
products.
A glance at the map will show why this island
assumed such importance. At a time when the
25
mariner was restricted to short passages, not liking for
long to lose sight of the shore, this spot naturally
made a most favourable halting-place on the road to
Finland, Livonia, or Sweden. It is evident from the
chronicles that the Germans soon acquired and exercised
great power in this island, and that they were
accorded special privileges. Thus Pope Honorius II.
granted them his protection for their town and harbour
of Wisby, in acknowledgment of the part they had
played in the conversion of the pagan nations.
There are many testimonies to the ancient wealth
and commercial importance of the island of Gothland;
among them the amount of Roman, Byzantine,
Anglo-Saxon, and German coins still found on its
soil, as also the number of ruined churches, many
of them of great size and architectural beauty, dotted
over its area. To this day the island, impoverished
and depopulated, owns a church to every six hundred
inhabitants. The churches have fallen into sad
decay, but yet remain to testify of past prosperity
and glory.
As the number of travelling merchants from
various cities increased on its shores, it was natural
that they should hold together more and more in a tacit
offensive and defensive alliance against the aliens,
and that when they returned home from their voyages
they should speak of the mutual benefits rendered
and the help that lay in union. Some influential persons
among them doubtless brought pressure to bear upon
the rulers and magistracies of the various cities to
give their informal union an official character. Thus
much is certain, that after a time the merchants from
26
various cities who traded with the Baltic had united
into a federation having a common seal and conforming
to a common law, so that by the middle of the
thirteenth century the Hanseatic League was practically
consolidated, although this name for the association
only occurs later.
So far, however, the Union only exercised rights
abroad. It was from Wisby also that the reaction was
to come for union at home; but this was a little
later, when its strength was well matured and
established.
What really, in the first instance, led the Germans
from their inland towns to the shores of the Baltic
was the desire to benefit by the great wealth that lay
hidden in its waters in the form of fish, which could
be obtained in return for the mere labour of fishing.
At a time when all Europe was Catholic, or of the
Greek Church, and fasts as well as feasts strictly
observed, the sale of fish was an important industry,
and, above all, of salted fish, since our forefathers
were ignorant of the art of preserving these creatures
fresh by means of ice. Now, from the beginning of
the twelfth century until the beginning of the fifteenth,
when they once more altered their course, each spring
and autumn the migratory fish, and especially that
most prolific and valued of fish, the herring, came
in great shoals to the shores of Scania,[4] the isle
27
of Rügen, and the coasts of Pomerania, tempting
the inhabitants of the strand and near inland hamlets
out on to the waters to secure these treasures. Nor
had nature herewith ceased her bounties. At certain
points of the littoral there were salt springs, in
which the precious draught could at once be pickled;
and it is certain that the art of preserving the gifts
of the ocean from decay was familiar to the Slav
inhabitants of these districts long before it was known
to those of the German Ocean. Already, in the
eleventh century, "salt Kolberg" was famed as an
emporium for salted herrings; and the words of a
Polish poem of rejoicing at a victory won over its
inhabitants in 1105 are extant to this day. It has
more historical than literary value. "Formerly," so
jubilantly sang the conquerors of the harbour, "they
brought us salt and stinking fish, now our sons bring
them to us fresh and quivering."
Salted herrings became an acknowledged form of
tax or tribute, as also a medium of exchange for
inland produce, and it was the value of these small
fish that really first roused the cupidity of the inland
dweller and caused them to compete with and finally
oust the pagan Slav. And Wisby for a time was
their great emporium, whence they extended their
power, founding among other towns Novgorod on
the Lake of Olm. It was to Wisby that association
dues were paid; it was in Wisby that common
money was deposited. They were kept in the German
28
Church of Our Lady Maria Teutonicorum. For the
churches in those times were buildings as much secular
as religious, being not only places of worship, but
also banks, storehouses, market-places, and sanctuaries.
Four aldermen, selected from important cities of the
League, namely, Wisby, Lübeck, Soest, and Dortmund,
had each a key to the common treasure. The rules laid
down in common council, over which these aldermen
presided, and whose execution they enforced, were
stringent in the extreme. For example, according to
an old principle of Teutonic laws, a city was made
responsible if a trader suffered malignant shipwreck
or was robbed of his goods within its domain, and
if these things occurred they were bound to help the
sufferers to recover their goods or safety.
That it was not always an easy task for the towns
to execute this command may be gathered from the
fact that in the earliest times even the Church looked
on flotsam and jetsam as its legitimate dues; indeed,
the revenues of some monasteries and churches were
distinctly founded on this. Even Papal authority,
even excommunication in later days, could not for a
long while break the force of a barbarous and cruel
custom. All the booty the waves cast on the shore
was designated by the well-sounding term of strandgut
(property of the shore), and was regarded as a gift
from Providence. The dwellers on the Baltic shore
held so naïve a belief with respect to this matter
that in their daily prayers they innocently asked God
to give them a good harvest of strandgut.
Lübeck in 1287, demanding from Reval, on the
basis of its treaties, the restitution of stranded property,
29
is told frankly by the governor of the city that
"however many and long and large letters they may
send him across the seas," yet his vassals would hold
to the rights of their land, and "if," he adds, "on your
letters or your prayers your goods are restored to
you, I will suffer my right eye to be put out."
Still by steady persistence the German cities got
their will, and of course they exercised it first on
members of their union. The defaulting city had to
pay a fine of something like two to three hundred
pounds of our money to the common fund of the
Union, and, in event of a recurrence, was threatened
with expulsion from the community. This punishment
was called unhansing, and it was inflicted several
times, and was only atoned for by the heaviest penalties
not only of money tributes, but often of pilgrimages
to some distant sacred shrine, to wipe out the disgrace
that the city had drawn down, not on itself alone,
but also on its brethren of the League, by the fact
that there could be such a black sheep among them.
Such, briefly, was the empire that, by the middle
of the thirteenth century, was exercised by a community
of German men of commerce, who had their
seat of control, not at home, but on a foreign soil.
Such, briefly, was the rise of these powerful merchants
who not only dared to dictate terms to distant cities,
but were absolutely obeyed. Such, briefly, was the
transformation of bands of pirates and adventurous
traders into a peace-loving and industrious association.
Let us now take a rapid glance at what had
occurred meantime in the Holy Roman Empire and
the towns.


III.
It is of importance to the study of the Hanseatic
confederation to remember that the settlements made
by the German merchants in their various foreign and
distant ports, though permanent in themselves, were
inhabited almost exclusively by a floating and ever-changing
population. True, the traders who had done
good business in this spot would return season after
season. But they did not form an established colony,
they did not take up their permanent abode abroad,
and hence the connection with their native towns was
never broken; they remained ever in touch with
home. Now the pettiest trader of one of the German
cities enjoyed in the Steelyard in London, in the
St. Peter's Court of Novgorod, in the factory of
Bergen, in the church of Wisby, and many other
places, a measure of personal freedom, a number
of privileges such as were frequently absolutely denied
him in his fatherland, or doled out grudgingly by
his territorial lord.
When the merchants had first appeared abroad
they were protected more or less by their suzerains.
Thus Barbarossa had given them the assistance of
his strong name, and extorted for them certain important
31
privileges from the King of England. The
same holds good with regard to the Duke of Saxony.
But as the emperors grew to care less and less for
purely German affairs, as the Saxon ducal power was
broken, as the German-speaking lands became the
camp of anarchy, confusion, and lordlessness, where
rightful and unlawful sovereigns quarrelled with each
other, where ruler fought ruler, noble robbed noble,
where, in short, the game of "devil take the hindmost"
was long played with great energy, the towns that
had silently and gradually been acquiring much independent
strength, perceived that if they would save
their prosperity, nay, their very existence, they must
take up a firm position against the prevailing social
conditions.
Founded upon trade, with trade as their vital
element, it was natural that traders also should
have a mighty voice in the councils of these towns.
The councillors indeed were chosen chiefly from
among the leading merchants, most of whom had
been abroad at some time or other of their career,
and tasted the sweets of wider liberty. None of
these were insensible to the pressure put upon them
by their returning fellow citizens that they should
struggle in their common interests to maintain a
position of strength at home, a position which could
not fail to increase the security of their settlements
abroad. For owing to this long period of political
chaos, the merchants abroad noticed or fancied that
the name of the Holy Roman Empire no longer
carried the same weight as formerly; that to
threaten those who overstepped their licenses towards
32
them with the empire's power had ceased to
have any serious effect. Yet unless there was
some real power at their back, how, at this lawless
time, could the Germans feel sure that the treaties
they had made with the aliens would be upheld?
Well then, urged the foreign traders, what our
emperors cannot or will not do for us, busy as they
are with Italian matters, or with self-destruction, we
must do for ourselves.
And quietly, unobtrusively, but very securely, they
formed among themselves that mutual offensive and
defensive alliance of whose exact date and origin
we are ignorant, but of whose great power in later
times the world was to stand in awe and admiration.
The purpose of the union was to uphold the respect
for the German name abroad by a strong association
of cities willing and able, if need were, to enforce its
demands by force of arms.
Mutual protection, moreover, was needed as much,
if not more, at home. The highroads, never too safe
from plundering barons, had grown yet less so during
the lawless and fighting period that followed the fall
of the Hohenstauffen dynasty. These, too, must be
guarded, or how could merchandize be brought from
place to place. Peace and security of property, being
the very corner-stones of commerce, did the merchant
seek above all to secure, and since nothing in this
life can be obtained without a struggle, these cities
had to fight hard, not only with moral force, but often
with the sword, in order to extort from their rulers
these elementary rights of civilization.
HIGHROAD.
Thus the Hansa from its earliest origin, though
34
organized for the ends of peace, was from its commencement
and throughout its existence a militant
body, ever watchful to punish infringement of its
rights, ever ready to extend its authority, ever prompt
to draw the sword, or send forth its ships against
offenders.
It is indeed a significant fact, that never once in
the whole course of its history did it draw the sword
aggressively, or against its own members. In its
domestic disputes it never needed to exercise other
than moral pressure. But the cities as they grew in
power almost assumed the proportions of small
democracies, and it is well-known that democracies,
save for purposes of self-defence, are not
so ready to rush into wars as monarchies. War is
the pastime of kings and statesmen; of men who
have nothing to lose, and perchance much to gain
in this pursuit; of men who do not stake life and
limb, health and home and trade. The wars waged
by the Hansa were never in one single instance
aggressive. Like all confederations, whose life nerve
is commerce, the Hansa ever sought to avoid war,
and only seized the sword as ultima ratio. It is
noteworthy that its ships were designated in its acts
as "peace ships" (Friedenschiffe), and even the forts
it built for protection were described as "peace
burgs" (Friedeburgen).
The germ of manly independence once awakened
in the burghers grew apace, and as they felt the
benefits of this new spirit they learnt that with it
they could cow their would-be despotic lordlings, and
exact from them respect and even aid. Cologne was
35
the first among the older cities to emancipate itself.
It is hard for us to realize the enslavement of the
middle class in former days. For example, a
merchant might not wear arms, no luxury, but an
absolute necessity in those wild times. Frederick
Barbarossa permitted him to carry a sword, but in order
that there might be no confusion of social castes, he
decreed that "the travelling merchant shall not gird
his sword, but attach it to his saddle, or lay it on his
cart, so that he may not wound the innocent, but yet
may protect himself against robbers." The inference
in this clause, that only a member of the third estate
would be likely to hurt an innocent person, is amusing
in its naïveté. As for the peasant, if he were found
with arms upon him, a lance or a sword, he had to
suffer severe punishment. The knightly weapon was
broken across the back of any serf who dared to
carry it.
A further instance of want of personal liberty in
Barbarossa's days is shown by his contempt for
commerce and for the trader's knowledge of the
commercial value of his goods. Thus he decreed
that a merchant selling his wares in camp must offer
them at the price fixed by the field-marshal, and if
the owner asked more than was deemed just by this
functionary, who probably knew as much of the value
of goods as his trusty lance, he lost not only his
market rights and his wares, but was whipped into
the bargain, his head shorn and his cheek branded
with a red-hot iron. At home his choice of dwelling-houses,
of trade, even of marriage was interfered
with. Is it astonishing, then, that with so little
37
personal liberty at home, so much abroad, the townsmen
aspired to change this state of things, and aided
by political events did change them, and rapidly too?
ITINERANT MERCHANTS.
Nor was it only the merchants returning from
abroad who stirred the legitimate longings of their
stay-at-home brethren. A liberating influence came
from yet another side; from that very land of
Italy, for whose sake the German rulers had suffered
their own country to endure neglect. Travelling
Italian merchants on their road to Flanders passed
through Central Germany, and as they halted in
the cities they would recount in the long evenings
those travellers' tales eagerly listened to in days when
reading for the most part was an unknown accomplishment,
and when all information was acquired by
ear.
"... I spoke of most disastrous chances;
Of moving accidents by flood and field;
And portance in my travel's history:
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle;
Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven
It was my hint to speak."[5]
These Lombards told of the prosperity of their
cities and the liberties they enjoyed, narrations that
sounded like fairy tales in the ears of the Northmen.
And when the Crusades broke out, and many of
them saw with their own eyes the glories of the
southern cities, when German merchants who had
followed in the train of the emperor's Roman campaign
returned, confirming all they had heard from
the Italians about commercial liberties and privileges,
38
their determination not to be left behind was
strengthened.
Freiburg (Free City) was the first town founded as
the outcome of the new liberty, an enlightened prince
lending his help and means to that end.
Further individual aid was given to the new idea
of personal liberty for all conditions of men by an
apostle of freedom, Arnold of Brescia. This eloquent
pupil of the French monk Abelard, the enlightened
philosopher, the lover of Heloïse, himself a
priest, was the most powerful opponent of the clerical
ideas in the twelfth century, which tried to keep
down the people in order that through their ignorance
and dependence they might be ruled with absolute
and unquestioned sway—ideas by no means wholly
extinct to this day among this class of men. Banished
by the Pope as a political and ecclesiastical heretic,
Arnold fled to Southern Germany, where he preached
his doctrines to eager ears, and roused an enthusiasm
that laid the train for a later Church reformation, and
helped towards the development of a new social state.
He awakened or fostered the thought of personal
liberty, a liberty not only consistent with corporate
union, but part and parcel of the same; a condition
alone worthy a rational human being, who, while
doing whatever pleases him best, never loses sight of
the fact that he has only a right to follow this desire
so long as his liberty does not trench upon that of his
neighbour and brother man.
SALTERS' HALL, FRANKFORT
(From an engraving in the British Museum.
John Stuart Mill had not yet defined the meaning
of the much abused term, liberty; Madame Roland
had not yet ejaculated upon the scaffold her true and
40
piteous cry, "Liberty! what crimes are committed in
thy name!" but Arnold of Brescia understood the
meaning of the word, and what was equally important,
he made his hearers understand it too. He did
not merely preach vague doctrines, he preached sound
political economy and social ethics.
And thus the Germans learnt from the Italians
both the true meaning of liberty and the virtue of
municipal institutions, which latter had, in the first
instance, sprung up in Lombardy from a Germanic
root; its essential features being a free choice of
the civic rulers from the fittest elements, a right to
govern themselves, and if need be to form alliances,
and the right to tax themselves. Further, they learnt
to recognize the principle that the final decision should
not rest with one person, but with the mass of the
inhabitants. This autonomy in all inner affairs,
founded on Italian models, became in the course of
several generations the most cherished possession of
all those German cities whence sprang the Hanseatic
League. There was, however, this difference that,
unlike the Lombard cities, the Germans ever acknowledged
the supremacy of the emperor, and never
developed either into complete oligarchies or democracies,
though in their statutes when they were at the
height of their power, it was distinctly stated that
decisions in important matters did not rest "with the
general council, but with the people."
MEDIÆVAL CITY.
(From a drawing by Albert Dürer.)
In the thirteenth century municipal privileges grew
and extended, for though the townsfolk were supposed
only to elect their own magistrates under the
sanction of the bailiffs of their respective territorial
42
lords, these functionaries, who generally lived in a
strong castle within the city or just upon its walls,
became only too ready to be bribed into compliance
with the burgher will as the distresses of the empire
caused their lords to require more and more of the
hard cash and other solid assistance which the rapid
progress of the cities in wealth could furnish. Of course
circumstances were not the same in all places. In
many there was open warfare between the lordlings
and the townsmen, and many a sacked and gutted
castle remained to testify to the successes of the
third estate.
As the baronial strongholds were razed, the towns
built up on their sites strong citadels, walls, and
moats, which they defended by a burgher militia
hardened to fatigue, brave, determined; who not
only dared to face the resentment of the barons, but
often extorted from them by force what they could
not up to that date buy from them or obtain as a
meed of justice. It was no infrequent event in the
thirteenth century for a town to be besieged by its
territorial lord; and these sieges, like that of Troy,
would last many years, for the art of reducing strong
places was but little developed, and wars, even
if they lasted longer, were less terribly destructive
than in our day.
The cities, having the wealth, were most frequently
the victors, and it would even come about that as terms
of peace their enemy would hire himself out to his vassals
as the legal and bound defender of his own subjects,
for a stated number of years. Further, the cities often
bought from these princelings the lands outside their
43
walls; the forests, mines, brine springs, even the highroads
and streams, thus drawing into their power anything
that might assist in diminishing the danger from
all that could impede their commerce. They would
also ask the cession of villages, of tolls; next the right
to coin money. In a word, they made use of every
means that came in their way, in accordance with
local and momentary circumstances, to extend and
consolidate their power.
What wonder that the burghers feeling their
strength and seeing the weakness of the empire
turned its dissensions and disorders to profit, and
began to make among themselves, quietly and unostentatiously,
alliances for maintaining peace in their
immediate vicinities, for keeping the roads cleared of
robbers, for opposing the black mail levied by their
feudal lords, and anything else that offended against
"the common freedom of the merchant."
Curiously enough such alliances were in direct
contravention of the existing laws of the German
Empire. At the Diet held in Worms, 1231, the
princes had expressed marked disapproval of such
leagues, in which they clearly recognized a dangerous
rival power. But the cities seemed little troubled by
this interdict. They, on their part, recognized that
the time had come for a firm union, and adhesion of
the weak against the strong, and more and more, as
they saw that the empire threatened from within and
from without was visibly falling asunder. For what
respect could be felt for a crown which was at last
actually put up for sale to the highest bidder, and
acquired by the rich but otherwise impotent brother
45
of the English Henry III., Duke Richard of Cornwall?
ROBBER KNIGHTS. (From Fritoch.)
The towns of the Rhine were the first to form themselves
into an alliance, a fact that can scarcely surprise
us when we remember how thickly set is that lovely
river with the now ruined strongholds of what erst
were robber lords. And the Baltic towns were not
slow to follow in their wake, forming a League "for
the benefit of the common merchant." These cities
even settled the contingent which each town had
to place at their common disposal, a great stone
of possible stumbling being skilfully avoided by a
phrase which occurs in a contract of 1296: "If the
fight goes against a prince who is lord of one of the
cities, this city shall not furnish men, but only give
money." The Rhenish section alone was able to
put into the field some eleven hundred crossbowmen
and six hundred stout galleys; no mean army in those
days.
In a word, the times were out of joint, and the
people had to help themselves, and did so. Sprung
from modest sources, having its origin in true neighbourly
feeling, what was at first a mere association of
merchants had developed into an association of cities.
The banner under which they had grouped themselves
bore the device "freedom for the common
merchant at home and abroad," and this device
became the elastic but durable bond, which, keeping
them together, made them a mighty power. Its
very elasticity was the cause of its strength, giving it
that facility of expansion and freedom from rigidity
which in more modern times has made the glory and
46
the might of England, whose constitution is distinguished
by a like principle of flexibility.
A naïve North German chronicler of the thirteenth
century telling of the various alliances formed, writes:
"But the matter did not please the princes, knights,
and robbers, especially not those who for ever put
forth their hands for booty; they said it was shameful
that merchants should rule over high-born and noble
men." Undaunted, however, by such objections, the
cities continued to form alliances, to make contracts
among themselves until these contracts assumed the
extent, dignity, and importance of those made by the
towns with their foreign settlements.
Thus, by slow degrees, cautiously, but very surely,
the Hanseatic League took its origin, and thus it grew
until it became an independent popular force, a state
within a state. Like everything that the Christian
Middle Ages called into life, the Vehmgericht (Vehmic
Tribunal), Gothic architecture, the knightly orders, it
bore strongly the impress of individuality.
The origin of the name of Hansa is wrapped
in some mystery. The word is found in Ulfila's
Gothic translation of the Bible, as signifying a
society, a union of men, particularly in the sense of
combatants. He applies it to the band of men who
came to capture Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane.
Later on Hansa occurs as a tax on commercial transactions,
and also as the sum, a very low one, which
the various cities paid as their entrance fee into the
association.
But our League did not yet officially bear that title;
it acquired it from the date of its first great war with
47
Waldemar of Denmark and the peace of Stralsund
(1370). Then it won name and rank at the point of
the sword, and after this it came to be classed among
the most redoubted powers of the period, being thus
by no means the first, and probably not the last,
example of the lift given to civilization by so barbarous
a thing as the powder cart.

IV.
Whoever looks on the old Schütting at Lübeck,
the building whence the herring fishers were wont to
start upon their voyages, and notes its armorial
bearings, three herrings upon a plain gold shield,
should go back mentally a few centuries and call
to mind the fact that the badge of this fish is the
emblem of a might which many a time set forth from
this spot bent upon commerce or needful warfare,
and which for generations exercised great power over
Northern Europe.
The district of Scania, which forms the southernmost
portion of the present land of Sweden, was
until 1658 almost exclusively the property of Denmark.
The Danes, a turbulent and maritime people,
had in the early times of our era been converted to
Christianity at the point of the sword by the
emperors of Germany, and during the 10th and 11th
centuries these emperors exercised a recognized
suzerainty over the Danish kings. Hence German
traders easily obtained privileges among a people
who were by no means inclined to commerce themselves,
but who welcomed none the less eagerly the
49
products that the strangers brought, above all, the
heady ale brewed by the Easterlings.
But as the might of the empire declined and the
Danes had grown strong, thanks to wise rulers, the
people grew restive under the restrictions imposed
upon them, and tried to secure their independence.
Under Waldemar the Great (1157 to 1182), the
country had acquired an important position, which
his successors strengthened. This increase of might
coincided with the German depression and with the
change of course at spawning time that the herring
suddenly took in the twelfth century.
Strange that a little fish should have had such great
power over mankind; yet it is not going beyond the
strict truth to state that the mysterious wanderings of
the herring determined throughout several centuries
the whole course of northern commerce. During the
Middle Ages, upon the appearance of the herring
now on this coast and now on that, the wealth and
prosperity of the whole districts depended. Herring
fishing became a branch of industry that decided the
fate of nations. To it the Hansa owes a large portion
of its riches and its power; in the herring fisheries,
when in the year 1425 the fish began to spawn in the
German Ocean, the Netherlands found the foundation
stone of their wealth and dignity. Indeed, it was
said later, with scant exaggeration, that Amsterdam
was built upon herrings.
Now, as masters of the Belt and the Sound, the
Danes were able, if they chose, greatly to harass the
Hanseatic traders and fishermen. For many years
they had not put forth their power, or rather the
50
Hanseatic towns, with the diplomatic astuteness that
greatly distinguished them, had averted the possibility
of such danger by wise concessions of tributes and
privileges. Still disputes would arise, things did not
always go off peaceably, and in 1227 the Hansa towns
won their first military laurels, defeating the Danes in
the battle of Bornhöved and permanently weakening
the power of their troublesome neighbours in Northern
Germany.
A few years later Lübeck, almost unassisted,
threatened in its independence by the Danish king,
won a great naval victory over its neighbours; and
gained yet another in 1249, when Eric II. had
ventured to attack some of its ships upon the open
seas. On this occasion the merchant townsmen even
seized and sacked Copenhagen and planted their flag
in Zealand.
It was no very easy position which the Baltic cities
(for it was they who were chiefly threatened) had to
maintain against the Danish kings as the power of the
latter increased. For with their power, their rapacity
and cupidity increased also, and this made them look
on the rich commercial towns with a longing desire
to absorb them into their own possessions. These,
though extensive, were poor, and their inhabitants
neither industrious nor prosperous. Further, the
Danes, Norwegians, and Swedes were in constant
feud with one another, and each of these states turned
an eye of greed towards the flourishing Baltic cities,
whose possession they coveted. The two Scandinavian
powers, in particular, constantly harassed the
German merchants by their scanty comprehension
51
of treaty rights, their breaches of faith, and it was
not easy work for the cities to steer clear between the
three kingdoms, that were now at deadly feud with
one another, now convulsed by civil wars, now united
in a policy of rapine.
It would be tedious to enumerate the quarrels,
jealousies, and feuds that agitated these kingdoms
during the early years of the fourteenth century; to
note in detail the trouble they caused to the Hanseatic
traders, and the need they awoke among them of
holding together in as close an alliance at home as
they had hitherto done abroad. It was necessary to be
ever wakeful and mistrustful; and to watch jealously
for the faintest signs of an infringement of privileges.
In 1326 a lad of some twelve summers, whose
memory was destined to be handed down to posterity
as that of a hero of romance, ascended the throne
of Denmark. In allusion to the famous fable about
the election of a king of the frogs, an old writer
speaks of this event as a choice by the frogs of the
stork as ruler instead of the log. For Waldemar, as
he was called, proved indeed no log and no puppet in
the hands of his ambitious barons. As a mere youth
he gave evidence of his strength and determination,
and under his ægis Denmark acquired great wealth
and consideration, and would have attained to yet
more had not Waldemar, with mistaken judgment,
drawn the reins too tight, until from a wise ruler he
became a despot. It was his aim and policy to
nationalize his country, to drive away the foreigners
who utilized it for their warlike and commercial
ends. He found it small and distracted with dissensions;
52
after twenty years' rule he could point to
marked success and change, for he had made Denmark
respected and feared at home and abroad.
History knows him as Waldemar III.,[6] story and song
as Waldemar Atterdag, a nickname that well expresses
the salient points of his character. For the
name of Atterdag, which means "there is yet another
day," refers to the king's constant habit of using
this expression in the sense that if to-day a goal is
not reached, it is not therefore unattainable, that a
man must wait, never despair, and never lose sight of
his aim.
And Waldemar for his part never did. He pursued
his purposes with a strenuousness and a patience,
which contrasted favourably with the vacillating attitude
of his princely northern contemporaries, and
which was only matched and finally surpassed by the
same strenuous and patient policy on the part of the
Baltic towns, and especially on the part of Lübeck,
their astute and diplomatic leader.
Nor was it only good aims that the king followed
with such persistence. He was an implacable, a
relentless enemy, who never forgot an injury, and who
waited with cruel calmness the day of vengeance.
In Waldemar's state policy there often appeared
mixed motives; considerations of the most personal
character were blended with care for the welfare of
his state, and when one should alone have been considered,
53
both frequently played a part. It was this
that led to his ultimate ruin; like too many clever
people he overreached himself. Therefore, while the
early years of his reign were really a blessing to distracted
and impoverished Denmark, of the latter part
a contemporary chronicler complains that—
"In the times of Waldemar, every tradition of our
ancestors, all paternal laws, all the freedom of the
Danish Church was abolished. The rest of the soldier,
the merchant, the peasant, was so curtailed, that in the
whole kingdom no time remained to eat, to repose, to
sleep, no time in which the people were not driven to
work by the bailiffs and servants of the king, at the
risk of losing his royal favour, their lives, and their
goods." In a word, Waldemar worked his subjects
hard, and even the most patriotic singers cannot present
him as a wholly attractive figure. He is rather
a character to be feared than loved.
The Hansa was not slow to recognize this. It
saw that it was face to face with a man whom no
obstacles could deter, to whom even treaty obligations
were not sacred, and who was liable to be swayed by
incalculable caprice. That it was right in its estimate
and its fears Waldemar was not slow to make
known, so soon as his power at home was fully
secured.
The first attack upon the Hansa towns was made
by the Danish king in the shape of interference with
their fishing rights on Scania, breaking the contracts
which his predecessors, and even he himself, had
made, and demanding extortionate fees for the renewal
of the time-honoured privileges. Diplomatic
54
negotiations were entered upon, but Waldemar befooled
the deputies from the cities, wasting their
time with idle discussion of irrelevant matters, and
refusing to come to a real agreement. After long
and fruitless debate the ambassadors of the Hansa
towns departed home anxious and discouraged.
Ten weeks after their return the cities were startled
by the terrible news that Waldemar, in a time of
perfect peace, without previous warning or declaration
of war, had suddenly invaded the island of Gothland,
and seized, sacked, and plundered the rich city of
Wisby, the northern emporium of the Hansa's wealth.
Such a blow was aimed not only at Wisby, but
at all the Hanseatic towns; from that moment diplomatic
negotiations with Waldemar were no more to
be thought of. This act meant war; war at all costs
and at all risks.
"In the year of Christ 1361 King Waldemar of
Denmark collected a great army, and said unto them
that he would lead them whither there was gold and
silver enough, and where the pigs eat out of silver
troughs. And he led them to Gothland, and made
many knights in that land, and struck down many
people, because the peasants were unarmed and unused
to warfare. He set his face at once towards Wisby.
They came out of the town towards him, and gave
themselves up to the mercy of the king, since they
well saw that resistance was impossible. In this
manner he obtained the land, and took from the
burghers of the town great treasures in gold and
silver, after which he went his ways."
Thus the contemporary chronicler of the Franciscans
55
of St. Catherine at Lübeck. By a skilful coup
de main Waldemar had indeed made himself master
of Gothland, then under Swedish suzerainty, and of
the wealthy city of Wisby. His aim had been booty,
and he had it in rich measure in the shape of gold, of
fur, and silver vessels.
Legend tells that the year previous to the attack
Waldemar had visited Gothland disguised as a merchant,
securing the love of a goldsmith's daughter,
whose father held an influential position in Wisby, and
who, in her loving trustfulness revealed to him the
strength and weakness of the island and town, thus
helping him to secure the spot that was rightly
regarded as the key to the three northern realms.
The inhabitants, unprepared, unarmed, had been
unable to offer much resistance. It was a terribly
bloody fight this that raged outside the walls of
Wisby; the site of it is marked to this day by a
cross erected on the spot where 1,800 Gothlanders
fell.
"Before the gates of Wisby the Goths fell under
the hands of the Danes,"[7] runs the inscription.
As was the custom among the conquerors of olden
days, Waldemar, it is related, entered the city, not by
means of the gates that had been forcibly surrendered
to him, but by a breach he specially had made for
this purpose in the town walls. The gap too is shown
to this hour.
When he had plundered to his heart's content,
aided in his finding of the treasure by his lady love,
after he had added to his titles of King of the Danes
56
and Slavs, that of the King of Gothland, Waldemar
proceeded to return home in his richly laden ships.
But it was decreed that he should not bring his booty
to port. A great storm arose in mid-ocean. It was
with difficulty that the king escaped with his life; his
ships were sunk, his coveted hoards buried in the
waves.
There are still shown at Wisby the two fine twelve-sectioned
rose windows of St. Nicholas' Church, in which,
according to tradition, there once burned two mighty
carbuncles that served as beacons to light the seamen
safely into harbour in the day of the town's prosperity.
These stones, it is said, were torn from their place and
carried off by Waldemar. The Gothland mariner
still avers that on certain clear nights he can see the
great carbuncles of St. Nicholas' Church gleaming
from out the deep.
As for Waldemar's lady love, whom it is said he
abandoned as soon as his purpose was attained, she
was seized on by the infuriated townspeople and
buried alive in one of the turrets of the city walls,
known to this day as the "Virgin Tower."
It is difficult to decide whether Waldemar foresaw
the full danger and bearing of his high-handed step;
whether he knew what it meant to plunder a city like
Wisby, one of the strongest arms of the Hansa. He
had certainly thrown the gauntlet down to the towns;
he was quickly to learn that the power which some
years ago had successfully beaten his predecessors
had but grown in strength since that date.
On the first news of Waldemar's treachery, the
Baltic cities laid an embargo on all Danish goods, and
57
then called together a hasty council in which it was
decreed that until further notice all intercourse with
Denmark should be forbidden on pain of death and
loss of property. Then they put themselves into
communication with Norway and Sweden in order in
the event of a war to secure the alliance of these
countries, an assistance that was the more readily
promised because their sovereigns were at feud with
Waldemar. To defray the war costs it was determined
to levy a poundage tax on all Hanseatic
exported goods.
A fleet was got ready with all possible speed, and
when everything was in order, the towns sent a herald
to Waldemar with a formal declaration of war.
In May, 1362, their ships appeared in the Sound,
and brilliant success at first attended their arms.
Copenhagen was plundered, its church bells carried
to Lübeck as the victor's booty. At Scania the cities
looked to meet their northern allies, in order in conjunction
with them to take possession of the Danish
strongholds on the mainland. Here, however, disappointment
awaited them. Whether lack of money
or fear had deterred the northern kings from keeping
their word is unknown; at any rate, they did not put
in an appearance with their armies.
The Burgomaster of Lübeck, Johann Wittenborg,
who commanded the Hanseatic fleet, saw himself
forced to use the men he had on board for the land
attack. He held himself the more justified in doing
this since he deemed he had so thoroughly routed the
Danes, that from the side of the sea there was nothing
to be feared.
58
This decision was rash, and Wittenborg was to
atone for it with his life. Already it seemed as if the
stronghold Helsingborgs was in his hands—he had
been besieging it sixteen days with great catapults—when
Waldemar suddenly appeared with his fleet upon
the Scanian coast, surprised the Hansa vessels that
had been left with but a feeble crew, and carried off
twelve of the best ships, and most of their provisions
and weapons. The consequence was that Wittenborg
saw himself obliged to return with the remnant of his
army to Lübeck.
He found the city embittered against him in the
highest degree for his defeat; though it saw that
the main guilt of the disastrous end of the war
lay with the faithless northern kings. The stern free
city deemed it right, not only towards itself, but also
to its sister towns, to punish heavily the unsuccessful
leader. Wittenborg had hardly landed ere he was
arrested, chained, and thrown into a dungeon. Here
he dragged out a weary year of imprisonment. In
vain some of the cities pleaded his cause, in vain his
friends tried to obtain his deliverance. Lübeck was
a stern mistress, who knew no mercy, and could brook
no ill success. In her dictionary, as in that of youth,
according to Richelieu in Bulwer's play, there might
be no such word as "fail." Wittenborg had, of course,
been at once deprived of his burgomagisterial honours;
a year after his defeat his head publicly fell under the
executioner's axe in the market-place of Lübeck.
Burial in the councillors' church was denied him.
He was laid to rest in the cloisters of the Dominicans
the spot where all criminals were interred in Lübeck
59
during the Middle Ages; the spot where, down to
our own era, all criminals passing that way to
execution received from the pious monks a soothing
drink as last farewell to life. Further, Wittenborg's
name is absent from the record of the burgomasters;
an omission in this place, which doubtless has the
same meaning as the absence of Marino Falieri's
portrait among the long row of Doges in the
Venetian Palace.
The election of a burgomaster as leader of the
troops is quite in character with the spirit of those
times. Such trade warriors are not uncommon in the
history of the Hansa. Within the roomy stone hall
that served as entry and store-room to those ancient
dwelling-houses, it was usual to see helmet, armour,
and sword hanging up above stores of codfish,
barrels of herrings, casks of beer, bales of cloth, or
what not besides.
To this day the stranger is shown in the marketplace
at Lübeck the stone on which Wittenborg sat
before his execution, and in the collection of antiquities
is the chair of torture in which he was borne
thither. So sternly did the Hansa punish.
There exists an entirely unauthenticated fable that
Wittenborg had betrayed his trust in return for a
dance with the Queen of Denmark, promising her as
a reward the island of Bornholm. That the fable had
some currency is proved by the fact that for a long
while there survived in Lübeck the expression, "He
is dancing away Bornholm," when some one light-heartedly
did an unjustifiable deed. The story has
given one of the younger German poets, Geibel, the
60
theme for a famous ballad. Further, it was fabled
that twice a year the Burgomaster and council of
Lübeck solemnly drank Hippokras out of silver cups
made from Wittenborg's confiscated property, repeating
the while a Low German distich that reminded
them of their stern duty and their predecessor's sad
fate. Modern accurate research, pitiless in the
destruction of picturesque legends has discovered
that these cups were not made till the sixteenth
century, and were paid for by a tax levied on Bornholm,
then in rebellion.
After the cruel defeat due to Wittenborg, the cities
concluded an armistice with Waldemar, an armistice
that might easily have been converted into a
permanent peace, for the towns were not eager to
fight. It was too great an interruption to trade.
Moreover, the war expenses had exceeded their calculations,
times were bad, harvests scant, food scarce,
and, to crown all, the Black Death had reappeared
in Europe and was devastating whole districts.
But Waldemar had resolved to break entirely the
power of the Hansa. Once more he befooled it in
diplomatic negotiations, and in the midst of the truce
attacked its herring settlements at Scania, and captured
some merchant vessels that passed through the
Belt.
The towns held council, Waldemar was offered
terms. Yet again he befooled them, and when he
soon after married his only child Margaret, celebrated
in history as the Semiramis of the North, to Hakon,
heir to the thrones of Sweden and Norway, thus preparing
the union of the three northern kingdoms
61
under one crown, the towns, alarmed at the mere prospect,
felt that now or never they must secure their
independence.
In November, 1367, deputies from the Baltic and
inland towns met in conclave in the large council
chamber of the Town Hall of Cologne, a meeting
that became the foundation act of the recognized and
open constitution of the Hanseatic League, and on
which account the hall still bears the name of Hansa
Room. It seems certain that here for the first time
was drawn up an Act, modified, renewed, altered
in course of time, but yet always the fundamental
basis of the League. There is no older Hanseatic
document than this of the congress known as the
Cologne Confederation, when the deputies of seventy-seven
towns met to declare most solemnly that
"because of the wrongs and injuries done by the
King of Denmark to the common German merchant,
the cities would be his enemies and help one another
faithfully." It was decided that such cities as were
too weak or too distant to help actively in the war,
should do so by the contribution of subsidies. It was
further enacted that such cities as would not join in
the war should be held as outside the League, with
whom its burghers and merchants should have nothing
more in common, neither buying from, nor selling to,
them, nor allowing them to enter their ports, or unlade
goods in their domains.
RATH-HAUS, COLOGNE.
Waldemar was warned of what the cities had resolved
against him. He replied with an untranslatable
pun, in which he likened the Hansa to a flock of
geese, who deafened him with their cackle. Warned
63
once more, Waldemar threatened the cities that he
would complain of them to their spiritual and
temporal lords; among them the Pope and the
emperor. The cities had forestalled him. They had
sent copies of a letter, stating their grievances against
a king whom they denounced as "a tyrant and a
pirate," to some thirty spiritual and temporal lords.
In the letter to the emperor, Lübeck, whence all the
letters were dated, excused itself in particular for
not responding to Charles's recent invitation to join
his Roman expedition on the plea of its home difficulties,
while humbly giving thanks for the honour
done it by the offer. It also justified itself for not
paying during the past year to Waldemar a tax
decreed by Charles, since this king, it wrote, "seeks
to withdraw your town of Lübeck from the emperor
and the empire." It grieved to state that the
emperor lived too far off to shield by his arms his
weak and neglected flock in the northern region of
the empire. Therefore the emperor's most gracious
majesty must not take it amiss if the cities, with
God's help, did something towards their own protection.
Worded with all the servile language of the period,
Lübeck yet in this letter made it pretty evident to
its supreme ruler that it meant to stand on its own
feet, as it knew too well how unsteady were its
sovereign's.
Yet, again, Waldemar was warned of the growing
strength, the earnest purpose of the League, and this
time he seems to have been alarmed, for he tried to
detach from it many of its members, and to win them
64
over to his own cause. He received from the towns
with whom he opened negotiations, the following
reply, which proves how perfected and tightly
secured were already the reciprocal engagements of
the League.
"The Hanseatic League," they said, "having
resolved on war, they must submit themselves to
that general resolution which bound them all."
The cackling geese whom Waldemar had despised
seemed to have grown into formidable eagles overnight.
Lordlings and princes too, many of whom
had private injuries to avenge, had joined the League
or promised their support. The Hansa had set up a
rival and successful king in Sweden, and it now
proposed nothing less than to dismember Denmark,
and to distribute its provinces to its own friends and
allies. It did not desire to retain possession of it.
It was ever its policy to restrict actual possessions,
but to seek that these should be as far as possible in
the hands of friends who would grant it the concessions
and privileges needful for commerce. Thus
could be applied to it what a Roman said of the
peoples he subjugated, "I do not ask for gold; I only
desire to rule over those who have gold." With this
difference, however, that the Hansa, without wishing
to conquer provinces, wished to draw to itself whatever
profits could be found therein.
It was on the Sunday of Quasimodo, April 16,
1368, that all the Hansa ships were to meet in the
Sound for a combined attack on Zealand. The
Easter days approached. All Northern Germany
awaited anxiously the moment for the decisive
65
combat to commence; when suddenly the cities
learnt that on Maundy Thursday Waldemar had
secretly fled from his dominions, alarmed by the
decision and strength shown by his enemies. In a
ship laden with much treasure he had landed on the
Pomeranian coasts to go further east and avoid the
impending squall, leaving a viceroy in his stead,
whom he authorized to conclude peace or carry on
war.
Waldemar's cowardly attitude could not of course
alter that of the cities. In that same month of April
the war began and raged all the summer, the Hansa
meeting with but little resistance. With the winter
came a truce, after the fashion of those times, but in
the summer war was renewed and for two years
the Hansa ships harassed the Danish coasts and
waters, sacked their cities and plundered their
treasures. The treacherous attack on Wisby was
avenged with interest, and the war proved so profitable
to the League that it settled in congress that
it should continue until the Danes sued abjectly
for peace. Its leader was once more a Lübecker,
Brun Warendorf, the son of the Burgomaster. He
died in battle, but the memory of his gallant deeds
remains in the stately monument the town erected
to him in the choir of St. Mary's Church. Thus
Lübeck honoured those who contributed to her
honour.
RATH-HAUS, TANGERMUNDE.
By the close of 1369, Denmark was exhausted and
the people weary of war. They pleaded for peace.
On this the seventy-seven cities, whom Waldemar
had derided as geese, dictated their terms. It was
67
indeed a peace such as few kings have signed in the
deepest degradation of their empire. For the term
of fifteen years they claimed two-thirds of the
revenues of Scania, the possession of its strongholds,
the free passage of the Sound, and the right
for the same fifteen years to veto the choice of a
Danish ruler, besides a number of other valuable
concessions and privileges; terms, in short, as humiliating
for Denmark as they were glorious for the
League. The last paragraph of this remarkable
Treaty of Stralsund, which put the Hansa in the
position of a first-class power, ran thus:
"Our king, Waldemar, shall seal to the cities the
above terms of peace with his great seal, if he would
remain with his kingdom and not give it over to
another ruler. If it should be that our lord and
king; Waldemar, desires to abdicate his land of
Denmark during his lifetime, we will and shall not
suffer it, unless it be that the cities have given their
consent, and that he has sealed to them their privileges
with his great seal. Thus, too, it shall be if our
lord and king, Waldemar, be carried off by death,
which God forfend. Then, too, we will accept no
ruler but in council with the cities."
It is evident from this paragraph that the Hansa
still mistrusted Waldemar, and feared he would by
some subterfuge evade the treaty obligations made
in his name by his appointed viceroy.
And they had probably not gauged him falsely.
It was further settled that Waldemar must sign this
document within sixteen months: if he did not do
so within this period, the Danish council and kingdom
68
would nevertheless be bound to keep its terms "even
if the king did not seal."
But abject though these stipulations were, complete
as was the submission of Denmark to the League
which they implied, Waldemar signed them within
the appointed time. He saw that he was defeated,
friendless, and alone. In vain had he scoured the
mainland, and recounted his woes to all who would
listen, in vain had he begged or bribed for help against
his enemies. He had made himself too much hated,
and even those who promised aid failed at the last
to keep their word.
With the signature of peace Waldemar also signed
away his position, nay, perhaps his life. Broken in
hope and spirits, his health gave way. Four years
later (1375) he died, after he had just appealed in
vain to the towns to restore to him his castles in
Scania.
With the peace of Stralsund the German merchants
had established the supremacy of the Hansa
over Scandinavia, and laid the foundation for that
power over the northern kingdom, which, in the
words of King Gustavus Vasa, places "the three
good crowns at the mercy of the Hansa."
Thus ended the Hansa's great war against the King
of Denmark—a war that marks an important era in
its history and development.
The League henceforth took a changed position,
not only in its own fatherland, but in the face of all
Europe, for nothing succeeds like success. Flanders,
France, and England, had all to recognize that a new
power had arisen in the north of Germany. For the
69
war had proved, not only how valiantly the League
could fight if need arose, but also how well organized it
was; how it held together for the common weal; how
it would be not only unwise, but dangerous to resist
its demands for trade privileges and concessions.
A curious juxtaposition of events was afforded by
this chapter of history; a German emperor was busy
in the interests of Rome, striving to bring back the
Pope from his long exile at Avignon, and obtaining
dubious victories over the great Italian family of the
Visconti; while meantime a league of cities in his
own empire was carrying on a successful war against
the kings of the north, dethroning and defeating them.
And so far from raising a hand to aid them, the
emperor, on paper, at least, and by word and protestation,
was taking part with Waldemar against his
own subjects. A curious, a unique condition of
things truly.
And herewith we have brought the history of our
League to the close of what is known as its first
period, dating from its origin to the peace concluded
with Denmark.
71

THE HISTORY OF THE HANSEATIC LEAGUE, FROM
1370 TO THE PUBLIC PEACE OF 1495, DECREED IN
GERMANY BY MAXIMILIAN I.

I.
The great war ended, the Hansa, in true merchant
spirit, instantly busied itself making up its
accounts. The poundage toll, instituted to cover
martial expenses, was at once abolished; credit
and debit carefully balanced. Examination of its
books showed that, notwithstanding the long duration
of the war, the Hansa had been as little a
pecuniary, as it had been a military, loser, in its
struggle against Waldemar's assumptions.
While thus engaged, Lübeck was startled by the
intelligence that the Emperor, Charles IV., intended
to honour "his beloved free Imperial City of
Lübeck" by a personal visit. Since Frederick
Barbarossa no emperor had ever passed the city
gates, and the town councillors were probably not
far wrong when they perceived in this proposal a
tacit imperial acknowledgment of the Hansa's great
military victories, victories in which Lübeck had
played the part of leader. For twenty-eight years
Charles had worn the imperial crown, and all that
time his chief efforts had been directed towards
extending the power of his family, and the home influence
of the emperors. He was a shrewd and wily
74
old man, who saw the dangers Italy presented to the
empire, and wished to avoid them. At first, however,
he had no proper comprehension of the great
power that had sprung up within his own domains in
the shape of the Hanseatic League, nay, indeed, he
had sided against his subjects and with Waldemar.
But now the scales fell from his eyes, and he appreciated,
as all Europe did, the greatness and the
strength of the Hansa.
Of course he did not admit this in words, yet there
is little doubt that he wished to gain the goodwill of
this League, and hoped thus to get from it both
pecuniary and military support for his dynastic plans.
It was, however, "diamond cut diamond;" the
worthy councillors of Lübeck were no less shrewd
and wily than their imperial master. Needless to
say that, in accordance with the usage of the age,
they indulged in the most servile and hyperbolical
expressions of their joy and unworthiness to be so
honoured, but like true merchants they had a good
memory, and knew that Charles had not so long ago
pawned his coronation cloak and some of his tolls to
one of their federation, and they suspected in their
heart of hearts that ulterior motives were probably
not absent to account for this unwonted event. Still,
with the wisdom of the serpent, they let nothing of
this appear, either in their replies to Charles, or in
their treatment of him. Like their Lombard predecessors,
even when in open warfare against the
emperor's authority, they ever protested in words
their submission and fidelity to the imperial crown.
It was in the autumn of 1375 that Charles the
75
Fourth entered the gates of Lübeck as the city's
guest. It is a curious fact that his visit coincided
with the death of Waldemar on the island of
Zealand; but in those days of slow communication
the news did not reach the emperor till after the
festivities were over.
On October 22nd, the Emperor, accompanied by
the Empress, the Archbishop of Cologne, prince-bishops,
dukes, earls, and suzerains many and
mighty, halted before the closed gates of Lübeck.
His suite, his armed retainers, and those of his
party, made such a numerous host that Lübeck
hesitated awhile ere opening its gates to so great
a multitude, not feeling wholly sure whether their
mission were indeed one of peace, or whether an
affectation of peace was meant to cover a deceitful
attack. For such things were not uncommon in
those days.
After some preliminaries it was however decided to
let them all in. A halt had been made outside the
walls. Here was situated the Chapel of St. Gertrude,
patron saint of strangers. The chapel was the property
of the municipal council, and to obtain relics for it the
town had spent many sums of money. Among
other matters, they boasted of possessing some bones
of Thomas à Becket, and it is curious to note that
they sent over to England to buy these at the very
time Chaucer was superintendent of tolls in the
harbour of London, and was writing his immortal
"Canterbury Tales," in which he derides the
frauds constantly practised upon the purchasers of
such wares; as in his "Pardonere's Tale." Now
77
Charles IV. had a great fancy for objects of this
nature; he was in the habit of making tours in his
kingdom in order to collect them, begging them
from churches or monasteries, and giving in return
privileges and sanctions. It is possible he also
had an eye to St. Thomas's bones, but among the
rich booty he took with him from Lübeck, we find no
mention of such relics.
SHIPPING HOUSE, LÜBECK.
It was before St. Gertrude's Chapel, then, that
Charles and his great suite halted, and here he and
his empress put on their imperial robes previous to
entering the city. This done, they were greeted by a
procession that came forth from the gates to welcome
them. It consisted of the temporal and spiritual
lords of the town, the leading men, and the most
lovely and notable of its women. They carried before
them a crucifix and a casket containing relics. Both
the emperor and his consort kissed these with great
fervour. Then two stately horses, richly caparisoned,
were brought before them, upon which they mounted.
That of the emperor was led by two burgomasters,
that of the empress by two town councillors. Eight
young patricians carried a baldachino of rich stuffs
over the heads of the imperial pair. In front of the
emperor rode a councillor, bearing aloft on a pole
the keys of the city; while he was flanked by two
imperial dukes, carrying respectively the sword and
the sceptre of the empire. In front of the empress
rode the archbishop, bearing the imperial globe.
Behind followed all the nobles, the suite, the men-at-arms.
Such was the procession that moved from St. Gertrude's
78
Chapel on the morning of October 22nd. In
the space between the outer and inner walls of the
city the women of Lübeck awaited them ready to
greet the guests with cheers and song and waving
kerchiefs. It was through the stately Burg Thor that
the great train passed and entered the streets of the
city, gaily decked out with arras and banners and
verdure to bid them welcome. They rode the whole
length of the town, through the Breite Strasse, to the
sound of fife and drum, and then made for the cathedral.
Here they halted, dismounted, and entered. A
solemn thanksgiving service was held, and the choir
sang the Introitus for the feast of the Epiphany: "Ecce
advenit Dominator Dominus" ("Behold the Lord, the
Ruler is come"), and then the second verse of the
Seventy-second Psalm, "Give the king Thy judgments,
O God." After this the party once more re-formed,
and rode along the Königstrasse, till they came to
the house that was to harbour the imperial guests.
Contemporary chroniclers tell us that all along the
route of the procession and both by night and day
the sounds of military and sacred music never ceased.
Night was as light as day, thanks to the general
illumination prescribed by the council; a prescription
that, in a city thus overcrowded by a martial
train and by curious spectators from far and near,
was as much a matter of safety as of compliment to
its guests. In those times street-lighting was an
unknown luxury, and nocturnal brawls of constant
occurrence.
The house where Charles halted exists to this day,
as also that where the empress lodged. They are
79
both corner-houses and boast gables, which according
to contemporary writers was an indication of an
aristocratic building. The lodging of the empress
was opposite to that of the emperor, and a covered
way was built across the street to connect them.
Such road-bridges, springing from the projecting
gable windows, were not unusual things in the
harrow streets of those times. The condition of the
unpaved roads made them requisite, as these could
not be crossed on foot with safety or cleanliness.
For the space of eleven days Charles and his
train halted at Lübeck, and the town spared neither
cost nor trouble to entertain him right royally, and
to impress him with its wealth and importance.
Feasts, tournaments, rejoicings, followed upon one
another; time was not allowed to hang heavy upon
the emperor's hands. But neither was he allowed to
carry out his ulterior objects. With great politeness
and fulsome flattery Charles was made to understand
that the Hansa was sure of its own strength,
and since he had not helped it in the hour of
need, it did not propose to make great sacrifices to
assist him in his troubles. All however was done
with perfect courtesy, Charles even being permitted
on one occasion to be present at a meeting of the
municipal council when both sides exchanged pretty
compliments. He even went so far as to address
them as "Lords." With great modesty they disclaimed
this appellation. But the emperor insisted
on it: "You are lords," he said; "the oldest imperial
registers know that Lübeck is one of the five towns
that have had accorded to them in the imperial
80
council the ducal rank, that they may take part in
the emperor's council and be present where is the
emperor."
These five cities were Rome, Venice, Pisa, Florence,
and Lübeck.
When Charles left Lübeck he was delighted with
the hospitality he had there received, but disappointed
in his political aims. It is certain, however,
that he rode out richer than he rode in; to this the
account books of the city bear testimony, of this the
taxpayers told a tale for many a long day. Indeed
the expenses incurred through this imperial visitor
were to lead later on to some serious riots of the
guilds against the municipality.
It was through the Mühlen Thor that Charles
departed with his train and by order of the town
council this gate was walled up for ever behind him. It
was meant as a piece of subtle flattery to the emperor,
a suggestion that no mortal was worthy to step
where he had stepped,[8] but it is not out of keeping
with the astute sense of humour that distinguished
these commercial princes, that the act also covered
a secret satisfaction in having outwitted their imperial
guest and in being once more the victors in an
encounter with royalty. Certain it is that Charles'
visit proves that the Hanseatic League had reached
the apex of power, and that the city of Lübeck was
81
regarded in Europe as the head of this organization.
Charles' visit was one of the proudest moments
in her story, and the memory survives in local
chronicles.
It also survives in an old picture preserved until
quite recently in the house where he lodged, and now
removed to the rooms of the Municipal Antiquarian
Society. In this canvas we see the Emperor Charles
IV., seated on a large throne-like chair. On either
side of him is a leaded window. A carpet lies before
his feet bordered with black, red, and gold cords.
The emperor is clothed partly in imperial, partly in
episcopal robes: a not uncommon mode of representation
in those days. He wears his hair long, has
a long moustache, and his full beard is parted in the
middle, showing the costly clasp that closes his
mantle. His head is surrounded by a golden jewelled
crown, in his right hand he holds a long sword, in
his left the imperial globe. The subscription runs:
"Anno Dni. 1376 ipse Sevori Dn. Carolus quartus
imperator invictissimus decem diebus hac in domo
hospitatus est."


II.
Our League had attained its maturity. As we
have seen from its origin and as we shall see until
its decadence, security and extension of commerce
was its one aim and solicitude. The Hanseatics
were at all times desirous to extend their markets
abroad, to obtain, if possible, the monopoly of trade,
and it must be admitted that they succeeded
admirably in achieving the end they had in view.
When we look back and consider the disorganized
state of the empire and the slight support they
received from their nominal liege lord, it seems
strange that they did not take this occasion to constitute
themselves also into a political union, forming
independent states after the pattern of the Italian
commercial republics. In general, the towns in
pursuing their policy took as little real notice of the
authority of the emperor, as the emperor of the
interests and doings of the towns.
Even our shrewd Hansa merchants, it would seem,
were afraid outwardly to present a bold front to
their rulers, though secretly they defied them and
circumvented their laws. The very existence of the
federation was illegal, and in direct contravention
83
to one of the chief clauses of the Golden Bull, which
forbade all associations and unions within the
empire. It is no doubt on this account that the
Hansa, like the Venetian Republic, kept its organization
so secret. Even in its own day people were
but vaguely informed as to the working of its
government, and as to the number and extent of its
dominions.
The very natural question arises now that our League
is mature, How many cities did it count in its federation?
but it cannot be answered with precision. Nay,
this question can receive no final reply in any period
of the Hansa's history. The towns that joined did
not always do so permanently, or were not able to
maintain their place, and to fulfil their duties. Often,
too, they proved restive and were "unhansed," and it
was no easy or inexpensive matter to be readmitted.
The ban of the Hansa was more potent than that of
pope or emperor. A town that fell under it lost its
commerce at one blow. Thus, for example, Bremen,
headstrong and stiff-necked, anxious to play an undue
part in the Hansa League, saw itself shut out in 1356,
because one of its burghers had traded with Flanders
at a time when such trading was forbidden. The
municipality, called upon to punish him, took his part,
with the result that for thirty years the town was "unhansed,"
thirty miserable years, during which "the
city was impoverished, grass grew in its streets, and
hunger and desolation took up their abode in its
midst," so writes a contemporary eyewitness. Reinstated
at last, Bremen had to take up heavy responsibilities
in atonement for its misdeeds.
84
GROCERS' HALL, BREMEN.
85
On another occasion Brunswick fell into the hands
of discontented artizans, who headed a revolt of
several towns against the League. A fulminating
decree was issued by the Hansa with the same
results as in the case of Bremen. Misery and
hunger in this case also proved persuasive, and at last,
after six years, this proscribed town was readmitted.
It had to send deputies to Lübeck, who craved pardon
in the most abject terms, and who had to accept the
most humiliating conditions. Besides questions of
internal management, the Brunswickers undertook to
build a votive chapel in the town in memory of their
bad behaviour, and to send pilgrims to Rome who
should crave the Papal pardon for the murders of
councillors committed by the rioters. Two burgomasters
of Brunswick, and eight of the chief citizens
walked humbly in procession, bare-headed, bare-footed,
carrying candles in their hands from the church of
our Lady at Lübeck, to the town hall, where in the
great council chamber of the League, before an
enormous crowd, they had publicly upon their knees
to confess their repentance for what unruly passion
had caused them to do, and to implore their confederates
to pardon them for the love of God, and the
honour of the Virgin Mary.
RATH-HAUS, BRUNSWICK.
More and more did Lübeck come to take the leading
place among the cities. Her laws ruled at the
Hansa diets. They were reckoned the wisest ever
framed by an autonomous community, and are still
quoted with respect. The right to use Lübeck law
was as eagerly craved by distant cities as the Greek
colonies craved the holy fire from native altars. No
87
wonder Lübeck's merchants loved to quote the proud
couplet:
"Was willst begehren mehr,
Als die alte Lübsche Ehr?"
("What more will you desire than the old Lübeck honour?")
Æneas Sylvius Piccolomini, afterwards Pope Pius
II., when travelling through Europe as Chancellor
of the Emperor Frederick III., visited Lübeck, and
writes of it as the town which surpasses all others in
the wealth and magnificence of its buildings and
churches. The same praise is echoed a little later by
a rare guest, the Metropolitan of Moscow, who passed
through Lübeck on his way to Florence, to be present
at the great church council held there by Eugene IV.
Æneas also visited Danzig, and says it was so well
equipped for land and sea warfare, that it could call
under arms at least 50,000 men.
The prominence of the cities varied greatly. Circumstances
which at one time might be to their
advantage, might at another time prove adverse.
Thus Wisby, after its sacking by Waldemar, was the
victim of an accidental fire, which destroyed all that
the Dane had spared. In consequence it fell at once
from its position of importance, and its very site, once
the source of its strength, became the cause of its
downfall, for it proved a most convenient station to
pirates. Where the merchant had safely halted, he
was now in peril of life and goods.
MÜHLENTHOR, STARGARD.
To the question put at various times to the Hansa's
ambassadors "which are the Hansa's cities?" evasive
replies were given, either "those towns that fought the
Hansa's battles;" or a few were enumerated, and the
89
list closed with a colossal etcetera, etcetera. For they
were not easily caught napping, these worthy burghers,
and had ever in view "the interests of the common
German merchants," which they feared might be
endangered by too much publicity. Still, they had
become a power that could not be hid, and seeing how
well they realized this in most respects, it is the more
curious that they did not avail themselves of their
chance of attaining political autonomy. The more
curious too, because, as a rule, the Hanseatics, like the
modern Italians, knew so well how to draw profit out of
all the dissensions and disorders that agitated Europe.
It was indeed a vast dominion that stood under the
sway of the Hansa. In the course of less than a
hundred years there had arisen on the Baltic coast,
within the area of two hundred and fifty miles, no
fewer than fourteen cities of first-class importance,
not to name those that already existed there. Thus
the merchants held in their possession the mouths of
all the great Baltic rivers, on all of which they founded
harbours and depôts. Germany in that epoch evinced
a power of colonization which in its successes recalls
the most brilliant moments of the extension of Greek
life in the Mediterranean. In more modern times
only the North American soil has exercised an
attraction similar to that of the Baltic coasts, and has
shown an equal power of upraising cities within a
brief space of time. Many of the towns boasted a
far larger population than they have at this day.
Thus Lübeck in the fourteenth century counted eighty
thousand inhabitants, as against forty-eight thousand
in 1870.
90
An interesting contemporary opinion on our merchants
is extant from the pen of a learned and travelled
Italian, Marino Sanudo, a pious Venetian, who set
forth early in the fourteenth century with a mission
to stir up the Christian world, and organize a new
Crusade, for Askelon, the last stronghold of the
Romish Church, had fallen into the hands of the unbelievers.
His first purpose was to gauge the fighting
power of the various European maritime states, for it
was a fleet rather than an army that was required.
In his journeyings he ventured as far north as the Baltic,
and thus reports in his letter to Pope John XXII.:
"In Alemannia live many peoples that could prove
most useful to us.... I have seen with my own eyes
that these coasts of Alemannia are quite similar to
the Venetian. The inhabitants, strong of limb and
practised in arms, are mostly warriors; others well
skilled in dyke-making; besides, they are rich, and
what is yet more commendable, they show a warm
zeal for the affairs of the Holy Land."
After enumerating other advantages to be gained
from these allies, he is however obliged to draw his
Holiness' attention to a serious drawback on their
part, namely, "that the Germans are enormous eaters,
which arouses anxiety in respect to supplies when the
fleet shall find itself in the hot regions."
A love for feasting meets us repeatedly in
the old chronicle reports on the German merchants,
and shows that in those days there also held good
what Hawthorne has more recently expressed, that
the Germans need to refresh exhausted nature twice
as often as any other peoples. Then, as now, they
91
were an upright, thorough, massive race, not made of
too fine a clay and wanting rather on the æsthetic
side; a want sure to strike the more finely strung
senses of an Italian.
BURGHERS AT TABLE.
It is certain that the fourteenth century was in
many respects the epoch when the Hansa cities
flourished most actively. Neither before nor after did
they have so many sided an importance for the whole
life of the German nation. It was a stirring period
in the history of the European continent; when the
92
Minnesingers gave place to the Mastersingers; when
learning, hitherto stored up jealously in the monasteries
and the libraries of the princes, had found its
way out among burghers and laymen; when protectors
of art and science were more often simple
merchant princes than noble-born beggars. In a word,
it was an epoch when the middle class sprang into
full being, and took its due and proper place as a
link between the nobility and the common people.
Towards bringing about this state of things the
Hansa had greatly contributed. If it failed to
emancipate itself entirely from the empire, it was
yet ever keenly desirous of emancipating itself from
its petty suzerains. Thus the burghers of Lübeck,
Cologne, Goslar, and other cities were early forbidden
to hold posts under the lord of the domain,
no matter how lucrative such posts might be. Wismar,
engaged on one occasion in a dispute with
the Dominican monks concerning the repair of
the town walls, and obliged to cede to these ecclesiastics
because the lord of the land was favourable
to the Church, carefully recorded the occasion in
its "town book," "in order," as it wrote, "that it
might remember the circumstance on some future
and more favourable occasion." "To pay them out"
is implied though not expressed in the phrase.
With the same insistence and energy the towns
made good their claims when it was requisite to protect
the burgher in his commerce, this source of life to
all the cities. Formerly, it is true, the German merchants
had appeared in the foreign markets as "the
men of the emperor," but now the emperors had no
93
longer might wherewith to back their right, and more
efficient protection was called for. This each found
in his own city. Hundreds and thousands of treaties
and letters of freedom attest to the fact that the towns
recognized their duties towards their citizens and
practised them most strenuously. Sometimes these
were written out in the name of a princeling, whose
signature it was always possible to buy for hard cash;
but as time went on the towns gradually took an entirely
independent stand, so that from France to the Russian
districts of Smolensk the whole continent was overspread
with a network of diplomatic and commercial
contracts eagerly supported and extended by the towns.
The first thing sought for from the territorial lords,
was protection for person and property from the gang
of banditti who dwelt in every castle under the leadership
of some titled robber; then protection against the
cruel rights of wreckage and salvage, which declared
all such goods the property of the territorial lord;
further, release from imprisonment for debts and
other misdemeanours incurred within the jurisdiction
of the city and to be dealt with by itself alone;
assistance in obtaining payment of foreign debts;
freedom from the so-called "judgments of God" in
the form of torture, walking on red-hot irons, &c.;
regulation and diminution of local taxes and tolls on
the lading or unlading of vessels, the weighing of
merchandise; permission to fell wood to repair ships;
in a word, one and all of the necessary permits to
render more easy and profitable the intercourse between
towns and nations.
GERMAN TRADE LIFE.
In each foreign country the Hanseatics had always
95
their permanent settlement, known as the Kontor,
and for these they had early obtained a species of
autonomy that permitted them to exercise jurisdiction
according to their native laws over their own country
people. Defaulters were judged by Hanseatic rules,
and the "common merchant" found a help and
support against the foreigners among whom he for
the moment resided and with whom he traded.
The shrewd towns knew well how to estimate the
value of such foreign settlements, and it is noteworthy
that they never accorded reciprocal rights. In
vain foreigners pleaded permission to found similar
settlements in the Hansa's dominions; the towns
always skilfully declined such requests. Thus in
Cologne foreign merchants were not allowed to reside
longer than six weeks at a stretch, and this only three
times in the year; therefore only eighteen weeks in all.
Similar and even more restrictive regulations prevailed
in the other cities.
It is curious to note that, until the end of the
thirteenth century, it was chiefly the inland towns
who were the great traders, but when they needed for
their trade the highway of the ocean, gradually the
maritime ports had taken the place of importance.
One of the chief lines of sea traffic was that between
Bruges in Flanders and Northern Russia. On this
route hundreds of ships sailed annually, all owned by
the "Easterlings," as the Baltic merchants were called
to distinguish them from the inland traders. It was
not until the fifteenth century that we find Dutchmen,
Zealanders, and Frisians striving to come into serious
competition with the Hansa.
96
A decree that no German merchant might go into
partnership with a Russian, Fleming, or Englishman,
no doubt aided greatly this exclusive possession of
the Baltic Sea. In Russia waterways led them as far
as Smolensk; and, later on, they penetrated even further
inland, by utilizing the roads that had been made
by the German knights whose seat of might was
Pomerania and Livonia. The Marienburg, the chief
house of the Order, proved a welcome halting station
for the merchant travellers, where they found safety
and shelter. Furs were largely obtained from the
inner districts of Russia. "They are plentiful as dung
there," writes the pious chronicler, Adam of Bremen;
adding, "for our damnation, as I believe, for per fas et
nefas we strive as hard to come into the possession
of a marten skin as if it were everlasting salvation."
According to him, it was from this cause and from
Russia "that the deadly sin of luxurious pride" had
overspread the West.
RENSLAU GATE.
Wax, that played so large a part in mediæval religious
rites, and was required in great abundance, was
furnished by the "honey-trees" of the virgin Russian
forests. Leather, skins, tallow, and all species of fat,
were also among the chief products of Russia and the
exports of the Hansa. In return, they imported into
that empire the produce of the looms of Germany,
England, and Flanders, the fine Flemish cloths, the
coarser English and German. Silk, too, and linen
were valued goods. Important also were all manner
of worked metal objects, and such wares as town
industries manufacture. Beer, too, was a valued and
most profitable article of commerce. This drink was
97
brewed in superior excellence in Northern Germany,
the hops being grown on the spot. Contemporary
writers tell how outside all the northern cities hop
gardens flourished. This beer was never wanting
at any carouse in the whole stretch of land from
Flanders to Finland; a heavy, heady beverage, which
would now be deemed unpalatable and indigestible.
98
Some specimens are preserved to this day in the
Danzig Topenbier and the Brunswick Mumme. To
this thirst for ale Hamburg largely owes its prosperity.
For many long years it was the greatest beer-making
town of the North, boasting in the fourteenth century
no less than five hundred breweries.
From Sweden the Hanseatics fetched copper and
iron; in many cases they had acquired the sole
possession of the mines. Scandinavia also furnished
skins, as well as the various forest products of wood,
potash, pitch, and tar. From Blekingen, as at this
day, the merchants brought granite, and from Gothland
and Bornholm limestone, both stones being
required for those building purposes for which the
native material of brick did not suffice. Already the
Baltic supplied the Netherlands with grain.
The Hansa carried in return to Sweden, Finland,
and Russia the requirements of daily life, since these
countries possessed neither manufactures nor skilled
labour. Down to the altar shrines and the psalters of
the Church the merchants brought the evidences of
civilized workmanship to these lands. The very furs
they had taken thence were returned to their northern
homes; of course manipulated and worked up. Even
the English, more advanced in handicraft, submitted
to the same régime. It used to be said on the European
continent in those days: "We buy the fox skins from
the English for a groat, and re-sell them the foxes
tails for a guilder." With England indeed the
Hansa's intercourse was most active, as we shall show
more in detail later on.
CROSSBOW.
Danzig owes almost all its splendour to the English
100
trade. This city dealt largely in Austrian and
Hungarian products, which were distributed from out
its harbour. English crossbowmen received all the
wood for their bows from Austria by way of Danzig.
They were made from the yew tree, which was considered
especially adapted to this end.
What the German merchant obtained as produce
from Russia, Scandinavia, and other parts of Europe,
not to mention the special productions of his own
towns, he distributed either at home or in the world-famed
markets of Bruges and London, for the Hansa
was then the only intermediary between East and
West. For more than three hundred years Bruges
maintained its place as the central market for the
whole of Europe this side the Alps. Here could be
met traders from all parts; the Lombard bankers
and money-changers, the Florentine, Spanish, Portuguese,
French, Basque, English, Scotch, North and
South Germans. It was from Bruges that the Baltic
merchant supplied his home and Northern Germany
with the products of the East, which the South
German had brought from Venice and over the Alpine
passes along the Rhine. In Bruges he could buy the
fruits of the Mediterranean, the silks of Florence, the
oils of Provence, the wines of Spain and Italy. These
meetings of merchants were wont to take place at
stated times, intercourse being thus made surer and
easier. This custom laid the foundation for those
annual fairs for the exchange of wares, of which one
yet survives in Germany in little diminished importance,
namely, the great fair of Leipzig, where all the
German publishers meet to exchange the intellectual
productions of the year.
101
Another source of wealth to the cities arose from
the circumstance that they not only supplied the
requirements of the mass, but were also the purveyors
to the princes and the aristocracy. We find in their
books that these frequently owed them heavy sums
for furs, Flanders cloth, and choice wines. They were
also most often their bankers, for the towns and,
above all, Lübeck, the centre of cash transactions,
were held desirable places for money investments.
Even in the distant districts of Sweden people knew
no better mode of investing capital than to confide it
to Lübeck merchants.
Of course the conditions of trade were vastly
different from those of to-day. Above all, the
merchant had to act more in person. Posts did not
exist, orders and contracts, therefore, could rarely
be made by letter, for it mostly required a special
messenger to carry these. It was hence almost the
rule that the merchant accompanied his wares "over
sea and sand," as the phrase went. For the sake of
greater security, and in order also to diminish expenses,
many would club together to charter a ship.
It was usual to interest the captains in the sales of the
wares, it being held advisable that every one on board
should have an advantage in bringing the goods safe
to land and in their profitable disposal. This custom
arose from the dangers that lurked from robbers, while
insurance of goods in transit was yet unknown. By
interesting captain and crew pecuniarily they were
less likely to throw the goods overboard in a storm, or
to allow pirates quietly to board and rob the vessels;
both matters of common occurrence.
102
If it was dangerous to travel by water, it was yet
far worse to travel by land. Not to mention that there
were few roads, that the mud often lay piled wheel
high, so that the strongest horses could not pull the
carts; the presence of robbers was a constant cause of
fear on the road. Many of these were, as we know,
the lordlings of the land in disguise, and hence they
naturally turned a deaf ear to the repeated petitions of
the merchants to keep the highways in better order.
Added to this, each lord had the right to demand toll
for the passing of his dominions and the toll stations
were often very close together. Thus, for example,
within a space of fifteen miles from Hamburg the
merchant encountered no less than nine. Fortunately
the tables of tolls in those days were not too complicated.
They were generally paid by waggon, or ship
load, regardless of contents.
The Middle Ages were ignorant of protective taxes.
These impediments to the useful exchange of international
produce were reserved for the invention and
practice of our more enlightened centuries. It is
characteristic that the oath which played so great a
part in all mediæval transactions, social and political,
was also employed to settle the toll dues of the
traveller. A crucifix was held before him; on this he
swore that he was not defrauding, that the weight of
his wares, as stated by him, was accurate, and herewith
the transaction was completed. It was, however,
necessary to be most careful not to diverge from the
toll roads. If a merchant was found on a bye-road
his goods were confiscated and he himself imprisoned.
On this account, too, companionship was sought after,
103
the leadership of some one familiar with the ground,
and hence merchants and merchandize generally
moved in caravans.
It is worthy of note that all the trade of that time
was strictly legitimate, and what is known as real
merchant's business. Speculation hardly existed.
Commission and agency dues were not wholly unknown,
but happily there was not existent that
pernicious scourge of modern trade, the time bargains,
which permit merchandize to be sold a dozen times
over before it actually exists. It was honest, true
trade, which only sold what it could show. Therefore,
it could uphold and practise the axiom, "ware
for ware, or for cash." In certain districts, for example
Russia, barter was more common than money payments.
Credit was absolutely forbidden in certain
towns and in certain branches of trade. If credit
was allowed the borrower had to find a surety,
and to go surety was a grave matter, of which the
consequences might easily prove disastrous, entailing
loss of property and often of personal freedom.
Payments were usually made in coined money, but
bar silver was also employed, especially in Russia, and
bills of exchange were not quite unknown. The bills
were payable as a rule either at Lübeck or Bruges.
Silver was the chief currency, but in the fourteenth
century Lübeck was permitted to coin gold. It made
guilders after the pattern of the Florentine ducats.
The gold to coin them with was bought at Bruges.
We must remember that money had a far higher value
in those days than in ours, and that if we want to
arrive at a just comparison with our own times, we
104
must multiply the sums by seventy or seventy-five.
The most common form of reckoning was the Flemish,
i.e., one pound, equal to twenty shillings at twelve
groats each; in a word, exactly the reckoning that has
survived in England to this day. The pound of
money was originally a weight. The best money was
that of Lübeck, and, above all, the English contracted
to be paid in pounds of the "Easterlings," their generic
name for the Baltic merchant. As a survival and
abbreviation of this phrase we in England say pound
sterling to this day. A bad light upon the morality
and conditions of the period is thrown by the fact that
the petty kings, seeing that their coins were often
refused and mistrusted, did not hesitate to coin and
give currency to false money bearing the imprint of
the League. We come across frequent bitter and
often useless complaints on this subject.
Putting out capital at interest was not wholly unknown
in those days, notwithstanding the prohibitions
of the Church which, founded on the text in St. Luke
vi. 54, and the Fourteenth Psalm ("qui pecuniam non
debet ad usuram"), forbade all usury business. The
Jews early held this branch of trade in their hands.
Rates of interest varied from 6 to 10 per cent.
Loans, too, were made to princes, foreign and native,
and to cities, upon industrial enterprises. Wholly
erroneous is the notion that capital was inactive, kept
in a strong box or an old stocking. That great
riches were accumulated is proved by some of the old
wills and account books. Fortunes of a quarter of
a million were not unknown. A single merchant
would often own not only many farms in different and
105
distant parts of the country, but whole villages and
townships. As for the men themselves, we encounter
them in every part of the continent, the artisan as
well as the merchant. Thus, for example, Germans
seem the favourite shoemakers; we hear of them in
this capacity as far off as Lisbon. Then, as now, they
were renowned as bakers, and no one knew better
how to salt and preserve herrings and cod-fish.
In Livonia, Esthonia, Gothland, rich merchants
died whose nearest heirs had to be sought in far off
Westphalia. For instance: A worthy shoemaker
became burgher of Lübeck; then visited Rome and
San Jago di Compostella as a pilgrim, and afterwards
being named shoemaker to the German knights, had
as his chief debtor for goods supplied a cavalier who
fought in Sweden. Thus diverse, many-coloured, and
full of adventure were lives in those times, which we
are too often tempted to think sleepy and stay-at-home.
It is difficult to gain an idea of the full extent and
nature of mediæval trade, but this too was far more
rich and varied than we suppose. Though there was
no activity outside Europe, still it can well stand
beside our modern commerce, and as regards honesty,
thoroughness of produce and workmanship, it unhappily
far eclipses it. Certainly the list of articles
imported and exported in their variety of needful and
needless objects, their luxury and magnificence, goes
far to disprove our notions of the greater simplicity
of life in the Middle Ages. For supply means
demand, and meant this yet more emphatically with
our practical forefathers.
106
Apart from the evidences of figures and statistics, the
evidences of wealth and luxury can also be found in
the yet extant monuments of the time, and, above all,
in the churches. In the Middle Ages the one converging
point of ideal life was the Church. Everything
that went beyond the immediate practical needs
of daily existence, every form of charity, every endeavour
after culture, every striving of artistic and scientific
activity had in those days a religious foundation.
Imagination, too, came to the aid of this tendency in
the shape of the possible and probable dangers encountered
by "sea and sand," by the town traders.
Thus in 1401 we find merchants and shippers at
Lübeck founding "an eternal brotherhood and guild
to the honour of God, of Mary His beloved mother,
and all the saints; above all, the holy true helper in
need, St. Nicholas, that they may aid and comfort the
living and the dead, and all those who seek their
rightful livelihood on the water, many of whom, alas!
perish in water troubles, are thrown overboard or
expire in other ways, dying unconfessed and without
repentance; for on account of their agonies they could
feel neither remorse nor penitence for their sins, and
who have none who pray for them except the general
prayers."
Such guilds were by no means rare. Legacies, too,
were left for similar ends, by which thousands of our
money were willed away: churches, monasteries, and
holy foundations of all kinds raised or aided to pray
for the benefit of the souls of the dead.
Nor were distant pilgrimages unknown. The merchant
would go in person, combining business and
107
religion on the road, or he would send a substitute,
who for a certain sum would visit Rome, the Holy
Land, San Jago in Spain, or Rocamadour in Guyenne.
Such pilgrims by profession were frequent. St. Peter,
St. James, after them St. John, then St. Nicholas and
St. Clement as patron saints of merchants, shippers
and fishermen, and among the women saints St.
Catherine, were the chosen objects of North German
piety. In no town was lacking a leper house, a refuge
for those troubled with that plague of the Middle
Ages, happily now almost unknown in Europe.
These were dedicated to the Holy Ghost and to St.
George, the slayer of dragons.
Above all, worship was paid to the Virgin Mary.
All the municipal churches were dedicated to her.
There is not a town that has not its church of "Our
Lady." The municipal council were put under her
especial protection. To this day the so-called Beautiful
Door of the Mary Church at Danzig bears the
inscription in golden letters: "Queen of Heaven, pray
for us!"
HOHE-THOR, DANZIG.
These churches and religious buildings of all kinds,
many of which survive to this day amid surroundings
to which they have grown strange, speak more eloquently
of the Hansa's might than piles of old parchment
records. All Scandinavia can show nothing to
compare with these architectural monuments, and we
can well comprehend that the Northman entering the
Elbe, the Trave, or other Baltic rivers, and seeing the
lighthouses, churches, and mighty buildings of the
towns, were awed by the Germans' wealth and power
and strength, much as we are impressed now-a-days
109
when we first set eyes upon Eternal Rome. These
buildings resembled each other in externals; in each
we find the same tall graceful steeples rising into the
heavens, the same proud, defiant battlements and
turrets, the same high-gabled many storeyed, small-windowed
houses, the same tendency to employ bricks
as building materials, and to use coloured varieties as
ornamentation. Of this method of building and
decoration the Holstenthor of Lübeck is a well-preserved
example, as indeed these double gates to the
towns were also a characteristic feature. One, a round
tower, resembling greatly the Castel St. Angelo of
Rome, situated on the south side of Rostock, was so
strongly built that even the mechanical contrivances
of our days found it hard work to demolish it when
modern progress required its removal.
Art was then almost exclusively the handmaiden of
religion, and hence it is also in the churches we have
to seek evidences of what the Hansa could produce in
this respect. Metal gravestones, rich bindings, cunning
iron work, attest its taste. Evidence of a
love of painting is found in many works now preserved
in museums of the pre-Holbein day. And, incredible
though it may seem, they were so famous for glass
painting that early in the fifteenth century men came
from Italy to Lübeck to learn perfection in the craft.
HOLSTENTHOR, LÜBECK.
Of their domestic architecture little, unhappily,
remains to us, the practice of building with wood
having wrecked most of the cities. Such houses as
survive, however, testify to the national love of cunning
carvings and inscriptions of didactic purpose.
For it is the keynote of that time to express in
111
artistic form its ardent faith and activity, and its
somewhat rough-and-ready philosophy. Theorizings
and abstractions were little understood. Thus in old
legal codes we see the punishments to be inflicted
pictorially portrayed. Contempt and mocking also
took tangible form, and the clergy were by no means
exempted from such satire. Notwithstanding all the
piety of the age, the people were ever on their guard
against the encroachments of the wily priests. The
deeds of Reynard the Fox—that favourite national
comic epic, so wholly in keeping with the Hansa spirit
of practical good sense and business cunning—was a
favourite theme for weaving into arras and carpet;
and it was common to give a distinct hit at the
clergy in the person of the sly beast.
It was the custom to depict the Last Judgment in
the court of justice of each guildhall. That painted
in 1341 for Hamburg led to a long lawsuit before the
Papal Court at Avignon, because the local dean and
chapter saw in it personal allusions. Thus devoutness
did not impede the townspeople from rigidly retaining
their mental independence of view and action.
Science and literature—such as those ages could
boast—were, like art, more or less pressed into the
service of the Church. The only exception is to be
found in the few popular folk-tales, all comic, like the
deeds of Eulenspiegel, and in the town chroniclers
who were in the pay of the municipal council; but
activity was not great in this latter domain. In most
cities, schools were attached to all the parishes, in
which the children of the wealthy classes learned
reading, writing, some arithmetic, singing, and a little
112
Latin. These institutions were founded in defiance
of the priests, who loved to keep the people in the
darkness and enslavement of ignorance.
Nearly all the merchants and many artizans could
read and write, even if they did not practise these
arts with great facility. Business letters were indited
either in Latin or German, for the latter tongue was
more widely diffused for commercial purposes than in
our day.
But if the wealth of the towns led them to encourage
the gentler aspects of life, it also enabled
them to give expression to less refined tastes, and
refinement of taste was never a speciality of these
rather coarse-grained and boorish Teutons. The
Middle Ages were essentially a time of animal enjoyment
and license; the people loved life and all life
could offer on the material side. We come across
constant records of carouses and feasts, at which the
manners and customs were—to our ideas, at least—most
gross. No occasion for merry-making, which
meant largely eating and drinking, was allowed to
slip by unheeded. Nor were these occasions few, for
the Catholic Church, with its endless list of saints,
furnishes easy and constant excuses for holiday-making,
as we see to this day in Catholic countries.
When guilds, corporations, or associations met for
convivial intercourse, this was pursued according to
established rules, some of which survive in the student
corps of German universities. Breaches of regulation
were punished by extra rations of beer that were paid
for by the delinquent. Entrance fees were defrayed
by giving a feast to all members. In short, they ate
113
hard and drank yet harder, with the result that
nightly drunken brawls were frequent, the quieter
folk often lodging complaints concerning disturbed
sleep or rioting beneath their windows between the
younger burghers and the watchman. Occasionally
a man is banished for molesting the town guard, while
intoxicated and disorderly, for undue license was not
winked at by the town council.
This was also the epoch when flourished those
civic games which furthered the sentiment of brotherhood,
and served, besides, to improve the youth of the
city in the use and practice of arms. Among these,
the May games, May processions, May empires, took
a foremost place. They had their origin in the pagan
conception of spring as a fair youth, who, in victorious
duel, overcame the treacherous winter.
The May emperor was usually elected from among
the town council. The one who had obtained the
wreath during the previous year delivered it up at the
beginning of May or at Whitsuntide. He would ride
out into a neighbouring wood "upon his good horse,"
accompanied by all the councillors clad in armour, to
the sound of martial music and with the town's flag
flying. This was called "going to fetch the May."
A beautiful boy generally headed the procession.
What ceremonies went on in the wood is not known,
but when the procession returned, leading in the new
May emperor, the boy would bear a flowery wreath
upon his long pole as token of victory; while all the
councillors and the huge crowd that followed in their
train were decked with green branches and boughs.
The newly-elected emperor was expected to treat
114
the crowd. After a while this grew a heavy and
serious expense, and we find it recorded that a certain
burgher of Stralsund, who knew he would be
elected to this honour, fled the city. He was, however,
followed and brought back, made to accept the
post and its expenses, and heavily fined into the
bargain.
As in modern Switzerland, so in mediæval Germany,
crossbow shooting for prizes gave another
occasion for public holiday, the different guilds turning
out, with banner and music, to do honour to their
various patron saints. In such wise all adult men
were trained to warfare, though the armies of the
Hansa usually consisted in great part of hired mercenaries,
easily obtained for ready cash in those days,
when fighting was held a pleasure far beyond legitimate
work. Many records survive to attest that these
Hansa merchants were skilled in the use of dagger
and axe. One, for example, a peaceful citizen and
trader, with his own hand killed a noted pirate who
had long rendered the Baltic unsafe. The merchant
went his road, as the saying was, trusting to God and
his own right arm. "Whosoever would be a good
burgher at Danzig must be industrious both in commerce
and arms," runs an inscription on the house of
the crossbow shooters of that city.
CHILDREN'S SPORTS.
Later on, as the towns grew more aristocratic in
character, the gilded youth of the day had games of
their own, from participation in which the artizan was
excluded. These, in many cases, led to such riots
and uprisings of the populace against the municipality
as occasioned the "unhansing" of Brunswick
116
and other cities. Foremost among them were the
so-called "Popinjay Associations," who met to shoot
down from a pole these bright-coloured birds with
which travellers had become acquainted in the market
of Bruges. It was usual for the winner to treat his
comrades to a barrel of beer and cakes.
Indeed, without touching upon the innumerable
institutions common to guilds, trades, patricians, and
plebeians, a picture of those times would be imperfect.
Some of these were instituted for purely
hilarious purposes, others combined charity and
mutual support with carouse and license. Thus in
Cologne there was a society which met to drink
wine, and presented to every honoured guest a medal
having the inscription, "Bibite cum hilaritate." This
society imposed on itself certain laws regarding the
avoidance of bad language, of lawless living, of coarse
speech and action.
In the North beer was the chief beverage, many
companies were dedicated to Gambrinus, the "arch-king
and inventor of brewing." Here, too, quaint
rules attest the rudeness of contemporary manners.
It was customary to exact a monetary fine
from those who spilt more beer than they could cover
with their hand. It seems that even women were
not excluded wholly from these revels. At least a
princely guest, harboured by Lübeck, expressed his
disapprobation at the presence in the cellar of the
town hall of patrician ladies, who under cover of their
veils, which formed for them an incognito, drank hard
and enjoyed themselves grossly.
Endless are the rules and regulations of the various
117
calends, ghostly brotherhoods, companies, and other
names by which they styled themselves. Thus, for
example, they were forbidden to take the food off
each other's plates, to call each other certain most injurious
names, to throw knives and plates at each other, to
appear at solemn drinking bouts bare-footed, to roll in
the mud, to retain arms, hat, and cloak when in company,
to tap a fresh barrel without the presence of an
elder, and so forth. Their duties to each other combined
social and religious obligations. Thus they were
often bound to pray for those who, absent on travels,
could not attend at mass. They gave decent burial
to their poorer comrades, nursed them when sick,
helped them when distressed. A pound of wax, half
a hundredweight of tallow, a barrel of beer, were not
uncommon fines for dereliction of duty. Games of
chance were universally forbidden. Dancing and
song were common forms of diversion. The shoemakers
and tailors of Lübeck were noted for their
skill in the sword-dance, a dance probably not
unlike the Highland reel executed to this day by
Scotchmen.
DOMESTIC MUSIC.
Wit, grace, imagination, were elements mostly
absent from the lives of these rough Germans. This
is nowhere more evident than in their amusements.
The carnival practices furnished a notable example,
practices so graceful, so pretty in the South, so rough
and rude in the North. Two instances will suffice.
At Stralsund it was customary to nail up a poor cat
with which a man fought until he hit it to death,
when he was mock-knighted by the burgomaster. In
Cologne poor blind people were let loose in an enclosed
119
space to hit a pig, which should be the prize
of the successful candidate. The joy of the spectators
reached its height when the poor blind men struck
each other in place of their victim. The practices at
weddings were too rude for description.
Luxury in dress was most pronounced, and
sumptuary laws were repeatedly enacted. It seems
strange that it was the men even more than the
women who offended in these respects. Simple, nay,
rude as the lives of these burghers were in their
homes, out of doors they loved to make display,
especially in the matter of costly weapons and brave
horses. Young men returning from the wars or the
great markets of London or Bruges, introduced new
fashions and fantasies which changed far more frequently
than we are apt to suppose. The most
conservative dress was the headgear of the patricians,
the councillors and members of the municipality.
This consisted for many ages in a long cap of
cloth, trimmed with fine fur. Before hats or caps
came into fashion as coverings, the sight of these
men in their long fur cloaks, with their heads enclosed
in these curious hoods, must have had a
stately, grave effect. So proud were the patricians
of this dress that the councillors of Bremen actually
forged a document early in the thirteenth century,
according to which Godfrey of Bouillon, accorded
to them, during the first Crusade, the permission to
wear fur and gold chains. The dress, clogging the
free action of the legs, necessitated a stately slow
walk, and its length would seem often to have inconvenienced
them in those times of unpaved streets and
120
mud-coated roads. A certain Evart von Huddessen,
the representative of Stralsund at the Court of King
Erik of Sweden, gained the special favour of the
monarch on an occasion, when, invited by the king to
visit with him his pleasure gardens outside the town,
he quietly walked through the puddles after Erik's
horse, instead of waiting like the other representatives
for their servants to carry for them their trains,
which they feared to spoil in the mud. "Eh! what
are we waiting for here?" he cried to his colleagues,
"shall his royal highness ride alone? I reckon my
masters of Stralsund are rich enough that they can
make good to me my new coat."
Nor were they invariably simple in their homes,
though usually so. A favourite German folk tale
tells how Melchior, of Bremen, had his dining-room
paved with silver dollars, and even if history
or chronicle does not confirm this legend, it is
thoroughly in keeping with Hanseatic modes of displaying
wealth. There did exist, for instance, a
certain Wulf Wulflam, of Stralsund, who sat upon
a silver seat, and had his rooms hung with costly
arras. When he married he, like a royal personage,
caused the road from his house to the church to be
overspread with a Flanders carpet, while musicians
played day and night before his door. No doubt at
his wedding appeared also the eighty dishes which
at weddings was the highest limit allowed to
burgher luxury by the Hanseatic by-laws.
It would seem, too, that the Hansa representatives
when sent to "Hansa days" (the meetings of the
various cities in common council) after a while indulged
121
in great display to impress beholders with the
power and wealth of their respective cities. This,
after a time, assumed such proportions that poorer
or wiser communities refrained, whenever possible,
from sending members to the "Hansa days."
Such were the habits and customs of these old
burghers. As we see, it was a time when men were
occupied with the material rather than the ideal side
of life. A curious medley it presents of egotism and
altruism, piety and license, love of individuality and
strict regulation, roughness of living and unbridled
luxury, boorishness and civilization.
A word must be said of that important institution,
the town council, to complete this sketch of the
German towns during the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. Its constitution varied somewhat of course,
according to the size and wealth of the cities, but
there were certain main resemblances. The number
of aldermen varied from twelve to twenty-four. At
their head were two or four burgomasters, who enjoyed
no special privileges, except that in council they
held the office of president. The appointment was
for life, but they took it in turns to be on active duty.
Certain limitations of choice as to aldermen existed.
Thus for long in Lübeck no one could hold that office
who earned his bread by handicraft. This regulation
however did not last. Still merchants throughout
filled the chief places; as, being travelled men, and
knowing the requirements of their fellows, they were
considered the most fit. Next to these, brewers
and tailors took a leading part. The general constitution
of the council may be regarded as in a fashion
123
aristocratic, but it was checked in deliberations and
decisions by a sort of second chamber, the common
council. Under their rule the cities certainly
flourished; the one chamber counselled, the other
acted, and to be alderman was indeed no sinecure,
but rather a post that imposed heavy labour. Honour
it brought, but scanty remuneration.
MIDDLE-CLASS OCCUPATIONS IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.
Noblesse oblige was the proud motto these men
acted on. The church bells called them to their
meetings, which at first were held in the municipal
church, later in the guildhalls. At Lübeck they
always assembled first in their own chapel of Our
Lady's Church, then went in procession to the town-hall.
This was the centre of all national life. The
market-place was built before it, around it were the
chief shops. In the market-place justice was
administered, either in the open air or under the
open porticos of the guildhall. Civic feasts were held
here, foreign guests received at this spot. No wonder,
then, that the burghers spent great sums upon the
building and decoration of their town-halls and surroundings.
They were to them the palladium of
civic independence, whence law and order, merriment
and feasting took their origin. To this day the
cellars of the town-halls in Germany boast the best
wines and choicest foods, and though now let out as
restaurants they still, many of them, show in fresco
and carving the remains of ancient splendour. In
the town-halls were preserved the treasure, the
civic documents, and the great town books, called
into requisition in all disputes. "No witness goes
beyond the Book" was the axiom of the day.
124
The market-place was always the largest open place
in a city. The streets were narrow and tortuous.
This was necessitated by the circumstance that all
towns at that date were walled, and hence their extension
circumscribed. Each class of workmen lived
together; shoemakers in one street, coopers in
another, and so forth. Their houses being small, it
was usual for them on fine days to do their work out
of doors, which gave an animated appearance to the
place. At night these streets were closed by iron
chains drawn across them.
The town life was, in short, but the family life on
an extended scale, and the municipality watched over
the welfare of the inhabitants as a father over that
of his household. To facilitate commerce and industry,
and to look after roads and buildings, were
among its chief cares. It is noteworthy that in some
towns regulations existed compelling every one who
had means to leave in his will a certain sum for
repairing the highways and keeping the ports in
good condition. Many fulfilled this provision, even
without this order.
Another occupation of the aldermen was to superintend
trade, and see it carried out on honest principles.
Thus, at Novgorod, a bale of linen is discovered
to be bad, so that "no honourable and good
man could be paid in such ware." It is sent back
to Riga, thence to Wisby, thence to Lübeck, where
the aldermen had to find out who delivered these
goods. Punishment for such fraud followed inevitably,
and was so heavy that, on the whole, few attempted to
play these base tricks. We also come across complaints
125
that barrels of herrings had been packed
fraudulently, good and large fish being on the top;
small and inferior and even stale ones filling the
rest of the barrel. As such perishable goods could
not be returned, the aldermen instituted official
herring packers, who were responsible for honest
action.
In all difficult matters, the advice of the municipality
was asked and given. It was held "that they
knew what others did not know." Thus burgher and
burgher ruler worked hand in hand, and each man
felt himself a link of the whole chain. This feeling
gave rise to an active patriotism, a warm love for
their own town, of which instances abound in the
mediæval chronicles. Many tales are preserved of
brawls arising in the towns through the vauntings
of rival citizens. Thus a certain Lübecker meeting
a Bremener in a Hamburg inn, boasted so greatly
of his native town's advantages and made such fun
of his companion's aldermen that they all but came
to serious blows. "You had better mind your words
and drink your beer in peace," was the friendly
advice of a bystander.
Such were these burghs which had grown free
and strong through burgher industry, and were kept
powerful by burgher unity and honesty.


III.
A serious interruption to the Baltic trade after
the glorious peace with Waldemar arose from the
notorious gang of pirates known to history as the
Victual Brothers. Upon the principle that all is
fair in love and war the Hansa, during its campaign
against the Danish king, had openly countenanced
and even abetted piracy, so long as the attacks of
the robbers were directed against their enemies. The
chance of plundering under protection was too
tempting not to attract a large number of adventurers,
who for some years carried on their black
trade under the designation of "Victual Brothers,"
a name chosen because their ostensible aim was to
supply with provisions that part of the Swedish coast
which belonged to the Hansa.
It seems strange to us of to-day to find as the
leading spirits among these Brothers the names of
Moltke and Manteuffel, doubtless forbears of the
famous modern German generals. These pirates
founded masses and charitable institutions on the
one hand, and robbed and sacked remorselessly
on the other. Peace being concluded, the Hansa
naturally had to clear the seas of these pests, but
127
it had been easier to call them into activity than
to suppress them. A large body of men had found
profitable employment coupled with stirring adventure;
this latter being a powerful incentive in those
days, and were loth to quit their free wild life.
They continued their association, nay, even enlarged
it, forming themselves into a corporation, after the
pattern of the Knights Templars, and divided all
booty equally among their body. In a brief space
they became the scourge of all the commercial cities.
"God's friend and all the world's enemy" was their
audacious motto. Masters of both seas, the Baltic
and the German Ocean, on one occasion they even
seized, plundered, and burnt down Bergen (1392) and
took prisoner the bishop. Gothland became their
stronghold, and Wisby, once the Hansa's glory, was
turned into a pirate's nest near which the merchant
sailed with fear and trembling.
It seems strange, to our modern ideas, even to
think that piracy was once a reputable calling. It
was held as such, for example, in ancient Greece,
as we may read in Thucydides, book i. chap. 5.
No offence was in those days either intended or
taken if one Greek asked another if he were a pirate.
In the Baltic, like duelling in more polished climes,
this practice long survived the positive laws framed
against it. Pirates would even give back empty
ships to merchants, wishing them a happy return
with fresh and fuller cargoes.
In vain did Margaret of Sweden protest against
the audacities of the Victual Brothers. She was
helpless against them. The measure of her impotence
128
can be gauged by the fact that she begged
from Richard II., king of England, permission to
hire three ships at Lynn for the protection of her
kingdom. In vain, too, on the days when the Hansa
met in council, was this theme discussed. For three
whole years all fishing on Scania had to be abandoned.
The result was severely felt throughout the
length and breadth of Christian Europe, for herrings
and other Lenten food became rare and costly.
SHIP-BUILDING IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY.
Stronger and stronger grew these pirates, so that
at last it was decided to send out an army against
them. Once more recourse was had to a poundage
tax to raise supplies and thirty-five large vessels with
three thousand men were sent to sea in 1394. After
long and arduous struggles they at last broke the power
of the association, but for long afterwards separate
bands of pirates, once members of the mighty gang,
rendered the navigation of these seas a peril.
Legend took possession of these robbers from an
129
early date, and we come across them in song and
fable. Taking a foremost place were Godeke
Michelson and Stortebeker, whose special mission
it was to harry the traders with England. Stortebeker,
it is said, was a nobleman, indeed noblemen
were frequently found in the association. As a youth
he had been wild and lived so riotous a life that all
his property was gambled and drunk away. When
finally the town of Hamburg, the scene of his
carouses, in order to pay his debts, deprived him
of his knightly armour and forbade him the city
precincts, he joined the Victual Brothers.
At this time their leader was Godeke Michelson,
who hailed the new confederate with joy, after testing
his strength, which was so great that with his hands
he broke iron chains like string. And because his
new ally was also great at drinking—he could pour
down huge bumpers at one gulp—he bade him lay
aside his noble name and renamed him instead
Stortebeker ("Pour down bumpers"). Once when the
pair had plundered the North Sea clean they made
a descent upon Spain. As was their wont, they divided
their spoils with their comrades, only on this occasion
they kept for themselves the holy bones of St.
Vincent, stolen from a church, bearing them under
their coats upon their naked breasts. Hence, says
legend, they grew invulnerable, so that neither crossbow
nor axe, sword nor dagger, could harm or wound
them.
When the Victual Brothers were conquered by the
Hansa and banished from the Baltic, these two chieftains
with their followers found good friends in Frisia,
130
where to this day memories of Stortebeker survive,
and the chieftain Keno then Broke became his father-in-law,
for his lovely daughter lost her heart to the
doughty pirate, and followed him on to his ships and
his floating kingdom. For Stortebeker was a king in
his way. When he made captives who promised him
a ransom he let them live. But if they were poor
and old and weak, he threw them overboard relentlessly.
If they were poor but strong, and so likely
to be of use, he tested their strength in this manner.
He caused his own enormous goblet to be filled
with wine. If they could empty it at one gulp they
were his peers, and he accepted them as comrades.
Those who could not pass this ordeal were dismissed.
It is said that Stortebeker and Godeke Michelson
sometimes had moments of penitence concerning
the lives they led. In such a moment of remorse
they each presented the cathedral of Verdun with
seven glass windows, on which were painted cunningly
the seven deadly sins. Stortebeker's "mark," two
reversed goblets, is depicted in one of them, probably
the one that treats of gluttony. They also founded
a charity for distributing bread to the poor.
In 1400, the Hansa sent out a fleet to Frisia to
combat these chieftains. It was in this war that the
Hamburgers attained the honour of conquering the
Victual Brothers, dispersing their crew and releasing
their captives. Keno then Broke was carried off into
confinement, for he had, against his oath and faith,
contrived to aid the pirates. With Keno the town of
Hamburg made a new treaty. It is said that just as
it was signed and the councillors had left the council
131
chamber, Stortebeker managed to slip out of a hiding-place,
where he had heard all that passed, and joked
with his father-in-law at the expense of the Hamburg
aldermen who had once more put faith in him. Whilst
so engaged a certain Councillor Naune, who had forgotten
his gloves, returned to the hall and overheard
them. Hence the war broke out afresh. Once more
many Victual Brothers were captured and beheaded in
Hamburg. Their heads were stuck upon poles for
the warning of all beholders, while the account books
prove that the executioner received eight pennies per
trunk decapitated and his servant twenty pennies per
body buried. Yet again a fleet had to set forth; for
as long as Stortebeker and Godeke Michelson were
living there was no peace possible. Under a Hamburg
alderman, Simon of Utrecht, who commanded
the fleet on board a mighty ship known as the
Coloured Cow, they again set out. The name of
this vessel is remarkable, and is the first instance we
come across in Hanseatic history of a profane denomination
for a ship. All the others are named after
some saint or angel, under whose special protection
it was supposed to sail. "The Coloured Cow, from
Flanders, that tore through the ocean with its great
horns," sings the folk-song, the "Stortebeker Lied,"
which a hundred and fifty years ago was still sung by
the people. The Victual Brothers lay off Heligoland.
Towards dark one evening in the year 1402, the
Hamburg fleet approached them, and a daring fisherman
came so near that he was able to pour molten
lead upon some of their rudders, loosening them,
and rendering the vessels unseaworthy. Next day
133
the battle began. It raged three days and three
nights, and only after a desperate resistance was
Stortebeker conquered.
HELIGOLAND.
Some of the pirates fled, many were killed or thrown
into the sea; their ships, richly laden with booty in
the shape of linen, wax, cloth, &c., were seized, and
Stortebeker with seventy comrades carried in triumph
to Hamburg. The cell in which Stortebeker was
confined was known as Stortebeker's hole as long as
it existed. It was destroyed like so many of the antiquities
of Hamburg in the great fire of 1842. Short
work was of course made of his trial, and with his
companions Stortebeker was condemned to death.
When he heard his sentence it afflicted him much, and
he offered the municipality in return for his life and
freedom a chain of gold to be made from his hidden
treasures, so long that they could span with it the whole
cathedral and also all the town. This offer was, of
course, indignantly rejected, and next day he was
publicly executed, together with seventy comrades. In
compliance with their dying petition they went to death
dressed in their best, marching in stately procession,
and preceded by fifes and drums.
After Stortebeker's death the Hamburgers searched
his ships for the hidden treasures. Except a few
goblets they could find nothing at first, until a carpenter
broke the main-mast, which was discovered to be
hollow and full of molten gold. With this fortune
the merchants who had suffered at Stortebeker's hands
were indemnified, the costs of the war paid, and out
of the remainder a golden crown was made and
placed on the spire of St. Nicholas Church.
134
Stortebeker was thus out of the way; but there still
remained Godeke Michelson. So the Hamburgers
with Simon of Utrecht and his Coloured Cow, once more
set forth and once more returned victorious, bearing
in their train Godeke Michelson, eighty robbers, and
the under-chieftain Wigbold, of whom it is said that
he had been a professor of philosophy at Rostock,
and had exchanged his chair for the forecastle of a
ship. These men also were all decapitated in the
presence of the burghers and municipal council.
It was a heavy day's work for the executioner, and
it is related that he waded up to his ankles in blood.
After it was all ended an alderman asked him kindly
if he were not much wearied. "Oh no," said the
headsman, laughing grimly, "I never felt better in my
life, and I have strength enough left to behead the
whole lot of you councillors." For this treasonable
speech he was at once dismissed from his post.
Various relics exist to this day to keep Stortebeker's
memory fresh in Hamburg. Among them were
a small whistle with which he gave the signal to his
ships during a storm, an iron cannon nineteen feet
long, his armour, and the executioner's sword.
But chief of all Hamburg preserved the so-called
Stortebeker goblet, a silver bumper, from which
tradition says he drank. "Whosoever comes to Hamburg
and does not go to the Ship's Company, that
he may drink from the goblet of Stortebeker and
Godeke Michelson, and write his name in the book
that lies beside it, has not been in Hamburg," says an
old writer. This goblet is about a yard and a half
high, and holds four bottles. A sea-fight is engraved
136
on it, together with other incidents out of Stortebeker's
life, and some rough rhymes. Once more
modern criticism, destructive and intolerant of all
picturesque legend, declares that the cup is of later
date than Stortebeker's time, and can never have
been his.
TOMB OF SIMON OF UTRECHT, HAMBURG.
Soon after the death of the pirate chiefs, Hamburg
sent an envoy as pilgrim to the shrine of San Jago of
Compostella. Whether he was employed to bear
thither the thanks of the city to the saint for their
victory, or to return to Spain the relics of St. Vincent,
history saith not. A medal was struck to commemorate
the event. It bears Stortebeker's portrait and
an appropriate inscription. Simon of Utrecht, the
victorious captain of the fleet, who later won other
battles for the Hansa, received high honours from
Hamburg. When he died he was accorded honourable
burial, and a gravestone to his memory was put outside
St. Nicholas Church. Happily it survived the
great fire. It shows the crest of Simon, a large three-masted
vessel, with the figure of a beast at the helm;
doubtless, the famous "coloured cow;" a swan draws
this ship through the waves. Below is an inscription
in Latin verse, recording the hero's feats against the
pirates, and enjoining posterity to imitate the great
deeds of their forbears, that the fame of the city may
not be diminished.


IV.
We have seen how great was the Hansa's power
in peace and in war; let us now cast a glance
at the basis upon which the whole proud fabric
rested. This is to be sought, beyond doubt, in
its foreign commerce. How enormous the interest
they had, especially in the Baltic trade, how
great, indeed almost exclusive, was their empire
in that sea, it is difficult to realize. And to retain
this empire, to be masters of the mercantile
relations between the eastern and western extremities
of Europe, they considered no sacrifice too
great. This was the keynote of their policy. Their
purpose, simple enough in conception, was carried out
with a disregard of other claims than their own, and
often a violence which made them encounter resistance,
and which in the end was largely the cause of
their fall.
The political agitations and confusions which disturbed
the Scandinavian kingdoms early in the
fifteenth century were astutely utilized by the Hanseatics,
who, having their settlements at Bergen and
Scania, were able to keep out the Dutch and English,
then just beginning to attempt a rivalry with them in
138
the northern trade. The Dutch were easily disheartened.
Not so the English; and we read of instances
in which the Hanseatics and English acted towards
one another with a savagery which proves that commercial
rivalry can excite hearts as bitterly and
furiously as political or religious fanaticism.
No matter at what cost, monopoly the Germans
were resolved to have, and they succeeded in forcing
the kings of Denmark to place an interdict upon
English trading. This prohibition corresponded to
another that they had extorted, according to which
all merchandize coming from the extreme end of the
Norwegian kingdom was obliged to pass through and
halt at their station of Bergen. The purpose of the
latter regulation was to concentrate all the productions
of the country at a single point; thus offering
to the Hanseatics the first refusal of goods, and a
power of dominating the market.
Indeed nowhere did their imperious and self-seeking
policy show itself in a less amiable light than in the
dealings of the Hansa with the poor inhabitants of
Norway's sterile coasts. The history of their factory
at Bergen is from its earliest foundation the history
of a relentless despotism, disfigured by violence and
breach of faith in treaties. King Haguin had, in
1376, accorded to the German merchants the right to
trade freely in all the burghs, villages, and harbours
of his kingdom, but it seemed that they themselves
preferred to restrict their business to the town of
Bergen, which, it is true, combined uncommon advantages.
It possessed an excellent harbour, the city
was shielded by an amphitheatre of lofty mountains,
139
and though, as regards climate, it could boast no
advantages, more rainy days occurring there than at
other points of the Norwegian coast, yet it had early
been the staple of all Norwegian and Arctic products.
Its geographical situation rendered it equally accessible
for travellers from the north and south, while its
harbour was so deep that even ships of considerable
draught could anchor almost in front of the town's
houses.
From the earliest times the inhabitants of Bergen
had been traders. In 1393 they were grievously pillaged
by the Victual Brothers; and ere they could
recover from this misfortune, another pirate, Bartholauer
Voet (1428), attacked them, just when the
English were helping them to recover their commerce.
It is pretty evident that his attack was countenanced,
if not commanded, by the Hansa. At sight of his
ships the inhabitants fled. The crew were thus
enabled to land unhindered; they plundered everything,
down to the bishop's palace and his library;
and they despoiled the Norman vessels which had
come there for the summer fishing. They then took
their stolen goods to market, returning the following
Easter for a second visit. This time the inhabitants
were more on their guard, and made a gallant but
vain defence. Once more the city was sacked, and
the royal and episcopal palace and many private
houses were burnt to ashes.
Shorn of its wealth, Bergen was now so weak that
the conquerors were able to dictate their own terms.
The city, which for five hundred years had been
in exclusive possession of the Greenland passage
140
had to renounce all maritime traffic. Further,
the citizens saw themselves forced to pawn their
land to the Hanseatics, in return for the mere
necessaries of life, and as they could rarely redeem
these pledges the whole city of Bergen gradually fell
into the hands of these opulent traders.
Expelled from their old dwellings in ancient
Bergen, which formed the part of the city known
as the Bridge, the inhabitants planned to establish
themselves on the harbour board that skirted the
opposite side of the crescent. But the insatiable
greed of the Hanseatics would not suffer them to
stay there. The conquerors obtained this also for
themselves, so that in the end the entire port was in
their power.
Thus, and by means of an ever-increasing population
of merchants, clerks, apprentices, sailors, workmen,
they exercised a practical suzerainty over the town.
Whenever cited to submit themselves to the local
authorities they claimed the privilege of foreigners;
they refused to pay city taxes, though they held the
rights of citizens, while they paid custom duties at a
reduction. They openly protected the enemies of the
king, felled the forests, introduced themselves arbitrarily
into the houses of strangers; in short, committed
every offence with impunity. As in London
and Novgorod, so in Bergen, the Hanseatic factory
formed a state within the state.
The Hanseatics, in their arbitrary actions, repeatedly
ran counter to the Hansa's command and how
to keep order at Bergen became one of the most
difficult problems at "Hansa days." It would seem
141
as if the rude climate had exercised a deleterious
influence over these naturally coarse-grained Germans.
As we have said, the whole harbour board was in
their hands. The two sides were connected by the
so-called Shoemaker's Alley, long the abode of
strangers at Bergen, a quarter that became after a
time the residence of all boors and doubtful characters,
who shrank from no acts of violence, and
defended the German monopoly after their own
fashion, i.e., by means of fisticuffs and knives. Thus,
as an example: the all-important fish market was so
situated that the inhabitants of Bergen could reach
it only by means of this street. Until the Germans
had had the first pick of newly-arrived goods, the
inmates of Shoemaker's Alley suffered no one to pass,
and woe to those who ventured to disregard this
prohibition. So completely broken was the might of
these northern people—the descendants of the Normans,
that most warlike race, the scourge of ancient
Europe.
JUSTICE IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.
The side of the harbour known as the Bridge—the
Bridge of the lice the natives called it in derision—was
the actual factory of the Hansa. It consisted of
so-called gardens, of which nine belonged to the community
of St. Martin and thirteen to that of St. Mary.
Each garden was isolated, and formed a separate factory,
bearing its own crest and name, such as "The
Cloak," the "Court of Bremen," &c. The common
crest of the Bridge was odd enough, presenting half of
the German imperial eagle, against a crowned cod-fish.
Each garden was connected with the sea by a drawbridge,
143
so that vessels could anchor in front. The
ground-floor consisted of workshops and warehouses: in
the first were the bedrooms of the resident merchants,
above were the kitchens. Behind the house were
mighty cellars, and above these again the "Schutting,"
a large windowless space used as a council chamber.
Opening thence was the kitchen garden.
Every "garden" was inhabited by at least ten
"families," each of whom had a husband as chief
superintendent and magistrate, to keep order among
the younger members and apprentices. As a rule the
"family" came from the same Hansa town. The
faults of the very young were punished by flogging,
those of the apprentices by fines or imprisonment. In
the summer the heterogeneous "families" dined alone,
in the sad winter time they all met in the "Schutting,"
but ate at separate tables. At a fixed hour every one
had to rise and go to bed.
Superintending the entire factory was a grand
council, composed of two aldermen, eighteen members,
and a secretary, who had to be a doctor of laws.
When conflicts arose between the different members
of a family, or between residents and travellers, the
matter was referred to the aldermen for decision.
Grave cases were sent up to the Hanseatic diet. The
aldermen had further to watch over trade, taxes, and
all that regarded the business transactions of the
colony.
In its time of greatest prosperity the factory at
Bergen counted about three thousand souls, all vowed
to celibacy, which was imposed on them under most
severe penalties. The fear was that union with the
144
native women might lead to the divulging of Hanseatic
secrets, or induce the men to settle permanently
in this spot, and so become denaturalized. Members
of the Hansa were strictly forbidden to spend a night
outside the factory. Armed watchmen and savage
dogs exercised a rigid guard.
These residents were usually agents for merchants
in the Baltic cities. After ten years' sojourn, they were
obliged to return to their native town to give place to
new arrivals, who then had to go through the various
gradations of rank, beginning as office boy, and ending,
if luck favoured, as alderman. It was a sort of hierarchic
organization, of which the rules were most
rigidly enforced. Entrance dues for vessels, fines, and
money penances defrayed the general expenses of the
factory; each town paid for the board, wages, and
arming of its representatives. Not all members of the
Hansa, however, were permitted to trade with Bergen,
the conditions being purposely made onerous and
expensive.
In the same restrictive spirit, and to hinder a great
influx of men to the factory, a series of probationary
ordeals was planned, through which every new-comer
had to pass. By rendering these tests difficult and
repulsive they hoped to deter from Bergen the sons of
opulent families, for whom the advantages to be gained
there would be counterbalanced by the perils of initiation.
These "games," as with grim humour they were
termed, were entirely in keeping with the grotesque
spirit of the age, and analogies are to be found, though
less gross, in the religious orders and the institutions
of chivalry. The mildest of them resembled in some
146
respects the practices common to British sailors in
crossing the line. It is scarcely strange, that in the
frigid, rigid north, among a population naturally rough,
far from home, friends, and the more refining influences
of life, a prey to deadly ennui, imagination should
have taken a fierce and coarse turn.
SHIP AT THE END OF THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY.
We cannot sully our pages by detailing the thirteen
different "games" or modes of martyrdom that were
in use at Bergen. Our more civilized age could not
tolerate the recital. In those days they attracted a
crowd of eager spectators, who applauded the more
vociferously the more cruel and barbarous the tortures.
The most popular were those practices known as the
smoke, water, and flogging games; mad, cruel pranks,
calculated to cause a freshman to lose health and
reason. Truly Dantesque hell tortures were these
initiations into Hansa mysteries. Merely to indicate
their nature we will mention that for the smoke game
the victim was pulled up the big chimney of the
Schutting while there burnt beneath him the most
filthy materials, sending up a nauseous stench and choking
wreaths of smoke. While in this position he was
asked a number of questions, to which he was forced,
under yet more terrible penalties, to reply. If he survived
this torture he was taken out into the yard and
plied under the pump with six tons of water.
The "water" game that took place at Whitsuntide
consisted in first treating the probationer to food, and
then taking him out to sea in a boat. Here he was
stripped, thrown into the ocean, ducked three times,
made to swallow much sea-water, and thereafter mercilessly
flogged by all the inmates of the boats. The
147
third chief game was no less dangerous to life and
limb. It took place a few days after, and was a rude
perversion of the May games. The victims had first
to go out into the woods to gather the branches with
which later they were to be birched. Returned to the
factory, rough horse-play pranks were practised upon
them. Then followed an ample dinner, which was
succeeded by mock combats, and ended in the victims
being led into the so-called Paradise, where twenty-four
disguised men whipped them till they drew blood,
while outside this black hole another party made
hellish music with pipes, drums, and triangles to deafen
the screams of the tortured. The "game" was considered
ended when the shrieks of the victims were
sufficiently loud to overtone the pandemonic music.
When all the ordeals were ended a herald, who also
occupied the rôle of fool, announced in a loud voice that
the games were over, adding the fervent wish that the
noble practice of ordeals might never be abandoned,
and that for the honour and prosperity of the Hansa
commerce and the Hanseatic factory they might ever
be held in veneration.
Only those who survived and sustained these rites
were admitted into the corporation at Bergen and
could rise to the highest grades, with the prospect of
assisting as spectators at the games in which before
they had themselves played a part. Not till 1671
were these barbarous practices, which every year increased
in ferocity, suppressed by order of Christian V.
of Denmark, and only, of course, after the Hansa had
sunk from its pristine power.


V.
Though the Government of Denmark was more
enlightened than that of Norway, and though the
Danes were jealously desirous of keeping their trade in
their own hands, they, too, could not free themselves
from the all-absorbing power of the Hanseatic League.
In vain did they endeavour to raise up rivals to these
traders; in vain did they even encourage pirates to
attack them; in vain did they institute custom dues
and taxes; each and all of these measures proved insufficient.
The credit of the towns was unassailable.
The Hanseatics knew how to vanquish all obstacles,
and finally they found themselves in full possession of
all their ancient privileges, as well as those which they
had extorted in concluding peace with Waldemar.
The dissensions of the three northern kingdoms,
which lasted for nearly fifty years, and which the
Hanseatic League were by no means anxious to see
settled (for, above all else, they feared the union of the
three northern kingdoms under one head) were admirably
utilized. The League played off one set of
enemies against another, now aided this faction, now
sided with that, never too openly expressed either
149
sympathy or hostility, and yet always contrived so
that any advantages accruing were theirs.
It was in those troubled times that Lübeck bought
from the Danish king the town of Kiel and adjoining
lands, while the queen pawned her jewels to the city
in order to raise money for war purposes.
Denmark was of immense importance to the
Hanseatic League, not only for the grain and cattle
it produced, but because it was the key to the
passages of the Belt and the Sound, the only maritime
routes for passing from the Baltic to the North
Sea. And, above all, the Sound was of first-class
importance as dominating the coveted province of
Scania, that mediæval Peru. This tongue of land,
which juts out into the sea in form of a hook on the
extreme south-west of Sweden, and shows to-day two
miserable towns, Skânoe and Falsterbo, almost buried
in driving sand, presented in the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries, from St. Jacob's to St. Michael's
Day (July 25th to September 29th), a most animated
spectacle. Nothing more strange is to be found in
either hemisphere than was the tumultuous life of
this arid province. Here each foot of ground was
jealously disputed by fishermen and merchants.
Englishmen, Flemings, Danes, and peoples of
tongues and customs the most diverse were found side
by side. But the Hanseatics preponderated. They
established themselves in a species of rude wooden
barrack called by them Witten, where they at once
instituted their peculiar rules and privileges, which
gave them that united power which in the end enabled
them to crush out all competition. For the device of
150
the Hanseatics, though unexpressed, was "Monopoly,"
and during these centuries they carried it rigidly into
effect. The word Witten still survives in the name of
various fishing stations on the Baltic; for example,
one not far remote from the old pagan city of Arkona,
once the site of a temple, where the Christian Saxons
bought the right to fish by paying tribute to the local
god.
The main object of the trade in Scandinavia was
herrings, but this brought many other industries in its
train. Itinerant merchants offered cloth, linen, hardware,
wine, beer, and many other articles to the natives,
whose country boasted no handicrafts, as well as to
the temporary residents. In short, the place became
a market for the exchange of Western and Eastern
products, natural and manufactured. Here could be
seen the Lübeck cooks busy in extemporized kitchens
that formed a sort of rude restaurant; here rough
taverns in which German drinks were obtainable at
easy prices; here German shoemakers plied their
skill; above all, the coopers drove a lively trade,
making and mending the barrels needed for the
precious fish. The import of salt, too, was obviously
of first-class importance, and this was entirely in the
hands of the Germans. We might expect that during
the busy period when thousands of men were hard at
work fishing, salting, packing the herring, beer should
have been drunk in large quantities, but the amount
consumed almost passes belief. This also was entirely
supplied by the Hanseatic cities. It was they, too,
who shipped the indispensable fish and sent it to
England, France, the Netherlands, the Baltic, nay, far
151
into the centre of Germany, and even to Poland and
Russia.
They had not in Scania, as at Bergen, a regularly
organized factory, but the Witten stood under superintendence,
while at adjacent Malmö they founded a
permanent colony, under the jurisdiction of an alderman,
who administered Lübeck law and watched over
the Witten trade with jealous care. Here each town
had its guild representative, often its house, and here
annually a dignitary from Lübeck would pay a
passing visit in order to adjust quarrels and investigate
the state of trade.
The "Scandinavian travellers," as they were named,
instituted a number of companies with rules of a
religious, commercial, and worldly-sensuous character.
Thus the "Pious Brotherhood of Malmö" buried
every poor stranger with the same church pomp,
costly palls, candles and masses, as they would one of
their own members. No one was admitted into the
brotherhood who was at feud with one of its associates.
No one might enter the common room bearing arms.
A member who introduced a guest was responsible for
his good behaviour. In a word, the regulations were
of a certain humane character, far different from those
which obtained at Bergen. They were evidently
copied from those of the guilds in the Hanseatic and
other towns of the Middle Ages.
Until early in the sixteenth century the League
retained in undiminished vigour its advantages in
Scandinavia. To break their power it was necessary
for the Dutch to discover a better mode of salting the
fish. Then the fish itself came in smaller shoals to
152
these coasts, and appeared instead near Scotland and
Ireland, and, worst of all, modern Europe became
Protestant, and fasting was hence no longer an
obligatory fashion. Only a few sunken gravestones,
still standing amid the desolation of this district, bear
witness to the former importance of the site.
As for the rest of Sweden, the country, though not
productive, was still of value to the Hanseatics, since
they held the entire trade in their hands. As from
Norway, they exported wood, iron, copper, skins, in
a word, explored all its resources. In most of the
maritime towns they exercised certain rights. Thus
Stockholm itself was partly in their possession, the
local administration being half chosen by them. In
this wise they were able to bring pressure to bear
upon the government. In short, they disposed of the
whole commerce of Sweden, and it was not until the
days of Gustavus Vasa that their might was rudely
and completely shaken.
Indeed, in those middle centuries there seemed no
limit to the Hanseatics' ambition and power. They
early cast their eyes towards that immense territory
in the far north, that Russian Empire which in those
days was truly an unknown land. With quick traders'
instinct they recognized that the country was worthy
to be included in their vast monopoly. When they
first established themselves in Russia is not known.
Towards the end of the thirteenth century we find
them in possession of a factory at Novgorod, on the
river Volchor, a city which, with the province that
surrounded it, was then an independent republic, for
the Russia of those days was surrounded by various
153
principalities mostly under Tartar rule. The natives
were not strong enough to claim as their own a rich
and populous city, whose liberties were protected by
the Western Christians, and which had moreover been
founded by aliens, namely, by one of those enterprising
Norman chiefs, who in early times were, as we
know, the terror of all states and countries.[9]
It is thought that the Hanseatics had another
similar establishment at Pleskow, a city on the Velika,
and perhaps even a depôt at Moscow, but undoubtedly
Novgorod was their most important station. Here
merchants and artizans fixed their abode, and drew
around them a rich commerce for the town. It was
the staple for Arctic and Byzantine riches, riches which
the more barbarian Russians did not understand how
to utilize like our cunning traders. As early as the
eleventh century we hear of a German trading settlement
at Novgorod. In 1269 the local ruler accorded
to the Hanseatics, "to the German settlement, the
Goths, and all peoples of Latin tongue," special freedom
in dealing with his province.
As usual, the Hanseatics created a monopoly and
jealously excluded all strangers. Assigned in Novgorod
to a special quarter of the town, they built a
church of their own, dedicated to St. Peter, and
grouped their guildhall, shops, stores, and dwelling-houses
around it. The quarter soon became known
as the Court of the Germans at Great Novgorod, or
the Court of St. Peter. As at Bergen, it was built in
154
such a manner that it could be defended, if need be,
and at night it was closed and guarded by watchmen
and fierce dogs.
There is happily preserved for us the Codex of this
German colony on the Lake of Ilmen. It is called
the Skra, an old German word which we encounter
elsewhere in Hanseatic chronicles. This Skra furnishes
a lively picture of the strange character of the
Court of St. Peter. It appears that "the entire council,
together with the common consent of the wisest of all
the German cities," had decreed that the laws here
laid down should be enforced on all who visited the
court, "as it was done from the commencement." The
non-resident merchants, who always travelled in large
parties and accompanied by a priest, are spoken of as
the "summer and winter travellers." They elected
from out of their number the alderman of the Court
of St. Peter. He became head of the settlement,
received the income, fees, and taxes, and defrayed the
general costs. The alderman of the dwelling court
was the highest dignitary and, with the aid of the four
wisest, adjudged all quarrels, personal or commercial.
These aldermen had special privileges in the choice
of residence, and the aldermen of the "winter travellers"
were further allowed certain honours and comforts
in the great common room. The land travellers
had to yield to the seafarers in all matters of convenience
and space. Their priest, too, was regarded as
the chief ecclesiastic of St. Peter's Court, and to him
alone was accorded free board and a salary out of the
common funds. Any one who refused to appear in
answer to a summons before the court was subjected
155
to a heavy fine. The so-called "rooms" (i.e., dwellings)
were common to all; except that the "winter travellers,"
secluded from all the world in midst of the long
Arctic nights, were permitted special privileges. The
"children's room," the abode of the younger clerks
and apprentices, also enjoyed rather more freedom