# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2004
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Greenwood, Arthur, 1880-1954, The War and Democracy, World War, 1914-1918
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10668.html.noimages
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

be so high as to cause an excessive rise in prices." Cd. 7560.

    1914. 2 1/2d.

The Government has issued a Manual of Emergency Legislation (3s.
6d.) containing the statutes, proclamations, orders in council, rules,
regulations, and notifications used in consequence of the war; the
appendices contain other documents (the Declarations of Paris and of
London, the Hague Convention, etc.).
"Peace cannot become a law of human society, except by passing through the
struggle which will ground life and association on foundations of justice
and liberty, on the wreck of every power which exists not for a principle
but for a dynastic interest."—MAZZINI in 1867.
"The greatest triumph of our time, a triumph in a region loftier than that
of electricity or steam, will be the enthronement of this idea of Public
Right as the governing idea of European policy; as the common and precious
inheritance of all lands, but superior to the passing opinion of any. The
foremost among the nations will be that one which, by its conduct, shall
gradually engender in the minds of the others a fixed belief that it is
just."—GLADSTONE.
§1. The Two Issues.—The War of 1914 is not simply a war between the
Dual Alliance and the Triple Entente: it is, for Great Britain and
Germany especially, a war of ideas—a conflict between two different and
irreconcilable conceptions of government, society, and progress. An attempt
will be made in this chapter to make clear what these conceptions are, and
to discuss the issue between them as impartially as possible, from the
point of view, not of either of the combatant Powers, but of human
civilisation as a whole.
There are really two great controversies being fought out between Great
Britain and Germany: one about the ends of national policy, and another
about the means to be adopted towards those or any other ends. The latter
is the issue raised by the German Chancellor's plea—not so unfamiliar
on the lips of our own countrymen as we are now tempted to believe—that
"Necessity knows no law." It is the issue of Law and "scraps of paper"
against Force, against what some apologists have called "the Philosophy of
Violence," but which, in its latest form, the French Ambassador has more
aptly christened "the Pedantry of Barbarism." That issue has lately been
brought home, in its full reality, to the British public from the course of
events in Belgium and elsewhere, and need not here be elaborated. Further
words would be wasted. A Power which recognises no obligation but force,
and no law but the sword, which marks the path of its advance by organised
terrorism and devastation, is the public enemy of the civilised world.
But it is a remarkable and significant fact that the policy in which this
ruthless theory is embodied commands the enthusiastic and united support of
the German nation. How can this be explained?
It must be remembered in the first place that the German public does
not see the facts of the situation as we do. On the question of Belgian
neutrality and the events which precipitated the British ultimatum, what
we know to be a false version of the facts is current in Germany, as is
evident from the published statements of the leaders of German thought and
opinion, and it may be many years before its currency is displaced.
This difficulty should serve to remind us how defective the machinery of
civilisation still is. One of the chief functions of law is, not merely to
settle disputes and to enforce its decisions, but to ascertain the true
facts on which alone a settlement can be based. The fact that no tribunal
exists for ascertaining the true facts in disputes between sovereign
governments shows how far mankind still is from an established "rule of
law" in international affairs. Not only is the Hague powerless to give and,
still more, to enforce its decision on the questions at issue between the
European Powers. It has not even the machinery for ascertaining the facts
of the case and bringing them to the notice of neutral governments and
peoples in the name of civilisation as a whole.
But apart from divergent beliefs as to the facts, it is remarkable that
thinking Germany should be in sympathy with the spirit and tone of German
policy, which led, as it appears to us, by an inexorable logic to the
violation of Belgian neutrality and the collision with Great Britain.
But the fact, we are told, admits of easy explanation. Thinking Germany has
fallen a victim to the teachings of Treitschke and Nietzsche—Treitschke
with his Macchiavellian doctrine that "Power is the end-all and be-all of a
State," Nietzsche with his contempt for pity and the gentler virtues, his
admiration for "valour," and his disdain for Christianity.
This explanation is too simple to fit the facts. It may satisfy those who
know no more of Treitschke's brilliant and careful work than the extracts
culled from his occasional writings by General von Bernhardi and the late
Professor Cramb. It may gratify those who, with so many young German
students, forget that Nietzsche, like many other prophets, wrote in
allegory, and that when he spoke of valour he was thinking, not of "shining
armour," but of spiritual conflicts. But careful enquirers, who would
disdain to condemn Macaulay on passages selected by undiscriminating
admirers from his Essays, or Carlyle for his frank admiration of Thor
and Odin and the virtues of Valhalla, will ask for a more satisfying
explanation. Even if all that were said about Treitschke and Nietzsche were
true, it would still remain an unsolved question why they and their ideas
should have taken intellectual Germany by storm. But it is not true. What
is true, and what is far more serious, both for Great Britain and for
Europe, is that men like Harnack, Eucken, and Wilamowitz, who would
repudiate all intellectual kinship with Macchiavelli and Nietzsche—men who
are leaders of European thought, and with whom and whose ideas we shall
have to go on living in Europe—publicly support and encourage the policy
and standpoint of a Government which, according to British ideas, has
acted with criminal wickedness and folly, and so totally misunderstood
the conduct and attitude of Great Britain as honestly to regard us as
hypocritically treacherous to the highest interests of civilisation.
That is the real problem; and it is a far more complex and difficult one
than if we had to do with a people which had consciously abandoned the
Christian virtues or consciously embarked on a conspiracy against Belgium
or Great Britain. The utter failure of even the most eminent Germans to
grasp British politics, British institutions, and the British point of
view points to a fundamental misunderstanding, a fundamental divergence
of outlook, between the political ideals of the two countries. It is the
conflict between these ideals which forms the second great issue between
Germany and Great Britain; and on its outcome depends the future of human
civilisation.
§2. Culture.—What is the German ideal? What do German thinkers regard
as Germany's contribution to human progress? The answer comes back with a
monotonous reiteration which has already sickened us of the word. It is
Kultur, or, as we translate it, culture. Germany's contribution to
progress consists in the spread of her culture.
Kultur is a difficult word to interpret. It means "culture" and a
great deal more besides. Its primary meaning, like that of "culture," is
intellectual and aesthetic: when a German speaks of "Kultur" he is thinking
of such things as language, literature, philosophy, education, art,
science, and the like. Children in German schools are taught a subject
called Kulturgeschichte (culture-history), and under that heading they
are told about German literature, German philosophy and religion, German
painting, German music and so on.
So far, the English and the German uses of the word roughly correspond. We
should probably be surprised if we heard it said that Shakespeare had made
a contribution to English "culture": but, on consideration, we should admit
that he had, though we should not have chosen that way of speaking about
him. But there is a further meaning in the word Kultur, which explains
why it is so often on German lips. It means, not only the product of the
intellect or imagination, but the product of the disciplined intellect and
the disciplined imagination. Kultur has in it an element of order, of
organisation, of civilisation. That is why the Germans regard the study of
the "culture" of a country as part of the study of its history. English
school children are beginning to be taught social and industrial history in
addition to the kings and queens and battles and constitutions which used
to form the staple of history lessons. They are being taught, that is, to
see the history of their country, and of its civilisation, in the light
of the life and livelihood of its common people. The German outlook is
different. They look at their history in the light of the achievements of
its great minds, which are regarded as being at once the proof and the
justification of its civilisation. To the question, "What right have you to
call yourselves a civilised country?" an Englishman would reply, "Look at
the sort of people we are, and at the things we have done," and would point
perhaps to the extracts from the letters of private soldiers printed in the
newspapers, or to the story of the growth of the British Empire; a German
would reply (as Germans are indeed replying now), "Look at our achievements
in scholarship and science, at our universities, at our systems of
education, at our literature, our music, and our painting; at our great men
of thought and imagination: at Luther, Dürer, Goethe, Beethoven, Kant."
Kultur then means more than "culture": it means culture considered as
the most important element in civilisation. It implies the disciplined
education which alone, in the German view, makes the difference between
the savage and the civilised man. It implies the heritage of intellectual
possessions which, thanks to ordered institutions, a nation is able to hand
down from generation to generation.
We are now beginning to see where the British and German attitudes towards
society and civilisation diverge. Broadly, we may say that the first
difference is that Germany thinks of civilisation in terms of intellect
while we think of it in terms of character. Germany asks, "What do you
know?" "What have you learnt?" and regards our prisoners as uncivilised
because they cannot speak German, and Great Britain as a traitor to
civilisation because she is allied with Russia, a people of ignorant
peasants. We ask, "What have you done?" "What can you do?" and tend
to undervalue the importance of systematic knowledge and intellectual
application.
But we have found no reason as yet for a conflict of ideals. Many English
writers, such as Matthew Arnold, have emphasised the importance of culture
as against character; yet Matthew Arnold's views were widely different from
those of the German professors of to-day. If their sense of the importance
of culture stopped short at this point, we should have much to learn from
Germany, as indeed we have, and no reason to oppose her. What is there then
in the German admiration for culture which involves her in a conflict with
British ideals?
§3. Culture as a State Product.—The conflict arises out of the alliance
between German culture and the German Government. What British public
opinion resents, in the German attitude, is not culture in itself, about
which it is little concerned, but what we feel to be its unnatural
alliance with military power. It seems to us wicked and hypocritical for a
government which proclaims the doctrine of the "mailed fist" and, like the
ancient Spartans, glories in the perfecting of the machinery of war, to be
at the same time protesting its devotion to culture, and posing as a patron
of the peaceful arts. It is the Kaiser's speeches and the behaviour of the
German Government which have put all of us out of heart with German talk
about culture.
This brings us to a fundamental point of difference between the two
peoples. The close association between culture and militarism, between the
best minds of the nation and the mind of the Government, does not seem
unnatural to a modern German at all. On the contrary, it seems the most
natural thing in the world. It is the bedrock of the German system of
national education. Culture to a German is not only a national possession;
it is also, to a degree difficult for us to appreciate, a State product.
It is a national possession deliberately handed on by the State from
generation to generation, hall-marked and guaranteed, as it were, for the
use of its citizens. When we use the word "culture" we speak of it as an
attribute of individual men and women. Germans, on the other hand, think
of it as belonging to nations as a whole, in virtue of their system of
national education. That is why they are so sure that all Germans possess
culture. They have all had it at school. And it is all the same brand of
culture, because no other is taught. It is the culture with which the
Government wishes its citizens to be equipped. That is why all Germans
tend, not only to know the same facts (and a great many facts too), but
to have a similar outlook on life and similar opinions about Goethe,
Shakespeare and the German Navy. Culture, like military service, is a part
of the State machinery.
Here we come upon the connecting link between culture and militarism. Both
are parts of the great German system of State education. "Side by side with
the influences of German education," wrote Dr. Sadler in 1901,[1] "are
to be traced the influences of German military service. The two sets
of influence interact on one another and intermingle. German education
impregnates the German army with science. The German army predisposes
German education to ideas of organisation and discipline. Military and
educational discipline go hand in hand…. Both are preserved and fortified
by law and custom, and by administrative arrangements skilfully devised
to attain that end. But behind all the forms of organisation (which would
quickly crumble away unless upheld by and expressing some spiritual force),
behind both military and educational discipline, lies the fundamental
principle adopted by Scharnhorst's Committee on Military organisation in
Prussia in 1807: 'All the inhabitants of the State are its defenders by
birth.'"
[Footnote 1: Board of Education Special Reports, vol. ix. p. 43.]
At last we have reached the root of the matter. It is not German culture
which is the source and centre of the ideas to which Great Britain is
opposed: nor yet is it German militarism. Our real opponent is the system
of training and education, out of which both German culture and German
militarism spring. It is the organisation of German public life, and the
"spiritual force" of which that organisation is the outward and visible
expression.
§4. German and British Ideals of Education.—Let us look at the German
ideal more closely, for it is worthy of careful study. It is perhaps best
expressed in words written in 1830 by Coleridge, who, like other well-known
Englishmen of his day (and our own) was much under the influence of German
ideas. Coleridge, in words quoted by Dr. Sadler, defines the purpose of
national education as "to form and train up the people of the country to
obedient, free, useful, and organisable subjects, citizens and patriots,
living to the benefit of the State and prepared to die in its defence." In
accordance with this conception Prussia was the first of the larger States
in Europe to adopt a universal compulsory system of State education, and
the first also to establish a universal system of military service for its
young men. The rest of Europe perforce followed suit. Nearly every State in
Europe has or professes to have a universal system of education, and every
State except England has a system of universal military service. The Europe
of schools and camps which we have known during the last half century is
the most striking of all the victories of German "culture."
Discipline, efficiency, duty, obedience, public service; these are
qualities that excite admiration everywhere—in the classroom, in the camp,
and in the wider field of life. There is something almost monumentally
impressive to the outsider in the German alliance of School and Army in the
service of the State. Since the days of Sparta and Rome, there has been no
such wonderful governmental disciplinary machine. It is not surprising that
"German organisation" and "German methods" should have stimulated interest
and emulation throughout the civilised world. Discipline seems to many to
be just the one quality of which our drifting world is in need. "If this
war had been postponed a hundred or even fifty years," writes a philosophic
English observer in a private letter, "Prussia would have become our Rome,
worshipping Shakespeare and Byron as Pompey or Tiberius worshipped Greek
literature, and disciplining us. Hasn't it ever struck you what a close
parallel there is between Germany and Rome?" (Here follows a list of
bad qualities which is better omitted.) … "The good side of it is the
discipline; and the modern world, not having any power external to itself
which it acknowledges, and no men (in masses) having yet succeeded in being
a law to themselves, needs discipline above everything. I don't see where
you will get it under these conditions unless you find some one with an
abstract love of discipline for itself. And where will you find him except
in Prussia? After all, it is a testimony to her that, unlovely as she is,
she gives the law to Germany, and that the South German, though he dislikes
her, accepts the law as good for him." And to show that he appreciates the
full consequences of his words he adds: "If I had to live under Ramsay
MacDonald (provided that he acted as he talks), or under Lieutenant von
Förstner" (the hero of Zabern), "odious as the latter is, for my soul's
good I would choose him: for I think that in the end, I should be less
likely to be irretrievably ruined."
Here is the Prussian point of view, expressed by a thoughtful Englishman
with a wide experience of education, and a deep concern for the moral
welfare of the nation. What have we, on the British side, to set up against
his arguments?
In the first place we must draw attention to the writer's candour in
admitting that a nation cannot adopt Prussianism piecemeal. It must take
it as a whole, its lieutenants included, or not at all. Lieutenant von
Förstner is as typical a product of the Prussian system as the London
policeman is of our own; and if we adopt Prussian or Spartan methods,
we must run the risk of being ruled by him. "No other nation," says Dr.
Sadler, "by imitating a little bit of German organisation can hope thus
to achieve a true reproduction of the spirit of German institutions. The
fabric of its organisation practically forms one whole. That is its merit
and its danger. It must be taken all in all or else left unimitated. And
it is not a mere matter of external organisation…. National institutions
must grow out of the needs and character (and not least out of the
weakness) of the nation which possesses them."
But, taking the system as a whole, there are, it seems to me, three great
flaws in it—flaws so serious and vital as to make the word "education" as
applied to it almost a misnomer. The Prussian system is unsatisfactory,
firstly, because it confuses external discipline with self-control;
secondly, because it confuses regimentation with corporate spirit; thirdly,
because it conceives the nation's duty in terms of "culture" rather than of
character.
Let us take these three points in detail.
The first object of national education is—not anything national at all,
but simply education. It is the training of individual young people. It is
the gradual leading-out (e-ducation), unfolding, expanding, of their
mental and bodily powers, the helping of them to become, not soldiers, or
missionaries of culture, or pioneers of Empire, or even British citizens,
but simply human personalities. "The purpose of the Public Elementary
School," say the opening words of our English code, "is to form and
strengthen the character and to develop the intelligence of the children
entrusted to it." In the performance of this task external discipline is no
doubt necessary. Obedience and consideration for others are not learnt in
a day. But the object of external discipline is to form habits of
self-control which will enable their possessor to become an independent and
self-respecting human being—and incidentally, a good citizen. "If I had
to live under Ramsay MacDonald, or the Prussian Lieutenant," says our
writer, "I would choose the latter, for my soul's good." But our British
system of education does not proceed on the assumption that its pupils
are destined to "live under" any one. Our ideal is that of the free man,
trained in the exercise of his powers and in the command and control of his
faculties, who, like Wordsworth's "Happy Warrior" (a poem which embodies
the best British educational tradition):
         … Through the heat of conflict, keeps the law

         In calmness made, and sees what he foresaw.

Neglect for the claims of human personality both amongst pupils and
teachers is the chief danger of a State system of education. The State
is always tempted to put its own claims first and those of its citizens
second—to regard the citizen as existing for the State, instead of the
State for its citizens. It is one of the ironies of history that no man was
more alive to this danger than Wilhelm von Humboldt, the gifted creator of
the Prussian system of education. As the motto of one of his writings he
adopted the words, "Against the governmental mania, the most fatal disease
of modern governments," and when, contrary to his own early principles,
he undertook the organisation of Prussian education he insisted that
"headmasters should be left as free a hand as possible in all matters of
teaching and organisation." But the Prussian system was too strong for him
and his successors, and his excellent principles now survive as no more
than pious opinions. The fact is that in an undemocratic and feudal State
such as Germany then was, and still largely is, respect for the personality
of the individual is confined to the upper ranks of society.
"I do not know how it is in foreign countries," says one of Goethe's
heroes,[1] "but in Germany it is only the nobleman who can secure a certain
amount of universal or, if I may say so, personal education. An ordinary
citizen can learn to earn his living and, at the most, train his intellect;
but, do what he will, he loses his personality…. He is not asked, 'What
are you?' but only, 'What have you? what attainments, what knowledge, what
capacities, what fortune?' … The nobleman is to act and to achieve.
The common citizen is to carry out orders. He is to develop individual
faculties, in order to become useful, and it is a fundamental assumption
that there is no harmony in his being, nor indeed is any permissible,
because, in order to make himself serviceable in one way, he is forced
to neglect everything else. The blame for this distinction is not to be
attributed to the adaptability of the nobleman or the weakness of the
common citizen. It is due to the constitution of society itself." Much has
changed in Germany since Goethe wrote these words, but they still ring
true. And they have not been entirely without their echo in Great Britain
itself.[2]
[Footnote 1: Wilhelm Meister's Lehrjahre, Book v. chapter iii.]
[Footnote 2: The contrast which has been drawn in the preceding pages, as
working-class readers in particular will understand, is between the aims,
not the achievements, of German and British education. The German aims are
far more perfectly achieved in practice than the British. Neither the law
nor the administration of British education can be acquitted of "neglect
for the claims of human personality." The opening words of the English
code, quoted on p. 359 above, are, alas! not a statement of fact but
an aspiration. We have hardly yet begun in England to realise the
possibilities of educational development along the lines of the British
ideal, both as regards young people and adults. If we learn the lesson
of the present crisis aright, the war, so far from being a set-back
to educational progress, should provide a new stimulus for effort and
development.]
But man cannot live for himself alone. He is a corporate being; and,
personality or no personality, he has to fit into a world of fellow-men
with similar human claims. The second charge against the German system is
that it ignores the value of human fellowship. It regards the citizens of a
country as "useful and organisable subjects" rather than as fellow-members
of a democracy, bound together by all the various social ties of
comradeship and intercourse.
The Prussian system, with its elaborate control and direction from above,
dislikes the free play of human groupings, and discourages all spontaneous
or unauthorised associations. Schoolboy "societies," for instance, are in
Germany an evil to be deplored and extirpated, not, as with us, a symptom
of health and vigour, to be sympathetically watched and encouraged.
Instead, there is a direct inculcation of patriotism, a strenuous and
methodical training of each unit for his place in the great State machine.
We do not so read human nature. Our British tendency is to develop habits
of service and responsibility through a devotion to smaller and more
intimate associations, to build on a foundation of lesser loyalties and
duties. We do not conceive it to be the function of the school to teach
patriotism or to teach fellowship. Rather we hold that good education
is fellowship, is citizenship, in the deepest meaning of those words;
that to discover and to exercise the responsibilities of membership in a
smaller body is the best training for a larger citizenship. A school, a
ship, a club, a Trade Union, any free association of Englishmen, is all
England in miniature. "To be attached to the subdivision, to love the
little platoon we belong to in society," said Burke long ago, "is the first
principle, the germ, as it were, of public affections. It is the first
link in the series by which we proceed towards a love to our country
and mankind…. We begin our public affections in our families. No cold
relation is a zealous citizen. We pass on to our neighbourhoods, to our
habitual provincial connections. These are inns and resting-places… so
many images of the great country, in which the heart found something which
it could fill."[1]
[Footnote 1: Reflections on the French Revolution, pp. 292, 494 (of vol.
iii. of Collected Works, ed. 1899).]
There is one fairly safe test for a system of education: What do its
victims think of it? "In Prussia," says Dr. Sadler, "a schoolboy seems to
regard his school as he might regard a railway station—a convenient and
necessary establishment, generally ugly to look at, but also, for its
purpose efficient." The illustration is an apt one: for a Prussian school
is too often, like a railway station, simply a point of departure,
something to be got away from as soon as possible. "In England a boy who
is at a good secondary school cares for it as an officer cares for his
regiment or as a sailor cares for his ship," or, we may add, as a Boy Scout
cares for his Troop.[1]
[Footnote 1: Special Reports, ix. p. 113. Dr. Sadler's article deals with
secondary schools only. Unfortunately, no one can claim that the idea of
fellowship is as prominent in English elementary schools, or even in all
secondary schools, as the quotation might suggest.]
Democracy and discipline, fellowship and freedom, are in fact not
incompatible at all. They are complementary: and each can only be at
its best when it is sustained by the other. Only a disciplined and
self-controlled people can be free to rule itself, and only a free people
can know the full meaning and happiness of fellowship.
§5. German and British Ideals of Civilisation.—Lastly, the German system
regards national "culture" rather than national character as the chief
element in civilisation and the justification of its claim to a dominant
place in the world. This view is so strange to those who are used to
present-day British institutions that it is hard to make clear what it
means. Civilisation is a word which, with us, is often misused and often
misunderstood. Sometimes we lightly identify it with motor cars and
gramophones and other Western contrivances with which individual traders
and travellers dazzle and bewilder the untutored savage. Yet we are seldom
tempted to identify it, like the Germans, with anything narrowly national;
and in our serious moments we recognise that it is too universal a force to
be the appanage of either nations or individuals. For to us, when we ask
ourselves its real meaning, civilisation stands for neither language nor
culture nor anything intellectual at all. It stands for something moral and
social and political. It means, in the first place, the establishment and
enforcement of the Rule of Law, as against anarchy on the one hand and
tyranny on the other; and, secondly, on the basis of order and justice,
the task of making men fit for free institutions, the work of guiding and
training them to recognise the obligations of citizenship, to subordinate
their own personal interests or inclinations to the common welfare, the
"commonwealth." That is what is meant when it is claimed that Great Britain
has done a "civilising" work both in India and in backward Africa. The
Germans reproach and despise us, we are told,[1] for our failure to spread
"English culture" in India. That has not been the purpose of British rule,
and Englishmen have been foolish in so far as they have presumed to attempt
it: England has to learn from Indian culture as India from ours. But to
have laid for India the foundations on which alone a stable society could
rest, to have given her peace from foes without and security within, to
have taught her, by example, the kinship of Power and Responsibility, to
have awakened the social conscience and claimed the public services of
Indians in the village, the district, the province, the nation, towards the
community of which they feel themselves to be members, to have found India
a continent, a chaos of tribes and castes, and to have helped her to
become a nation—that is not a task of English culture: it is a task of
civilisation.
[Footnote 1: For evidence of this see Cramb's Germany and England, p.
25.]
Law, Justice, Responsibility, Liberty, Citizenship—the words are
abstractions, philosophers' phrases, destitute, it might seem, of living
meaning and reality. There is no such thing as English Justice, English
Liberty, English Responsibility. The qualities that go to the making of
free and ordered institutions are not national but universal. They are no
monopoly of Great Britain. They are free to be the attributes of any race
or any nation. They belong to civilised humanity as a whole. They are part
of the higher life of the human race.
As such the Germans, if they recognised them at all, probably regarded
them. They could not see in them the binding power to keep a great
community of nations together. They could not realise that Justice and
Responsibility, if they rightly typify the character of British rule,
must also typify the character of British rulers; and that community of
character expressed in their institutions and worked into the fibre
of their life may be a stronger bond between nations than any mere
considerations of interest. Educated Indians would find it hard to explain
exactly why, on the outbreak of the war, they found themselves eager to
help to defend British rule. But it seems clear that what stirred them most
was not any consideration of English as against German culture, or any
merely material calculations, but a sudden realisation of the character of
that new India which the union between Great Britain and India, between
Western civilisation and Eastern culture, is bringing into being, and a
sense of the indispensable need for the continuance of that partnership.[1]
[Footnote 1: The reader will again understand that it is British aims
rather than British achievements which are spoken of. That British rule
is indispensable to Indian civilisation is indeed a literal fact to which
Indian opinion bears testimony; and it is the conduct and character of
generations of British administrators which have helped to bring this sense
of partnership about. But individual Englishmen in India are often far
from understanding, or realising in practice, the purpose of British rule.
Similarly, the growth of a sense of Indian nationality, particularly in the
last few years, is a striking and important fact. But it would be unwise to
underestimate the gigantic difficulties with which this growing national
consciousness has to contend. The greatest of these is the prevalence
of caste-divisions, rendering impossible the free fellowship and social
intercourse which alone can be the foundation of a sense of common
citizenship. Apart from this there are, according to the census,
forty-three races in India, and twenty-three languages in ordinary use.]
It is just this intimate union between different nations for the
furtherance of the tasks of civilisation which it seems so difficult
for the German mind to understand. "Culture," with all its intimate
associations, its appeal to language, to national history and traditions,
and to instinctive patriotism, is so much simpler and warmer a conception:
it seems so much easier to fight for Germany than to fight for Justice in
the abstract, or for Justice embodied in the British Commonwealth. That is
why even serious German thinkers, blinded by the idea of culture, expected
the break-up of the British Empire. They could imagine Indians giving their
lives for India, Boers for a Dutch South Africa, Irishmen for Ireland
or Ulstermen for Ulster; but the deeper moral appeal which has thrilled
through the whole Empire, down to its remotest island dependency, lay
beyond their ken.
Let us look a little more closely at the German idea of national culture
rather than national character as the chief element in civilisation. We
shall see that it is directly contrary to the ideals which inspire
and sustain the British Commonwealth, and practically prohibits that
association of races and peoples at varying levels of social progress which
is its peculiar task.
"Culture," in the German idea, is the justification of a nation's
existence. Nationality has no other claim. Goethe, Luther, Kant, and
Beethoven are Germany's title-deeds. A nation without a culture has no
right to a "place in the sun." "History," says Wilamowitz in a lecture
delivered in 1898, "knows nothing of any right to exist on the part of a
people or a language without a culture. If a people becomes dependent on a
foreign culture" (i.e. in the German idea, on a foreign civilisation) "it
matters little if its lower classes speak a different language: they, too
… must eventually go over to the dominant language…. Wisely to further
this necessary organic process is a blessing to all parties; violent
haste will only curb it and cause reactions. Importunate insistence on
Nationality has never anywhere brought true vitality into being, and often
destroyed vitality; but the superior Culture which, sure of its inner
strength, throws her doors wide open, can win men's hearts."[1] In the
light of a passage like this, from the most distinguished representative of
German humanism, it is easier to grasp the failure of educated Germany to
understand the sequel of the South African War, or the aspirations of the
Slav peoples, or to stigmatise the folly of their statesmen in Poland,
Denmark, Alsace-Lorraine, and Belgium. "Importunate insistence on
Nationality"—the words come home to us now with a new meaning when we
learn that in Belgium, now perforce "dependent on a foreign culture,"
babies are registered under German names and newspapers printed in "the
dominant language," and that already "forty newspaper vendors in Brussels
have been sentenced to long terms of hard labour in German prisons for
selling English, French, and Belgian newspapers."[2] "Our fearless German
warriors," writes the leading German dramatist, Gerhart Hauptmann,[3]
"are well aware of the reasons for which they have taken the field. No
illiterates will be found among them. Many of them, besides shouldering
their muskets, carry their Goethe's Faust, some work of Schopenhauer, a
Bible, or a Homer in their knapsacks." Such is a serious German writer's
idea of the way in which civilisation is diffused!
[Footnote 1: Speeches and Lectures, pp. 147-148 (1913 edition).]
[Footnote 2: Daily Papers, October 12, 1914 (Exchange Telegram from

vassalage and find new markets. The so-called "Pig War"—the breeding
of swine is Serbia's staple industry, and the founders of her two rival
dynasties were wealthy pig-breeders—proved an unexpected success, for new
trade outlets were found in Egypt and elsewhere. But the initial strain
hit every peasant in his pocket and thus greatly accentuated the feeling
against Austria-Hungary. At this stage came the Young Turk revolution and
its sequel, the annexation of Bosnia. To any impartial observer it had been
obvious from the first that those who dreamt of Austria-Hungary's voluntary
withdrawal from the two provinces were living in a fool's paradise. The
formal act of annexation merely set a seal to thirty years of effective
Austrian administration, during which the Sultan's rule had been confined
to the official celebration of his birthday. Educational and agrarian
problems had been neglected, popular discontent had smouldered, but at
least great material progress had been made. Roads, railways, public
buildings had been created out of nothing, capital had been sunk, a new
machine of government had been constructed. Austria had come to stay, and
Aehrenthal, in annexing the provinces, felt himself to be merely setting
the seal to a document which had been signed a generation earlier. He
had failed to reckon with the outcry which this technical breach of
international law evoked: like Bethmann-Hollweg, he had no blind faith in
"scraps of paper," and had no scruple in tearing up the Treaty of Berlin on
which the whole Balkan settlement had rested. Nowhere was the outburst of
feeling so violent as in Serbia and Montenegro, who had never ceased to
dream of the lost Serb provinces. For some months the two little States
challenged the accomplished fact, and seemed bent on staking their very
existence upon war with the great neighbouring Monarchy. Aehrenthal
remained unmoved by their cries of impotent fury and settled down to a
trial of strength with his rival Izvolsky, the Russian Foreign Minister,
who encouraged the sister Slavonic States in their resistance. At length
in March 1909 Germany stepped forward in "shining armour" to support her
Austrian ally, and Russia, to avoid European war, gave way and abandoned
the Serbs to their fate. Nothing was left but a humiliating submission:
the Serbian Government was obliged to address a Note to the Great Powers,
declaring that the annexation and internal condition of Bosnia did not in
any way concern her.[1]
[Footnote 1: This declaration was made the basis of the Austrian Note to

Serbia in July 1914.]

§5. The Renaissance of Serbia.—From this diplomatic defeat dates the
renaissance of Serbia. It restored her to a sense of hard realities, and
taught her to substitute hard work for loud talk. So rough a challenge put
the national spirit on its mettle. The brief period between 1908 and 1912
worked a real transformation in Belgrade, which could not fail to impress
those who took the trouble to look beneath the surface. Nowhere was the
change more marked than in the Serbian army, from which the regicide
elements had been slowly but steadily eliminated. The two Balkan wars of
1912-1913 revealed Serbia to the outside world as a military power, notable
alike for the élan of its infantry, the high efficiency of its artillery,
the close camaraderie of officers and men. The first use made of her
victories over the Turks was the occupation of northern Albania, her only
possible outlet to the sea so long as Dalmatia remains in Austrian hands.
Austria-Hungary, who had only remained inactive because she had taken a
Turkish victory for granted, now intervened, and by the creation of an
artificial Albanian State vetoed Serbia's expansion to the Adriatic. The
Austrian Foreign Minister, Count Berchtold, short-sighted and indolent then
as now, failed to realise that the North Albanian harbours, for obvious
reasons of physical geography, could never be converted into naval bases,
save at a prohibitive cost, and that their possession by Serbia, so far
from being a menace to Austria, would involve the policing of a mountainous
tract of country, inhabited by a turbulent and hostile population. It ought
to have been obvious to him that the moment had arrived for tempting
the Serbs into the Austrian sphere of influence by the bait of generous
commercial concessions through Bosnia and Dalmatia. Several far-sighted
politicians in Austria urged this course upon him, and the Serbian Premier
actually approached Vienna with far-reaching proposals in this very sense.
Their contemptuous rejection by Berchtold and the little clique of Foreign
Office officials who controlled his puppet figure, naturally strengthened
still further the bonds which united Belgrade and Petrograd. Serbia, shut
out from the Adriatic, had no alternative save to seek her economic outlet
down the valley of the Vardar towards the Aegean, and in so doing she came
into violent conflict with Bulgarian aspirations in Macedonia. These facts
alone would justify the assertion that the war between the Balkan allies
was directly due to Austro-Hungarian initiative; but it has also transpired
that the dissensions between Sofia and Belgrade were actively encouraged
from Vienna, that Magyar influences were brought to bear upon King
Ferdinand, and that war material was sent down the Danube from Hungary to
Bulgaria. The outward and visible sign of these intrigues was a speech of
the Hungarian Premier, Count Tisza, opposing the Tsar's intervention in
favour of peace and virtually inciting Bulgaria to fight it out. The
break-up of the Balkan League was the first condition to that Austrian
advance on Salonica which has always remained the ideal of the advocates
of a forward policy in Vienna and Budapest, and which lies at the root of
Austria-Hungary's action in provoking the present war.
Serbia and Montenegro, however, are but one half of the problem. The issues
involved are wider and deeper than the quarrels of Vienna and Budapest with
Belgrade. Even if every man in Serbia were willingly prostrate before the
Habsburg throne, there could be no real peace until the internal problem of
Austria-Hungary's Southern Slav provinces is solved. What is at stake is
the future of eleven million people, inhabiting the whole tract of country
from sixty miles north of Trieste to the centre of Macedonia, from the
southern plains of Hungary to the North Albanian frontier. Of these,
roughly four millions are in the two independent kingdoms; the remaining
seven millions are divided between Austria (the provinces of Dalmatia,
Istria, and Carniola) and Hungary (the autonomous kingdom of
Croatia-Slavonia), while Bosnia-Herzegovina are governed jointly by Austria
and Hungary. The history of these provinces during the past generation is
one of neglect and misgovernment. Croatia has been exploited economically
by the Magyars, and the narrow interests of Budapest have prevented railway
development and hampered local industries by skilful manipulation of
tariffs and taxation. A further result is that even to-day Dalmatia (with
the exception of Ragusa) has no railway connections with the rest of
Europe, and those of Bosnia are artificially directed towards Budapest
rather than towards Agram, Vienna, and Western Europe. It is not too much
to say that the situation of those provinces had become less favourable
(if compared with surrounding standards) than it was at earlier periods of
their history; for the old system of trade-routes had broken down there as
elsewhere in Europe, but had not been replaced by modern communications.
§6. Serbo-Croat Unity.—Parallel with the new era instituted in Serbia
since 1903, a strong movement in favour of national unity took root among
her kinsmen across the Austro-Hungarian frontier. The disruptive tendencies
which had hitherto been so marked in Croatian politics began to weaken.
The so-called Serbo-Croat Coalition round which all the younger elements
speedily rallied, put forward an ambitious programme of constructive
democratic reform as the basis of joint political action on the part of
both races, and held stubbornly together when the inevitable breach with
the Magyar oligarchy occurred. The Magyar Government felt that every effort
must be made to restore that discord between Croat and Serb which had been
for a generation one of the main pillars of their racial hegemony. These
designs happened to coincide with the aims of the Foreign Office in Vienna
in connection with the annexation of Bosnia, and Budapest and Vienna
combined in a systematic campaign of persecution against the Serbs of
Croatia. "Wholesale arrests and charges of treason led up to the monster
trial at Agram, which dragged on for seven months amid scandals worthy of
the days of Judge Jeffreys. The Diet ceased to meet, the constitution of
Croatia was in abeyance, the elections were characterised by corruption and
violence such as eclipsed even the infamous Hungarian elections of 1910;
the Press and the political leaders were singled out for special acts of
persecution and intimidation." These tactics were revealed to the outside
world in the notorious Friedjung Trial (December 1909), resulting out of
a libel action brought by the Serbo-Croat Coalition leaders against Dr.
Friedjung, the distinguished Austrian historian. The documents, on the
basis of which he had publicly accused them of being paid agents of the
Serbian Government, had been supplied to him by the Austro-Hungarian
Foreign Office, and the trial revealed them as impudent forgeries,
concocted in the Austro-Hungarian Legation in Belgrade! The moral
responsibility for these forgeries was subsequently brought home to Count
Forgách, the Minister in Belgrade, and indirectly, of course, to Count
Aehrenthal himself as Foreign Minister. But Forgách, though publicly
denounced as "Count Azev,"[1] was not allowed to fall into disgrace; on
the contrary, he had become within two years of his exposure permanent
Under-Secretary at the Ballplatz, and inspirer of new plots to discredit
and ruin Serbia.
[Footnote 1: An allusion to the notorious Russian _agent provocateur _who
was at one and the same time a member of the secret police and of the
revolutionary organisation.]
The scandals of the Friedjung Trial led to the fall of the Governor of
Croatia, but there was no change of system. After a temporary truce the old
conflict revived, and within eighteen months the friction between Magyars
and Croats was as acute as ever. The Magyar Government employed every
possible device of administrative pressure in order to create dissensions
between the Croat and Serb parties—repeated elections, wholesale
corruption and violence, persecution of the Press and of the political
leaders. Yet so far from languishing under such a system, the movement for
unity gained fresh strength and extended to the kindred Slovenes, striking
root even among the extreme Clericals, who had hitherto regarded the
Orthodox Serbs with distrust and suspicion.
In the spring of 1912 the conflict culminated in the abolition of the
Croatian constitution by the arbitrary decree of the Hungarian Premier, in
the appointment of a reactionary official as dictator, and a few months
later in the suspension of the charter of the Serb Orthodox Church.
§7. The Balkan Wars.—Never in history had a more inopportune moment
been chosen for such crying illegalities. For close upon the heels of the
demonstrations and unrest which they evoked, came the dramatic events of
the Balkan War, the crushing victories of the allies, the resurrection of
the lost Serb Empire, the long-deferred revenge for the defeat of Kosovo.
The whole Southern Slav provinces of Austria-Hungary were carried off their
feet by a wave of enthusiasm for the allies, and an impossibly strained
situation was reached when the Government of Vienna placed itself in
violent conflict with Serbia, vetoed her expansion to the sea, insisted
upon creating a phantom Albanian State, egged on Bulgaria against her
allies, and finally mobilised in order to impose its will upon the Serbs.
Every peasant in the Slavonic South naturally contrasted Magyar misrule
in Croatia with the splendid achievements of his Serb kinsmen across
the frontier. I know of poor villagers in the mountainous hinterland of
Dalmatia who, having no money to give to the cause of the Balkan Red Cross,
offered casks of country wine or even such clothes and shoes as they could
spare from their scanty belongings. The total subscriptions raised among
the Southern Slavs of the Monarchy in aid of the allies far exceeded any
sums previously raised for charitable purposes among so poor a population.
"In the Balkan sun," said a prominent Croat Clerical, "we see the dawn of
our day."
The national rejoicings which "the avenging of Kosovo" evoked among the
Croats, Serbs, and Slovenes of Austria-Hungary were accompanied by lively
protests against the bare idea of an Austro-Serbian war, which, so far as
the Southern Slavs on both sides of the frontier were concerned, would have
been a civil war in the most literal sense of the word (and this civil
war, it must be remembered, is now actually being waged). The politicians,
however, though well-nigh unanimous in their enthusiasm for the cause
of the Balkan allies, could not at one breath throw off the habits of a
lifetime. Petty jealousies still divided them and were skilfully played
upon by the Magyar Government. The strain of five years of opposition and
persecution had produced its effect upon the Coalition leaders and rendered
them all too prone to further concessions. But the younger generation had
been profoundly affected by the Croatian dictatorship and the Balkan wars;
at an age when our youth think of nothing but cricket and football, the
students and even the schoolboys of Croatia, Dalmatia, and Bosnia became
engrossed in political speculation, brooded over the wrongs of their
disunited race, and dreamt of Serbia as the new Piedmont of the Balkans. To
all alike even the most advanced politician seemed no better than an old
fogey, and it is no exaggeration to assert that the existing parties had
lost all hold upon the overwhelming majority of those who in ten years'
time will represent the manhood and the intellect of the race. The
widespread nature of the movement may be illustrated by the school strike
of the spring of 1912, during which every boy and girl above the age of
fourteen in most of the primary and secondary schools of Croatia, Dalmatia,
and Bosnia played truant as a protest against the misgovernment of Croatia.
On that occasion a crowd of 5000 school children paraded the streets of
Agram shouting "Down with Cuvaj" (the Ban or Governor of Croatia), and
cheering the police when they tried to intervene!
As in all such movements, the views of individuals varied in intensity:
some merely gave a theoretical adherence to the ideals of Mazzini or of
Mill, others swallowed the Nihilist doctrine of Bakunin and dreamt of
revolution, ushered in by terrorist propaganda. Out of this milieu came the
two young assassins who murdered the Archduke Francis Ferdinand.
§8. The Murder of the Archduke.—By a hideous irony of fate Francis
Ferdinand was the one man capable of restoring order to an already
desperate internal situation. His very person was a programme and a
watchword, and it had long been an open secret that his accession would be
the signal for drastic reforms. It was his ambition to supersede the effete
Dual system by a blend of centralism and federalism such as would reconcile
the national sentiment of individual races with the consciousness of a
common citizenship and would at the same time restore to foreign policy the
possibility of initiative. This programme involved the emancipation of the
non-Magyar races of Hungary from the intolerable racial tyranny of the
Magyars, and at the same time a serious attempt to solve the Southern Slav
question by unifying the race under Habsburg rule. As his Imperial uncle
grew older and feebler, Francis Ferdinand is known to have elaborated his
designs, and a regular staff of able lieutenants had grouped themselves
round him. But on the very eve of action the strong man was removed, to the
scarcely veiled relief of all those elements in the State whose political
and racial monopoly was threatened by such far-reaching and beneficial
changes.
The circumstances of the murder are still shrouded in mystery. It is known
that no proper measures were taken for the protection of the Archduke
and his wife in Bosnia, though it is still impossible to assign the
responsibility for such criminal negligence. It is notorious that in a
country like Bosnia, which has for years been infested with police spies
and informers, and where every movement of every stranger is strictly under
control, so elaborate and ramified a plot could hardly hope to escape the
notice of the authorities. It has even been asserted that Princip and
Cabrinovic, the two assassins, were agents provocateurs in the pay of
the police, and though no proof is as yet forthcoming, there is nothing
inherently improbable in the idea.[1] Certain it is that the gravest
suspicion rests upon those who connived at the disgraceful anti-Serb riots
of which Sarajevo was the scene for nearly forty-eight hours after the
murder.
[Footnote 1: The fact that they have only been sentenced to terms of
imprisonment, while some of their accomplices have been condemned to death,
has a much simpler explanation. Both men are under the age of twenty, and
therefore by Austrian law immune from the death penalty.]
The murder provided an admirable pretext for aggression against Serbia, and
at the same time tended to revive all the latent prejudice with which the
country of the regicides was still regarded in the West. Yet those who seek
to establish a connection between the crime of Sarajevo and the Serbian
Government are on an utterly false scent. I have tried to describe
the atmosphere of universal and growing discontent which produced the
explosion. Those who know the Slavonic South are well aware that Bosnia,
Dalmatia, and Croatia are a seething pot which needs no stirring from the
outside, and that the assassins are but the natural successors of the wild
young students who during the last five years fired upon the Governors
of Croatia and Bosnia.[1] But quite apart from this, the complicity of
official Belgrade is rendered incredible by urgent considerations of
internal Serbian politics. After a long and delicate negotiation the
Concordat with the Vatican had just been concluded: the Orient railway
question had reached the critical stage: above all, a customs and military
union between Serbia and Montenegro was on the point of being concluded.
But, of course, quite apart from such considerations, Serbia was suffering
from the extreme exhaustion consequent upon waging two wars within a year,
and her statesmen, despite the rebuffs administered by Count Berchtold,
were genuinely anxious for a modus vivendi with the neighbouring
Monarchy, as an essential condition to a period of quiet internal
consolidation. But this was the very thing which the controllers of
Austrian foreign policy—the phantom Minister Berchtold, the sinister
clique in the Foreign Office, and the Magyar oligarchy, led by that
masterful reactionary, Count Tisza, the Hungarian Premier—were anxious to
avoid. They had never reconciled themselves to the new situation in the
Balkans; and having twice backed the wrong horse (Turkey in the first
war, Bulgaria in the second) still continued to plot against the Bucarest
settlement of August 1913. Salonica still remained the secret Austrian
objective, and Serbia the main obstacle to the realisation of this dream.
Not for the first time, the interests of Vienna and Constantinople
coincided, and the occult interests which link Budapest with Salonica
played their part in the game.
[Footnote 1: June 1910, June and November 1912, June 1913.]
The crime of Sarajevo removed the chief restraining force in the councils
of the Monarchy and placed the fate of Europe at the mercy of a group of
gamblers in Vienna, Budapest, and Berlin. The military party, under Konrad
von Hoetzendorf, chief of the Austrian General Staff (who a year ago was
seriously speculating as to the collapse of Austria-Hungary), joined hands
with the Magyar extremists, whose political monopoly was threatened by the
advancing Slavonic tide, and with the inner ring of Prussian diplomacy,
which believed the psychological moment to have arrived for measuring
swords with Russia. The murder served as an admirable pretext to veil
grossly aggressive tactics. It was hoped that Russia might be manoeuvred
into a position where autocracy would rather abandon the Slav cause than
seem to condone assassination; and it was confidently believed that Britain
would hold aloof from a quarrel whose origin was so questionable. Stripped
of all outward seeming, the true issues of the conflict were very
different. Just as the policy of violent Turkification adopted by the Young
Turks inevitably provoked the Balkan War, so the policy of Magyarisation,
which has dominated Hungarian affairs for forty-five years and poisoned the
relations of Austria-Hungary with her southern neighbours, has led directly
to the present conflagration.
§9. The Future of the Southern Slavs.—There have always been two fatal
obstacles to an Austrian solution of the Southern Slav problem,—Magyar
hegemony and the Dual System, to which alone that hegemony owed its
survival; and it is these two worn-out and reactionary ideas (if they can
be described as "ideas") that are at present fighting their death-struggle.
It was the ambition of Francis Ferdinand to achieve Serbo-Croat unity
within the Monarchy, and thus simultaneously to counteract the attractions
of Pan-Serb propaganda and to remove the most fertile source of friction
between Austria-Hungary and Serbia. His death destroyed the last chance of
such a solution; for the statesmen of Vienna and Budapest were not merely
incapable but openly hostile. An appeal was to be made to the arbitrament
of the sword.
Long before war broke out it had become a commonplace of political theory
that the Southern Slav question could be solved in one of two ways—either
inside the Habsburg Monarchy or outside it—either with its help and under
its aegis, or against it and despite its resistance. With the outbreak of
war the problem assumed a new form; the alternatives are the absorption
of the two independent Serb States in the neighbouring Monarchy—in other
words, the union of the entire Southern Slav race under Habsburg rule—or
the liberation of her kinsmen in the Monarchy by Serbia as the Southern
Slav Piedmont. This latter ideal, it has always been obvious, could only be
achieved through the medium of a general European war, and it is in this
manner that it is actually in process of achievement.
The Austrian Note to Serbia was deliberately framed in such a manner as to
be unacceptable by any State which valued its self-respect or prestige. The
military leaders desired war, while the Foreign Office, already committed
for years to a violently Serbophobe policy, was working hand in glove with
the German Ambassador Tschirschky, and with the very highest quarters in
Berlin. The German Government in its official case admits having given
Austria "a free hand against Serbia," while there are good grounds for
believing that the text of the Note was submitted to the German Emperor
and that the latter fully approved of (if he did not actually suggest) the
fatal time-limit of forty-eight hours, which rendered all efforts towards
peace hopeless from the outset.
The Austrian case against Serbia, as embodied in this Note, rested upon a
secret investigation in the prison of Sarajevo. The persistent rumours that
the assassins are agents-provocateurs, and that pressure of a somewhat
drastic kind was brought to bear upon them after their arrest, cannot of
course be accepted as proved. But the essential point to bear in mind
is the fact that the details of the Austrian "case," as embodied in the
notorious Note of July 23, originated in the same quarter as the previous
attempts to slander and discredit Serbia. Count Forgách, the arch-forger
of the Austrian Legation in Belgrade, was permanent Under-secretary in the
Foreign Office, and as Count Berchtold's right hand and prompter in Balkan
affairs, was directly responsible for the pronounced anti-Serb tendencies
which have dominated the foreign policy of the Dual Monarchy since the
rise of the Balkan League. As a Magyar nobleman with intimate Jewish
connections, Forgách was an invaluable link between Magyar extremist policy
and Berlin on the one hand and Salonica and Constantinople on the other.
In view of his record as the inspirer of the Vasic forgeries, we are amply
justified in declining to accept any "evidence" prepared by him and his
subordinates, and insisting upon a full and open trial of the murderers as
the only conceivable foundation for charges of complicity.
When all is said and done, however, the murder of the Archduke, though an
event of world-importance so far as the internal development and future
of the Dual Monarchy is concerned, is none the less a side-issue in the
Southern Slav question. This seeming paradox will not surprise those who
consider the currents of national life among the Southern Slavs. The
diplomatic conflict between Belgrade and Vienna or Budapest is but
the outcome of a far deeper and wider movement. We are witnessing the
birth-throes of a new nation, the rise of a new national consciousness,
the triumph of the idea of National Unity among the three Southern Slav
sisters—the Croats, Serbs, and Slovenes. Fate has assigned to Britain and
to France an important share in the solution of the problem, and it is our
duty to insist that this solution shall be radical and permanent, based
upon the principle of Nationality and the wishes of the Southern Slav race.
Only by treating the problem as an organic whole, by avoiding patchwork
remedies and by building for a distant future, can we hope to remove one of
the chief danger-centres in Europe.
Unfortunately some of the indispensable books are in German or French, but
the following list offers a very considerable choice:—
Austria-Hungary and Poland, by H.W. Steed, W. Alison Phillips, and D.
Hannay. (Britannica War Books.) 2s. 6d. net. Uncritical reprint of very
valuable articles from the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
LOUIS LEGER. History of Austria-Hungary. 1889 (from French) (out of
print).
GEOFFREY DRAGE. Austria-Hungary. 21s. net. 1909. A mine of economic
facts.
H.W. STEED. The Habsburg Monarchy. 1914. (3rd ed.) 7s. 6d. net. Far the
best summary of tendencies, on the lines of Bodley's France and Bryce's
American Commonwealth.
R.W. SETON-WATSON (SCOTUS VIATOR). Racial Problems in Hungary. 1908. 16s.
net.
R.W. SETON-WATSON. Corruption and Reform in Hungary. 1911. 4s. 6d. net.
HON.C.N. KNATCHRULL-HUGESSON. The Political Development of the Hungarian

Nation. 1910. 2 vols. 14s. net. A good exposition of the extreme Magyar

Chauvinist point of view.

R. MAHAFFY. The Emperor Francis Joseph. 1910. 2s. 6d. A useful
character-sketch.
C.E. MAURICE. Bohemia. (Story of the Nations.) 1896. 5s. An admirable
text-book.
C.E. MAURICE. The Revolutionary Movement of 1848-49. 1887. 16s. The best
epitome in English.
COUNT FRANCIS LUTZOW. Bohemia. 1896. (Everyman Library.) 1s.
EMILY G. BALCH. Our Slavic Fellow Citizens. New York. 1910. The best book
on emigration. 10s. 6d. net.
W. MILLER. The Balkans. 1896. (Story of the Nations.) The best general
text-book. 5s.
W. MILLER. The Ottoman Empire, 1801-1913. 1913. (Cambridge Historical
Series.) An excellent book, with a misleading title; it is really a history
of the Balkan Christians, with special reference to the Greeks. Turkish
history is only introduced incidentally. 7s. 6d. net.
EMILE DE LAVELEYE. The Balkan Peninsula. 1887. (Out of print,) By a
distinguished Belgian professor, who was in his day recognised as an
authority on Balkan questions.
LEOPOLD VON RANKE. History of Servia. 3s. 6d. (Bohn's Library.) This
brilliant and sympathetic study by the greatest of German historians is of
permanent value.
SIR ARTHUR J. EVANS. Through Bosnia on Foot. 1877. (Out of print.) The
distinguished archaeologist took part, as a young man, in the Bosnian
rising against the Turks.
R.W. SETON-WATSON. The Southern Slav Question and the Habsburg Monarchy.
1911. 12s. 0d. net. (Greatly modified and extended in a German edition
published in 1913.)
R.W. SETON-WATSON. Absolutism in Croatia. 1912. 2s. net.
CEDO MIJATOVIC. Servia of the Servians. 1911. 16s. net.
ELODIE MIJATOVIC. Serbian Folklore.. 1874.
SIR CHARLES ELIOT (ODYSSEUS). Turkey in Europe. 2nd ed. 7s. 6d. net.
H.N. BRAILSFORD. Macedonia. 1906. 12s. 6d. net.
LUIGI VILLARI AND OTHERS. The Balkan Question. 1905. 10s. 6d. net.
"God will save Russia as He has saved her many times. Salvation will come
from the people, from their faith and their meekness. Fathers and teachers,
watch over the people's faith, and this will not be a dream. I have been
amazed all my life in our great people by their dignity, their true and
seemly dignity. I have seen it myself, I can testify to it; I have seen
it and marvelled at it; I have seen it in spite of the degraded sins and
poverty-stricken appearance of our peasantry. They are not servile;
and, even after two centuries of serfdom, they are free in manner and
bearing,—yet without insolence, and not revengeful and not envious. 'You
are rich and noble, you are clever and talented, well be so, God bless you.
I respect you, but I know that I too am a man. By the very fact that I
respect you without envy I prove my dignity as a man….'
"God will save His people, for Russia is great in her humility. I dream of
seeing, and seem to see clearly already, our future. It will come to pass
that even the most corrupt of our rich will end by being ashamed of his
riches before the poor; and the poor, seeing his humility, will understand
and give way before him, will respond joyfully and kindly to his honourable
shame. Believe me that it will end in that; things are moving to that.
Equality is to be found only in the spiritual dignity of man, and that
will only be understood among us. If we were brothers, there would be
fraternity; but before that they will never agree about the division of
wealth. We preserve the image of Christ, and it will shine forth like a
precious diamond to the whole world. So be it, so be it!"—DOSTOIEFFSKY,
The Brothers Karamazov.
"The French are a decent civilised lot of people; but I wish we were not
allies of Russia." This, or something very like it, is the spoken or
unspoken thought of a very large number of persons, especially among the
working-classes in England at the present time. English suspicion of Russia
is no new thing, though there is no doubt that the suppression of the
revolution during the years 1906-1909 made it more general than ever
before. It was responsible, for example, for the Crimean War, and the
"crafty Russian" has become a catch-word almost as widely accepted in
England as the phrase "perfidious Albion" is upon the Continent. I have
seen Russia at her worst: I saw the revolution stamped out cruelly and
relentlessly; I have lived three years in Finland, and know the weariness
of spirit and aching bitterness of heart that comes to a fine and cultured
race in its perpetual struggle for liberty against an alien Government to
whom the word liberty means nothing but rebellion. And yet I am firmly
persuaded of the innate soundness of the Russian people, and of the
tremendous future which lies before it in the history of the world. I
believe too that the English are suspicious of Russia, not because Russia
is crafty or evil or barbaric, but because English people find it very
difficult to understand a race which is so extraordinarily different from
themselves. We fear the unknown; we suspect what is unlike ourselves; yet
we shall do well, in the present crisis, whether we are thinking of our
enemy Germany or our ally Russia, to remember the axiom laid down by Edmund
Burke, the greatest of English political thinkers: "It is impossible to
bring an indictment against a whole nation."
In any case, for good or ill, Russia is our ally, and if Germany is beaten,
Russia seems likely to play as great a part in the settlement as she did in
1815. It therefore behoves us, in our own self-interest if for no higher
motive, to try and understand the spirit and ideals of a great people, who,
as they did a century ago at the time of Napoleon, are once again coming
forward to assist Europe in ridding herself of a military despotism.
§1. The Russian State.—Many of us do not realise the most obvious facts
about Russia. For example, our atlases, which give us Europe on one page
and Asia on another, prevent us from grasping the most elementary fact of
all—her vastness. Mr. Kipling has told us that "East is East and West
is West, and never the twain shall meet." But Russia confounds both Mr.
Kipling and the map-makers by stretching from the Baltic to the Pacific.
For her there is not Europe and Asia but one continent, and she is the
whole inside of it. All Europe between the four inland seas, and all Asia
north of lat. 50° (and a good deal south of it too)—that is Russia, a
total area of 8-1/4 million square miles! This enormous country, which
comprises one-sixth of the land-surface of the globe, is at present thinly
populated; it has roughly 20 persons to the square mile as against 618 to
the square mile in England and Wales. Yet for all that it contains the
largest white population of any single state on earth, numbering in all
171 million souls. Moreover, this population is increasing rapidly; it
has quadrupled itself during the last century, and with the advent of
industrialism the increase is likely to be still more rapid. Many among us
alive to-day may see Russia's population reach and perhaps pass that of
teeming China. As yet, however, industrialism is only at its beginning in
Russia; more than 85 per cent of the inhabitants live in the country, as
tillers of the soil.
It will be at once evident that this fact gives her an immense advantage
over industrial nations in time of war. She has, on the one hand, an almost
inexhaustible supply of men to draw upon, while, on the other hand, her
simple economic structure is hardly at all affected. A great European war
may mean for a Western country dislocation of trade, hundreds of mills and
pits standing idle, vast masses of unemployed, leading to distress, poverty
and in the end starvation; for Russia it means little more than that the
peasants grow fat on the corn and food-stuffs which in normal times they
would have exported to the West. Furthermore, her geographical and economic
circumstances render Russia ultimately invincible from the military point
of view, as Napoleon found to his cost in 1812. She has no vital parts,
such as France has in Paris or Germany has in Silesia or Westphalia, upon
which the life of the whole State organism depends; she is like some vast
multi-cellular invertebrate animal which it is possible to wound but not
to destroy. Russia has much to gain from a great European war and hardly
anything to lose.
At first sight, therefore, there seems to be a great deal in favour of
the theory, somewhat widely held at the moment, that to crush Germany and
Austria will be to lay Europe at the feet of Russia, and that when Germany
has been driven out of France and Belgium, the Allies in the West might
have to patch up a peace with her in order to drive the Russians out
of Germany. Behind this theory lies the assumption that Russia is an
aggressive military state, inspired by the same ideals as have led Germany
to deluge the world with blood. This is an assumption which is, I believe,
absolutely unwarranted by anything in the history or character of the
nation.
Historically speaking, the Russian Empire is an extension of the old Roman
Empire; it is the direct heir of the Eastern Roman Empire, which had its
capital at Constantinople, as the mediaeval "Holy Roman Empire," founded by
Charlemagne in A.D. 800, was the heir of the Western Roman Empire, which
had its capital at Rome itself. But the Eastern Empire survived its Western
twin by a thousand years; the Goths deposed the last Roman emperor in 476,
the Turks took Constantinople in 1453. The Russian Empire, therefore,
which did not begin its political development until after the fall of
Constantinople, entered the field some six and a half centuries later than
the mediaeval empire of Charlemagne, which was indeed already falling
to pieces in the end of the fifteenth century. Thus Russia presents the
strange spectacle of a mediaeval State existing in the twentieth century,
and she is still in some particulars what Western Europe was in the Middle
Ages. She has, however, attained a unity, a strength and a centralisation
which the Holy Roman Empire never succeeded in acquiring. There is nothing
corresponding to the feudal system, with all the disruptive tendencies
which that system carried with it, in modern Russia; partly owing to the
constant danger of Mongolian invasion which threatened Russia for so many
centuries, partly as a result of Ivan the Terrible's destruction of the
boyars, who were analogous to the mediaeval barons, and of Peter the
Great's substitution of a nobility of service for that of rank, Russia
is politically more centralised than any mediaeval, and socially more
democratic than any modern, country. Russia has also solved that other
great problem which perpetually agitated the mediaeval world—the conflict
between the secular and the spiritual power. She is the most religious
nation in the world, but she has no Papacy; Peter the Great subordinated
the Church to the State by placing the Holy Synod, which controls the
former, under the authority of a layman, a minister appointed by the Tsar.
Yet, while she appears united and centralised when we think of her nebulous
prototype, the Holy Roman Empire, we have only to compare her with her
Western neighbours, and especially with that triumph of State-organisation,
Germany, to see how amorphous, how inefficient, how loose, how mediaeval is
the structure of this enormous State.
Peter the Great, who was more than any other man the creator of modern
Russia, saw clearly that the only way of holding this inchoate State-mass
together was to call into existence a huge administrative machine, and he
saw equally clearly that, if such a machine was not itself to become a
disruptive force through the personal ambition and self-aggrandisement
of its members, it must be framed on democratic and not aristocratic
principles. As Mr. Maurice Baring puts it, "Peter the Great introduced
the democratic idea that service was everything, rank nothing. He had it
proclaimed to the whole gentry that any gentleman, in any circumstances
whatsoever and to whatever family he belonged, should salute and yield
place to any officer. The gentleman served as a private soldier and became
an officer, but a private soldier who did not belong to the nobility, and
who attained the rank of a commissioned officer, became, ipso facto, a
member of the hereditary nobility…. In the civil service he introduced
the same democratic system. He divided it into three sections: military,
civil, and court. Every section was divided into fourteen ranks, or
Chins; the attainment of the eighth class conferred the privilege of
hereditary nobility, even though those who received it might have been
of the humblest origin. He hereby replaced the aristocratic hierarchy of
pedigree by a democratic hierachy of service. Promotion was made solely
according to service; lineage counted for nothing. There was no social
difference, however wide, which could not be levelled by means of State
service." This is partly what was meant when it was stated in the last
paragraph that Russia was socially the most democratic of modern countries.
The system established by Peter the Great exists to-day. Russia is
governed, not by a feudal nobility like that which ground the faces of
the poor in France before the revolution of 1789, nor by a number of
capitalists who live by exploiting the workers; for neither feudal nobility
nor capitalism (as yet) has any real power in Russia. She is governed by a
civil service, and by a civil service more democratic than our own, where
the higher posts are as a rule only open to members of the upper and middle
classes, less exclusive than that of India, where the higher officials are
nearly all recruited from the members of an alien race—a civil service,
in short, whose only close parallel is the hierarchy of the Roman Catholic
Church. Imagine the Roman Church as a secular institution, with a monarch
at its head ruling by hereditary right instead of an elected president like
the Pope, and you get a very fair idea of the Russian Government machine.
All that we associate with the word aristocracy in the West, the hereditary
principle, primo-geniture, the accumulation of the land and capital of the
country in the hands of a small class, the spirit of caste, the traditions
of nobility handed down with the title-deeds from father to son, are either
non-existent or of comparative unimportance in Russian society.
There is also none of the keen sensitiveness to minute social distinctions
and to the social proprieties which mark them that is so striking a feature
of the life in "democratic" England and to which we have given the name
"snobbery." There are of course social strata in Russia, but they are
broadly marked and there is no sense of competition between them. A peasant
is not ashamed of being a peasant, and when he meets a nobleman he meets
him on terms of spiritual equality while acknowledging his superior
position in the social scale. A twin-brother of English "snobbery" is
English "hypocrisy." This, as has been well said, is a kind of "social
cement," for it is a tribute to a standard of social conduct set up by the
dominant class in a nation. And since there exists no dominant class in
Russia, but only a dominant hierarchy drawn from all classes, hypocrisy is
absent from the Russian character. Mr. Stephen Graham, who was, I believe,
at one time a clerk in a London office, found our civilisation so
intolerable that one day he flung it off and escaped to Russia, where he
has lived as a peasant tramp for many years. To revolutionaries who met him
and expressed their astonishment that an Englishman should choose Russia of
all places to live in, he replied, "I came to Russia because it is the only
free country left in the world." There is, in truth, much to be said for
this startling remark. In no country on earth is there such unaffected
good-will, such open hospitality, such an instinctive respect for personal
liberty—liberty of thought and of manners—such tolerance for the
frailties of human nature, such an abundance of what the great Russian
novelist Dostoieffsky called "all-humanness" and St. Paul called "charity,"
as in Russia. All this, of course, did not come about as a result of
the bureaucratic system; it springs like that system itself from the
fundamentally democratic spirit of the Russian people.
§2. Religion.—The last paragraph will read strangely to those people
whose only ideas about Russia are gleaned from newspaper accounts of
the revolution of 1905. We shall come back to the revolution and its
significance later; but meanwhile we must notice another very striking fact
about Russian life—its all-pervading religious atmosphere. Russia is a
land of peasants. In England and Wales 78 per cent of the population live
in towns and the remaining 22 per cent in the country; in Russia something
like 87 per cent live in the country as against 13 per cent in the towns.
These figures are enough to show where the real centre of gravity of the
Russian nation lies. The peasant, or moujik, is a primitive and generally
an entirely illiterate person, but he possesses qualities which his more
sophisticated brothers in the West may well envy and admire, a profound
common-sense, a grand simplicity of life and outlook, and an unshakable
faith in the unseen world.
The interior of Russia is almost wholly unknown in the West; until a few
years back it was as much of a terra incognita as Central Africa. But the
revolution led English writers and journalists to explore it, and when the
dust and smoke of that upheaval, which had obscured the truth from the eyes
of Europe, passed away, an astonished world perceived the real Russia for
the first time. "Russia," writes Mr. Stephen Graham, who has done more
than any other man to bring the truth home to us, "is not a land of
bomb-throwers, is not a land of intolerable tyranny and unhappiness, of
a languishing and decayed peasantry, of a corrupt and ugly church; the
Russians are an agricultural nation, bred to the soil, illiterate as the
savages, and having as yet no ambition to live in the towns; they are as
strong as giants, simple as children, mystically superstitious by reason
of their unexplained mystery." Russia is in fact 145 million
peasants—ploughing and praying. And here once again one is reminded of the
Middle Ages. Cross the Russian frontier and you enter the mediaeval world.
Miracles are believed in, holy men are revered as saints, thousands of
pilgrims journey on foot every year to Jerusalem, which is to every true
believer the centre of the universe and therefore becomes at Easter almost
a Russian city. Russia is the most Christian country in the world, and her
people are the most Christ-like. The turbulence and violence, so contrary
to the Christian spirit, which was an inseparable feature of mediaeval
feudalism is absent from Russia; and the gospel of non-resistance, of
brotherly love, of patience under affliction, of pity and mercy, which
Tolstoi preached so eloquently to the world at large, he learnt from
two teachers—the peasant of modern Russia and the Peasant of ancient
Palestine, who was crucified upon the Cross.
Yet it is a mistake to talk, as some do, of the power of the Russian
Church, or of "priestcraft." The Church has little political power or
social prestige. It is the power of religion, not that of ecclesiastical
institutions, which is the arresting fact about modern Russia. It is not
so much that Russia has a church, as that she is a church. In England
we have narrowed religion down to one day of the week and shut it up in
special buildings which we call churches; in Russia it is impossible to
avoid religion. As you pass out of the gangway of the ticket-office at the
railway station, you find yourself in front of a sacred picture with a
lamp burning continually before it, and you are expected to utter a prayer
before beginning your journey. Every room in Russia has its eikon—is in
fact a chapel, every enterprise is sanctified by prayer and ceremony. All
English travellers in Russia have acknowledged this profound national sense
of religion, and contrasted it with the religious formalism of the West.
"Italy," wrote Mr. H.G. Wells, on his recent visit to Russia, "abounds
in noble churches because the Italians are artists and architects, and a
church is an essential part of the old English social system, but Moscow
glitters with two thousand crosses because the people are organically
Christian. I feel in Russia that for the first time in my life I am in a
country where Christianity is alive. The people I saw crossing themselves
whenever they passed a church, the bearded men who kissed the relics in the
Church of the Assumption, the unkempt grave-eyed pilgrim, with his ragged
bundle on his back and his little tea-kettle slung in front of him, who was
standing quite still beside a pillar in the same church, have no parallels
in England." Mr. Rothay Reynolds, in his interesting and sympathetic book
My Russian Year, writes in much the same strain: "In Russia God and His
Mother, saints and angels, seem near; men rejoice or stand ashamed beneath
their gaze. The people of the land have made it a vast sanctuary, perfumed
with prayer and filled with the memories of heroes of the faith. Saints and
sinners, believers and infidels, are affected by its atmosphere; and so it
has come about that Russia is the land of lofty ideals." And Mr. Stephen
Graham, again, in his Undiscovered Russia, speaks with glowing admiration
of the Russian Church. "The Holy Church," he says, "is wonderful. It is the
only fervid living church in Europe. It lives by virtue of the people
who compose it. If the priests were wood, it would still be great. The
worshippers are always there with one accord. There are always strangers in
the churches, always pilgrims. God is the Word that writes all men brothers
in Russia and all women sisters. The fact behind that word is the fountain
of hospitality and friendship."
The religious aspect of Russian life has been dwelt upon at some length,
because it is the key to everything in Russia and has a direct bearing upon
the present war. "Religion in Russia," writes Mr. Maurice Baring, "is a
part of patriotism. The Russian considers that a man who is not Orthodox
is not a Russian. He divides humanity, roughly, into two categories—the
Orthodox and the heathen—just as the Greeks divided humanity into Greeks
and Barbarians. Not only is the Church of Russia a national church, owing
to the large part which the State, the Emperor, and the civil authority
play in it, but in Russia religion itself becomes a question of
nationality, nationalism, and patriotism." Russian Christianity, like
Russian Tsardom, is derived from the old Roman empire of Constantinople.
The Russian Church is a branch, and far the most important branch, of the
Greek Orthodox Church, which drifted apart from the Catholic Church, which
had its centre at Rome, and finally separated from it in the eleventh
century. As the greatest Orthodox Christian power in the world, Russia
naturally regards herself as the rightful protector of all Orthodox
Christians. Her mortal enemy, with whom so long as he remains in Europe any
lasting peace is impossible, is the Turk; and her eyes are ever directed
towards Constantinople, as the ancient capital of her faith. The spirit of
the Crusades is far from dead in the Russian people; the Crimean War, for
example, was fought in that spirit.
It will be at once apparent that Russia takes and must continue to take
a profound interest in the Christian peoples of the Balkans. Greeks,
Roumanians, Servians, Bulgarians and Montenegrins all belong to the
Orthodox Church; all have been engaged throughout the nineteenth century
in a struggle for existence against the common foe, Islam. Moreover, all
except the two first-mentioned peoples are allied to Russia by ties of race
as well as by religion, since they are members of the Slavonic stock. To
the average Russian, therefore, the bulk of the Balkan peninsula is as
much Russia Irredenta, as the north-east coast of the Adriatic is Italia
Irredenta to the average Italian; and as a matter of fact there is a good
deal more to be said for Russia's case than for Italy's. There is, however,
another great power which possesses interests in the Balkans and which
is viewed by Russia with a suspicion and dislike hardly inferior to that
entertained towards Turkey—I mean the empire of Austria-Hungary. A
Catholic state, controlled by Germans and Magyars, Austria-Hungary contains
in its southern portion a population of over seven million Slavs, some
three millions of whom are of the Orthodox faith. The Dual Monarchy has
constantly outraged national and religious feeling in Russia by her
treatment of this Slavonic population, and her annexation in 1908 of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, both of them Slavonic countries, was regarded as an open
challenge to Russia.
It is not therefore surprising that the Tsar has intervened in the present
crisis. Had it refused to come to the assistance of Servia when Austria
attacked her, the Russian Government would have been unable to face public
opinion. Even those who know Russia best are amazed at the complete
unanimity of the country in the matter of this war; and proof that it is
not merely a war of aggression inspired by Pan-Slavist sentiment may
be found in the fact that all political parties, revolutionaries,
constitutionalists and reactionaries, have enthusiastically approved it.
How far Germany misunderstood (or affected to misunderstand) the real state
of feeling in Russia may be seen in the despatch of July 26 by the British
Ambassador in Vienna, who, in talking the crisis over with the German
Ambassador and asking "whether the Russian Government might not be
compelled by public opinion to intervene on behalf of a kindred
nationality," was told that "everything depended on the personality of the
Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs, who could resist easily, if he
chose, the pressure of a few newspapers." England drew her sword in this
struggle on behalf of Belgium and in the name of civilisation and treaty
rights; Russia has done the same on behalf of Serbia and in the name of
common blood and a common altar. I, for one, firmly believe that her hands
are as clean as ours.
§3. The Revolutionary Movement and its Significance.—It is now time to
say something of the revolutionary movement of 1905 and of its ruthless
suppression which gave Russia so evil a reputation in the eyes of Western
Europe. It was my good fortune to be a resident in the dominions of the
Tsar during the critical years of 1906-9, to be present at a session of the
first Duma and to mingle with the members of that historic assembly in the
lobby of the Parliament House, to catch something of the extraordinary
belief in the coming of the millennium which was prevalent among all
classes in Petrograd in the first charmed months of 1906, and finally
to have been acquainted with active revolutionaries and their friends
throughout the whole of my period of residence. I can therefore speak with
a certain amount of inner knowledge of the revolution; and though I do not
wish to claim any particular authority for the opinions stated below, which
are after all nothing but the opinions of a single individual who has lived
for three years in a corner of the Russian Empire, yet they have at least
this advantage over those entertained on the subject by the average
Englishmen, viz. that they are based not on newspaper reports but on
actual experience, and that they were arrived at gradually and—it may be
added—with considerable reluctance, since they had, as it were, to win
their way through a number of my own personal sympathies and political
prejudices. There is, of course, no room here for any detailed treatment of
a movement upon which a big book might be written, and I shall therefore
have to limit myself to a few rather bald generalisations which I must
ask the reader to accept not as the truth, but as what one man of limited
experience and vision conceives to be the truth about the Russian
revolution.
The main reason why English people get mistaken ideas about Russia is that
they imagine Russians to be nothing but Englishmen picturesquely disguised
in furs and top-boots, and because they interpret the political situation
in Russia in terms of English history and politics. As I have already tried
to show, Russians are built differently from English people, from the soul
outwards, while the political and social condition of the Russian Empire
is totally unlike anything that has ever existed in this country. If
therefore the real causes of the movement of 1905 and of its failure are to
be rightly understood, we must put away from our minds the desire to find
analogies in the English revolutions of 1642 and 1688, or the French
Revolution of 1789, or the social revolution of which Karl Marx dreamed;
Russia can only be interpreted in terms of Russian history and Russian
conditions. In one thing, however, the Russian revolution was like all
revolutions which have ever been or are ever likely to be, viz. that it was
concerned with two distinct issues, one a narrow question of political and
constitutional reform, and the other a far wider question involving an
attempt to reconstruct not merely the institutions of society but also to
transform the ideals and conceptions upon which society rested.
Let us first of all consider the narrower political issue. This was simple
enough; the outbreak of 1905 had as its primary object the setting up of
some form of representative government which would control the bureaucratic
machine. It has been already pointed out that the constitution of modern
Russia was largely due to the genius of Peter the Great. During the
nineteenth century, however, it became apparent to thinking Russians that
the constitution, for the sake both of stability and efficiency, needed
development in the direction of popular representation. The plea of
efficiency was really far the stronger of the two. Had Peter the Great been
eternal, he might possibly have continued to exercise an effective control
over the administrative system which he created; for he was a man of
superhuman energy and will-power. But most Tsars, who are men of ordinary
capacity, found it impossible to do so. The consequence was that
the bureaucracy acquired what amounted in practice to absolute
irresponsibility. Now irresponsibility is demoralising to any
administration, however democratic be the principles upon which its
officials are selected. A bureaucracy, ruling without proper external
control, becomes a prey to the demons of red tape, routine, officialdom and
place-hunting; it tends to stifle individual initiative and the sense
of moral responsibility, since it forgets the real object of its
existence—the good government of the country—in its passion for
self-preservation and its desire to secure the smooth-working of the
machine; it becomes inhuman, intensely conservative and corrupt. Above all
it develops a hyper-sensitiveness to lay criticism, which compels it to do
all in its power—and in Russia that power is unlimited—to crush freedom
of speech and freedom of the press. The problem, however, of devising some
popular check upon its action was an extremely difficult one for the simple
reason that the mass of the Russian people never have taken, and even
to-day do not take, any interest in political questions. Nevertheless the
Tsar, Alexander II., who was one of the most enlightened monarchs that
ever sat upon the Russian throne, determined to attempt a solution.
Unfortunately on March 1, 1881, the very day when Alexander had given his
approval to a scheme of constitutional reform, involving the establishment
of representative institutions, he was assassinated by revolutionaries.
This fatal act put back the clock for twenty-five years, the court and the
nation were thrown into the arms of the bureaucracy as their only protector
against terrorism, and reaction reigned supreme. Meanwhile the bureaucracy
grew more corrupt, more tyrannical, more inefficient every day, while on
the other hand the party of reform, thrust as it were underground and
hunted like rats, became more and more bitter in spirit and more and more
extreme in theory.
It is important to bear in mind that the struggle has never from beginning
to end been one which divided the nation as a whole into two hostile camps.
Public opinion, when it has not been indifferent, has swayed now to one
side and now to the other, according as it was stirred by some flagrant
act of oppression on the part of the bureaucracy or some outrageous act of
terrorism on the part of the revolutionaries. The truth is that the civil
war in Russia—for it was nothing less—was confined to quite a narrow
section of society. It has been said that there are practically speaking no
class distinctions in the English sense of the word, in Russia; there is,
however, a very real distinction between the intelligentsia and the
peasants. The intelligentsia are the few million educated Russians who
control, or seek to control, the destinies of the 145 million uneducated
tillers of the soil. There is nothing quite like them in this country,
though the expression "the professional class" describes them in part.
Broadly speaking, they are people who have passed through school and
university, and can therefore lay claim to a certain amount of culture;
their birth is a matter of no moment, they may be the children of peasants
or of noblemen. It is from this "class," if we can call it so, that both
the bureaucracy and the revolutionary movement draw their recruits. The
real tragedy of Russia is that neither the party of reform nor the party of
reaction shares, or even understands, the outlook and ideals of the people.
Russian culture is still so comparatively recent that it has not yet passed
out of the imitative stage; and, in spite of the work of Pushkin, Gogol,
and Dostoieffsky, the books that are read and studied in Russia are for
the most part translations from foreign authors. The result is that the
political and social ideas of the intelligentsia are almost wholly
derived from countries whose structure is totally different from their
own. We shall presently see that this fact had an important bearing on the
development of the outbreak of 1905. It is sufficient here to notice
that the struggle was one between two sections of the intelligentsia,
political idealism against political stagnation, the Red Flag versus Red
Tape.
After twenty years of bureaucratic government the country as a whole began
to grow once again restless. In this period a proletariate had come into
being. It was a mere drop in the bucket of 145 millions of peasants,
but its voice was heard in the towns, and it was steeped in the Marxian
doctrines of Social Democracy. Moreover the peasants themselves had their
grievances. They cared nothing and understood less of the political
theories which the revolutionaries assiduously preached among them, but
they pricked up their ears when the agitators began to talk about land and
taxation. Up to 1861 the peasants had been serfs, the property, with the
land on which they lived, of the landowner. At their emancipation it was
necessary to provide them with land of their own; the State, therefore,
bought what was considered sufficient for the purpose from the landowners,
handed it over to the peasants, and recouped itself by imposing a land-tax
on the peasants to expire after a period of forty-nine years. This tax was
felt to be exceedingly onerous, and in addition to this by the beginning of
the twentieth century it became clear that the land acquired in 1861 was
not nearly enough to support a growing population. These factors, together
with the disastrous Russo-Japanese war, which revealed an appalling state
of corruption and incompetency in the government of the country, furnished
the revolutionaries with an opportunity which was not to be missed. A rapid
series of military and naval mutinies, agrarian disorders, assassinations
of obnoxious officials, socialist risings in the towns, during the
year 1905, culminating in the universal strike of October, brought the
Government to its knees, and on the 17th of the same month the Tsar issued
his manifesto granting freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and a
representative assembly. The revolution had, apparently, won on the
constitutional issue.
Yet what looked like the end of bureaucratic absolutism proved to be
the destruction of the revolutionary party. Had the reformers of 1905
concentrated their energies upon the task of turning the new legislature
into an adequate check upon the bureaucratic system, there is little doubt
they would have succeeded. As it was their success in this direction was
only partial. It is true that a Duma still sits at the Taurida Palace
at Petrograd, but it is elected on a narrow property franchise, and
its relations with the bureaucracy are as yet not properly defined; it
criticises but it possesses no real control. This failure of the revolution
was almost wholly due to the revolutionaries themselves, who, instead of
confining their attacks to the Government machine, sought to undermine the
entire structure of society and to overthrow the moral and religious ideals
of the nation. Moreover, their attitude was entirely negative, and they
possessed little or no constructive ability of any kind. Even the first
Duma, which contained the ablest politicians among the reformers, did
not succeed in passing acts of parliament, affirming the most elementary
principles of civil liberty; and it damaged itself irreparably in the
eyes of the country by refusing to condemn "terrorism" while demanding an
amnesty for all political offenders. The unique opportunity which the first
Duma afforded was frittered away in futile bickerings and wordy attacks
upon the Government.
Meanwhile, though a temporary truce was observed during the Duma's
sessions, its dissolution on July 21, 1906, two and a half months after
opening, was the signal for a fresh outburst of outrages on both sides. The
country was fast drifting into anarchy; agrarian risings, indiscriminate
bomb-throwing, pogroms, highway robberies carried out in the name of the
"social revolution" and euphemistically entitled expropriation, outbreaks
of a horrible kind of blood-lust which delighted in motiveless murder for
the sake of murder, were the order of the day. The revolution was
strong enough neither to crush the reactionaries nor to control the
revolutionaries themselves. The foundations of the social structure seemed
to be dissolving in a welter of blood and crime, and public opinion, which
in its hatred of bureaucracy had hitherto sided with the revolution,
suddenly drew back in horror from the abyss which opened out in front of
it. Stolypin, the Strafford of modern Russia, who condemned the extremists
of both sides, was called to the helm of the State; his watchword, "Order
first, reform afterwards," was backed by the force of public opinion; and,
as he stamped out the revolution with a heel of iron, the country shuddered
but approved. The peasants were pacified by the remission of the hated tax,
and by measures for providing them with more land; and Russia sank once
more into her normal condition.
But political incompetency is not a reason sufficiently weighty in itself
to account for the remarkable revulsion of public feeling against the
revolutionary party. Behind the narrow political issue lay the larger
philosophical and moral one; and it was the discovery by the country of the
real character and ultimate aims of the party which for a few months
in 1906 seized the reins of power that will alone provide a sufficient
explanation of one of the most astonishing political debacles of modern
history. The revolution was nothing less than an attempt by a small
minority of theorists and moral anarchists to force Western civilisation
upon Russia, and not Western civilisation as it actually is but a sort of
abstract "Westernism" derived from books. For the revolutionaries were far
more Western than the Westerns. They had not merely swallowed wholesale
the latest and most extreme political and social fads, picked up from the
literature of England, France, and Germany, but they possessed a courage of
their convictions and a will to carry them out to the logical conclusion
which many "advanced thinkers" of the West lack. They were not modernists
or new theologians but atheists, not Fabians or social reformers but
revolutionary socialists armed with bombs, not radicals but republicans,
not divorce-law-reformers but "free lovers." A remarkable book was
published in 1910 called Landmarks. It was written by a number of
disillusioned revolutionaries, and gives a vivid picture of the effect
which the foregoing principles had upon the lives of those who upheld them.
Here is one extract:
"In general, the whole manner of life of the intelligentsia was terrible;
a long abomination of desolation, without any kind or sort of discipline,
without the slightest consecutiveness, even on the surface. The day passes
in doing nobody knows what, to-day in one manner, and to-morrow, as a
result of a sudden inspiration, entirely contrariwise—everyone lives his
life in idleness, slovenliness, and a measureless disorder—chaos and
squalor reign in his matrimonial and sexual relations—a naïve absence of
conscientiousness distinguishes his work; in public affairs he shows an
irrepressible inclination towards despotism, and an utter absence of
consideration towards his fellow-creatures; and his attitude towards the
authorities of the State is marked at times by a proud defiance, and at
others (individually and not collectively) by compliance."
As a set-off to this picture of moral chaos, it should be remembered that
these people when called upon to die for their revolutionary faith did so
with the greatest heroism. Nor is the picture true of all revolutionaries;
some of the noblest men it has ever been my good fortune to meet were
Russian revolutionaries. But these were the product of an earlier and
sterner school, the puritanical "Nihilism" of the 'eighties; and it is
impossible to deny the substantial truth of the above description as far as
the rank and file of the modern revolutionary school are concerned.[1] Such
people were divided by a whole universe from the peasants to whom they
offered themselves as leaders and saviours; and the schemes of regeneration
which they preached were not merely useless, because purely negative, but
were exotic plants which could never flourish on Russian soil. Thus the
revolution triumphed for about twelve months as a purely destructive force,
but when the necessity for construction arose its adherents found that they
were entirely ignorant of the elements of the problem before them.
This problem was the peasant, and the revolutionaries, though they had
worshipped the People (with a capital P) for years and had done their best
to convert them, had never made any attempt to understand them. And when
the peasant discovered what the revolutionary was like, he loathed and
detested him. "They hate us," a writer in Landmarks confesses, "because
they fail to recognise that we are men. We are, in their eyes, monsters in
human shape, men without God in their soul; and they are right."
[Footnote 1: It is confirmed by all impartial observers, see e.g.

Professor Pares' Russia and Reform, chap. ix., entitled "Lives of the

Intelligents."]

There is a characteristic story told by Mr. Maurice Baring about a certain
revolutionary who one day arrived at a village to convert the inhabitants
to socialism. "He thought he would begin by disproving the existence of
God, because if he proved that there was no God, it would naturally follow
that there should be no Emperor and no policeman. So he took a holy picture
and said, 'There is no God, and I will prove it immediately. I will spit
upon this eikon and break it in pieces, and if there is a God He will
send fire from heaven and kill me, and if there is no God nothing will
happen to me at all.' Then he took the eikon and spat upon it and broke
it to bits, and he said to the peasants, 'You see, God has not killed me.'
'No,' said the peasants, 'God has not killed you, but we will'; and they
killed him."
This story, whether true or not, is a parable, in which one may read the
whole meaning of the failure of the Russian revolution. It shows how an
attack upon what they hold sacred may rouse to acts of fury a people
who are admitted by all who know them to be the most tolerant, most
tender-hearted, and most humane in Europe. The notion that Russia is a
humane country may sound strange in English ears. Yet capital punishment,
which is still part of our legal system, was abolished in Russia as long
ago as 1753, except for cases of high treason. From 1855 to 1876 only one
man was executed in the whole of that vast empire; and from 1876 to 1903
only 114. On the other hand between the years 1905 and 1908 the total of
executions reached the appalling figure of 3629. This is but to translate
into criminal statistics the story just quoted; for the years 1905-8 were
the years when martial law reigned in Russia, the years of revolution.
The Tsar, it is true, wore the black cap, and the hangman's rope was
manipulated by the bureaucracy, but the jury who brought in the verdict was
a jury of 145 million peasants.
Such, in broad outline, is the history of the revolutionary movement which
is still so greatly misunderstood in England. It was not the uprising of an
oppressed nation, which successful for a brief while was finally crushed by
the brute force of reaction; it was a civil war between two sections of
a small educated class, in which the sympathies of the nation after
fluctuating for a time eventually came down heavily against the
revolutionaries. There is in truth every excuse for misunderstanding
amongst English people, especially if they belong to the party of progress
in English politics; for the obvious things about Russia are so deceptive.
All that one saw on the surface were, on the one hand, an irresponsible
bureaucracy using the knout, the secret agent, the pogrom, and Siberia
for the suppression of anything suspected of threatening existing
conditions; and, on the other, a band of devoted reformers and
revolutionaries risking all in the cause of political liberty, and dying,
the "Marseillaise" on their lips, with the fortitude of Christian martyrs.
But, beneath all this, something immensely bigger was in progress,
which can only be described as a conflict of two philosophies of life
diametrically opposed or, if you like, a life-and-death struggle between
two civilisations, so different that they can hardly understand each
other's language; it is a renewal of the Titanic contest, which was decided
in the West by the Renaissance and the Reformation, the contest between
the mediaeval and the modern world. To the modern mind no period is so
difficult to grasp as the Middle Ages; our dreams are of progress which is
another word for process, of success which implies perpetual change, in
either case of "getting on" somewhere, somehow, we know not where or how;
our very universe, from which we have carefully excluded the supernatural,
has become a development machine, a huge spinning-mill, and our religion,
if we have one, a matter of "progressive revelation." We look before and
after, forwards to some dim utopia, backwards to some ape-like ancestor who
links us with the animal world. Our outlook is horizontal, the mediaeval
outlook perpendicular. The mediaeval man looked upward and downward, to
heaven and hell, when he thought of the future, to sun and cloud, land
and crops, when he thought of the present. He lived in the presence of
perpetual miracle, the daily miracle of sunrise, sunset, and shower; and in
the constant faith in resurrection, whether of the corn which he sowed in
the furrow or of his body which his friends would reverently sow in that
deeper furrow, the grave. And his life was as simple and static as his
universe; the seasons determined his labours, the Church his holidays.
Books did not disturb his faith in the unseen world, for he was illiterate;
nor the lust of gold his contentment with his existence, for commerce was
still confined to a few towns. Russia to-day is in spirit what Europe was
in the Middle Ages.[1] The revolutionaries offered her Western civilisation
and Western philosophy, and she rejected the gift with horror.
[Footnote 1: This, of course, by no means implies that she is behind the
West, or that she is of necessity bound to pass through the same process of
development. The problem of modern Russia is not to imitate the West but
to discover some way of coming to terms with Western ideals without
surrendering her own.]
Will she continue to maintain this attitude? "The Russian peasant," says
Mr. Maurice Baring, "as long as he tills the ground will never abandon his
religion or the observance of it…. Because the religion of the peasant is
the working hypothesis taught him by life; and by his observance of it he
follows what he conceives to be the dictates of common sense consecrated by
immemorial custom." The crucial point of this passage is the conditional
clause: "as long as he tills the ground." Of course, Russia, the granary of
Europe, must always be predominantly an agricultural country; yet she is at
the present moment threatened in many parts with an Industrial Revolution,
the ultimate effects of which may prove far more subversive than the
attempted revolution of 1905. For beneath her soil lie explosive materials
more deadly than any dynamite manufactured by intelligentsia. Her mineral
wealth, at present almost untouched, is incalculable in quantity and
amazing in variety. When her mines are opened up Russia will become,
according to the judgment of Dr. Kennard, editor of The Russian
Year-Book, "without a doubt the richest Empire the world has ever seen."
Attracted by her vast mining possibilities, by her enormous virgin forests,
by her practically unlimited capacity for grain-production, the capital
of Europe is knocking at the doors of Russia. Factories are rising, mines
being started all over the country. Russia is about to be exploited by
European business enterprise, just as America and Africa have been. The
world has need of her raw materials, and is only interested in her people
as potential cheap labour. Thus within the last few years something
analogous to the proletariat and the bourgeoisie of Europe has come into
existence in Russia. We may catch a glimpse of what these new classes are
like from a recent book by Mr. Stephen Graham, called Changing Russia. He
writes:
"The Russian bourgeois is of this sort; he wants to know the price of
everything. Of things which are independent of price he knows nothing,
or, if he knows of them, he sneers at them and hates them. Talk to him of
religion, and show that you believe the mystery of Christ; talk to him
of life, and show that you believe in love and happiness; talk to him of
woman, and show that you understand anything about her unsexually; talk
to him of work, and show that though you are poor you have no regard for
money—and the bourgeois is uneasy…. Instead of opera, the gramophone;
instead of the theatre, the kinematograph; instead of national literature,
the cheap translation; instead of national life, a miserable imitation of
modern English life…. It may be thought that there is little harm in the
commercialisation of the Russian, the secularising of his life; and that
after all the bourgeois population of England, France, and Germany is not
so bad as not to be on the way to something better. But that would be a
mistake; if once the Russian nation becomes thoroughly perverted, it will
be the most treacherous, most vile, most dangerous in Europe. For the
perverted Russian all is possible; it is indeed his favourite maxim,
borrowed, he thinks, from Nietzsche, that 'all is permitted,' and by 'all'
he means all abomination, all fearful and unheard-of bestiality, all
cruelty, all falsity, all debauch…. Selfish as it is possible to be,
crass, heavy, ugly, unfaithful in marriage, unclean, impure, incapable
apparently of understanding the good and the true in their neighbours and
in life—such is the Russian bourgeois."
Mr. Graham's picture of the new proletariat in the Ural mines is an equally
horrible one:
"Gold mining is a sort of rape and incest, a crime by which earth and man
are made viler. If I had doubted of its influence on man I needed but to
go to the Ural goldfields. A more drunken, murderous, brother-hating
population than that of this district I have not seen in all Russia. It was
a great sorrow to see such a delightful peasantry all in debauchery….
The miner has no culture, no taste, not even a taste for property and
squiredom, so that when at a stroke he gains a hundred or a thousand
pounds, it is rather difficult to know how to spend it. His ideal of
happiness has been vodka, and all the bliss that money can obtain for him
lies in that…. Mias is a gold-mining village of twenty-five thousand
inhabitants. It has two churches, four electric theatres, fifteen vodka
shops, a score of beer-houses, and many dens where cards are played and
women bought and sold to the strains of the gramophone. It is situated in a
most lovely hollow among the hills, and, seen from the distance, it is one
of the most beautiful villages of North Russia; but seen from within, it is
a veritable inferno."
Mr. Graham writes as a poet rather than as an economist or a sociologist,
but there is no doubt a grave danger to Russia in a sudden adoption of
industrial life.
Intelligentsia, bourgeoisie, and proletariate are all products of the
same forces, all belong to the same family; they are westernised Russians;
they have passed from the fourteenth to the twentieth century at one
stride, and the violent transition has cut them completely adrift from
tradition and from all moral and religious standards; books, commerce,
and industry, the three boasted instruments of our civilisation, have
not civilised such Russians, they have de-civilised them. But, as yet,
Russians of this character form only a tiny fraction of the nation; and
there are happily signs that the dangers of an exotic culture are being
realised even by the intelligentsia themselves. Since the failure of the
revolution there has been a remarkable revival of interest among Russian
thinkers in the native institutions, habits, and even the religion of the
country; and it may be that in time there will emerge from this chaos of
ideals a culture and a civilisation which will "make the best of both
worlds" by adopting Western methods without surrendering an inch of the
nation's spiritual territory, above which floats the standard of religion,
simplicity, and brotherly love. The present war, terrible as it is, may do
something towards bringing this about, for the Russian people, faced by a
common danger and united in a common purpose, are now of one mind and one
heart, in a way that they have not been since a century ago Napoleon was
thundering at the gates of Moscow.
And let this be said: if Russia should ever cease to be Russia, if she ever
loses those grand national characteristics which make her so different from
the West, and therefore so difficult for us Westerns to understand, the
world as a whole will be infinitely the poorer for that loss. We need
Russia even more than Russia needs us; for, while we have grasped the
trappings, she possesses the real spirit of democracy. Of the three
democratic ideals, proclaimed by France in 1789, the mystical trinity:
Liberty, Fraternity, Equality, how much has yet been realised by the
peoples of the West? And Russia is in the way of realising them all!
Fraternity and equality are, as we have seen, the distinctive features of
her national spirit and social structure, and, if her liberty is as yet
imperfect on the political side, it is far more complete than ours on the
side of moral tolerance and respect for the sanctity of human personality.
After all, the reason why Russia has not got complete political freedom is
because, as a nation, she has hitherto taken no interest in politics; for
the first time in 1905 she discovered the use of political action, and she
got out of it a solution of the agrarian distress and a representative
assembly; when she wants more liberty in this direction, she will have no
difficulty in securing it.
§4. The Subject Nationalities.—It may fairly be objected at this
point that while Russia may possess these excellent qualities, she has
consistently refused to allow liberty to other peoples, to the Jews,
for example, the Poles, and the Finns. It is necessary therefore to say
something on the matter of Russia's subject nationalities before bringing
these remarks to a conclusion.
Out of the six or seven million Jews in the world, over five million live
within the boundaries of the Russian Empire. Russia is therefore the
motherland of the Children of Israel; though, perhaps, the phrase
step-motherland would express more truly the actual relationship, both
in its origin and its character. Russia has inherited her tremendous
responsibilities towards the Hebrew race from Poland, and her vexed "Jewish
question" is in part a just punishment for her complicity in the wicked
partitions of that country in the eighteenth century. The matter, however,
goes back much farther than the eighteenth century. In the Middle Ages
Poland was a more powerful state than Russia, and comprised territory
stretching from the Gulf of Riga to the Black Sea and from the Oder to the
Dnieper. She was also the one country in Europe which offered to the Jews
security from persecution and an opportunity of developing the commercial
instincts of the race without interference. The result was that Jews
settled in large numbers all over the King of Poland's possessions, and the
presence of Jews in any part of modern Russia is almost a sure sign that
that particular town or province has been Polish territory in former times.
The Russian Government has never, except for a short period, allowed the
Jews to live in Russia proper, and it is very rare to find Jews in north
or central Russia. Even in large cities like Petrograd and Moscow their
numbers are small, while it is interesting to note that the Finns have
copied the rest of Russia in this respect at least that they have always
resolutely refused to admit the Hebrew. Where Russia found Jews among the
new subjects which she acquired by her gradual encroachments upon Poland,
she had of course to let them remain, but she has confined them strictly to
these districts. The existence of this Jewish pale is one of the grievances
of the Jews of Russia, but it is not the heaviest. The liberal-minded
Alexander II. had shown himself lenient to them; but his assassination
in 1881 at the hands of terrorists and the accession of the reactionary
Alexander III. began a period of persecution which has continued until the
present day.
Alexander III. was much influenced by his tutor, Pobiedonostsev, who for
the next thirty years was the most prominent exponent of the philosophy of
Slavophilism. This, which in its modern form may be traced back to 1835,
was in fact nothing else than a perverted glorification of the Russian
national characteristics which have been dwelt upon above. The Slavophils
declared not only that the Russians were a great and admirable nation,
which few who really know them will be disposed to deny, but that their
institutions—and in particular, of course, autocracy and bureaucracy—were
a perfect expression of the national genius which could hardly be improved
upon. Furthermore, it was maintained that, since all other countries but
Russia had taken a wrong turn and fallen into decadence and libertinism, it
was Russia's mission to bring the world back into the paths of rectitude
and virtue by extending the influence of her peculiar culture—and in
particular again, of course, its special manifestations, autocracy
and bureaucracy—as widely as possible. A variant of Slavophilism is
Panslavism, which works for the day when all members of one great Slav race
will be united in one nation, presumably under the Russian crown. Both
these movements are examples of that nationalism run mad to which reference
has been made in the second chapter.[1] But the Slavophils, who are of
course ardent supporters of the Orthodox Church, were faced at the outset
with a great difficulty; the western provinces of Russia, from the Arctic
to the Black Sea, contained masses of population which were neither Russian
nor Orthodox. The Finns in the north were Lutherans; the Poles in the
centre, though Slavs, were Roman Catholic in religion and anti-Russian in
sentiment; and the Jews in the centre and south were—Jews. The first
step, therefore, towards the Slavophil goal was the "Russification" of the
subject peoples of Russia. In theory "Russification" means conferring the
benefits of Russian customs, speech, and culture upon those who do not
already possess them; in practice it amounts to the suppression of local
liberties and traditions.
[Footnote 1: See p. 57.]
It is obvious that it is no easier to make a Jew into a Russian by force
than to change the skin of the proverbial Ethiopian; nor is it likely that
the Russian Government ever entertained the idea of making such an
attempt. If it had any definite plan at all, it was to render things so
uncomfortable to the unfortunate Hebrews that they would gradually leave
the country. Real persecution began at the accession of Alexander III. in
1881, when it spread into Russia, significantly enough, from Germany, where
a violent anti-Semite agitation had sprung up at the beginning of the year.
Riots directed against the Jews, and winked at if not encouraged by the
authorities, broke out in the towns of Southern Russia. Edicts followed
which excluded the Jews from all direct share in local government, refused
to allow more than a small percentage of Jews to attend the schools and
universities, forbade them to acquire property outside the towns, laid
special taxes upon their backs, and so on. This attitude of the Government
encouraged the populace of the towns to believe that they might attack the
Jews with impunity. The Jews are regarded in modern Russia in much the same
light as they were regarded by our forefathers in the Middle Ages. They are
hated, that is to say, on two counts: as unbelievers and as usurers. The
condition of affairs in a township where the population is half-Jewish,
half-Christian, and where the Christians are financially and commercially
in the hands of the Jews, and the Jews are politically and administratively
in the hands of the Christians, is obviously an extremely dangerous one.
Add to this the presence of a large hooligan section which is found in
almost every Russian town of any size, the open disfavour shown towards
the Jews by the Government, and the secret intrigues and incitement of the
police, and you get a train of circumstances which lead inevitably to those
violent anti-Semitic explosions, known as pogroms, which have stained the
pages of modern Russian history. The revolutionary movement has complicated
matters still further; for Jews are naturally to be found in the
revolutionary ranks, and the bureaucracy and its hooligan supporters have
tended to identify the Jewish race with the Revolutionary Party. Nothing
can excuse the treatment of the Jews in Russia during the last thirty-five
years, and the guilt lies almost entirely upon the Government, which,
instead of leading the people and educating them by initiating an
enlightened policy towards the Jews, a policy which might in fact have done
more than anything else to "Russify" the latter, has persistently aided and
abetted the worst elements of the population in their acts of violence.
It has reaped its reward in the rise of one of the most formidable of the
revolutionary parties in modern Russia, the so-called Jewish "Bund." The
Governor of Vilna, in a confidential report written in 1903, declared that
"this political movement is undoubtedly a result of the abnormal position
of the Jews, legal and economic, which has been created by our legislation.
A revision of the laws concerning the Jews is absolutely urgent, and every
postponement of it is pregnant with the most dangerous consequences."
Yet when we condemn Russia for her pogroms and her Jew-baitings, we must
not forget two facts: first, that these occurrences are the work, not of
the real Russian people, the peasantry which has been described above, but
of the dregs of the population which are to be found at the base of the
social structure in the towns of Russia as in towns nearer home; second,
that Russia is not the only country in the world that has these racial
problems to face. I once heard a Russian and an American discussing the
comparative demerits of their respective lands, and I am bound to say that
the former held his own very well. When, for example, the American said,
"What about the Jews?" the other answered, "Well, what about the negroes?"
and he parried the further question, "What about pogroms?" with another
of his own, "What about lynching?" The problems are not, of course, quite
on all fours, nor do two wrongs make a right, but a reminder that similar
problems exist in other parts of the world will perhaps be enough to show
that the Jewish question in Russia is neither unique nor at all easy to
solve. Let us, instead of visiting the sins of a few townships upon the
heads of the entire Russian nation, be thankful that we have no such
problems in our own islands. Recent riots outside the shops of German
pork-butchers in different parts of the country do not, it must be
confessed, lead one to hope that our people would behave much more calmly
and discreetly than the Whites of the Southern States or the Christians of
South-West Russia, were they placed in the same circumstances.
The Polish question is at once simpler and its story less damaging to the
Russian Government than that of the Jews. The partitions, an account of
which has already been given,[1] were of course iniquitous, but, as we have
seen, Prussia must bear the chief blame for them. In any case, the Tsar
Alexander I. did his utmost for Poland at the Congress of Vienna in 1815.
He pleaded eloquently for a reunited Poland, and he almost won over Prussia
by making arrangements to compensate her for her Polish territory at the
expense of Saxony. But France, England, and Austria opposed his project,
and he was obliged to yield to the combined pressure of these powers.
Russia is, therefore, not more but less guilty of the present dismembered
state of Poland than her Western neighbours, among whom we must not forget
ourselves;[2] and she is to-day only attempting to carry out the promise
which she made, but was not allowed to fulfill, a century ago. Disappointed
as he was, Alexander I. made the best of a bad job by granting a liberal
constitution to that part of Poland which the Congress assigned to
Russia. Indeed he did everything possible, short of a grant of absolute
independence, which at that time would have been absurd, to conciliate
public opinion in the Grand-Duchy of Warsaw. Unfortunately the experiment
proved a complete failure, largely owing to the factious and self-seeking
Polish nobility who have always been the worst enemy of their country.
Alexander after a time lost patience, and in 1820 he felt compelled to
withdraw some of the liberties which he had conferred in 1815. After this
the breach between the Russian Government and the Polish people began to
widen, partly owing to stupid and clumsy actions on the side of Russia,
partly to the incurable lack of political common-sense on the side of the
upper classes in Poland, partly to the fact that the country could never
be anything but restless and unsatisfied while it remained divided. The
history of Russian Poland since the time of Alexander is the history of two
great failures to throw off the Russian yoke, the failure of 1830 and of
1863. These risings were marked by heroism, disunion, and incapacity on the
one side, and by relentless repression on the other. The upshot was that
Poland was deprived of her constitutional rights one by one, until finally
she became nothing more than so many provinces of Russia itself. To some
extent, however, the failure of 1863 proved a blessing in disguise. The
rising had been almost entirely confined to the nobility; Russia therefore
turned to the peasants of Poland, released them from all obligations to
work upon the estates of the large landowners, and handed over to them at
least half the land of the country as freehold property. The result of
this measure, and of the removal of the customs barrier between the two
countries in 1877, was twofold: the power of the factious nobility was
shattered for ever, and a marvellous development of industry took place in
Poland which has united her to Russia "with chains of self-interest
likely to prove a serious obstacle to the realisation of Polish hopes of
independence."[3] It is indeed doubtful whether at this date the
Poles cherish any such hopes. What they desire is national unity and
self-government rather than sovereign independence, and they know that they
are at least as likely to receive these from Russia as from Prussia.
[Footnote 1: Pp. 24-27.]
[Footnote 2: As a matter of fact our representative, Lord Castlereagh, was
Alexander's chief opponent at the Congress in the question of Poland. See
Camb. Mod. Hist. vol. x. p. 445.]
[Footnote 1: Camb. Mod. Hist. vol. xi. p. 629.]
While of late years the relations between Russia and Poland have steadily
improved, those between Russia and Finland, on the contrary, have grown
rapidly worse. Until 1809 Finland was a Grand-Duchy under the Swedish
crown, but in that year, owing to a war which had broken out between Russia
and Sweden, she passed into the control of the nearer and more powerful
State, after putting up a stubborn resistance to annexation which will
always figure as the most glorious episode in the annals of the country.
Alexander I., who was at that time Tsar, adopted the same policy towards
Finland as he did towards Poland. He refused to incorporate the new
province into the Russian State-system, he took the title of Grand-Duke
of Finland (thereby implying that she lay outside the Empire), and he
confirmed the ancient liberties of the Finns. Later on they even secured
greater liberty than they had possessed under Sweden by the grant of a
Finnish Diet, on the lines of the Swedish Diet in Stockholm, which should
have full control of all internal Finnish affairs. Finland, therefore,
gained much from the transfer; she possessed for the first time in her
history complete internal autonomy. This state of things lasted for
practically ninety years, during which period Finland made wonderful
progress both economic and intellectual, so that by the end of the
nineteenth century she was one of the happiest, most enlightened, and most
prosperous countries in Northern Europe. "As regards the condition of
Finland," Alexander I. had declared, "my intention has been to give
this people a political existence, so that they may not feel themselves
conquered by Russia, but united to her for their own clear advantage;
therefore, not only their civil but their political laws have been
maintained." This liberal policy was continued by the various Tsars
throughout the century, the reformer Alexander II. taking particular
interest in the development of the Grand-Duchy, which he evidently regarded
as a place where experiments in political liberty were being worked
out that might later be applied to the rest of Russia. The weakness of
Finland's position lay in the fact that her liberties really depended upon
the personal whim of the Grand-Duke: in theory her constitutional laws were
only alterable by the joint sanction of monarch and people; in practice the
small but courageous nation had no means of redress should the Tsar,
swayed by bureaucratic reaction, choose to go back upon the policy of his
ancestors. And in 1894 a Tsar mounted the throne, Nicholas II., who did so
choose.
The word went forth for the "Russification" of Finland. After picking a
quarrel with the Diet on the military question, the Tsar on February 18,
1899, issued a manifesto suspending the Finnish Constitution and abolishing
the Diet. Finland became with a stroke of the pen a department of the
Russian Empire. A rigorous Press censorship was established, the hated
governor-general Bobrikoff filled the country with gendarmes and spies,
native officials were dismissed or driven to resign, an attempt was made
to introduce the Russian language into the schools, and, though the Finns
could only oppose a campaign of passive resistance to these wicked and
short-sighted measures, at the end of seven years the nation which had for
almost a century been the most contented portion of the Tsar's dominions
was seething with ill-feeling and disloyalty. The inevitable outcome was
the assassination of General Bobrikoff by a young student in June 1904; and
when the Russian universal strike took place in October 1905, the entire
Finnish nation joined in as one man. Finland regained her liberties for
a time, and immediately set to work putting her house in order by
substituting for her old mediaeval constitution a brand new one, based on
universal suffrage, male and female, and employing such up-to-date
devices as proportional representation. The only result of seven years'
"Russification" was the creation of a united democracy, with a strong
socialistic leaven, in place of a nation governed by an antiquated
aristocratic Diet, and divided into two hostile political camps on the
question whether Swedish or Finnish should be the language of the national
culture. But the fortunes of Finland were accidentally but inextricably
bound up with those of the party of reform in Russia, and when the
bureaucracy, after the downfall of the revolutionaries, found itself once
more firmly seated in the saddle, it returned to the attack on the Finnish
Constitution, not indeed with the open and brutal methods of Bobrikoff, but
by gradual and insidious means no less effective. And it must be admitted
that the Russian Duma, as "reformed" by Stolypin, so far from being of
any help to Finland in the struggle, has been made the instrument of the
destruction of her liberties.
Finland is in a very unfortunate position. Geographically she is bound to
form part of the Russian Empire; even the extremest Russophobes in the
country have long ago given up hopes of re-union with Sweden; and yet the
frontier between Finland and Russia is one which divides two worlds, as all
who have made the journey from Helsingfors to Petrograd must have noticed.
In literature, art, education, politics, commerce, industry, and social
reform Finland is as much alive as any of the Scandinavian States from
whom she first derived her culture. In many ways indeed she is the most
progressive country in Europe, and it is her proud boast that she is
"Framtidsland," the land of the future. Lutheran in religion, non-Slavonic
in race, without army, court, or aristocracy, and consequently without
the traditions which these institutions carry with them, she presents the
greatest imaginable contrast to the Empire with which she is irrevocably
linked. Finland is Western of the Westerns, and keenly conscious of the
fact just because of this irrevocable link; Russia is—Russia! And yet, as
part of the Russian system, she must come to terms sooner or later with the
Empire; she cannot receive the protection of the Russian military forces, a
protection to the value of which, if reports be true, she is at the present
moment very much alive, and yet retain her claims to be what is virtually
an independent State. That these claims have been pitched on a high note
is no doubt largely the fault of the blundering and cruel policy of the
Russian bureaucracy. But it must be admitted that Finland has never tried
in the very least to understand her mighty neighbour; she has always sat,
as it were, with her back to Russia, looking westwards, and her statesmen
have not even taken the trouble to learn the Russian language. There has,
in fact, been something a little "priggish" in her superior attitude, in
her perpetually drawn comparison between Russian "barbarism" and Finnish
"culture." Though her capital, Helsingfors, is but twelve hours by rail
from Petrograd, Finland knows as little of the interior of Russia as people
do in England.
The policy of the Russian Government, on the other hand, has been marked
by that inconsistency, political blindness, and arbitrariness which one
expects from an irresponsible bureaucracy. For ninety years Finland was
left alone to work out her own salvation, entirely apart from that of the
rest of the Empire; and then suddenly it was discovered that her coasts
were of the highest strategical importance, and that she was developing a
commercial and industrial system in dangerous competition with the tender
plant of commerce and industry in Russia itself. The Slavophils raised an
outcry, and the decree went out that the Russian whale should swallow this
active and prosperous little Jonah. The former policy was really as stupid,
though less cruel, than the latter. Had there been anything like that
steady political tradition and wide political experience in Russia which we
can draw upon in England, the Imperial Government would have from the first
endeavoured to draw Finland closer to the Empire, not by bands of steel and
iron but by the more delicate and more permanent ties of considerateness,
affection, and self-interest. It is political stupidity, based upon
ignorance and inexperience, and not inhumanity, which is the real
explanation of Russia's unfortunate relations with her subject peoples
during the past century. Moreover, the political machinery which has
hitherto served her own internal needs is the worst possible instrument for
dealing with provinces which possess a full measure of Western political
consciousness together with the traditions of political liberty. Russia,
therefore, requires representative institutions not merely for the
political education of her own people and as a check upon bureaucratic
tyranny and incompetency, but also in order that she may adopt some fair
and consistent policy towards her subject nationalities.
It may be optimistic, but I cannot help feeling that the present war will
do much for Russia, much for Finland, much for Poland. Russia is
fighting to defend a small nation against oppression, she is fighting
a life-and-death struggle with the military bureaucracy which we call
"Germany" for the moment, she is fighting on behalf of "liberty" and of the
"scraps of paper" upon which the freedom of States and individuals depends.
All this will leave a profound effect upon the national consciousness, and
may even bring home for the first time to the people at large the meaning
of political freedom. Russia is so vast, so loose in structure, so
undeveloped in those means of intercommunication such as roads, railways,
newspapers, etc., which make England like a small village-community in
comparison, that it takes the shock of a great war to draw the whole people
together. That it has done so, no one who has read the papers during the
last two months can doubt. War, as a historical fact, has always been
beneficial to Russia; the Crimean War led to the emancipation of the serfs,
the Japanese War led to the establishment of a Duma, and the present war
has already led to surprising results. The consumption of alcohol has been
abolished, concessions have been promised to a reunited Poland, and,
except against the unhappy Jews in the Polish war-area, there has been a
subsidence throughout the Empire of racial antagonism. It is the hope of
all who love Russia, and no one who really knows her can help loving her,
that these beginnings may be crowned not only with victory over Germany in
the field of battle but with victory over the German spirit in the world of
ideas, a victory of which the first-fruits would be the firm establishment
of representative government, a cleansing of the bureaucratic Augean
stables, and a settlement of the problem of subject nationalities upon
lines of justice and moderation.
But whatever the outcome may be, let us in England be fair to Russia.
The road to fairness lies through understanding; and we have grossly
misunderstood Russia because we have not taken the trouble to acquaint
ourselves with the facts, the real facts as distinct from the newspaper
facts, of her situation. When those facts are realised, is it for us to
cast the first stone? Russia needs political reform, the tremendous task
of Peter the Great needs completing, the bureaucracy must be crowned
with representative institutions; but is Russia's need in the sphere of
political reform greater than ours in the sphere of social reform?
Look at our vast miserable slums, our sprawling, ugly, aimless industrial
centres, inhabited by millions who have just enough education to be able to
buy their thinking ready-made through the halfpenny Press and just enough
leisure for a weekly attendance at the local football match and an annual
excursion to Blackpool or Ramsgate; who seldom, if ever, see the glorious
face of Nature and, when they do, gaze into it with blank unrecognising
eyes; whose whole life is one long round of monotony—monotonous toil,
monotonous amusements, monotonous clothes, monotonous bricks and
mortar;—until the very heaven itself, with its trailing cloud-armadas and
its eternal stars, is forgotten, and the whole universe becomes a cowl of
hodden grey, "where-under crawling cooped they live and die." And then look
at those other millions—the millions of Russia—look at the grand simple
life they lead in the fields, a life of toil indeed, but of toil sweet and
infinitely varied; Russia is their country, not merely because they live
there but because they—the peasants—now actually possess by far the
greater part of the arable land; God is their God, not because they have
heard of Him as some remote Being in the Sunday School, but because He
is very near to them—in their homes, in their sacraments, and in their
hearts; and so contentment of mind and soul is theirs, not because they
have climbed higher than their fellows, whether by the accumulation of
knowledge or wealth, but because they have discovered the secret of
existence, which is to want little, to live in close communion with nature,
and to die in close communion with God.
MAURICE BARING. The Mainsprings of Russia. 1914. Nelson. 2s. net.
This is an excellent introduction to the subject, recording as it does the
general impressions of an acute and sympathetic observer; it does not, of
course, pretend to be comprehensive, and says nothing, for example, of the
Jews, Poles, Finns, etc.
BERNARD PARES. Russia and Reform. 1907. 10s. 6d. net.
MILYOUKOV. Russia and its Crisis. 1905. 13s. 6d. net.
MAURICE BARING. The Russian People. 1911. 15s. net.
These three books may be consulted for the Revolution of 1905 and the
events which led up to it. Professor Milyoukov's book was actually
published before the Revolution, but its author was leader of the Cadet
party in the First Duma, and it is therefore something in the nature of
a liberal manifesto. Professor Pares' book, which is perhaps the most
penetrating and well-balanced of all and contains most valuable chapters
on the Intelligentsia, does not, unfortunately, deal with the years of
reaction which followed the dissolution of the First Duma. Mr. Baring's
book may be recommended especially for the later chapters which deal with
the causes of the failure of the Revolution. All three contain a good deal
of sound historical matter.
H.W. WILLIAMS. Russia of the Russians. 1914. 6s. net.
ROTHAY REYNOLDS. My Russian Year. 1913. 10s. 6d. net.
Two good books dealing with life in contemporary Russia. The first is the
best and most comprehensive treatment of the new Russia which has emerged
from the revolutionary period, and gives one not merely the political
but also the social and artistic aspect. The other book is lightly and
entertainingly written.
STEPHEN GRAHAM. Undiscovered Russia. 1911. 12s. 6d. net.
STEPHEN GRAHAM. Changing Russia. 1913. 7s. 6d. net.
STEPHEN GRAHAM. With the Russian Pilgrims to Jerusalem. 1913. 7s. 6d.
net.
Mr. Stephen Graham may be said to have discovered the Russian peasant for
English people, and his books give an extraordinarily vivid and sympathetic
picture of Russian peasant-life by one who knows it from the inside. They
afford also the best account of religion in Russia as a living force, while
those who wish to know more of the Orthodox Church as an institution may be
referred to chaps. xxvi. and xxvii. of Mr. Baring's Russian People; chap.
viii. of the same writer's Mainsprings of Russia; and chap. vi. of Sir
C. Eliot's (Odysseus) Turkey in Europe (7s. 6d. net). The second of Mr.
Graham's books deals with the threatening industrial changes in Russia. The
third is a fine piece of literature as well as being the only account in
any language of one of the most characteristic figures in modern Russian
life—the peasant-pilgrim.
SIR D.M. WALLACE. Russia. 2 vols. 1905. 24s. net.
Russia and the Balkan States. Reprinted from the Encyclopedia
Britannica. 2s. 6d. net.
Both these accounts, though written many years ago, have now been brought
up to date in view of present events.
R. NISBET BAIN. Slavonic Europe, 1447-1796. 1908. 5s. 6d. net.
F.H. SKRINE. The Expansion of Russia, 1815-1900. 1903. 4s. 6d. net.
W.R. MORFILL. Russia. 1890. 5s.
W.R. MORFILL. Poland. 1893. 5s.
Are all useful for the history of Russia, and of her relations with Poland,
and Finland. Readers may also be referred to the Cambridge Modern History
(vol. ix. chap. xvi.; vol. x. chaps. xiii., xiv.; vol. xi. chaps. ix.,
xxii.; vol. xii. chaps. xii., xiii.).
V O. KLUCHEFFSKY. A History of Russia. 3 vols. 1913. Dent. 7s. 6d. net
each.
The standard economic and social history of Russia up to the reign of Peter
the Great.
H.P. KENNARD. The Russian Year-Book. Eyre and Spottiswoode. 10s. 6d. net.
Excellent for facts and figures.
E. SÉMÉNOFF. The Russian Government and the Massacres. 1907. 2s. 6d. net.
An account of the pogroms in Russia from the Jewish point of view.
J.R. FISHER. Finland and the Tsars, 1800-1899. 1899. 12s. 6d.
The best account in English of the history of Finland's relations with

Russia up to the beginning of the reactionary period.

K.P. POBIEDONOSTSEV. Reflections of a Russian Statesman. 1898. 6s. For

Slavophilism.

P. KHOPOTKIN. Memoirs of a Revolutionist. 1907. 6s.
MAURICE BARING. Russian Literature. (Home University Library.) 1s.
A. BRÜCKNER. A Literary History of Russia. 1908. 12s. 6d. net.
MAURICE BARING. Landmarks in Russian Literature. 1910. 6s. net.
The last-named are the best available books in English on Russian
literature. The works of the great Russian novelists are now accessible to
English readers. Nothing helps one to understand Russia so well as reading
the works of Tourgeniev, Tolstoi, and Dostoieffsky. The best translations
are those of Mrs. Garnett. The following are recommended to those who are
beginning the study of Russian literature and who are desirous of reading
novels which throw light on the springs of Russian life and thought:—
TOURGENIEV. Fathers and Children. Heinemann. 2s. net.
A study of Russian Nihilism in the 'eighties, which may be read and
compared with Kropotkin's Memoirs.
TOLSTOI. War and Peace. Heinemann. 3s. 6d. net. Anna Karenin.

Heinemann. 3s. 6d. net.

The first of these is perhaps the finest treatment of war in modern
literature, the subject being the Russian campaign of Napoleon in 1812. No
other book gives one a better idea of the way the Russians make war and of
the essential greatness of the Russian national spirit.
DOSTOIEFFSKY. The Brothers Karamazov. Heinemann. 3s. 6d. net.
This, which is one of the greatest novels ever written, depicts, at once
relentlessly and with infinite tenderness, the spiritual conflict which has
agitated Russian society for at least fifty years past.
JOSEPH CONRAD. Under Western Eyes. 6s.
A powerful study of modern revolutionary types. Conrad, of course, is not a

Russian novelist, but he is of Polish origin.

GOGOL. The Inspector-General. Walter Scott. 1s. net.
A comedy first produced in Petrograd in 1836. Gogol is one of Russia's
classics. This play is a humorous treatment of bureaucratic corruption and
inefficiency.
The present war has raised in the minds of many men a question which we as
a people will soon be called upon to answer. Was this war necessary? Or was
it caused by the ambitions and foolishness of statesmen? Might it not have
been averted if the peoples of Europe had had more control over the way in
which foreign policy was carried on?
Out of these questions has arisen a demand for the "democratisation of
foreign policy"; that is, for greater popular control over diplomatic
negotiations. In view of this, it becomes necessary for every British
citizen to gain some idea of what foreign policy is and by what principles
it should be governed.
It is the purpose of this chapter to give, first, some account of the
actual meaning of the words "foreign policy," and then, secondly, to
consider how foreign policy may best be controlled in the interests of the
whole population of the British Empire, and in the interests of the world
at large.
§1. The Foreign Office.—To the ordinary man foreign policy is an affair
of mystery, and it not unnaturally rouses his suspicions. He does not
realise, what is nevertheless the simple truth, that he himself is both the
material and the object of all foreign policy.
The business of the Government of a country is to maintain and further the
interests of the individual citizen. That is the starting-point of all
political institutions. The business of the Foreign Office is a part of
this work of Government, and consists in the protection of the interests of
the individual citizen where those interests depend upon the goodwill of a
foreign Government.
But just as in domestic politics the individual citizen is inclined to
suspect—too often with truth—that the Government does not give impartial
attention to the interests of all the citizens, but is preoccupied in
protecting the interests of powerful and privileged persons or groups, so
in foreign policy the individual citizen is particularly prone to believe
that the time of the Foreign Office is taken up in furthering the interests
of rich bondholders or powerful capitalists. Moreover, the charge is
sometimes heard that some of the most powerful of these capitalists are
engaged in the manufacture of armaments, and that the Foreign Office
aims at securing orders from foreign Governments for these firms, thus
encouraging the nations of the world to provide themselves with means of
destruction.
Now, just as no sensible man will say that Governments do not often oppress
the people under their care, so no sensible man will contend that Foreign
Offices do not sometimes sin in the same way. But let us try to give an
accurate picture of the work on which the British Foreign Office spends its
time.
The organisation of the Foreign Office consists of:
(1) An office, situated in Downing Street, manned by a number of clerks,
under the direction of the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
(2) The Diplomatic Service—that is to say, from three to eight officials
residing in the capital of each foreign country. In the more important
countries these officials are called an Embassy, and are under the
direction of an Ambassador; in the smaller countries they are called a
Legation, and are under the direction of a Minister. These Ambassadors and
Ministers receive instructions from and report to the Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs, and are the mouthpiece of the British Government in
all business which Great Britain transacts with foreign countries.
(3) The Consular Service—that is to say, a large number of officials,
called Consuls, distributed over all the towns of the world where British
subjects have important trade connections or where there are a considerable
number of British subjects. These Consuls are under the direction of the
Foreign Office and of the Embassy or Legation in the country where they
reside, and their business is to assist British trade and protect British
subjects.
§2. The Work of the Foreign Office.—The work of this whole organisation
may be divided into four classes:
(1) The protection of individual British subjects. This protection often
extends to the most petty matters. Through the offices of a Consul and
of an Embassy or Legation flows day by day a continual stream of British
subjects who are in small difficulties or have small grievances against the
officials of the country. One old lady has lost her luggage; a working man
is stranded without work and wants to get back to England; a commercial
traveller has got into trouble with the customs officials and asks for
redress. But the protection thus given is often concerned with very
important matters, and is constantly employed on behalf of the poorest and
the most helpless. For instance, our officials in the United States are
constantly occupied, in assisting British immigrant working men and women
who are suffering hardships under the stringent provisions of the United
States immigration laws.
(2) The furthering of British trade. It is the duty of the whole Foreign
Office organisation, but especially of the Consuls, to give advice to the
representatives of commercial firms, to report openings for the sale of
British goods abroad, and generally to give assistance to British trade
in its competition with foreign trade. Enquiries will, for instance, be
received by a Consul at a Chinese port from a manufacturer of pottery or
harness or tin-tacks, asking what type of goods will be likely to find
a market in that locality. The Consul will then enquire and give such
information as his local knowledge enables him to supply. Or again,
a foreign country will sometimes make regulations which hinder the
importation of English products. English oats may, for instance, be
affected with a blight which Italy fears may infect her crops if she allows
their importation. It may then become the duty of the British Embassy at
Rome to make arrangements with the Italian Government in order that English
farmers may not suffer by losing the market for their produce. But one
important point must be remembered, because it is too often forgotten by
those who criticise the Foreign Office. There is one general restriction on
the activities of the Foreign Office in assisting British trade: no British
official is allowed to invite, or try to persuade, any foreign Government
to give orders to British firms, whether for war material or for any other
article.
What we have already said applies to the relations between civilised
countries. But the relations between civilised countries on the one hand,
and uncivilised or semi-civilised countries on the other hand, are very
much more difficult in many ways. Difficulties especially arise with regard
to commerce. Many of the less-developed countries of the world, such
as some South American countries and China, cannot, like their richer
neighbours, undertake the development of their own resources. They lack
money, scientific training, business ability, and so on. They therefore
give what are called "concessions" to foreign companies or capitalists;
that is, the Government of the country leases some industry for a term of
years to the foreign company. The Mexican Government, for instance, has
leased its oil-wells to English, American, and Dutch companies, and the
Chinese Government has largely confided the construction and management of
its railroads to English, French, and German companies.
Now, in many countries where this happens, the Government is not strong
enough or permanent enough to guarantee proper security of tenure to the
foreign company to which it grants a concession; very likely some official
is bribed to grant the concession to one company and then bribed by another
company to cancel it, or the Government is overthrown by a revolution
and its successor cancels the concessions it has granted. By this means,
British workmen may be thrown out of work and their employment may pass
to workmen in the United States or Germany. Consequently, foreign
Governments—the Governments of civilised countries—gradually begin to
intervene and give protection to their subjects who have concessions in
such countries, provided that they have obtained their concessions in a
respectable and proper manner. Competition between the different foreign
companies then grows up; their Governments gradually begin to support them
against each other in this competition, until at last it becomes necessary
for the different Governments, if bad feeling is to be avoided, to try to
arrive at some arrangement among themselves, fixing the way in which
the concessions granted by this or that semi-civilised country shall be
distributed among the subjects of the Great Powers. Something like this has
been recently happening in China.
To a certain extent this line of action seems to be necessary in dealing
with backward countries, and it may be made mutually beneficial both to
those countries themselves and to the commerce of the Great Powers, but,
on the other hand, the whole policy is obviously liable to great abuse.
Consequently, every self-respecting Government knows that all matters
relating to concessions must be treated with the greatest caution and
forbearance, and that the interests of all concerned will be best served
in the long run by gradually helping backward countries along the path of
civilisation and strengthening their Governments so that they may be able
to assume complete control of their own finance and commercial enterprises.
We have now described roughly the personal and the commercial work of the
Foreign Office. This work covers all the immediate interests of individual
British citizens in regard to foreign countries. If each British subject
is protected when abroad, and if the trade and industry of the country on
which the welfare and livelihood of every individual citizen ultimately
depends is fostered and safe-guarded, then the primary duties of the
British Government in relation to other Governments have been discharged.
But this is not enough. If the interests of the individual citizen of Great
Britain are to be permanently secured in relation to foreign countries, we
must be assured that the policy of foreign Governments is civilised and
generally friendly to British subjects. There must be a general rule of law
throughout the world on which British subjects can count with assurance of
safety. And so the Foreign Office has a third and even more important class
of work:
(3) The maintenance of permanent good relations with foreign countries.
These good relations are secured, not only by continually friendly
communication with foreign Governments over innumerable questions of
policy, but also by the conclusion of a network of treaties, some of them
designed to establish international co-operation in particular social or
economic questions such, for instance, as the existing treaty between Great
Britain and France providing for the mutual payment of compensation under
the Workmen's Compensation Laws of the two countries, and others concluded
with the object of defining the mutual policy of different countries in
general matters such as the regulation of trade. The newest and most
important class of treaties are those which, like the Hague Conventions and
the treaties guaranteeing the neutrality of Belgium and Luxemburg, attempt
to lay down general rules of law which all countries agree to observe.
In other words, the office of diplomacy is to secure certainty in the
government of the world, so that every man may know what to expect in
dealing with his fellow-man of a different nationality.
It is difficult to describe adequately the complexity of this diplomatic
work. The economic and social systems of the world have become so involved
and intertwined that there is hardly anything one country can do which does
not react in some way on the interests of the subjects of another country.
In every European country, and in the United States, the Government is
being more and more called upon to regulate the delicate economic and
social machinery on which modern life depends. Each Government adopts an
attitude towards such problems which is determined partly by the thought
and the beliefs of its public men, and partly by the course of historical
development through which each country has passed. There thus arises
gradually in each country a more or less definite policy with which the
country becomes identified. Formerly the policy of most European countries
was mainly confined to questions arising in Europe itself, but in these
days of industrial expansion the real aims of their policy generally lie
outside Europe.
There are vast regions of the world where civilised government does not
exist, or is only beginning to exist, but where the citizens of civilised
countries travel and carry on trade. No civilised country can prevent its
traders going where they please—indeed, the prosperity of every great
country now depends to some extent at least upon its traders finding
new markets for the sale of their goods—but if these traders go to an
uncivilised country like Central Africa or the interior of China or the
South Sea Islands the civilised country not only feels obliged to protect
them there, but it must also, by every claim of justice and humanity,
prevent them from ill-using the uncivilised and helpless natives.
The horrors which accompany the unregulated activity of foreign traders in
a savage country may be seen from the Life of John G. Paton, a missionary
in the New Hebrides Islands of the Southern Pacific. These islands, before
they came under the government of any civilised Power, were visited by
European and American traders, especially traders in sandalwood. "The
sandalwood traders," wrote Paton, "are as a class the most godless of
men…. By them the poor defenceless natives are oppressed and robbed on
every hand; and if they offer the slightest resistance they are ruthlessly
silenced by the musket or revolver…. The sale of intoxicants, opium,
fire-arms, and ammunition by the traders among the New Hebrideans, had
become a terrible and intolerable evil." It became necessary for the
civilised Powers to prohibit, by international regulation, the sale of
fire-arms and intoxicants in the islands. Such international regulations
are always very difficult to enforce, and finally the administration of the
islands was taken over by Great Britain and France, who now govern them
jointly.
Hence the civilised countries of the world have gradually been led to
assume jurisdiction in uncivilised regions, and have converted many of them
into colonies or "protectorates" or "spheres of influence." By this process
the interests of the nations of Europe reach out into all the far corners
of the earth, and constant care and arrangement is needed to prevent those
interests clashing. Where the interests of the different Powers do clash in
an uncivilised or semi-civilised part of the world a general international
agreement is often necessary to put things straight; for instance, during
recent years the interests of Germany, France, and Spain—and to a less
degree those of many other countries—were continually clashing in Morocco,
till it became necessary in 1906 to conclude a general international treaty
called the Algeciras Act, whereby the relations of all the Powers with
regard to Morocco were defined in great detail.
§3. The Balance of Power.—It is this continual attempt to arrange
matters and to keep the different Powers clear of each other in order that
their interests may not clash, which is the real underlying cause to-day of
what is known as the "Balance of Power." The doctrine of the "Balance
of Power" grew up at the end of the seventeenth and beginning of the
eighteenth century when Europe was threatened by the policy of aggression
and conquest undertaken by Louis XIV. of France. From that day onward,
European statesmen have sought to establish a definite European system and
to limit the growth of the European States in such a way as to ensure that
no State should be so strong as to threaten its neighbours.
The history of this attempt has been somewhat as follows. A coalition of
the States of Europe was formed against the aggressions of Louis XIV.
After a series of wars a peace was signed at Utrecht in 1713 defining the
boundaries of the European States in such a way as to establish equality
and a balance of power between them. For about ten years European statesmen
attempted to maintain the system thus set up by means of what has since
come to be known as the "Concert of Europe"—that is, by means of a series
of international congresses where opportunity was given for the settlement
of disputes between the different States. Soon, however, it became
impossible to satisfy the ambitions of the rulers and peoples of Europe by
this means, and the Concert of Europe broke up. Wars followed, during which
those statesmen, especially in England, who believed in the "Balance of
Power" sought to prevent any European nation from being overwhelmed by its
enemies. To this end, England supported Austria against the attacks of
Prussia, and then later supported Prussia against a coalition formed by the
rest of Europe to crush her. Unfortunately neither England nor France had
sufficient strength or courage to prevent the partition of Poland between
Prussia, Russia and Austria, which constituted a fatal violation of the
Balance of Power. Peace did not return to Europe till 1815, when the whole
continent had been driven to combine for the overthrow of Napoleon. At the
Congress of Vienna in that year the "Concert of Europe" was revived, and
for more than thirty years it practically succeeded by means of a series
of international congresses in maintaining a stable and balanced system in
Europe.
But this "Concert of Europe" was the very thing against which the
democratic forces on the continent finally rebelled, for the "Concert" took
the form of the so-called "Holy Alliance" between the rulers of Europe,
whose object was to prevent popular movements from disturbing the neat and
orderly peace which they had created. The system created by the Congress of
Vienna began to break down in 1848. Since then the warlike nationalist and
democratic movements in Europe, followed by the tremendous economic growth
of the European nations, have made it almost impossible to secure any
stable balance of power, though a more or less successful attempt to
establish such a balance in the affairs of south-eastern Europe was made at
the Congress of Berlin in 1878. The two Hague Conferences of 1899 and 1907
did little but reveal the mutual fears and suspicions of the European
nations, though many statesmen, especially English and American, laboured
sincerely to make the Hague Conventions the guarantee of a lasting peace.
But it must be observed that the "Balance of Power," which was originally a
distinctly European conception, has now become a world-wide conception. In
order to secure a balance of power between the European States it is no
longer sufficient to settle European frontiers; it is necessary to settle
and, as it were, dovetail into each other the economic interests of the
European countries in Africa, Asia, and the Southern Pacific. It is also
necessary to define the relations of European countries to the States in
North and South America.
What is the conclusion to be drawn from this history? The idea of the
Balance of Power is unsatisfactory. You cannot really "balance" living
forces. Nations are not dead masses which can be weighed against each
other, but living growths which expand according to obscure natural laws.
Human laws can never stop natural growth; growth can only be stopped by
death, and so the Balance of Power seems to necessitate continual conflict.
And so, at least twice in the last two centuries, the attempt to maintain a
stable European system by a peaceful "Concert of Europe" has broken down.
Once, in the Holy Alliance, that Concert itself became an intolerable
tyranny. Many men to-day hope to secure peace by re-establishing the
Concert of Europe on a democratic basis, but it may well be doubted whether
any such system can be permanent, unless there be a radical reform in the
mind and character not only of European statesmen but of the European
peoples. We shall discuss this later, but meanwhile we may say this at
least. A balance of power is an imperfect conception. It is a rough and
ready—almost barbarous—policy. The best that can be said for it is that
no alternative policy has been devised, or at least none has succeeded.
Every one of us who has a spark of idealism believes that the day will come
when it shall give place to some more perfect system. But at the present
day not only international politics but also home politics are governed
by this idea of a balance of power. No democracy has yet been able to
establish itself in any country except by virtue of a continual conflict
between class and class, between interest and interest, between capital and
labour, and international conflicts are but the reflection of the domestic
conflicts within each State; both are continual unsuccessful attempts to
reach a stable equilibrium, and they can only be ended by a true fusion of
hearts and wills.
§4. The Estimation of National Forces.—It has been necessary to
undertake this long discussion in order to give a more or less clear idea
of the work done by diplomacy in maintaining a stable international system.
Arising out of this we have now to consider the fourth class of work—and
the most difficult—which the Foreign Office has to perform. For want of a
better name we may call it—
(4) The estimation of national forces. Nations are not mere agglomerations
of individuals; they have each their own character, their own feelings,
and their own life. Science has done little to determine the laws of
their growth, but, as we have seen, each nation does grow, reaches out
slowly—almost insensibly—in this or that direction, and gathers to itself
new interests which in their turn give new impulse to its growth. Perhaps
the best simile that we can use for the foreign policy of the world is that
of a rather tangled garden, where creepers are continually growing and
taking root in new soil and where life is therefore always threatening
and being threatened by new life. The point is that we are dealing with
life—with its growth and decay; not with the movements of pieces on a
chequer-board.
Now, the Foreign Office largely exists in order to watch this growth and,
like a gardener, to train and lead it in directions where it can
expand without danger. But for this work intimate knowledge is
necessary—knowledge not so much of the personal character or policy of
those who govern the different nations, but knowledge of the character,
the economic needs, the beliefs, the feelings, and the aspirations of the
half-dumb millions who form and ultimately determine the life of each
nation. The diplomatist must study every political and social movement
which goes on in a nation; he must estimate the effect which the national
system of education is having on the mind of the nation; he must form an
idea of the lessons which the Government of his own country should learn
from the government of other countries, whether it be, for instance,
lessons in constitutional government or in municipal sanitation; and he
must above all be able to warn his Government of the dangers to his own
country which the growth of foreign countries seems to entail, in order
that peaceful measures may be taken in time to prevent a collision.
This, then, is a rough account of the actual work of diplomacy. It is not a
full account. There are many wrong things done which deserve criticism, but
which we have not had space to mention. There is also much self-sacrificing
and thankless work done by diplomatists and consuls in distant parts of the
world—much seeming drudgery which can hope for no reward—many honourable
services rendered to the public of which the public never hears. But the
above account will suffice to give a rough idea of the organisation with
which we are dealing, and we may now pass on to consider the question of
how this organisation should be managed and controlled.
This phrase is rapidly becoming a political catchword. As such it requires
to be approached with the utmost caution. Before going further it is
necessary to test the assumptions underlying it and to inquire how far they
really correspond to the facts.
§1. Democracy and Peace.—First of all, the main assumption made by
Englishmen who advocate the democratisation of foreign policy is that
international peace would thereby be assured. True, the extension of the
democratic principle is to many men an end in itself, quite apart from the
question whether it tends to peace. But great masses of men are not moved
to make political demands merely by theoretical considerations; it is the
pressure of definite and imminent evils which arouses them to action. In
the case of England the demand for greater democratic control in the sphere
of foreign policy arose in large measure from the sudden realisation, in
the late summer of 1911, at the time of the so-called Agadir crisis, that
war between this country and Germany was a possibility with which English
statesmen and the English people had to reckon. We had felt the breath
of war actually on our cheek, and a large section of English sentiment
revolted from it. A demand was raised for a democratic policy of peace.
Three years later, on August 3, 1914, when Parliament met to decide the
happiness or sufferings of the quarter of the human race comprised in the
British Empire, the same demand was voiced in a series of speeches which
accurately expressed the belief that peace was the policy of the people,
while war was the secret aim of their rulers. Mr. T. Edmund Harvey, M.P.,
spoke as follows:
"I am convinced that this war, for the great masses of the countries of
Europe, and not for our own country alone, is no people's war. It is a war
that has been made … by men in high places, by diplomatists working in
secret, by bureaucrats who are out of touch with the peoples of the world,
who are the remnant of an older evil civilisation which is disappearing by
gradual and peaceful methods."
Mr. Ponsonby, M.P., spoke in the same sense:
"I trust that, even though it may be late, the Foreign Secretary will use
every endeavour to the very last moment, disregarding the tone of messages
and the manner of Ambassadors, but looking to the great central interests
of humanity and civilisation to keep this country in a state of peace."
Democracy means peace;—can we accept this assumption? Contrasts are
sometimes illuminating, and it may be well to turn from the Parliamentary
debate of August 3 to an article written sixty-two years ago in an English
review by the greatest democrat of his time. In April 1852 Mazzini
published in the Westminster Review an appeal to England to intervene on
the Continent in favour of the revolutionary movements in progress there
since 1848. The following is an extract from that article:
"The menace of the foreigner weighs upon the smaller States; the last
sparks of European liberty are extinguished under the dictatorial veto of
the retrograde powers. England—the country of Elizabeth and Cromwell—has
not a word to say in favour of the principle to which she owes her
existence. If England persist in maintaining this neutral, passive, selfish
part, she will have to expiate it. A European transformation is inevitable.
When it shall take place, when the struggle shall burst forth at twenty
places at once, when the old combat between fact and right is decided,
the peoples will remember that England had stood by, an inert, immovable,
sceptical witness of their sufferings and efforts…. England will find
herself some day a third-rate power, and to this she is being brought by a
want of foresight in her statesmen. The nation must rouse herself and shake
off the torpor of her Government."
Mr. Ponsonby appealing in the name of the people to Sir Edward Grey to
stand aloof from European war; Mazzini appealing in the name of the people
to the respectable, peaceable, middle classes of England to forsake
Cobden's pacifist doctrines and throw England's sword into the scale of
European revolution—it is a strange contrast which serves to remind us
that the word "democracy," so lightly bandied about by political parties,
has many different meanings and has stood for many different policies. It
may be roughly said that it stood for internationalism in 1792, when France
claimed as her mission the liberation of all nations under the tricolor;
it stood for nationalism in 1848 in the mouth of Mazzini, Kossuth and the
German constitutional party; to-day it again stands for internationalism
in the more advanced countries of Europe, but are we justified as yet in
calling this more than a phase in the development of democratic doctrine?
It is a very difficult question, which it would be presumptuous to try to
answer offhand; all we have tried to show here is that, on the whole, the
assumption as to the peaceful tendencies of a democratic foreign policy is
a doubtful one, on which we must to some extent reserve our judgment.
§2. Foreign Policy and Popular Forces.—The above considerations will
help us to appreciate at its true value the second main assumption which
lies behind the demand for increased democratic control of foreign
policy—namely, the assumption that the stuff of international politics
is at present spun from the designs of individual statesmen, and has no
relation to the needs of the peoples they govern. Stated thus, this idea
will not bear examination for a moment. The doctrine of the "economic
interpretation of history," which has received perhaps its most emphatic
expression in the teaching of Marxian socialists, is now in one form or
another accepted by all thinking men. But "economics" is after all a rough
name for the sum of the ordinary needs and efforts of every single human
being, and the economic interpretation of history means that the history of
the world is in the long run determined by the cumulative force of these
humble needs and efforts. This and this alone is the real stuff of
international politics. Statesmen may attempt to found systems, but the
only real force in international as in domestic politics is the education
of the individual man's desires. It is indeed open to any critic to say
that our present capitalist economic system is responsible for war because
it dams up and diverts from their true channels the needs and the efforts
of the mass of mankind. But to this an Englishman may fairly answer that
the free trade system under which our capitalist organisation has reached
its greatest development was built up by the Manchester School with the
sincere and avowed object of introducing universal peace. Cobden avowed
this object clearly:
"I see," he said, "in free trade that which shall act on the moral world
as the law of gravitation in the universe, drawing men together, thrusting
aside the antagonism of race and creed and language and uniting us in the
bonds of eternal peace… I believe that the desire and motive for large
and mighty empires, for gigantic armies and mighty navies … will die
away."
Yet, in spite of these aspirations, great wars have come to England,
not once, but at least three times, since these words were spoken, and
armaments are immeasurably larger than ever before.
Let us understand one thing clearly in connection with the present war. Mr.
Ponsonby, in the words already quoted, implored Sir E. Grey to "look to the
great central interests of humanity and civilisation," and to preserve the
neutrality of England in those interests. But at the moment at which he
spoke the eyes of English statesmen were looking at one thing alone. It was
not a question of what French statesmen expected them to do. The British
Government had explained quite clearly to French statesmen that they must
not expect armed support from England. This fact had been made clear to the
French Foreign Office long before in a series of conversations between the
statesmen, and it had been embodied in a letter from Sir E. Grey to the
French Ambassador. But when the shadow of war actually fell on France these
conversations and this letter faded into the background. It was no longer a
question of what the French President expected from the King of England. It
was a question of what Jacques Roturier, artisan in the streets of Paris,
knowing that the Germans were on the frontier and might be dropping their
shells into Paris in a fortnight, expected from John Smith, shopkeeper in
the East India Dock Road, London, safe behind the English Channel from all
the horrors of war. That was, not rhetorically but in all soberness of
fact, the real "international obligation" on August 3, 1914; for though
treaties are made by statesmen they are in the long run interpreted, not
by statesmen, but by the public opinion which becomes slowly centred on
them—by the hopes and fears of millions of working men and women who have
never read the terms of the treaty but to whom it has become the symbol of
a friendship on which they can draw in case of need. The magistrate may
write the marriage lines, but the marriage becomes what the husband and
wife make it—a thing far deeper and more binding than any legal contract.
In the light of these considerations, we can establish one point of supreme
importance in dealing with foreign policy—namely, that the causes of war
are very different from the immediate occasions of war. When the British
Government, at the outbreak of the present war, published a White Paper
containing the diplomatic correspondence between July 20 and August 4,
1914, they were publishing evidence as to the immediate occasion of
war—namely the Austrian ultimatum of July 23 to Serbia which brought on
the war. In the twelve days which intervened between the delivery of that
ultimatum and the declaration of war between England and Germany, the
negotiations on which hung the immediate fate of Europe were, it is true,
conducted by a few leading statesmen. But it is of little use to argue
whether or not these negotiations were conducted ill or well, for they were
not the real cause of the war. The cause of the war must be sought in the
slow development of forces which can be traced back for years, and even for
centuries. It was comparatively futile for Parliament to discuss whether
this or that despatch or telegram was wise or unwise; the real questions to
be asked were—What produced the crowds in Vienna surging round the Serbian
Legation at the end of June, and round the Russian Embassy at the end of
July; what produced the slow, patient sympathy for the Balkan peoples and
hatred for Austria in the heart of millions of Russian peasants; what
produced the Servian nationalist movement; above all, what produced that
strange sentiment throughout Germany which could honestly regard the
invasion of Belgium as justifiable? To answer those questions we have to
estimate the force of the most heterogeneous factors in history:—for
instance, on the one hand, the slow break-up of the Turkish Empire,
extending over more than two centuries, which has allowed the cauldron of
the Slavonic Balkan peoples to boil up through the thin crust of foreign
domination; and on the other hand, the gradual development of the whole
system of German State education, and the character of the German
newspapers, which have turned the eyes of German public opinion in upon
itself and have excluded from public teaching and from the formation of
thought every breath of fresh air from the outside world, until at last
German public sentiment, through extreme and incessant self-contemplation,
has lost the calmness and simplicity which were once the strength of the
German character. No man can allot the responsibility for these things,
spreading as they do over generations; but assuredly the responsibility
does not rest with the half-dozen Ministers for Foreign Affairs who were in
power in July 1914.
If we are right in what we have said above, then the phrase "the
democratization of foreign policy" takes on a new meaning. It does not
mean merely the introduction into foreign policy of any set of democratic
institutions; it means the realisation by both statesmen and people that
foreign policy is already in its essence a fundamentally democratic thing,
and that the success or failure of any line of action depends not upon the
desires of politicians but upon the mighty forces which move and determine
the life of peoples.
At present the statesmen do not realise this sufficiently, and hence comes
much futile and aimless talking and writing among politicians who fancy
that what they say or write to each other in their studies can determine
the course of the world. In order to enable diplomatists to discharge all
the duties we have already enumerated under the heading of "the estimation
of national forces," they need to have a better training and a fuller
knowledge of the life and social movements both of their own country and
of foreign countries. The Royal Commission on the Civil Service was still
considering, when war broke out, how this could be accomplished. It is too
long a question to enter on here, but it may safely be said that the more
the problem is examined the more does it appear to be, like the wider
problem of the whole body of 200,000 civil servants in the United Kingdom,
a question of national education, and not a mere matter of Government
regulations and democratic institutions. What is required, in the Foreign
Office, as in the whole British civil service, has been well expressed by
Mr. Graham Wallas in his book Human Nature in Politics:
"However able our officials are and however varied their origin, the danger
of the narrowness and rigidity which has hitherto so generally resulted
from official life would still remain and must be guarded against by every
kind of encouragement to free intellectual development."
§3. Foreign Policy and Education.—But if statesmen do not sufficiently
realise the strength of existing popular forces in foreign policy, it is
equally true that the people themselves do not realise it. The people of
every country are inclined to think that they can alter the destiny of
nations by ousting one foreign minister from power and setting up another;
they think that speeches and the resolutions passed by congresses can
change fundamental economic facts. They think that mere expressions of
mutual goodwill can take the place of knowledge, and they forget that no
nation can shake itself free in a moment from the historical development
which has formed it, just as no man can wholly shake himself free from
the character which he has inherited from his ancestors. Indeed all our
phrases—our whole attitude of mind—shows how little we, as a people,
realise popular forces. We commonly speak, for instance, of Russia as if
nothing in that vast country had any influence on foreign affairs except
the opinions of a few bureaucrats in Petrograd. Our sympathy for
or hostility to Russia is determined by our opinion of the Russian
bureaucracy, and we never spare a thought for the hopes and fears and the
dumb but ardent beliefs of millions of Russian peasants. We are apt to
dismiss them from our minds as ignorant and superstitious villagers
tyrannised over by the Tsar, without troubling to enquire narrowly into the
real facts of Russian life. We thus make precisely the same mistake that
diplomatists too often make. We forget that the masses of peasants who flow
every year on pilgrimage to the shrines of their religion constitute a more
vital fact in the history of the world than the deliberations of the Duma
or the decisions of police magistrates.
Here we have a lesson to learn from Germany, for German statesmen,
strangely enough, have taken immense trouble to make their policy a
democratic one. The whole German nation is behind them because for
years and years they have taught the nation through the schools, the
universities, and the press, their own reading of history and their own
idea of what true civilisation is. They have adapted their teaching to the
fundamental characteristics and to the history of the German people. They
have taken pains to ally the interests alike of capital and labour to their
policy, and to fuse the whole nation by a uniform national education and by
a series of paternal social reforms imposed from above. The real strength
and danger of Germany is not what her statesmen or soldiers do, but what
Germans themselves believe. We are fighting not an army but a false idea;
and nothing will defeat a false idea but the knowledge of the truth.
When this war is over, whatever its outcome may be, we must try to
introduce a new era into the history of the world. But our fathers and our
fathers' fathers have tried to do this same thing, and we shall not succeed
if we go about the work in a spirit of self-sufficiency and hasty pride.
Only knowledge of the truth will enable us to succeed. Knowledge of the
truth is not an easy thing; it is a question of laborious thought, mental
discipline, the humility which is content to learn and the moral courage
which can face the truth when it is learnt. How are we to gain these
things?
First of all, by schools, universities, classes—all the machinery of our
national and private education.
Then, by the same means as popular government employs in other matters—by
discussion, by debates in Parliament, by criticism of the Government. Now,
these means are not employed at present partly because it is feared that
criticism of the Government in matters of foreign policy will weaken its
hands in dealing with foreign nations. This is a just fear if criticism
merely springs from the critics' personal likings or prejudices, but
no such evil effects need be feared if the criticism springs from deep
thought, from knowledge of the facts and from the patience and wisdom
which thought and knowledge bring. But partly also effective discussion
of foreign politics does not exist because we are more interested in home
politics. We really have, if we cared to use it, as much democratic control
over the Foreign Office under our constitution as over any Government
Department, for the Foreign Office, like every other Department, is under
the control of a member of Parliament, elected by the people. But we
are more interested in social reform, in labour legislation, and in
constitutional reform than in foreign politics; and so it is on questions
of home policy that we make and unmake Governments, and when we discuss
whether a Conservative or a Liberal Government ought to be in power, we
never think what effect the change would have on foreign policy. If the
democracy is to take a real part in foreign politics, it must recognise
that great responsibilities mean great sacrifices. We must be content to
think a little less of our internal social reform, and give more of our
attention to the very difficult questions which arise beyond the Channel
and beyond the Atlantic Ocean. We must live constantly in the consciousness
that the world to-day is one community, and that in everything we do as
a people we bear a responsibility not to ourselves alone but to the
population of the British Empire as a whole and to the family of nations.
But when we have really set ourselves to understand and discharge the
responsibilities of foreign policy, how shall we, the people of this
country, make our opinions effective? How can we be sure that the Foreign
Office will carry out a policy corresponding to the considered convictions
which we as a people have formed?
As already stated, we have in our hands the same means of Parliamentary
control over foreign policy as over internal policy. Parliament can
overthrow a Government whose policy it disapproves, and it can refuse to
grant supplies for the carrying out of such a policy. Short of this, the
people can express through Parliament its views as to the way in which
foreign policy should be conducted, and generally Ministers will bow, in
this as in other matters, to the clearly expressed views of Parliament. We
have, in fact, recently seen a striking example of this. When after the
international crisis of 1911 the country clearly expressed the opinion that
no secret engagements should be entered into with any Power which would
force Great Britain to go to war in support of that Power, the Prime
Minister stated, and has repeated his statement emphatically on several
subsequent occasions, that the Government of this country neither had
entered, nor would enter, into any such secret engagements, and that any
treaty entailing warlike obligations on this country would be laid before
Parliament. This has now become a fixed and recognised fact in British
policy, and it is not too much to say that, like other constitutional
changes under the British system of government, it is rapidly becoming a
part of the unwritten constitution of the country.
But many people would like to go beyond this, and lay down that no treaty
between Great Britain and another country shall be valid until it has been
voted by Parliament. Many countries have provisions of this kind in their
constitutions; for instance, the constitution of the United States provides
that all treaties must be ratified by a two-thirds majority of the Senate,
and the French constitution contains the following provision:
"The President of the Republic negotiates and ratifies treaties. He brings
them to the knowledge of the Chamber so soon as the interests and the
safety of the State permit.
"Treaties of peace and of commerce, treaties which impose a claim on the
finances of the State, those which relate to the personal status and
property rights of French subjects abroad, do not become valid until they
have been voted by the two Chambers. No cession, exchange, or increase of
territory can take place except by virtue of a law."
Such constitutional provisions may be good in their way, and it may be
that we should copy them. But the question is one of secondary importance.
Whether treaties must actually be ratified by Parliament, or merely laid
before Parliament for an expression of its opinion, as is commonly done in
this country, the Parliament and people of Great Britain will have control
over foreign policy just in the measure that they take a keen interest in
it. If they take a keen interest no statesman dependent for his position
on the votes of the electorate will dare to embody in a treaty a policy of
which they disapprove; while if they do not take an adequate interest,
no amount of constitutional provisions will enable them to exercise an
intelligent control over the actions of statesmen.
The same may be said of another expedient adopted in many countries;
namely, the appointment by Parliament of Committees on Foreign Affairs,
with power to call for papers and examine Ministers on their policy.
Democratic government both in foreign and internal affairs has hitherto
rested on the idea that Parliament should have adequate control over the
principles on which policy is conducted, but must to a large extent leave
the details of administration to the executive departments which are
controlled by the Ministers of the Crown. Parliament, whether through
committees or otherwise, will never be able to follow or control all
diplomatic negotiations, any more than it can control all the details
of the administration necessary to carry out a complicated law like the
Insurance Act; and Committees of Parliament, however useful, will have
no influence unless the people of the country so recognise their
responsibilities in foreign politics that they will demand from the men
whom they elect to Parliament a judgment and a knowledge of foreign
affairs, at least as sound and well based as they now require in the case
of internal affairs.
It will be seen that this imposes a very difficult task on the British
electorate. How are they to weigh foreign affairs and internal affairs
against each other? What are they to do if they approve the internal policy
of a Government, but disapprove of its foreign policy, or vice versa? Are
we, for instance, to sacrifice what we believe to be our duty in foreign
affairs in order that we may keep in power a Government which is carrying
out what we believe to be a sound policy of internal social reform? It
is here, it would seem, that some reform is really needed. There is one
solution: namely, to separate the control of domestic affairs on the one
hand and foreign affairs on the other, placing domestic affairs in the
hands of a Parliament and and a Cabinet who will stand or fall by their
internal policy alone, and entrusting foreign affairs to an Imperial
Parliament and an Imperial Cabinet formed of representatives not of Great
Britain alone but of the whole British Empire. This is an idea which merits
the most careful consideration by the people of the United Kingdom, for it
may well be doubted whether any real popular control of foreign policy is
possible until some such division of functions takes place. One word in
conclusion. If it is true that domestic policy and foreign policy are
separate functions of Government, it is also true that the domestic policy
of a country in the long run determines its foreign policy. International
peace can never be attained between nations torn with internal dissensions;
international justice will remain a dream so long as political parties and
schools of thought dispute over the meaning of justice in domestic
affairs. A true ideal of peace must embrace the class struggle as well as
international war. If we desire a "Concert of Europe" which shall be based
on true freedom and not on tyranny, it behoves us to realise our ideal
first in England, and to raise our country itself above the political and
social conflicts and hatreds which have formed so large and so sordid a
part of our domestic history for the last decade.
It is difficult to give a list of books illustrating foreign policy in
general. The lists given in other chapters sufficiently illustrate the
various problems with which foreign policy to-day has to deal.
The diplomacy of a century ago is well illustrated by the Diaries and
Correspondence of the Earl of Malmesbury. 4 vols. 1844. (Out of print.)
For the diplomacy of the middle of the nineteenth century, when the present
national forces of Europe were being created, the following biographies are
useful:
Life of Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, by Lane-Poole. 2 vols. 1888.
Life of Lord Granville, by Lord Fitzmaurice. 2 vols. 1905.
Life of Lord Clarendon, by Sir Herbert Maxwell. 2 vols. 1913.
Life of Lord Lyons, by Lord Newton. 2 vols. 1898.
Life of Cavour, by Roscoe Thayer. 2 vols. 1911.
Bismarck's Reflections.
There are many studies of the diplomatic problems of the present day, but
as they deal with history in the making they are to be read for the general
survey they give of forces at work rather than as authoritative statements.
A very comprehensive survey of all the complexities of international
politics will be found in Fullerton's Problems of Power (1913). 7s. 6d.
net.
The actual workings of diplomacy may best be seen in the "White Books" of
diplomatic correspondence, periodically published by the Foreign Office,
such, for instance, as the successive volumes of Correspondence Respecting
the Affairs of Persia. Perhaps the best idea of the actual labour of
foreign relations can be gained by consulting such compilations as
Hertslet's Commercial Treaties—23 vols. 1827-1905—which are a record of
work actually completed.
On the staffing of the Foreign Office and the Diplomatic Service, see the
fifth Report of the Royal Commission on the Civil Service (Cd. 7748), just
published (5-1/2 d.).
"March ahead of the ideas of your age, and it will follow you: go
with them, and you can feel at ease: remain behind them, and you are
lost."—NAPOLEON III.
§1. Is there an Idea behind the War?—The object of the preceding
chapters has been to provide the historic background without which it is
impossible to understand either the motives of our opponents or the events
which led up to their quarrel. It is now necessary to attempt a survey of
the issues raised by the war, both as concerns Europe as a whole and the
individual nations which form its component parts. This is a task of no
small difficulty, for just as it is true to say that no war in the previous
history of mankind has ever been waged on so huge a scale as this, so it is
also true to say that the issues raised by it are vaster and more varied
than those of any previous European conflict. It is as though by the
pressure of an electric button some giant sluice had been opened,
unchaining forces over which mortal men can hardly hope to recover control
and whose action it is wellnigh impossible to foresee.
Yet complex as is the problem before us, it is essential that we should
face it bravely. There is grave danger lest, just as we have been "rushed
into" this war (through no fault of ours, as the diplomatic correspondence
abundantly proves), so we may at a given moment be "rushed out" of it,
without having reached any very clear idea as to what issues are involved,
and how far our vital interests have been affected.
The essence of the problem before us is to discover whether there is an
Idea behind this war—whether on our own side or on that of the enemy. A
dangerous question, this!—a question posed again and again by the jingoes
and the fanatics of history, and invariably answered according to the
dictates of their own convenience. And yet a question which we dare not
shirk, a question which a Carlyle, a Ruskin, a William Morris would not
have hesitated to formulate. Does Britain stand for an Idea? Is it true
that we are fighting in the main for the cause of Liberty and Democracy,
for progress in Europe and the world at large? And if this be really true
to-day, how can we best ensure that it shall still be true at the close
of this long war, if, as we hope and pray, victory crowns the arms of
the Allies? It was an Idea that nerved Britain for the struggle against
Napoleon. It was an Idea that inspired Germany in the great uprising of
1813 against Napoleon. It was an Idea that brought the Balkan League
into being and carried its armies in triumph to Salonica and Adrianople.
Freedom, Unity, Liberation, such were the forms which that Idea took: the
determination of a free people to resist an upstart despot's designs
of world-dominion; the enthusiasm of a divided nation for the dream of
national unity; the longing of races which had but recently won their own
freedom, to emancipate their kinsmen from an alien and oppressive yoke.
In each of these struggles error and even crimes were committed by the
victors, and yet it is a thousand times true to assert that the victorious
Idea represented in each case the triumph of civilisation. To-day the
position is equally clear. In opposing Germany's claim to override
international treaty obligations to suit the convenience of her military
strategists, in associating ourselves with Belgium and Serbia in their
vindication of the rights of the smaller nations, we are not merely
resisting a fresh bid for world-dominion on the part of a single power, but
are challenging the theory that Might is superior to Right in the political
world.
§2. The Aims of British Statesmanship.—Mr. Asquith on September 19
defined as follows the three main aims of British statesmanship in entering
upon war: "(1) To vindicate the sanctity of treaty obligations and what is
properly called the public law of Europe, (2) to assert and to enforce
the independence of free States, relatively small and weak, against the
encroachments and the violence of the strong, and (3) to withstand, as
we believe in the best interests not only of our own Empire, but of
civilisation at large, the arrogant claim of a single Power to dominate the
development of the destinies of Europe." In speaking thus, Mr. Asquith had
no intention of placing Britain upon a moral pedestal or of suggesting that
we have ever enjoyed a monopoly of political right dealing. Every nation
has blots upon its scutcheon; and the cynic may point to the Irish Union,
the destruction of the Danish fleet, the Cyprus Convention, as proofs that
we have richly earned the name of "Perfidious Albion." Let us forego the
patriotic retort which would fling in Prussia's teeth such incidents as the
conquest of Silesia, the partition of Poland, the Ems telegram, the seizure
of Kiaochau. But let us, while admitting our shortcomings in the past, nail
our colours to the mast and insist that this war shall never degenerate
into one of mere revenge or aggrandisement, that the fate of the nations of
Europe shall be decided, so far as possible, in accordance with their own
aspirations rather than the territorial ambitions of dynasties or racial
cliques.
Is it, then, possible, when considering the lines of settlement, to lay
down any general principles? The Europe which we have known has gone
beyond recall; the new Europe which is coming to birth will be scarcely
recognisable to those who have known its predecessor. Its political,
racial, social, economic outlook will be radically changed. Let us then
meet fate halfway and admit boldly that we want a new Europe. But let us
bear in mind the fiery process by which a huge bell is forged and the fate
which befell the impatient apprentice who opened the furnace doors too
soon. The Prussian leaders, to whom war is an ideal and a programme, are
entitled, if fortune should desert them, to manoeuvre for a "draw"; for
they would console themselves with the hope of winning a subsequent match.
But to us, who regard war as a hateful necessity, from which we do not
shrink, but which we did everything in our power to avert—to us there
can be no thought of relinquishing our task, until there is a reasonable
prospect of a really lasting settlement. We should need no prompting from
our statesmen to realise that this must be "a fight to a finish." There
must be no reversion to the status quo, that accursed device of a
worn-out diplomacy, with its inevitable seeds of new quarrels and yet
another Armageddon.
Public Law, Nationality, and a general reduction of armaments (as
distinguished from complete disarmament) are the three foundation stones
of the new era, as already envisaged in the public utterances of those who
have some right to speak for the Triple Entente. Let us then endeavour to
apply these principles to the various problems raised by the war. It is
obvious that their application depends upon the victory of the Allies. If
we are defeated, public law will have lost its value, for the Germans will
have asserted their right to violate its fundamental provisions. The idea
of Nationality will have received its death-blow; for not only will the
independence of several of the smaller nations have been destroyed,
but Germany will have reasserted her right to dominate her own minor
nationalities, and to drain the life-blood of the 26 million Slavs of
Austria-Hungary in a conflict with their own Slavonic kinsmen. Finally,
all hope of reduced armaments will have been exploded, since the theory of
Blood and Iron will have attained its fullest expression in the virtual
domination of a single power on land and sea. Regrets or misgivings we may
have, but the time for their utterance has long since passed. The British
nation must have no illusions; defeat means the downfall of the Empire, and
the reduction of Britain to the position of a second-rate power. Either we
shall emerge victorious, or for all practical purposes we shall not emerge
at all. Even if we shrink from a "fight to a finish," our enemies can be
relied upon to persist to the bitter end. It is for this reason only, and
not because I underestimate for a moment the vast resources, the splendid
organisation, the military valour of Germany, that I restrict myself in
the following pages to a consideration of the possible effects of victory
rather than of defeat. It would be the height of folly to anticipate
victory before it is achieved; but it is essential that we should be
prepared for all possible contingencies, and this involves a careful survey
of the various factors in an extraordinarily complicated situation.
§3. Britain and Germany.—In the forefront of the discussion stands our
quarrel with Germany. What are to be our future relations with Germany
after the war? If there is anything in the assertion that we are fighting
for the cause of liberty and progress, it can only mean that we are
fighting a system rather than a nation—Prussian militarism and
bureaucracy, but not German civilisation. We have to go still further and
consider the motive powers behind that iron system. Sitting in our little
island, we are apt to forget what it means to possess a purely artificial
frontier of 400 miles, and to see just beyond it a neighbour numbering
171,000,000 inhabitants, in an earlier stage of civilisation and capable of
being set in motion by causes which no longer operate in the western world.
If the final settlement is to be just and lasting, the demands of the
victors must be adjusted to the minimum, not the maximum, of their own
vital interests. For Britain the central problem must inevitably be: What
is to be the position of the German Navy if we are successful in this war?
Is anything even remotely resembling disarmament to be attained unless that
Navy is rendered innocuous? Is it conceivable that even if Britain accepted
the status quo, a victorious Russia could ever tolerate a situation which
secured to Germany the naval supremacy of the Baltic, and the possibility
of bottling Russian sea-trade? Even the opening months of the war have
shown what ought always to have been obvious, that sea-power differs from
land-power in one vital respect: military supremacy can be shared between
several powerful States, but naval supremacy is one and indivisible. In
this war we shall either maintain and reassert our command of the sea, or
we shall lose it: share it with Germany we shall not, because we cannot.
Again, what is to be the fate of German shipping and German colonies? Can
we not curtail Germany's war navy, while respecting her mercantile marine?
Is it either expedient or necessary to exact the uttermost farthing in the
colonial sphere in the event of victory? It is obvious that just as Germany
offered to respect French territory in Europe at the expense of the French
colonial empire, so the Allies, if victorious, might divide the German
colonies between them. By so doing, however, we shall provide, in the eyes
of the German nation, a complete justification of William II.'s naval
policy. One of the most widespread arguments among educated Germans
(including those friendly to this country) has always been that German
colonies and shipping are at the mercy of a stronger sea-power, and that
therefore Germany only holds her sea-trade on sufferance. If, as a result
of the war, we take from her all that we can, we shall ingrain this
point of view in every German. We should thus tend to perpetuate the old
situation, with its intolerable competition of armaments, unless indeed
we could reduce Germany to complete bankruptcy—a thing which is almost
inconceivable to those who know her resources and which would deprive us of
one of our most valuable customers.
On the other hand, we must of course remember that any extra-European
territorial changes depend not merely upon the attitude of Britain and her
Allies, but upon the wishes of the Dominions. Even in the event of victory,
it is still not London alone that will decide the fate of New Guinea, of
Samoa, or of German South-West Africa. The last word will probably be
spoken by Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa, and it is improbable
that any one of the three will consent to the restoration of territory
which they have occupied. It is only in the case of German colonies which
border upon British Crown colonies (e.g. Togoland, Cameroon, or East
Africa) that the decision will rest entirely with the European governments.
At this stage it would be absurd to suggest even the bare outlines of a
settlement; but it is well to emphasize the fact that it involves not only
the United Kingdom but the Dominions, and that on its solution depends the
future development of the British Empire. In other words, the war can only
result in the downfall of the Empire or in the achievement of Imperial
Federation and a further democratisation of the central government.
§4. Nationality and the German Empire.—Finally, there is a still graver
question. Is Germany, if defeated, to lose territory in Europe? and if
so, would it be either possible or expedient to compensate her in other
directions for such a loss? The application of the principle of
Nationality to the German Empire would affect its territory in three
directions—Alsace-Lorraine, Schleswig-Holstein, and Posen. Let us very
briefly consider these three problems.
[Illustration: THE FRANCO-GERMAN FRONTIER Boundary of France 1815-1871
and Boundary of France 1871-1914]
(1) The population of the two provinces of Alsace and Lorraine is mainly
German by race and language, but none the less it had become by 1870 almost
entirely French in feeling, as the result of its long union with France.
The Germans, in reannexing the provinces after the war, were actuated
almost equally by reasons of sentiment and strategy. They welcomed the
recovery of a section of their race which had been wrested from them by the
brutal aggression of Louis XIV. and the dynastic policy of his successor;
they also desired to secure their western frontier against the possible
attacks of France, which, under the Third Empire, was still most
emphatically an aggressive power. In drawing the new frontier they included
for purely strategic reasons a small portion of western Lorraine, round the
fortress of Metz, which was admittedly as French as Champagne or Picardy.
From 1871 till 1911, Alsace-Lorraine was governed as a direct appanage of
the Imperial Crown; in the latter year it received a constitution,
but nothing even remotely resembling self-government. Contrary to the
expectation of most Germans, the two provinces have not become German in
sentiment; indeed the unconciliatory methods of Prussia have steadily
increased their estrangement, despite their share in the commercial
prosperity of the Empire. Those who know intimately the undercurrents of
feeling in Alsace-Lorraine are unanimous in asserting that if before last
July an impartial plebiscite, without fear of the consequences, could have
been taken among the inhabitants, an overwhelming majority would have voted
for reunion with France. But having once been the battleground of the two
nations and living in permanent dread of a repetition of the tragedy, the
leaders of political thought in Alsace and Lorraine favoured a less drastic
solution. They knew that Germany would not relinquish her hold nor France
renounce her aspirations without another armed struggle; but they believed
that the grant of real autonomy within the Empire, such as would place them
on an equal footing with Würtemberg or Baden, would render their position
tolerable, and by removing the chief source of friction between France
and Germany, create the groundwork for more cordial and lasting relations
between Germany and the two Western Powers.[1] Now that the nightmare of
war has once more fallen upon them, the situation has radically changed,
and there can be no question that in the event of a French victory the
provinces would elect to return to France. The fact that several of their
leading politicians have fled to France and identified themselves with the
French cause, is symptomatic, though doubtless not conclusive. That the
government of the Republic, if victorious, will make the retrocession of
Alsace-Lorraine its prime condition of peace, is as certain as anything can
be certain in the seething pot to which triumphant militarism has reduced
unhappy Europe. It may, then, seem merely pedantic to refer to an
alternative solution; and yet there is unquestionably a great deal to be
said in favour of forming the two provinces into an independent State, or
better still, uniting them in federal union with Luxemburg and Belgium.
Thus would be realised that "Middle Kingdom" which so many efforts have
been made to create, from the days of Charlemagne onwards. Henceforward
the fate of Alsace-Lorraine would be neither French nor German; they would
become a neutral clearing-house for the two cultures which have both come
to be so inextricably bound up with the life and traditions of the border
race. At the same time the most fertile source of friction between France
and Germany would be removed, and the two countries would no longer glare
at each other across a frontier bristling with fortifications.
[Footnote 1: This ideal was being actively pursued by many thoughtful
people on both sides of the frontier. Only last June I was discussing it at
some length with a prominent Alsatian deputy and various other friends in
Berlin.]
(2) The problem of Schleswig-Holstein presents far less difficulty, if
treated on a basis of nationality. Much has been written about the enormity
of Prussia's treatment of Denmark in 1848 and 1863; but the plain truth
is that the great majority of the population of the two duchies was as
enthusiastic in favour of union with their German kinsmen farther south, as
the population of Alsace-Lorraine was reluctant to be torn from France. The
whole of Holstein and much the greater part of Schleswig always was, and
is, pure German by race. Unfortunately Prussia, in annexing territory
which is as German as Kent is English, also acquired a portion of North
Schleswig, which is as unquestionably Danish, alike by blood and by
sentiment. Hence a complete revision of frontiers on a racial basis would
certainly involve the cession to Denmark of the extreme eastern portions of
Schleswig, as far as and including the port of Flensburg.
To-day, however, this question is complicated by strategic considerations,
due to the creation of the Kiel Canal as an almost impregnable naval base.
The suggestion has already been seriously put forward, that Denmark should
be allowed, in the event of Germany's defeat, to extend her territory
as far as the north bank of the Canal, which would thus become an
international highway for peaceful commerce, possibly under a general
guarantee of neutrality. Whether such a present might not prove a very
grave embarrassment to Denmark, and whether the guarantee would be more
effectual than the treaty which secured Belgian independence, are questions
which depend mainly upon the mood of the peoples of Europe after they are
tired of shedding each other's blood. But it is well to realise that
the question of the Kiel Canal is one which may very possibly lead to a
prolongation of the war, and which, as I have already hinted, Russia will
not allow to rest, even if Britain should hesitate to complete the work.
(3) The third point at which, on a basis of racial redistribution, a
defeated Germany must inevitably suffer territorial loss, is the Polish
district on her eastern frontier. The present kingdom of Prussia includes
3,328,750 Poles among its subjects, mainly in the former duchy of Posen,
but also in Silesia and along the southern edge of West and East Prussia
(known as Mazurians and Kasubians). The pronouncedly anti-Polish policy
pursued by the German Government for over twenty years past has aroused
deep and insurmountable hatred against Prussia in the heart of the Poles,
who even in the days when Berlin was relatively conciliatory towards them
had never relinquished their passionate belief in the resurrection of their
country. Above all, the attempt to denationalise the eastern marches by
expropriation, colonisation of Germans, and other still cruder methods,
has not only been in the main unsuccessful, but it has roused the Poles
to formidable counter-efforts in the sphere of finance and agrarian
co-operation. This coincided with remarkable changes in Russian Poland,
which has rapidly become the chief industrial centre of the Russian Empire.
Economic causes have toned down the bitterness which Russia's cruel
repression of Polish aspirations had inspired, and to-day Prussia is
unquestionably regarded by every Pole as a far more deadly enemy than even
the Russian autocracy, the more so as the conviction has steadily gained
ground that the Polish policy of Petrograd has been unduly subject to the
directions of Berlin. While, then, the Poles look upon the promises from
either of these two capitals with pardonable suspicion and reserve, it
is certain that to-day such hopes as they may entertain from foreign aid
centre more and more upon Russia.
Any attempt to reconstruct the kingdom of Poland, whether as an independent
State or, as seems more practicable, as an autonomous unit within the
Empire of the Tsar, would inevitably deprive Prussia of the greater part of
the Duchy of Posen (except the three or four western "Kreise" or districts,
in which the German element predominates), a strip of eastern Silesia
from the upper reaches of the Vistula northwards, and a further strip of
territory in East Prussia, extending from near the fortress of Thorn along
the Mazurian lakes (in fact, the scene of the opening battles of the
present war). Polish extremists, however, not content with these
indubitably Polish districts, are already laying claim to the lower reaches
of the Vistula and to Danzig as the port of the historical Poland; and
there is a further tendency in certain Russian circles to regard the whole
province of East Prussia as part of the natural spoils of war. And yet it
is obvious that the annexation of Danzig,[1] one of the bulwarks of the old
Hanseatic League, and of Königsberg, the cradle of the Prussian Crown
and of modern German philosophy, would be a flagrant violation of that
principle of Nationality which the Allies have inscribed upon their banner.
The province of which Königsberg is the capital is to-day, whatever it may
have been in the twelfth century, as German as any portion of the German
Empire. Moreover, it is the stronghold of Junkerdom, that arrogant but
virile squirearchy which still forms the backbone of the old Prussian
system; and while it is doubtless the desire to undermine this caste
by robbing it of hearth and home that prompts such drastic schemes of
conquest, it cannot be too clearly realised that we should not only be
guilty of a monstrous injustice in lending our support, but should
be sowing the seeds of a new and even thornier problem than that of
Alsace-Lorraine. It would, moreover, be a superfluous injustice, since it
is perfectly possible to create on broad racial lines a new frontier at
least as natural as that which divides Russia and Germany to-day.
[Footnote 1: Strictly speaking, Danzig, though under Polish suzerainty till
1772, has always been a German town enjoying complete autonomy. It shares
the fame of Hamburg and Lübeck as one of the greatest of the mediaeval
Hansa towns.]
Such are the changes which an application of the principle of Nationality
involves. Let us then be under no illusions; they are changes such as can
only be extracted from a Germany which has virtually ceased to exist as a
military power—a contingency which is still remote to-day, and which can
only be attained by enormous sacrifices in blood and resources. It is only
by readjustment and compensation in other directions that the German nation
could be induced even to consider a revision of frontier, and from the
nature of things such compensation can only have one meaning—the break-up
of Austria-Hungary.
§5. The Future of Austria-Hungary.—For many years this break-up has been
foretold by political pessimists inside and outside the Habsburg dominions,
and by many interested agitators both in Central and in Western Europe. The
present writer, on the other hand, has always regarded Austria-Hungary as
an organism full of infinite possibilities of progress and culture, a State
modelled upon that diversity of type which Lord Acton held to be the
surest guarantee of liberty. Those who affected to treat it as moribund
under-estimated both the underlying geographical bases of its existence and
its great natural resources; they emphasised what separates rather than
what unites. In short, they saw the rivalry between the two mottoes "Divide
et Impera" and "Viribus Unitis," and laid undue stress upon the former.
Just because they realised the extraordinarily complicated nature of the
racial problems involved, they tended to overlook the steady advance
made in recent years by Austria in the conceptions of political and
constitutional freedom. But at every turn Hungary has been Austria's evil
genius: the influence of the Magyar oligarchy has given a reactionary
flavour alike to internal and to foreign policy, has hampered every reform,
and poisoned the relations of the State with its southern neighbours.
[Illustration: AUSTRIA-HUNGARY: POLITICAL DIVISIONS]
For a short time the aggressive Balkan policy of Count Aehrenthal, as
exemplified in the annexation of Bosnia and the diplomatic duel with
Russia, was hailed as worthy of the Bismarckian tradition; but it soon
became clear that he was far from being the genius whose advent the
Monarchy was so anxiously awaiting. In recent years, then, despite many
hopeful signs, and despite increasing activity in almost every sphere of
life, a kind of progressive paralysis has taken hold upon the body-politic.
Three main causes may be noted—the lack of any great men capable of
counteracting the Emperor's lack of initiative, which was always very
marked, but has been accentuated by advancing old age; the superficial and
malicious outlook of the capital and the classes which control it; the
alliance between the Magyar oligarchy and the Jewish press and Haute
Finance, working in a pronouncedly anti-Slav direction. The wheels
still went round, but the machine of State made less and less progress:
stagnation and aimlessness were everywhere apparent. On all sides it was
recognised that the existing system had become unworkable, and that a
catastrophe could only be averted by speedy reforms. To many far-seeing
patriots the last hope of salvation for the State seemed to lie with the
late Heir-Apparent, not perhaps as the ideal Prince, but as a man of
courage and force of character, possessing the necessary energy to carry
through drastic political changes. His removal was a crushing blow to all
who still hoped against hope in the regeneration of the Monarchy. His place
was filled by a young man, lacking both experience and prestige; never was
there less sign of the heaven-born genius who alone could save a desperate
situation.
In the life of nations and States, as in that of individuals, there
sometimes comes a moment when it is possible to make the "Great Refusal"
of which Dante sang; and "History teaches that those who decline, or
prove unworthy of, the leading rôle which is offered to them, are trodden
mercilessly underfoot." In closing the German edition of my book with these
words, I expressed the conviction that "for a State such as Austria there
could only be one choice"; but unhappily her statesmen have preferred the
fatal alternative.[1] "The historic mission of the House of Habsburg is the
vindication of equal rights and liberties for all races committed to its
charge. The abandonment of this mission would endanger the very existence
of a Great Power upon the Middle Danube."[2] Austria has proved untrue to
this mission, and the inexorable forces of history seem at this moment to
be working her destruction. Nations, like individuals, sometimes commit
suicide; and those who have most earnestly warned them against such a crime
are left as mourners in the funeral procession.
[Footnote 1: In July 1911 I dedicated The Southern Slav Question to "that
Austrian statesman who shall have the courage and the genius necessary to
solve the Southern Slav Question." In April 1913, in publishing a German
edition, I added the words, "At the twelfth hour this dedication is
repeated." In November 1914 it is unhappily only too evident that that hour
has already struck.]
[Footnote 2: See Racial Problems in Hungary, concluding sentence.]
The war-fever which seized upon the populace of Vienna and Budapest last
July typified the feelings of the three dominant races in the Monarchy, the
Germans, the Magyars, and the Jews; but it is no criterion for the attitude
of large masses of the population. In fact, the war has accentuated the
centrifugal tendencies which were so marked a feature of recent years, and
which the introduction of Universal Suffrage and the annexation of Bosnia
arrested but failed to eradicate; a stringent censorship may conceal, but
cannot alter, this fact. Disaffection is rife in portions of the army and
affects its powers of resistance, while the financial and economic crisis
grows from week to week. Cynics have tried to define the mutual relations
of Germany and Austria-Hungary by comparing the former to a strong man
carrying a corpse upon his shoulders, and the course of the war during
the first three months would seem to confirm this view. So far as
Austria-Hungary is concerned, its two outstanding features have been the
signal failure of the "punitive expedition" against Serbia and the debacle
of Auffenberg's army in Galicia. Friendly observers were prepared for a
break-down in the higher command and were aware that many Slav regiments
could not be relied upon, but they had expected more from the German and
Magyar sections of the army and from the very efficient officers' corps, as
a stiffening element. It is now known that despite the aggressive policy
of its chiefs, the Austro-Hungarian army was far from ready, and that its
commissariat and sanitary arrangements utterly broke down.
The evident failure to profit by the experience of two general
mobilisations within the previous six years is in itself a proof that there
is "something rotten in the state," and it is already obvious that only a
complete and crushing victory of Germany can extricate Austria-Hungary from
the war without loss of prestige and actual territory. Unless the Russians
can be not merely defeated but driven out, it is absolutely certain that
they will retain the province of Galicia, or at least the eastern portion,
with its Ruthene or Ukrainian population; unless the Serbian army can be
overwhelmed, Bosnia and at least some portion of Dalmatia will fall into
the hands of Serbia. This would be an eminently unsatisfactory solution
or rather it would be no solution at all, for it would solve neither the
Polish, the Ukraine, nor the Southern Slav questions. I merely refer to it
as a possible outcome of one form of stalemate; it is hardly necessary to
add that from every point of view stalemate is the result which is most
to be dreaded, since it inevitably involves fresh wars in the immediate
future. Whatever happens, the effete Dual System in its present form is
doomed, for while an Austrian defeat means dissolution, an Austrian victory
means the absorption of Serbia and Montenegro, and in either case the
balance between Austria and Hungary will be fatally disturbed and a new
constitutional arrangement rendered inevitable. It is thus a tragic paradox
that while the attempt to bolster up the Dual System was undoubtedly one of
the great underlying causes of the war, its first effect is likely to be
the collapse of that very system.
The Dual System once abolished, it might seem reasonable to aim at a
reconstruction of Austria-Hungary on a modified federal basis. But this was
essentially a peace-ideal. The war, far from kindling a common patriotism
which in Austria-Hungary was so conspicuous by its absence, has placed a
gulf of blood between race and race, and rendered their continued existence
under the same roof not only difficult but undesirable. Even in the event
of only relative failure on the part of Austria-Hungary a much more radical
solution may be expected, while the effect of her complete defeat would be
to place the solution of the whole "Austrian problem" in the hands of the
Entente Powers and of her own disaffected populations. In that case there
are two probable alternatives, one more radical than the other. Both depend
to a large extent upon the development of the military situation and upon
as yet incalculable economic influences, but it is possible to indicate
their broad outlines. Indeed, this is the best means of illustrating the
conflicting fears and aspirations which the great conflict has still
further intensified in the racial whirlpool of Central Europe. Let us
consider the less drastic of the two first.
Austria, as distinguished from Hungary, consists of seventeen provinces,
of which Galicia is the largest and most populous; yet there are many
Austrians who have long regarded its possession as anything but an unmixed
blessing for the Monarchy as a whole, and would scarcely regret its loss.
It has always occupied a peculiar autonomous position of its own; its
political, social, and economic conditions are at least a century behind
those of the neighbouring provinces, and have given rise to many gross
scandals. It has been a hot-bed of agrarian unrest, electoral corruption,
and international espionage. Instead of paying its own way, it has been
financially a heavy drag upon the State, while racially it provides, in the
Polish-Ruthene conflict, an object-lesson on the disagreeable fact that
an oppressed race can become an oppressor when occasion arises. But the
argument which weighs most with the Germans of Austria is that the Poles
of Galicia have for a whole generation held in their hands the political
balance in the Austrian Parliament, and that the disappearance of
the Polish and Ruthene deputies would destroy the Slav majority and
correspondingly strengthen the Germans. The Magyars in their turn would no
doubt view with some alarm the extension of the Russian frontier to the
line of the Carpathians; but the change would bring to them certain obvious
compensations, since it would greatly increase the relative importance of
Hungary inside what was left of the Habsburg Monarchy. In short, it is
by no means impossible that if the Russians succeed in holding Galicia,
Austria-Hungary may show a sudden alacrity to buy peace by disgorging a
province which has never wholly fitted into her geographical or political
system.
It is obvious that the fate of the small province of Bukovina is bound up
with that of Galicia; and in such circumstances as we have just indicated,
it would doubtless be divided between Russia and Roumania on broad
ethnographical lines, the northern districts being Ruthene, the southern
Roumanian. This, however, must depend upon the attitude of the kingdom of
Roumania, to which reference will be made later.
There is one other direction in which Austria could afford to surrender
territory, without serious loss save that of prestige. The southern portion
of Tirol—the so-called Trentino, the district round the town of Trent—is
purely Italian by race, and its union with the kingdom of Italy has long
been the chief point in the programme of the Italian Irredentists or
extreme Nationalists. It is a poor and mountainous country, which belongs
geographically to its southern rather than to its northern neighbour. The
pronouncedly Italian sympathies of its inhabitants have complicated the
problem of government and have been a permanent source of friction between
Austria and Italy. The elaborate fortifications along the existing frontier
would have to be sacrificed, but the new racial frontier could soon be made
equally satisfactory from a strategic point of view. It should then be
borne in mind that at a later stage of the war an attempt may be made by
Austria to buy off Italy with the offer of the Trentino. Whether the latter
would seriously consider such an offer, if made, will doubtless depend
upon future events, but it is clear that Italy, if her diplomatists are
sufficiently adroit, has a fair prospect of acquiring the Trentino,
whichever side wins, and consequently that a much more tempting bait will
be required in order to induce her to abandon her neutrality. These two
losses, the one already probable, the other hypothetical, would still leave
Austria in the unquestioned position of a Great Power. The problem of her
future relations with her Balkan neighbours raises an infinitely more
complicated issue. Let us consider the Southern Slav and Roumanian
questions, first separately, and then in their bearing upon each other.
§6. The Southern Slav Question.—The Southern Slav question, as
has already been argued in an earlier chapter, can only be treated
satisfactorily as an organic whole; and it may be taken for granted that
Austria-Hungary, in the event of victory, will annex the two independent
Serb kingdoms, and unite the whole Serbo-Croat race under Habsburg rule.
The task of governing them, when once she has overcome their resistance,
will be one of extraordinary difficulty, and will involve a complete
revision of her own standards of government and administration. Her record
and that of Hungary in the Slavonic South does not inspire one with
confidence as to the result. Moreover, it is not too much to assert that
the destruction of Serb independence—a task which the present writer
unhesitatingly regards as beyond the powers of Austria—will in no way
solve the Southern Slav problem, but merely transfer its centre of
gravity. The task of Southern Slav liberation would pass to Bulgaria, and
Austria-Hungary would be involved in an ever-widening field of hostilities.
Hence, even if Serbia's independence were not now inextricably bound up
with the success of the British arms, it would still be essential that
every effort should be made to heal what has long been an open sore upon
the face of Europe. People in this country are only too apt to ignore the
question altogether, or at best to say, "Oh yes, of course, if the Allies
win, the Serbs will get Bosnia." Those who talk thus have not grasped the
elements of the great problem, of which Bosnia, like Serbia itself, is only
one section. The idea that to transfer Bosnia alone from Austro-Hungarian
to Serbian hands would settle anything whatever, fatally ignores alike the
laws of geography and those considerations of national sentiment
which dominate politics in South-Eastern Europe. In every respect
Bosnia-Herzegovina and Dalmatia complement each other. So long as there
were no railways in the Balkans and Bosnia stagnated under Turkish rule, so
long as the national consciousness of the Serbo-Croats slumbered or ran in
purely provincial channels, the separation between coast and hinterland
was possible, though even then unnatural. But with the advent of modern
economic ideas the situation radically changed. It was above all the
possession of the Dalmatian seaboard that tempted Austria to occupy Bosnia,
and so conversely the acquisition of Bosnia by Serbia would at once
compel the latter, willy-nilly (quite apart from all racial affinities or
sentiments), to aspire to Dalmatia as well.
Geographically, it is inconceivable that to-day Dalmatia should be in
different hands from Bosnia-Herzegovina. Herzegovina does actually touch
the sea at two places—for a few miles at the swampy mouth of the Narenta
below Metkovié, and for a mile at Castelnuovo-Zelenika, inside the Bocche
di Cattaro. It is obvious that to allow Serbia these two outlets, while
leaving their surroundings to another State, would create immediate and
intolerable friction; whereas to assign the southern half of Dalmatia to
Bosnia, but to leave the northern half in other hands, would be keenly
resented by the Dalmatians themselves, as an outrage alike upon their
national and their local traditions.
When we consider the population of Dalmatia we must apply the rival tests
of history and of race. On the grounds of historical sentiment Italy might
claim Dalmatia; for its chief towns (Zara, Sebenico, Trau, Spalato, Lesina,
Curzola)[1] were Venetian colonies, and not only they but even the Republic
of Ragusa, which always maintained an independent existence, were saturated
with Italian culture and ideals. But on ethnical grounds Dalmatia is now
overwhelmingly Slavonic. In 1900 only 3.1 per cent of its population—in
other words, about 15,000 out of a total of 584,000—were Italians, the
remaining 97 per cent being Serbo-Croats. The census of 1910 is even more
unfavourable to the Italians, probably unduly so. It is, of course, true
that the Italian element, though numerically negligible, represents a
higher percentage of the educated and cultured class; but while this would
entitle Italy to demand guarantees for the maintenance of existing Italian
schools and institutions, it cannot conceivably be employed as an argument
in favour of an Italian occupation. Not only would it bring her inevitably
into collision with the Southern Slavs who already are, and are likely to
remain, a military power of no mean order; it would lead her on into the
false and hopeless path of attempting to assimilate a hostile population
by the aid of an insignificant minority which only exists in half a dozen
towns, and in all the rest of the province is simply non-existent. The
price paid would be the eternal enmity of all Slavs, the jeopardising of
Italian interests in the Balkans, the sacrifice of many of the
benefits which the new Trans-Balkan railway route
(Odessa-Bucarest-Kladovo-Sarajevo-Spalato) would naturally bring to Italy,
a challenge to one of the finest maritime races in Europe—the Croats of
Dalmatia, Croatia and Istria—a challenge which would sooner or later
involve the creation of a Southern Slav navy against Italy. So far as
Britain is concerned, to separate Dalmatia from Bosnia is not only to
prevent even the beginnings of a solution of the Southern Slav question,
but to obscure the naval situation in the Mediterranean, to alienate Russia
in a matter in which we have everything to gain and nothing to lose by
accommodating her. But even when Bosnia and Dalmatia have been united to
Serbia and Montenegro, the Southern Slav problem will still be far from
solution. Dalmatia is alike in constitutional theory and in political
fantasy, though not in sober fact, an integral portion of the Triune
Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia-Dalmatia, and it is unthinkable that
Serbo-Croat opinion could ever consent to the liberation of the one without
the other. No solution has any chance of permanence which ignores Agram as
the centre of Croat political and religious life, of education, art and
historic memories. The Dalmatian Croats, as the most virile and stubborn
element in the race, have always formed the vanguard of political thought,
but it is to Agram that they have always turned for the necessary backing,
and it is the peasantry of Croatia who have always borne the brunt of every
attempt at repression. Latterly the Dalmatians have been the soul of
the student movement, which plays so vital a part in recent political
development.
[Footnote 1: In the West they are only known under their Italian names, but
at home they are known as Zadar, Sibenik, Trogir, Split, Hvar, Korcula,
and Dubrovnik (Ragusa).]
Croatia-Slavonia is a vital part of the problem, indeed from a national
point of view perhaps more vital than Bosnia and Dalmatia. But even this is
not enough. No settlement will be complete which ignores the Slovenes of
eastern Istria, Carniola, and southern Carinthia and Styria: they must
share the fate of their Croat and Serb kinsmen.
So far, then, as the Southern Slavs are concerned, the triumph of the
Allies ought to mean the creation of a new State on the Eastern Adriatic,
the expansion of gallant Serbia into Jugoslavia (Jug is the Slav word for
south), and the achievement of Unity by the three kindred races, Serbs,
Croats, and Slovenes. On the north it would be comparatively easy to draw
a new frontier corresponding to the main requirements of ethnography,
geography, and strategy. With only very slight deviations, this would
follow the racial line between Slovenes and Germans from the present
Italian frontier as far as the little town of Radkersburg in Styria;
thence, the course of the rivers Mur and Drave as far as the latter's
junction with the Danube. It is only in the Banat—that portion of the
great Hungarian plain which faces Belgrade across the Danube—that an
artificial frontier will be inevitable, if the Serb districts of Hungary
are to be included in the new State and if the Serb capital is to be
rendered immune from the dangers of future bombardment. The weak spot in
so drastic a solution is the inclusion of the Slovene districts, which—in
view of their geographical position, cutting off the German provinces of
Austria from the sea—is unthinkable, save in the event of a complete
collapse of the Monarchy. All depends upon the number of leaves which are
pulled off the artichoke. If only a few of the outer rows are taken,
a situation may arise in which it would be necessary to sacrifice the
Slovenes and to rest satisfied with the acquisition of Bosnia, Dalmatia,
and Croatia—in other words, with the frontier which at present divides
Croatia from Austria and from Hungary proper. But this, it must be
remembered, would leave the work of Southern Slav Unity incomplete, and is
only to be regarded as a pis aller.
The Slovene section of the Southern Slav problem is further complicated by
the attitude of Italy, who cannot be indifferent to the fate of Trieste and
Pola. On historic grounds Italy cannot lay claim to Trieste, which has been
a possession of the House of Habsburg since 1386 (400 years longer than
Dalmatia). But if as before we apply the principle of nationality, it is
indisputable that Trieste is an Italian town, though the whole surrounding
country up to the very suburbs is purely Slovene. On the other hand, the
commercial interests of Trieste are entirely bound up with its hinterland,
by which is meant not only the Alpine provinces, but Upper and Lower
Austria and Bohemia on the one hand and even south Germany (Bavaria) on
the other. Any settlement, then, must be a compromise between national and
economic interests. As an ancient centre of Italian culture, Trieste
would welcome the flag of the Regno upon its municipality, as the surest
guarantee that the town would remain Italian in character to all time. But
any attempt to include Trieste within the tariff system of the kingdom of
Italy would produce fatal results, and the obvious solution is to proclaim
the city as a free commercial port. Of course, from a purely Southern
Slav point of view, the fate of the town of Trieste (as distinct from the
district) ought to be a matter of complete indifference, though of course
the extremists claim it. It is, however, well to bear in mind that the
inclusion of Trieste in Italy's tariff system would mean the speedy
economic ruin of a great and flourishing commercial centre. Commercially,
then, Trieste is unthinkable save either as the port of Austria or as a
porto franco under Italian suzerainty. So far as Istria is concerned,
there would be no insurmountable difficulty in drawing a satisfactory
frontier on ethnographical lines; the western portions, including
Capodistria, Rovigno, and Pola, are overwhelmingly Italian, while the
interior of the little province and the eastern shore (with Abbazia,
Lovrana, etc.) is as overwhelmingly Slavonic (Croat and Slovene mixed).
Any redistribution of territory on the basis of nationality must therefore
inevitably assign western Istria to Italy, and no reasonable Southern Slav
would raise any valid objection. Once more the essential fact to consider
is that the acquisition of Trieste and Pola by Italy presupposes the
disappearance of Austria-Hungary; otherwise it is not even remotely
possible. Hence it is no exaggeration to assert that the fate of Trieste
is one of the central issues in the whole European settlement. Once
make Trieste a free port, under the Italian flag, and ipso facto the
Austro-Hungarian navy ceases to exist, and with it all need for Italian
naval activity in the Adriatic. In other words, such a settlement would
lead to an almost idyllic reduction of naval armaments in the Adriatic,
since both Italy and the new Jugoslavia could afford to restrict
themselves to a minimum of coast defence. It is obvious, however, that the
dismantlement of Pola—to-day an almost impregnable fortress—would be an
essential condition to neighbourly relations between the two, the more so
since under such altered circumstances an Italian naval base at Pola could
only have one objective.
There is an unfortunate tendency in Italy to misread the whole situation
on the eastern Adriatic, to ignore the transformation which the revival
of Southern Slav consciousness has wrought in lands which once owned the
supremacy of Venice. A short-sighted distrust of the Slav blinds many
Italians to the double fact that he has come to stay, and that his
friendship is to be had for the asking. The commercial future of Dalmatia,
Bosnia, and Serbia is intimately bound up with Italy, and Italy herself
will be the chief loser if she closes her eyes to so patent a truth.
The fate of Trieste and Istria is a triangular issue between Teuton, Slav,
and Latin. The Italian, if his claims are too ambitious or exacting, may
succeed in preventing the Slav from obtaining his share of the spoils, but
only by leaving them all in the hands of a still more dangerous rival, in
other words, by a crude policy of dog-in-the-manger.
One thing is certain in all this interplay of forces—that it is too late
in the day to suppress Southern Slav national consciousness, and that there
can never be durable peace and contentment on the eastern Adriatic until
the unity of the race has been achieved. It would be premature to discuss
the exact forms which the new State would assume; but when the time
comes it will be found that the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Dalmatia,
Croatia-Slavonia, Istria and Carniola, will acclaim their liberation at the
hands of free Serbia and Montenegro. Their watchword, however, will be not
conquest from without, but free and voluntary union from within—a union
which will preserve their existing political institutions and culture as a
worthy contribution to the common Southern Slav fund. The natural solution
is a federal union under which the sovereign would be crowned not only as
King of Serbia but with the crown of Zvonomir as King of the Triune Kingdom
of Croatia-Slavonia-Dalmatia, thus reviving historic traditions dating from
the tenth century and never abandoned or forgotten. The Croatian Parliament
would continue in Agrani, parallel with the Serb Parliament in Belgrade,
but both would be represented in a central federal Parliament. The only
question is whether the existing provincial divisions should be allowed to
survive, the Diets of Bosnia, Dalmatia, Istria, and Carniola thus forming
conjointly with the Serbian, Montenegrin, and Croatian Parliaments
the units on which the new constitution is based, or whether complete
unification should be attempted. The latter would be the ideal arrangement,
but in view of the great divergence of local customs and institutions it
would probably be premature, and it might therefore be wiser to preserve
the smaller units until they were ripe for fusion, rather than to
compromise by creating a dual State of Serbia and Croatia.
§7. The Roumanian Question.—I have dwelt at some length upon the
Southern Slav problem, because it is as complicated as it is unfamiliar
to public opinion in this country. It has been the causa causans of the
present struggle, and if neglected or mismanaged at the final settlement,
may again plunge Europe into trouble at some future date. Parallel with
any solution of the Southern Slav question must come the solution of the
Roumanian question, which represents the other half of Austria-Hungary's
Balkan policy. The Kingdom of Roumania is, alike in territory, population,
and resources, the leading power in the Balkan peninsula, but over five
million Roumanians, including the very cream of the race, still live under
foreign domination. Of these at least 3,500,000 are in Austria-Hungary, the
great majority under the grossly oppressive rule of the Magyars; and the
redemption of Transylvania and the neighbouring counties of Hungary has
always been the ideal of all patriotic Roumanians, even of those who looked
to a distant future for its realisation. Russia's short-sighted policy in
1878, in annexing the Roumanian province of Bessarabia as a reward for
their valiant support at Plevna, drove the Roumanians into the arms of
Austria-Hungary, and for a whole generation not even the perpetual irritant
of Magyar tyranny in Transylvania could avail to shake the entente
between Vienna and Bucarest, strengthened as it was by the personal
friendship of the Emperor Francis Joseph and King Charles. But the spell
was broken by Austria's attitude during the Balkan War. The imperious force
of circumstances brought the interests of Roumania and Serbia into line;
for it was obvious that any blow aimed against Serbia's independent
existence must threaten Roumania also, just as any weakening of the
Serbo-Croat element in the Monarchy must react unfavourably on that of
the Roumanians and other nationalities of Hungary. The growth of national
feeling within the two neighbour races has proceeded for some time past on
parallel lines, and even before the war there were manifest signs that
the Roumanians of Hungary, whose economic and cultural progress since the
beginning of the century has been very rapid, were at length nearing the
end of their patience. The bomb outrage at Debreczen last February—an
event which is without parallel in Roumanian history—was the first
muttering of the gathering storm. Roumania occupies a position of extreme
delicacy. Her natural tendency would be to espouse the cause of the Allies,
since they obviously have more to offer her than their rivals. But the
somewhat equivocal attitude of her statesmen has been determined not merely
by an astute desire to win the spoils of war without making the necessary
sacrifice—a policy which is apt to overreach itself—but also by a very
pardonable anxiety as to the attitude of Bulgaria and Turkey. Roumania has
hitherto been the foremost upholder of the Treaty of Bucarest, and it is
only in the event of drastic territorial changes farther west that she is
likely to consent to its being torn up. She has made no secret of the fact
that she would not tolerate naked aggression against the Greeks, whether
from the Turkish or Bulgarian side. In view of the political record of King
Ferdinand of Bulgaria and his present Prime Minister, the Roumanians may
perhaps be excused for adopting an attitude of vigilant reserve; for their
statesmen suspect that Bulgaria is only waiting until the Roumanian army
has crossed the Carpathians in order to reoccupy the southern Dobrudja.
Certain it is that Roumania, while declining all temptations to join the
central powers, has also rejected the Russian invitation to occupy the
Bukovina, and has actually approached Hungary with a view to securing the
restoration of Transylvanian autonomy. The Magyars on their part have tried
to buy off Roumania by introducing the Roumanian language of instruction in
many of the State schools of Transylvania—a wholly inadequate concession
which would none the less have been inconceivable four short months ago.
Unfortunately the realisation of Roumanian unity inevitably involves the
inclusion in the new State of considerable Magyar and Saxon minorities,
amounting in all to not less than 600,000 inhabitants. There are no means
of overcoming the hard facts of geography, but it is essential that
Roumania, while incorporating Magyar and Saxon islets in the Roumanian
racial sea, should guarantee the existing institutions of the two races,
and the fullest possible linguistic freedom in church,[1] school, and
press. The Saxons in particular have preserved their identity for over
seven centuries in this little corner of the Carpathians, and have
contributed far more than their share to the cause of culture and progress
in Hungary. It would be a crying irony of fate if they were allowed to
perish in the twentieth century at the hands of those who have pledged
themselves to vindicate the rights of smaller nationalities.
[Footnote 1: The Szekel (Magyar) districts of Transylvania are mainly
Calvinist, the Saxons Lutheran to a man, while the Roumanians are divided
between the Orthodox and the Roumanian Uniate Churches. Transylvania is
also the centre of an interesting sect of Unitarians, who are for the most
part Magyar by race.]
It must not be forgotten that the dream of Roumanian Unity can only be
fully realised if Russia restores at least a portion of Bessarabia, which
contains not less than a million and a quarter Roumanians. A victorious
Russia might well afford such a concession; for it would involve no
strategic dangers and would, especially if conveyed in the graceful form of
a wedding dowry, triumphantly efface the last traces of Russophobe feeling
that still linger in Roumania. But it would be absurd to expect such
magnanimity on the part of Russia unless Roumania's action is prompt and
vigorous. The abstract theory of nationality must be reinforced by the more
practical argument of sterling services rendered to a common cause.
§8. Can the Dual Monarchy be replaced?—The result of applying the
principle of nationality to the Southern Slavs and Roumanians would thus
be to create two powerful national States at the expense of the Habsburg
Monarchy; and here it is well to repeat that such drastic territorial
changes are only possible if the military power of Austria suffers
an almost complete eclipse. But even the loss of Galicia, Bukovina,
Transylvania, the Trentino, and the Serbo-Croat provinces would still leave
Austria-Hungary a State of very considerable area, with a population of 32
millions. There is no reason why such a State should not continue to exist,
provided that it retained the necessary access to the sea at Trieste and
Pola, and this would involve the exclusion of the Slovenes from the
new Jugo-Slav State. Under such circumstances it would be possible to
reconstruct the State on a federal basis, with five main racial units,
the Germans, the Czechs and Slovaks, the Magyars, the Slovenes, and the
Italians. Certain unimportant racial minorities would still be left, but
these could unquestionably be dealt with by a law of guarantees, similar to
those which have played so conspicuous a part in the theory, but sometimes
also in the practice, of the Dual Monarchy. So many severe amputations
might, however, prove too much for the vitality of the patient; and in any
case we may assume that either Austria-Hungary will be able to prevent the
operation, or that the Allies, if they can once bring matters thus far,
will insist upon completing the process by a drastic post-mortem inquiry.
Any sympathetic qualms are likely to be outweighed by the consideration
that a State of this hybrid nature would tend to be more than ever a vassal
of Germany. Moreover, there can be no doubt that one of the surest means of
bringing Germany to her knees is by crushing her most formidable ally, and
thus tapping some of the sources of her own military and economic strength.
It is safe to assume that this consideration plays an important part in the
military plans of Russia; and for many reasons—political, strategic, and
economic—a Russian occupation of Bohemia must be regarded as the essential
prelude to a decisive victory of the Allies. The war has thrown the
Dual Monarchy into the melting-pot; but it is not enough to accept the
possibility of its disappearance from the map, it is also necessary to
consider what new organisms would take its place. A complete partition
would, as we have seen, remove the last obstacle to a unified Southern
Slav State. The dreams of Italia Irredenta and Greater Roumania would
be realised. Western Galicia and a part of Silesia would be united to
autonomous Poland as reconstituted by the Russian Tsar. Eastern Galicia,
Northern Bukovina, and the Ruthene districts of Hungary as far as Ungvár
and Munkács, would be incorporated in the Russian Empire, though it is
to be hoped that an early result of this change would be the grant of a
certain modified autonomy, or at least of special linguistic and religious
privileges, to the Ukraine population, thus united after centuries of
partition in a single body politic.
§9. Bohemia and Hungary.—But the most striking result of the partition
would be the revival of the famous mediaeval kingdoms of Bohemia and
Hungary as independent States. Thus would be realised the dream of two
races, the Czechs and Magyars, whose national revival forms one of the
most romantic incidents of the nineteenth century. But it is difficult to
imagine a greater contrast than their respective development. In Bohemia
the Czechs, after losing their religious and civic liberty and enduring for
two centuries the domination of the Germans, raised themselves once more
in the course of two generations, by sheer force of character and tireless
industry, to a position of equality, and reorganised their national life on
an essentially democratic basis. In Hungary the Magyars, thanks to their
central position, their superior political sense, and their possession of
a powerful aristocracy, succeeded in concentrating all government and
administration in their own hands and reducing the other races of the
country, who have always formed a majority of the population, to a state of
veritable political helotry. And just as their evolution has been on very
different lines, so must be their future fate. In Bohemia all is activity
and political progress, in Hungary the sterility of a corrupt and
reactionary system, staking the future upon the hollow credit of
a long-vanished past. The Czechs are beyond all question the most
progressive, the most highly civilised, the most democratic of all Slavonic
nations. The stubborn spirit of John Hus is still alive among them to-day,
and their recent achievements in music, art, and industry are in every way
worthy of the nation which has produced Comenius and Dvorák and first
lit the torch of Reformation in Europe. The ancient city of Prague contains
all the elements of culture necessary for the regeneration of Bohemia, and
the mineral riches and industrial resources of the country are infinitely
greater than those of many European States which have successfully led a
separate national existence.
But the liberation of the Czechs would not be complete unless their close
kinsmen the Slovaks were included in the new Bohemian State; and every
reason alike of politics, race, and geography tells overwhelmingly in
favour of such an arrangement. The Slovaks, who would to the last man
welcome the change, have long suffered from the gross tyranny of Magyar
rule. Their schools and institutions have been ruthlessly suppressed or
reduced in numbers, their press muzzled, their political development
arrested, their culture and traditions—far more truly autochthonous than
those of the conquering Magyar invaders—have been discouraged and hampered
at every turn. The Slovaks are a race whose artistic and musical gifts,
whose innate sense of colour and poetry have won the sympathy and
admiration of all who know them; and their systematic oppression at the
hands of the Magyar oligarchy is one of the greatest infamies of the last
fifty years. In this war Britain has proclaimed herself the champion of
the small nations, and none are more deserving of her sympathy than the
Slovaks. Unless our statesmen renounce that principle of nationality which
they have so loudly proclaimed, the Slovaks cannot be abandoned to their
fate; for they form an essential part of the Bohemian problem. Without
them the new kingdom could not stand alone, isolated as it would be among
hostile or indifferent neighbours. In every way the Slovak districts form
the natural continuation of Bohemia and are the necessary link between it
and Russia, upon whose moral support the new State must rely in the first
critical years of its existence.
The main difficulty would be the fate of racial minorities; for minorities
there still must be, no matter how the frontiers may be drawn. At first
sight the natural solution would be to pare down Bohemia by assigning
to the neighbouring provinces of Germany the German fringe which almost
completely surrounds the Czech kernel. So far as the south-west and
north-east districts of Bohemia (near Budweis and along the German Silesian
border) are concerned, the historic boundaries might fairly be revised on
ethnographic lines, and in the same way the line of demarcation between
Bohemia and Hungary could in the main be made to follow the racial boundary
between Slovak and Magyar and later between Slovak and Ruthene. But in the
north of Bohemia there are insurmountable objections to any revision of the
historic frontier of the kingdom; for not merely is its industrial life
concentrated to a very considerable degree in the German districts, but
this fact is responsible for the existence of important Czech industrial
minorities, which it would be difficult to sacrifice. So far as there is to
be any sacrifice, it must be made by the losers rather than by the winners
in this war. But it ought to be possible, under the rule of some
carefully selected western prince as ruler of Bohemia, to devise proper
administrative guarantees for the linguistic rights of minorities in every
mixed district of Bohemia, whether it be Czech or German. The case of
Hungary is different. That the Allies, if victorious, should perpetuate the
racial hegemony of the Magyars, and with it many of the abuses which have
contributed towards the present war, is as unthinkable as that they should
once more bolster up the Turkish régime. If the Habsburg Monarchy should
break up, Hungary is fully entitled to her independence. She will become a
national Magyar State, but in a sense very different from that which her
Jingo politicians have intended—not by assimilating the non-Magyar races
of the country, but by losing to the other national States by which she
will be surrounded all but the purely Magyar districts of the central
plains. Hungary will then be more fully than before a Danubian State; her
rich alluvial lands will be developed, and a check will be put upon the
unnecessary streams of Magyar emigration which the present political and
economic situation favours. The chief gainer by the change will be the
Magyar peasantry, who have in their own way been exploited by the ruling
oligarchy as cruelly as their non-Magyar neighbours. One result of the war
will be to discredit the policy and methods of this oligarchy and to hasten
the break-up of the vast latifundia of the great magnates and the Church,
and those other drastic land reforms without which Hungary cannot hope to
attain her full economic value as the granary of central Europe. Hitherto
the government of the day has secured a parliamentary majority by
corrupting and terrorising the non-Magyar constituencies of the periphery
and thus out-voting the radical Magyar stalwarts of the great plain; and
with the loss of the Slovak, Ruthene and Roumanian districts this system
would automatically collapse. The result might be a genuine strengthening
of democratic elements and the dawn of a new era for the Magyar race.
§10. Germany and Austria.—One final problem connected with
Austria-Hungary remains. What is to be the fate of the German provinces of
Austria? If the map of Europe is to be recast on a basis of nationality, we
obviously cannot withhold from the great German nation that right to racial
unity which we accord to the Czechs, the Poles and many minor races. The
seven German provinces—Upper and Lower Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Tirol,
Salzburg and Vorarlberg—reconstituted perhaps as a kingdom of Austria
under the House of Habsburg and augmented by the German population of
western Hungary, would then become an additional federal unit in the German
Empire. Such an event, it cannot be too often repeated, is inconceivable
except as the result of a complete defeat of the central powers, but if on
that assumption Germany loses Alsace-Lorraine and Posen, the loss would be
made good by the incorporation of German Austria. The result of this
in figures would be the subtraction of six million inhabitants and the
addition of eight million others—a transaction which need not unduly alarm
the British Jingo, and at the same time might render defeat less galling to
the German patriot.
Whether this fulfillment of the Pan-German aspiration would meet with
unqualified enthusiasm on either side of the present frontier, is a
question on which it is not altogether easy to answer. The idea of
admitting eight million additional Catholic subjects into Germany would
certainly arouse misgivings in Prussia, both among the stricter Protestants
and among the far more active section of "intellectuals" who merely regard
Protestantism as a political asset in the struggle against Latin and
Slavonic influences. From a political point of view their admission would
unquestionably transform the whole parliamentary situation and force the
Imperial Government to revise its whole attitude; for the Austrian voters
would greatly strengthen the two parties to whose existence Prussia has
never become reconciled—the Clerical Centre and the Social Democratic
Left,—while contributing little or nothing to the parties of the
Conservative Junkers or the middle-class "Liberals." In other words, the
new element might prove to be an effective leaven which would permeate the
whole lump. All the arguments which induced Bismarck to expel Austria
from Germany in 1868 would still be upheld by the advocates of
"Preussen-Deutschland" (see p. 65), and the Prussian hegemony; but after an
unsuccessful war and territorial losses the chance of making these good
by the achievement of national unity would probably sweep away the
dissentients, who would no longer represent a triumphant system, but a
beaten and discredited caste. The old idea of the "seventy-million Empire,"
which appealed so strongly to the Liberals of Frankfurt in 1848, should
prove irresistible under these circumstances. The influence of Austrian
Germans, already so marked in literature, art, music, and above all in
political theory, might make itself felt in other spheres also.
Meanwhile, in view of the wild talk in which certain sections of the Press
are already indulging, it cannot be too strongly emphasised that only the
Germans can reform their political institutions, and that any attempt at
external interference will not merely fail lamentably, but produce the very
opposite effect from that which is intended. If the German Emperor insists
upon confusing the relative positions of the Deity and some of his
self-styled vicegerents upon earth, only the German people can restore him
to a sense of proportion and modesty. All believers in human progress hope
that after this war the monstrous theories of divine right propounded
by the House of Hohenzollern will be relegated to the lumber-room of a
vanished past. But the sooner references to St. Helena as a residence for
deposed emperors are dismissed as arrant nonsense, the better. The future
of German dynasties, as of German Unity, rests with the German people
itself; and those who challenge this statement repudiate ipso facto
the two principles of Nationality and International Law, which we have
officially adopted as our programme for the future.
The fate of the German provinces of Austria is one of the central problems
raised by this war, since it is the link between the fate of two Empires.
The present writer most emphatically disclaims all idea of prophecy; but
he feels that the time has come for outlining some of the possible
alternatives which confront the statesmen of "the new Europe." So far as
Austria-Hungary is concerned, it is clear that the splendid dream of "a
monarchical Switzerland," as conceived by many serious political thinkers,
has already died a violent death; but it would be quite premature to
dogmatise on the future grouping of the races of the Dual Monarchy at a
moment when its ultimate fate has still to be decided on the field of
battle.
§11. Italian Aspirations.—We have already alluded to Italy's position,
in connection with the Southern Slav question, and have pointed out that a
settlement which follows even approximately the lines of nationality would
assign the Trentino, the town of Trieste (as a free port), and a strip
of Western Istria to Italy, but the remainder of the coast from Cape
Promontore to the Bojana river to the new "Jugoslavia." There are, however,
other directions in which Italy may claim compensation for her friendly
attitude towards the Triple Entente. She has already occupied the rocky
islet of Saseno, opposite Valona, and in the event of the collapse of
Austria-Hungary, she may demand the whole bay of Valona, as the strategic
key to the Adriatic, and even a general protectorate of the embryo Albanian
State. The establishment of a miniature Gibraltar on the eastern side of
the Straits of Otranto is a step which neither France nor Britain would
oppose, if Italy should insist upon it; but it may be questioned whether
she would not thereby be laying up stores of trouble for a distant future,
altogether incommensurate with any possible advantages which might accrue.
Indeed, Italy would probably be well advised to abandon all idea of an
Albanian adventure (which, originally conceived as a counterstroke to
Austrian aggression, would lose its point if Austria disappeared from the
scene), to leave the Greeks a free hand in south Epirus, to cede to them
Rhodes and the other islands occupied during the Tripolitan War, and then
to secure, during the partition of Turkey, the reversion of Cilicia and the
Gulf of Alexandretta. It is in any case clear that the Powers of the Triple
Entente will raise no objections to such action on the part of Italy, and
are resolved to show every consideration to a power whose great and vital
interests in the Mediterranean in no way conflict with their own.
§12. The Balkan Situation: Bulgaria and Greece.—The creation of a

Greater Roumania and of a new Southern Slav State would transform the whole

Balkan situation, and therefore obviously involves material concessions to

Bulgaria and Greece.

(A) If Roumania succeeds in redeeming her kinsmen across the northern
frontiers, she cannot be so ungenerous as to insist upon retaining
territory whose population is overwhelmingly Bulgarian, and the least which
might be expected from her would be the retrocession to Bulgaria of her
bloodless acquisition during the second Balkan War. This means a reversion
to the boundary defined under Russian arbitration at Petrograd in January
1913—except outside the fortress of Silistria, where strategic reasons
demand its rectification.
It is in the relations of Bulgaria and Serbia, however, that the key to the
Balkan situation is to be found. The Serbo-Bulgarian treaty of February
1912, which formed the groundwork of the Balkan alliance, had limited
Serbia's sphere of influence to northern Macedonia and referred to the
arbitration of the Russian Tsar any disputes arising from conquests to the
south of a certain specified line. Serbia was tacitly given a free hand
in her attempt to reach the sea in Northern Albania. The action of
Austria-Hungary in vetoing her access to the Adriatic forced Serbia to turn
her eyes from west to south and to seek her economic outlet to the sea
down the valley of the Vardar to Salonica and the Aegean. The cession of
Monastir, Ochrida, and the Vardar Valley to Bulgaria would have rendered
this impossible, for it would not merely have driven a wedge between Serbia
and Greece, but would have placed two customs frontiers, the Bulgarian and
the Greek, between Serbia and the sea, instead of only one, the Turkish, as
hitherto. Shut in upon all sides, with all hope of expansion blocked by the
powerful Dual Monarchy to north and west and by a big Bulgaria to east and
south, Serbia would have found herself in a worse position than before the
war. The Bulgarians, intoxicated by their victories over the Turks and
seduced by the promptings of the Austrian tempter, turned a deaf ear to the
arguments of their Serbian allies, and insisted upon their pound of flesh.
They failed to realise that the most effective way of inducing the Serbs to
evacuate Macedonia was to give them adequate backing in their demand for an
Adriatic port. Every fresh intrigue of Sofia with Vienna confirmed Belgrade
in its view of the vital necessity for retaining the Vardar Valley. The
hoary argument that "circumstances alter cases," appeared anew in the garb
of the Bismarckian theory that all treaties are subject to the provision
"rebus sic stantibus"—a theory which many great international lawyers
have unhesitatingly endorsed. In this form it appealed as irresistibly to
the Serbs as did the rival shibboleth of "The treaty, the whole treaty,
and nothing but the treaty" to the Bulgarians. It is impossible to absolve
either side from blame; for the Serbs, in formally denouncing a treaty into
which they had voluntarily entered, were doing exactly what they had so
bitterly resented in Austria-Hungary's treatment of Bosnia, while the
Bulgarians, in flouting the Tsar whom they had named as arbiter and in
attempting to uphold the treaty by brute force and treachery, abandoned the
ground of law, and placed themselves openly in the wrong.
The events of the great war have already modified the problem. The one
unanswerable argument of the Serbs in declining to surrender Macedonia
was the plea that they would then have nothing to offer Bulgaria for her
neutrality or her support when their own inevitable day of reckoning with
Austria should arrive. In short, Veles, Monastir and Ochrida were widely
regarded as a pledge to be held until Bosnia and Dalmatia could be
redeemed, but then to be handed over to the Bulgarians. It is true that the
Serbo-Bulgar War of 1913 and the passions which it aroused have converted
this feeling into one of reluctance to sacrifice what was bought at such a
fearful price. But the moment has now arrived to translate an instinct into
a reality. If Southern Slav Unity is to be achieved, a binding promise,
under the guarantee of the Entente Powers, must be given to Bulgaria, that,
in proportion as the work of Serbo-Croat unification is achieved, the
Macedonian frontier will be revised in favour of Bulgaria. It is possible
that Bulgaria may prefer a different formula, according to which the Tsar
with the approval of his Western Allies should arbitrate upon the original
Serbo-Bulgar treaty. Any such concession to Bulgarian sentiment ought not
to be resented in Serbia, in view of the great issues involved. It is
obvious that Serbia cannot hope to achieve her national unity unless
Bulgaria abstains from hostile action, or to consolidate her new position
when won unless she can win Bulgaria's active friendship. The latter by her
intervention could at any moment turn the scales against Turkey or against
Serbia, and it is thus essential that the Allies should treat her now with
a generosity proportionate to the callous neglect with which Europe left
her to her fate in September 1913.
The tendency to look down upon the Balkan States from the fancied heights
of a superior "culture" has never been so marked in France or Britain as
in Germany, where the Press is now engaged in comparing their own cultural
exploits in Belgium with the lack of culture displayed by the "bandits" and
"assassins" of Serbia, and where a man of such scientific distinction as
Werner Sombart can describe the heroic kingdom of Montenegro as "nothing
but a bad joke in the history of the world!"[1] But even here the habit
of condescension lingers, and amidst the threatened collapse of Western
civilisation it is well to remember the essential distinction between
primitive and savage. The Balkan nations have grown to manhood while
we slept, and must henceforth be regarded as equals in the European
commonwealth.
[Footnote 1: Berliner Tageblatt, cited by Observer, November 8, 1914.]
(B) Such territorial changes as have been outlined above would vitally
affect the position of Greece, who is also fully entitled to claim
compensation for any serious disturbance of the balance of power. The first
and most obvious form which compensation would take is the final occupation
of southern Epirus; no objections will be raised to this by the Entente
Powers, and it is probable that Italy has already made her own bargain with
the Cabinet of Athens on this very point. It is to be hoped that Italy may
also consent to hand over Rhodes and the neighbouring islands to Greece, in
return for a free hand in Southern Asia Minor in the event of the Turkish
Empire breaking up. By far the thorniest problem is provided by the future
ownership of Kavala, which the Treaty of Bucarest assigned to Greece in
August 1913, but which from an economic point of view is Bulgaria's port on
the Aegean, and as vital a necessity for her future development as it is a
superfluous luxury to Greece. The statesmen of Petrograd were not blind to
these considerations, but the scale was turned at Bucarest by the active
intervention of the German Emperor, who, under the plea of seconding his
brother-in-law, King Constantine, skilfully provided a permanent bone of
contention between Bulgaria and Greece. His action may not unfairly be
compared to that of the Hungarian Premier, Count Tisza, in fomenting the
quarrel between Serbia and Bulgaria two months earlier.
Serbia's cession of Central Macedonia to Bulgaria could not fail to be
distasteful to the Greeks, for it would automatically render their tenure
of Kavala highly precarious. It is to be hoped, however, that they may be
brought to realise that its surrender and the consequent improvement of
Greco-Bulgarian relations are in the highest interests of Greece and the
whole Hellenic race. Here again, the break-up of the Turkish Empire may
enable the Greeks to compensate themselves on the shores of Asia Minor. But
the real key to the problem of Kavala, and thus indirectly to the revival
of the Balkan League and all the far-reaching effects which that would have
upon the fate of Europe, lies in the hands of Britain. It could instantly
be solved by the cession of Cyprus to Greece, on condition that Kavala and
the valley of the Strymon were restored to Bulgaria. Neither strategically
nor economically is Cyprus of any value to Britain; thirty-five years ago
it was taken over by Disraeli "as a sort of fee for opposing Russia," a
foolish habit which we had abandoned long before the present war with
Turkey. Its population is predominantly Greek, and the Hellenic national
movement is steadily gaining ground. Anything that we might gain by its
retention is more than counterbalanced by its value as an instrument of
barter.
§13. The Future of Turkey.—The entry of Turkey into the great war
marks a further stage in the winnowing process from which we hope that a
regenerated Europe will emerge. Two of the main causes of the war are the
Turk and the Magyar, whose effete and tyrannous systems have each in its
own manner and degree long kept South-Eastern Europe in a ferment of unrest
and reaction. It is a matter of profound regret that two infinitely more
virile and progressive races, the German and the Jew, should be fighting
their battles for them, and indeed bolstering up causes which would
otherwise speedily collapse by reason of their own inward rottenness. It is
the Triple Alliance which has made it possible for the iniquitous racial
hegemony of the Magyars to survive in Hungary; it is the joint policy of
Vienna, Budapest, and Berlin which has hampered the progress of the Balkan
States, and above all the development of every Slavonic nation; and in this
their most valuable allies have been the Jewish Press and the Jewish haute
finance of Germany, Austria and Hungary. Just as we hope and believe that
one result of this war will be the emancipation of Germany and German
"culture" from the corroding influences of militarist doctrine, so there
are good grounds for hoping that it will also give a new and healthy
impetus to Jewish national policy, grant freer play to their many splendid
qualities, and enable them to shake off the false shame which has led
men who ought to be proud of their Jewish race to assume so many alien
disguises and to accuse of anti-Semitism those who refuse to be deceived
by mere appearances. It is high time that the Jews should realise that few
things do more to foster anti-Semite feeling than this very tendency to
sail under false colours and conceal their true identity. The Zionist
and the orthodox Jewish nationalist have long ago won the respect and
admiration of the world. No race has ever defied assimilation so stubbornly
and so successfully, and the modern tendency of individual Jews to
repudiate what is one of their chief glories suggests an almost comic
resolve to fight against the course of nature.
These cryptic tendencies of pseudo-national as opposed to national Judaism
have played a great part in the Young Turkish movement and the destruction
which it is bringing upon Turkey. The Committee of Union and Progress at
first enjoyed the moral and financial support of many men, both Christians
and Jews, to whom its methods and secret currents were a sealed book. For
a time the Young Turks, like the Magyars farther west, deceived foreign
opinion by claptrap phrases from the repertory of modern democracy. But
"murder will out," and the Committee—despite the tiny group of able, and
in certain cases honourable, men who control its destinies—has gradually
been revealed in its true colours, as a parasitic growth upon the body
politic, preserving the worst faults of the old régime and blending with it
much of the decadence which lies like froth along the backwaters of Western
civilisation.
Since 1908, then, the fate of Turkey has passed from the control of the
Turk and is being decided by an alien clique of infidels, renegades,
political freemasons[1] and Jews, in whose hands the Caliph is a helpless
tool, and to whom the teachings of Christ and of Mohammed are mere worn-out
superstitions. In fact, the Committee is in its essence non-Turkish
and non-Moslem. In the name of a secret society, based openly upon the
subversive ideas of the wilder French Jacobins, and not shrinking from
assassination as a convenient political weapon, a Jehad or Holy War is to
be preached against the British Empire, and the most sacred interests of
Islam are to be exploited in the interests of Germany. What bitter irony is
in the fact that William II., who risked universal war to avenge the murder
of his friend, the Archduke Francis Ferdinand, should now find himself
closely allied with Enver Pasha, the military adventurer who barely two
years ago foully assassinated his own commander-in-chief, Nazim Pasha, and
who therefore represents everything that is anathema to the Prussian
War Lord with his exaggerated ideas of military discipline and personal
loyalty!
[Footnote 1: Not to be confused for a moment with the very different form
of freemasonry which prevails in this country.]
The die has been cast, and even those who most regret Turkey's action
cannot shut their eyes to the fact that it inevitably raises the whole
question of Constantinople and the Dardanelles. If Germany should emerge
victorious, Turkey is likely to fall under a more or less veiled German
protectorate. In the event of the victory of the Allies, Turkey may
continue to exist as an Asiatic power, but there is little doubt that
she will be eliminated from Europe. The only real question is, Who is to
replace her? Bulgaria will, it is to be hoped, recover Adrianople and the
Enos-Midia line, of which she was so cruelly robbed last year. The fact
that the Turks on their re-entry systematically wiped out the entire
Bulgarian population of northern Thrace does not weaken, but enormously
strengthens, the case for its restoration. But to offer Constantinople to
Bulgaria would be a fatal gift. She has absolutely no historic claim to
the great city of the Caesars (Tsarigrad, as it is rightly known to every
Slav); nor is there even any considerable Bulgarian population which could
rally round the new government. The administrative task is obviously far
beyond the powers of a small peasant state, most of whose present leaders
were born under a foreign yoke. Nor is Greece a serious candidate for the
vacant post. The Greeks, of course, unlike the Bulgarians, have a definite
claim, based on the traditions of the Byzantine Empire, and there is a
large Greek population in the city—at present close upon 350,000, though
their numbers are likely to be materially reduced before this war is over.
But in their case also Constantinople would be a fatal gift. The resources
even of the enlarged Hellenic kingdom would inevitably prove unequal to the
task. Moreover, it must not be forgotten that a Greek occupation would be
opposed on many grounds by the entire commercial community of every other
nation in Europe.
In some ways the ideal arrangement would be that Roumania should assume the
administration of the city, as trustee for a reconstituted Balkan League,
with proper guarantees for the commercial rights of all the Powers. But it
is to be feared that such a solution would please nobody, perhaps not even
Roumania herself. A league of the five Balkan kings, with Roumania as
primus inter pares, is the dream of a remote future, and until it can be
realised, Constantinople cannot assume its natural position as capital of
the Balkan peninsula.
§14. Russia and Constantinople.—In short, as matters stand to-day, there
is only one power which can replace the Turks as master of Constantinople,
and that power is Russia. The Russians could not of course incorporate the
city in their empire for reasons of geography; and this fundamental fact
destroys at a blow the numerous objections which might have told against
the occupation, if Constantinople had been contiguous to the Russian
dominions. It would obviously be necessary to establish a special
autonomous administration under a Russian governor. It is by no means
impossible that Russia would be satisfied with the expulsion of the Turks
and the internationalisation of Constantinople as a free port under a
Christian prince or a commission of the Powers. But, though admirable
in theory, such a solution would give rise to endless complications and
disputes. Unless the Western Powers can trust Russia sufficiently to leave
her in full possession, they must make up their minds to bolstering up the
impossible Turk for a further period of years. Such a surrender to the
unreasoning and ignorant prejudices of a previous generation would be a
sure prelude to the collapse of our alliance with Russia, which it is the
vital interest of all British patriots to uphold at all costs. Happily,
"the fear of Russia," as of a strange and unknown colossus, is dying out,
vague fancies inevitably yielding to the hard logic of facts. The Disraeli
policy in the Near East must give place once and for all to the broader
conceptions of Gladstone, tempered by the cautious statesmanship of
Salisbury. The greatest of the Christian Powers must be allowed to replace
the cross upon the dome of Saint Sofia. The religious appeal of such a
change is clear enough, nor need there be any anxiety on economic grounds.
There is nothing to prevent Constantinople from becoming a free port under
the Russian flag, and filling a similar place to that which the free port
of Trieste would occupy under the flag of United Italy. Indeed it may be
confidently assumed that the change would give an extraordinary impetus to
trade in the whole eastern Mediterranean. The recent history of Batum and
Baku is a faint indication of what might be expected.
The fate of the Dardanelles cannot be separated from that of the capital;
both must be in the same hands. At the same time a reasonable compensation
for their cession to Russia would be the dismantlement of their forts. In
any case, whatever their fate may be, it is clear that an end must be put
to the galling restrictions upon Russia's Black Sea fleet. The essential
point to bear in mind is that if the war goes well with the Allies, and
if Russia expresses a definite desire to occupy Constantinople and the
straits, resistance on our part would be alike difficult, pointless, and