# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Emile Zola, The Downfall
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13851/13851-h/13851-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

They were approaching the edge of the wood when a cry of distress was
      heard behind them.
    

      “Help! help!”
     

      It was the subaltern standard-bearer, who had been shot through the left
      lung. He had fallen, the blood pouring in a stream from his mouth, and as
      no one heeded his appeal he collected his fast ebbing strength for another
      effort:
    

      “To the colors!”
     

      Rochas turned and in a single bound was at his side. He took the flag, the
      staff of which had been broken in the fall, while the young officer
      murmured in words that were choked by the bubbling tide of blood and
      froth:
    

      “Never mind me; I am a goner. Save the flag!”
     

      And they left him to himself in that charming woodland glade to writhe in
      protracted agony upon the ground, tearing up the grass with his stiffening
      fingers and praying for death, which would be hours yet ere it came to end
      his misery.
    

      At last they had left the wood and its horrors behind them. Beside Maurice
      and Jean all that were left of the little band were Lieutenant Rochas,
      Lapoulle and Pache. Gaude, who had strayed away from his companions,
      presently came running from a thicket to rejoin them, his bugle hanging
      from his neck and thumping against his back with every step he took. It
      was a great comfort to them all to find themselves once again in the open
      country, where they could draw their breath; and then, too, there were no
      longer any whistling bullets and crashing shells to harass them; the
      firing had ceased on this side of the valley.
    

      The first object they set eyes on was an officer who had reined in his
      smoking, steaming charger before a farm-yard gate and was venting his
      towering rage in a volley of Billingsgate. It was General
      Bourgain-Desfeuilles, the commander of their brigade, covered with dust
      and looking as if he was about to tumble from his horse with fatigue. The
      chagrin on his gross, high-colored, animal face told how deeply he took to
      heart the disaster that he regarded in the light of a personal misfortune.
      His command had seen nothing of him since morning. Doubtless he was
      somewhere on the battlefield, striving to rally the remnants of his
      brigade, for he was not the man to look closely to his own safety in his
      rage against those Prussian batteries that had at the same time destroyed
      the empire and the fortunes of a rising officer, the favorite of the
      Tuileries.
    

      “Tonnerre de Dieu!” he shouted, “is there no one of whom one can
      ask a question in this d——-d country?”
     

      The farmer's people had apparently taken to the woods. At last a very old
      woman appeared at the door, some servant who had been forgotten, or whose
      feeble legs had compelled her to remain behind.
    

      “Hallo, old lady, come here! Which way from here is Belgium?”
     

      She looked at him stupidly, as one who failed to catch his meaning. Then
      he lost all control of himself and effervesced, forgetful that the woman
      was only a poor peasant, bellowing that he had no idea of going back to
      Sedan to be caught like a rat in a trap; not he! he was going to make
      tracks for foreign parts, he was, and d——-d quick, too! Some
      soldiers had come up and stood listening.
    

      “But you won't get through, General,” spoke up a sergeant; “the Prussians
      are everywhere. This morning was the time for you to cut stick.”
     

      There were stories even then in circulation of companies that had become
      separated from their regiments and crossed the frontier without any
      intention of doing so, and of others that, later in the day, had succeeded
      in breaking through the enemy's lines before the armies had effected their
      final junction.
    

      The general shrugged his shoulders impatiently. “What, with a few daring
      fellows of your stripe, do you mean to say we couldn't go where we please?
      I think I can find fifty daredevils to risk their skin in the attempt.”
       Then, turning again to the old peasant: “Eh! you old mummy, answer,
      will you, in the devil's name! where is the frontier?”
     

      She understood him this time. She extended her skinny arm in the direction
      of the forest.
    

      “That way, that way!”
     

      “Eh? What's that you say? Those houses that we see down there, at the end
      of the field?”
     

      “Oh! farther, much farther. Down yonder, away down yonder!”
     

      The general seemed as if his anger must suffocate him. “It is too
      disgusting, an infernal country like this! one can make neither top nor
      tail of it. There was Belgium, right under our nose; we were all afraid we
      should put our foot in it without knowing it; and now that one wants to go
      there it is somewhere else. No, no! it is too much; I've had enough of it;
      let them take me prisoner if they will, let them do what they choose with
      me; I am going to bed!” And clapping spurs to his horse, bobbing up and
      down on his saddle like an inflated wine skin, he galloped off toward
      Sedan.
    

      A winding path conducted the party down into the Fond de Givonne, an
      outskirt of the city lying between two hills, where the single village
      street, running north and south and sloping gently upward toward the
      forest, was lined with gardens and modest houses. This street was just
      then so obstructed by flying soldiers that Lieutenant Rochas, with Pache,
      Lapoulle, and Gaude, found himself caught in the throng and unable for the
      moment to move in either direction. Maurice and Jean had some difficulty
      in rejoining them; and all were surprised to hear themselves hailed by a
      husky, drunken voice, proceeding from the tavern on the corner, near which
      they were blockaded.
    

      “My stars, if here ain't the gang! Hallo, boys, how are you? My stars, I'm
      glad to see you!”
     

      They turned, and recognized Chouteau, leaning from a window of the ground
      floor of the inn. He seemed to be very drunk, and went on, interspersing
      his speech with hiccoughs:
    

      “Say, fellows, don't stand on ceremony if you're thirsty. There's enough
      left for the comrades.” He turned unsteadily and called to someone who was
      invisible within the room: “Come here, you lazybones. Give these gentlemen
      something to drink—”
     

      Loubet appeared in turn, advancing with a flourish and holding aloft in
      either hand a full bottle, which he waved above his head triumphantly. He
      was not so far gone as his companion; with his Parisian blague,
      imitating the nasal drawl of the coco-venders of the boulevards on a
      public holiday, he cried:
    

      “Here you are, nice and cool, nice and cool! Who'll have a drink?”
     

      Nothing had been seen of the precious pair since they had vanished under
      pretense of taking Sergeant Sapin into the ambulance. It was sufficiently
      evident that since then they had been strolling and seeing the sights,
      taking care to keep out of the way of the shells, until finally they had
      brought up at this inn that was given over to pillage.
    

      Lieutenant Rochas was very angry. “Wait a bit, you scoundrels, just wait,
      and I'll attend to your case! deserting and getting drunk while the rest
      of your company were under fire!”
     

      But Chouteau would have none of his reprimand. “See here, you old lunatic,
      I want you to understand that the grade of lieutenant is abolished; we are
      all free and equal now. Aren't you satisfied with the basting the
      Prussians gave you to-day, or do you want some more?”
     

      The others had to restrain the lieutenant to keep him from assaulting the
      socialist. Loubet himself, dandling his bottles affectionately in his
      arms, did what he could to pour oil upon the troubled waters.
    

      “Quit that, now! what's the use quarreling, when all men are brothers!”
       And catching sight of Lapoulle and Pache, his companions in the squad:
      “Don't stand there like great gawks, you fellows! Come in here and take
      something to wash the dust out of your throats.”
     

      Lapoulle hesitated a moment, dimly conscious of the impropriety there was
      in the indulgence when so many poor devils were in such sore distress, but
      he was so knocked up with fatigue, so terribly hungry and thirsty! He said
      not a word, but suddenly making up his mind, gave one bound and landed in
      the room, pushing before him Pache, who, equally silent, yielded to the
      temptation he had not strength to resist. And they were seen no more.
    

      “The infernal scoundrels!” muttered Rochas. “They deserve to be shot,
      every mother's son of them!”
     

      He had now remaining with him of his party only Jean, Maurice, and Gaude,
      and all four of them, notwithstanding their resistance, were gradually
      involved and swallowed up in the torrent of stragglers and fugitives that
      streamed along the road, filling its whole width from ditch to ditch. Soon
      they were at a distance from the inn. It was the routed army rolling down
      upon the ramparts of Sedan, a roily, roaring flood, such as the
      disintegrated mass of earth and boulders that the storm, scouring the
      mountainside, sweeps down into the valley. From all the surrounding
      plateaus, down every slope, up every narrow gorge, by the Floing road, by
      Pierremont, by the cemetery, by the Champ de Mars, as well as through the
      Fond de Givonne, the same sorry rabble was streaming cityward in panic
      haste, and every instant brought fresh accessions to its numbers. And who
      could reproach those wretched men, who, for twelve long, mortal hours, had
      stood in motionless array under the murderous artillery of an invisible
      enemy, against whom they could do nothing? The batteries now were playing
      on them from front, flank, and rear; as they drew nearer the city they
      presented a fairer mark for the convergent fire; the guns dealt death and
      destruction out by wholesale on that dense, struggling mass of men in that
      accursed hole, where there was no escape from the bursting shells. Some
      regiments of the 7th corps, more particularly those that had been
      stationed about Floing, had left the field in tolerably good order, but in
      the Fond de Givonne there was no longer either organization or command;
      the troops were a pushing, struggling mob, composed of debris from
      regiments of every description, zouaves, turcos, chasseurs, infantry of
      the line, most of them without arms, their uniforms soiled and torn, with
      grimy hands, blackened faces, bloodshot eyes starting from their sockets
      and lips swollen and distorted from their yells of fear or rage. At times
      a riderless horse would dash through the throng, overturning those who
      were in his path and leaving behind him a long wake of consternation. Then
      some guns went thundering by at breakneck speed, a retreating battery
      abandoned by its officers, and the drivers, as if drunk, rode down
      everything and everyone, giving no word of warning. And still the
      shuffling tramp of many feet along the dusty road went on and ceased not,
      the close-compacted column pressed on, breast to back, side to side; a
      retreat en masse, where vacancies in the ranks were filled as soon
      as made, all moved by one common impulse, to reach the shelter that lay
      before them and be behind a wall.
    

      Again Jean raised his head and gave an anxious glance toward the west;
      through the dense clouds of dust raised by the tramp of that great
      multitude the luminary still poured his scorching rays down upon the
      exhausted men. The sunset was magnificent, the heavens transparently,
      beautifully blue.
    

      “It's a nuisance, all the same,” he muttered, “that plaguey sun that stays
      up there and won't go to roost!”
     

      Suddenly Maurice became aware of the presence of a young woman whom the
      movement of the resistless throng had jammed against a wall and who was in
      danger of being injured, and on looking more attentively was astounded to
      recognize in her his sister Henriette. For near a minute he stood gazing
      at her in open-mouthed amazement, and finally it was she who spoke,
      without any appearance of surprise, as if she found the meeting entirely
      natural.
    

      “They shot him at Bazeilles—and I was there. Then, in the hope that
      they might at least let me have his body, I had an idea—”
     

      She did not mention either Weiss or the Prussians by name; it seemed to
      her that everyone must understand. Maurice did understand. It made his
      heart bleed; he gave a great sob.
    

      “My poor darling!”
     

      When, about two o'clock, Henriette recovered consciousness, she found
      herself at Balan, in the kitchen of some people who were strangers to her,
      her head resting on a table, weeping. Almost immediately, however, she
      dried her tears; already the heroic element was reasserting itself in that
      silent woman, so frail, so gentle, yet of a spirit so indomitable that she
      could suffer martyrdom for the faith, or the love, that was in her. She
      knew not fear; her quiet, undemonstrative courage was lofty and
      invincible. When her distress was deepest she had summoned up her
      resolution, devoting her reflections to how she might recover her
      husband's body, so as to give it decent burial. Her first project was
      neither more nor less than to make her way back to Bazeilles, but everyone
      advised her against this course, assuring her that it would be absolutely
      impossible to get through the German lines. She therefore abandoned the
      idea, and tried to think of someone among her acquaintance who would
      afford her the protection of his company, or at least assist her in the
      necessary preliminaries. The person to whom she determined she would apply
      was a M. Dubreuil, a cousin of hers, who had been assistant superintendent
      of the refinery at Chene at the time her husband was employed there; Weiss
      had been a favorite of his; he would not refuse her his assistance. Since
      the time, now two years ago, when his wife had inherited a handsome
      fortune, he had been occupying a pretty villa, called the Hermitage, the
      terraces of which could be seen skirting the hillside of a suburb of
      Sedan, on the further side of the Fond de Givonne. And thus it was toward
      the Hermitage that she was now bending her steps, compelled at every
      moment to pause before some fresh obstacle, continually menaced with being
      knocked down and trampled to death.
    

      Maurice, to whom she briefly explained her project, gave it his approval.
    

      “Cousin Dubreuil has always been a good friend to us. He will be of
      service to you.”
     

      Then an idea of another nature occurred to him. Lieutenant Rochas was
      greatly embarrassed as to what disposition he should make of the flag.
      They all were firmly resolved to save it—to do anything rather than
      allow it to fall into the hands of the Prussians. It had been suggested to
      cut it into pieces, of which each should carry one off under his shirt, or
      else to bury it at the foot of a tree, so noting the locality in memory
      that they might be able to come and disinter it at some future day; but
      the idea of mutilating the flag, or burying it like a corpse, affected
      them too painfully, and they were considering if they might not preserve
      it in some other manner. When Maurice, therefore, proposed to entrust the
      standard to a reliable person who would conceal it and, in case of
      necessity, defend it, until such day as he should restore it to them
      intact, they all gave their assent.
    

      “Come,” said the young man, addressing his sister, “we will go with you to
      the Hermitage and see if Dubreuil is there. Besides, I do not wish to
      leave you without protection.”
     

      It was no easy matter to extricate themselves from the press, but they
      succeeded finally and entered a path that led upward on their left. They
      soon found themselves in a region intersected by a perfect labyrinth of
      lanes and narrow passages, a district where truck farms and gardens
      predominated, interspersed with an occasional villa and small holdings of
      extremely irregular outline, and these lanes and passages wound
      circuitously between blank walls, turning sharp corners at every few steps
      and bringing up abruptly in the cul-de-sac of some courtyard, affording
      admirable facilities for carrying on a guerilla warfare; there were spots
      where ten men might defend themselves for hours against a regiment.
      Desultory firing was already beginning to be heard, for the suburb
      commanded Balan, and the Bavarians were already coming up on the other
      side of the valley.
    

      When Maurice and Henriette, who were in the rear of the others, had turned
      once to the left, then to the right and then to the left again, following
      the course of two interminable walls, they suddenly came out before the
      Hermitage, the door of which stood wide open. The grounds, at the top of
      which was a small park, were terraced off in three broad terraces, on one
      of which stood the residence, a roomy, rectangular structure, approached
      by an avenue of venerable elms. Facing it, and separated from it by the
      deep, narrow valley, with its steeply sloping banks, were other similar
      country seats, backed by a wood.
    

      Henriette's anxiety was aroused at sight of the open door, “They are not
      at home,” she said; “they must have gone away.”
     

      The truth was that Dubreuil had decided the day before to take his wife
      and children to Bouillon, where they would be in safety from the disaster
      he felt was impending. And yet the house was not unoccupied; even at a
      distance and through the intervening trees the approaching party were
      conscious of movements going on within its walls. As the young woman
      advanced into the avenue she recoiled before the dead body of a Prussian
      soldier.
    

      “The devil!” exclaimed Rochas; “so they have already been exchanging
      civilities in this quarter!”
     

      Then all hands, desiring to ascertain what was going on, hurried forward
      to the house, and there their curiosity was quickly gratified; the doors
      and windows of the rez-de-chaussee had been smashed in with
      musket-butts and the yawning apertures disclosed the destruction that the
      marauders had wrought in the rooms within, while on the graveled terrace
      lay various articles of furniture that had been hurled from the stoop.
      Particularly noticeable was a drawing-room suite in sky-blue satin, its
      sofa and twelve fauteuils piled in dire confusion, helter-skelter, on and
      around a great center table, the marble top of which was broken in twain.
      And there were zouaves, chasseurs, liners, and men of the infanterie de
      marine running to and fro excitedly behind the buildings and in the
      alleys, discharging their pieces into the little wood that faced them
      across the valley.
    

      “Lieutenant,” a zouave said to Rochas, by way of explanation, “we found a
      pack of those dirty Prussian hounds here, smashing things and raising Cain
      generally. We settled their hash for them, as you can see for yourself;
      only they will be coming back here presently, ten to our one, and that
      won't be so pleasant.”
     

      Three other corpses of Prussian soldiers were stretched upon the terrace.
      As Henriette was looking at them absently, her thoughts doubtless far away
      with her husband, who, amid the blood and ashes of Bazeilles, was also
      sleeping his last sleep, a bullet whistled close to her head and struck a
      tree that stood behind her. Jean sprang forward.
    

      “Madame, don't stay there. Go inside the house, quick, quick!”
     

      His heart overflowed with pity as he beheld the change her terrible
      affliction had wrought in her, and he recalled her image as she had
      appeared to him only the day before, her face bright with the kindly smile
      of the happy, loving wife. At first he had found no word to say to her,
      hardly knowing even if she would recognize him. He felt that he could
      gladly give his life, if that would serve to restore her peace of mind.
    

      “Go inside, and don't come out. At the first sign of danger we will come
      for you, and we will all escape together by way of the wood up yonder.”
     

      But she apathetically replied:
    

      “Ah, M. Jean, what is the use?”
     

      Her brother, however, was also urging her, and finally she ascended the
      stoop and took her position within the vestibule, whence her vision
      commanded a view of the avenue in its entire length. She was a spectator
      of the ensuing combat.
    

      Maurice and Jean had posted themselves behind one of the elms near the
      house. The gigantic trunks of the centenarian monarchs were amply
      sufficient to afford shelter to two men. A little way from them Gaude, the
      bugler, had joined forces with Lieutenant Rochas, who, unwilling to
      confide the flag to other hands, had rested it against the tree at his
      side while he handled his musket. And every trunk had its defenders; from
      end to end the avenue was lined with men covered, Indian fashion, by the
      trees, who only exposed their head when ready to fire.
    

      In the wood across the valley the Prussians appeared to be receiving
      re-enforcements, for their fire gradually grew warmer. There was no one to
      be seen; at most, the swiftly vanishing form now and then of a man
      changing his position. A villa, with green shutters, was occupied by their
      sharpshooters, who fired from the half-open windows of the rez-de-chaussee.
      It was about four o'clock, and the noise of the cannonade in the distance
      was diminishing, the guns were being silenced one by one; and there they
      were, French and Prussians, in that out-of-the-way-corner whence they
      could not see the white flag floating over the citadel, still engaged in
      the work of mutual slaughter, as if their quarrel had been a personal one.
      Notwithstanding the armistice there were many such points where the battle
      continued to rage until it was too dark to see; the rattle of musketry was
      heard in the faubourg of the Fond de Givonne and in the gardens of
      Petit-Pont long after it had ceased elsewhere.
    

      For a quarter of an hour the bullets flew thick and fast from one side of
      the valley to the other. Now and again someone who was so incautious as to
      expose himself went down with a ball in his head or chest. There were
      three men lying dead in the avenue. The rattling in the throat of another
      man who had fallen prone upon his face was something horrible to listen
      to, and no one thought to go and turn him on his back to ease his dying
      agony. Jean, who happened to look around just at that moment, beheld
      Henriette glide tranquilly down the steps, approach the wounded man and
      turn him over, then slip a knapsack beneath his head by way of pillow. He
      ran and seized her and forcibly brought her back behind the tree where he
      and Maurice were posted.
    

      “Do you wish to be killed?”
     

      She appeared to be entirely unconscious of the danger to which she had
      exposed herself.
    

      “Why, no—but I am afraid to remain in that house, all alone. I would
      rather be outside.”
     

      And so she stayed with them. They seated her on the ground at their feet,
      against the trunk of the tree, and went on expending the few cartridges
      that were left them, blazing away to right and left, with such fury that
      they quite forgot their sensations of fear and fatigue. They were utterly
      unconscious of what was going on around them, acting mechanically, with
      but one end in view; even the instinct of self-preservation had deserted
      them.
    

      “Look, Maurice,” suddenly said Henriette; “that dead soldier there before
      us, does he not belong to the Prussian Guard?”
     

      She had been eying attentively for the past minute or two one of the dead
      bodies that the enemy had left behind them when they retreated, a short,
      thick-set young man, with big mustaches, lying upon his side on the gravel
      of the terrace.
    

      The chin-strap had broken, releasing the spiked helmet, which had rolled
      away a few steps. And it was indisputable that the body was attired in the
      uniform of the Guard; the dark gray trousers, the blue tunic with white
      facings, the greatcoat rolled and worn, belt-wise, across the shoulder.
    

      “It is the Guard uniform,” she said; “I am quite certain of it. It is
      exactly like the colored plate I have at home, and then the photograph
      that Cousin Gunther sent us—” She stopped suddenly, and with her
      unconcerned, fearless air, before anyone could make a motion to detain
      her, walked up to the corpse, bent down and read the number of the
      regiment. “Ah, the Forty-third!” she exclaimed. “I knew it.”
     

      And she returned to her position, while a storm of bullets whistled around
      her ears. “Yes, the Forty-third; Cousin Gunther's regiment—something
      told me it must be so. Ah! if my poor husband were only here!”
     

      After that all Jean's and Maurice's entreaties were ineffectual to make
      her keep quiet. She was feverishly restless, constantly protruding her
      head to peer into the opposite wood, evidently harassed by some anxiety
      that preyed upon her mind. Her companions continued to load and fire with
      the same blind fury, pushing her back with their knee whenever she exposed
      herself too rashly. It looked as if the Prussians were beginning to
      consider that their numbers would warrant them in attacking, for they
      showed themselves more frequently and there were evidences of preparations
      going on behind the trees. They were suffering severely, however, from the
      fire of the French, whose bullets at that short range rarely failed to
      bring down their man.
    

      “That may be your cousin,” said Jean. “Look, that officer over there, who
      has just come out of the house with the green shutters.”
     

      He was a captain, as could be seen by the gold braid on the collar of his
      tunic and the golden eagle on his helmet that flashed back the level ray
      of the setting sun. He had discarded his epaulettes, and carrying his
      saber in his right hand, was shouting an order in a sharp, imperative
      voice; and the distance between them was so small, a scant two hundred
      yards, that every detail of his trim, slender figure was plainly
      discernible, as well as the pinkish, stern face and slight blond mustache.
    

      Henriette scrutinized him with attentive eyes. “It is he,” she replied,
      apparently unsurprised. “I recognize him perfectly.”
     

      With a look of concentrated rage Maurice drew his piece to his shoulder
      and covered him. “The cousin—Ah! sure as there is a God in heaven he
      shall pay for Weiss.”
     

      But, quivering with excitement, she jumped to her feet and knocked up the
      weapon, whose charge was wasted on the air.
    

      “Stop, stop! we must not kill acquaintances, relatives! It is too
      barbarous.”
     

      And, all her womanly instincts coming back to her, she sank down behind
      the tree and gave way to a fit of violent weeping. The horror of it all
      was too much for her; in her great dread and sorrow she was forgetful of
      all beside.
    

      Rochas, meantime, was in his element. He had excited the few zouaves and
      other troops around him to such a pitch of frenzy, their fire had become
      so murderously effective at sight of the Prussians, that the latter first
      wavered and then retreated to the shelter of their wood.
    

      “Stand your ground, my boys! don't give way an inch! Aha, see 'em run, the
      cowards! we'll fix their flint for 'em!”
     

      He was in high spirits and seemed to have recovered all his unbounded
      confidence, certain that victory was yet to crown their efforts. There had
      been no defeat. The handful of men before him stood in his eyes for the
      united armies of Germany, and he was going to destroy them at his leisure.
      All his long, lean form, all his thin, bony face, where the huge nose
      curved down upon the self-willed, sensual mouth, exhaled a laughing,
      vain-glorious satisfaction, the joy of the conquering trooper who goes
      through the world with his sweetheart on his arm and a bottle of good wine
      in his hand.
    

      “Parbleu, my children, what are we here for, I'd like to know, if
      not to lick 'em out of their boots? and that's the way this affair is
      going to end, just mark my words. We shouldn't know ourselves any longer
      if we should let ourselves be beaten. Beaten! come, come, that is too
      good! When the neighbors tread on our toes, or when we feel we are
      beginning to grow rusty for want of something to do, we just turn to and
      give 'em a thrashing; that's all there is to it. Come, boys, let 'em have
      it once more, and you'll see 'em run like so many jackrabbits!”
     

      He bellowed and gesticulated like a lunatic, and was such a good fellow
      withal in the comforting illusion of his ignorance that the men were
      inoculated with his confidence. He suddenly broke out again:
    

      “And we'll kick 'em, we'll kick 'em, we'll kick 'em to the frontier!
      Victory, victory!”
     

      But at that juncture, just as the enemy across the valley seemed really to
      be falling back, a hot fire of musketry came pouring in on them from the
      left. It was a repetition of the everlasting flanking movement that had
      done the Prussians such good service; a strong detachment of the Guards
      had crept around toward the French rear through the Fond de Givonne. It
      was useless to think of holding the position longer; the little band of
      men who were defending the terraces were caught between two fires and
      menaced with being cut off from Sedan. Men fell on every side, and for a
      moment the confusion was extreme; the Prussians were already scaling the
      wall of the park, and advancing along the pathways. Some zouaves rushed
      forward to repel them, and there was a fierce hand-to-hand struggle with
      the bayonet. There was one zouave, a big, handsome, brown-bearded man,
      bare-headed and with his jacket hanging in tatters from his shoulders, who
      did his work with appalling thoroughness, driving his reeking bayonet home
      through splintering bones and yielding tissues, cleansing it of the gore
      that it had contracted from one man by plunging it into the flesh of
      another; and when it broke he laid about him, smashing many a skull, with
      the butt of his musket; and when finally he made a misstep and lost his
      weapon he sprung, bare-handed, for the throat of a burly Prussian, with
      such tigerish fierceness that both men rolled over and over on the gravel
      to the shattered kitchen door, clasped in a mortal embrace. The trees of
      the park looked down on many such scenes of slaughter, and the green lawn
      was piled with corpses. But it was before the stoop, around the sky-blue
      sofa and fauteuils, that the conflict raged with greatest fury; a maddened
      mob of savages, firing at one another at point-blank range, so that hair
      and beards were set on fire, tearing one another with teeth and nails when
      a knife was wanting to slash the adversary's throat.
    

      Then Gaude, with his sorrowful face, the face of a man who has had his
      troubles of which he does not care to speak, was seized with a sort of
      sudden heroic madness. At that moment of irretrievable defeat, when he
      must have known that the company was annihilated and that there was not a
      man left to answer his summons, he grasped his bugle, carried it to his
      lips and sounded the general, in so tempestuous, ear-splitting strains
      that one would have said he wished to wake the dead. Nearer and nearer
      came the Prussians, but he never stirred, only sounding the call the
      louder, with all the strength of his lungs. He fell, pierced with many
      bullets, and his spirit passed in one long-drawn, parting wail that died
      away and was lost upon the shuddering air.
    

      Rochas made no attempt to fly; he seemed unable to comprehend. Even more
      erect than usual, he waited the end, stammering:
    

      “Well, what's the matter? what's the matter?”
     

      Such a possibility had never entered his head as that they could be
      defeated. They were changing everything in these degenerate days, even to
      the manner of fighting; had not those fellows a right to remain on their
      own side of the valley and wait for the French to go and attack them?
      There was no use killing them; as fast as they were killed more kept
      popping up. What kind of a d——-d war was it, anyway, where
      they were able to collect ten men against their opponent's one, where they
      never showed their face until evening, after blazing away at you all day
      with their artillery until you didn't know on which end you were standing?
      Aghast and confounded, having failed so far to acquire the first idea of
      the rationale of the campaign, he was dimly conscious of the existence of
      some mysterious, superior method which he could not comprehend, against
      which he ceased to struggle, although in his dogged stubbornness he kept
      repeating mechanically:
    

      “Courage, my children! victory is before us!”
     

      Meanwhile he had stooped and clutched the flag. That was his last, his
      only thought, to save the flag, retreating again, if necessary, so that it
      might not be defiled by contact with Prussian hands. But the staff,
      although it was broken, became entangled in his legs; he narrowly escaped
      falling. The bullets whistled past him, he felt that death was near; he
      stripped the silk from the staff and tore it into shreds, striving to
      destroy it utterly. And then it was that, stricken at once in the neck,
      chest, and legs, he sank to earth amid the bright tri-colored rags, as if
      they had been his pall. He survived a moment yet, gazing before him with
      fixed, dilated eyes, reading, perhaps, in the vision he beheld on the
      horizon the stern lesson that War conveys, the cruel, vital struggle that
      is to be accepted not otherwise than gravely, reverently, as immutable
      law. Then a slight tremor ran through his frame, and darkness succeeded to
      his infantine bewilderment; he passed away, like some poor dumb, lowly
      creature of a day, a joyous insect that mighty, impassive Nature, in her
      relentless fatality, has caught and crushed. In him died all a legend.
    

      When the Prussians began to draw near Jean and Maurice had retreated,
      retiring from tree to tree, face to the enemy, and always, as far as
      possible, keeping Henriette behind them. They did not give over firing,
      discharging their pieces and then falling back to seek a fresh cover.
      Maurice knew where there was a little wicket in the wall at the upper part
      of the park, and they were so fortunate as to find it unfastened. With
      lighter hearts when they had left it behind them, they found themselves in
      a narrow by-road that wound between two high walls, but after following it
      for some distance the sound of firing in front caused them to turn into a
      path on their left. As luck would have it, it ended in an impasse;
      they had to retrace their steps, running the gauntlet of the bullets, and
      take the turning to the right. When they came to exchange reminiscences in
      later days they could never agree on which road they had taken. In that
      tangled network of suburban lanes and passages there was firing still
      going on from every corner that afforded a shelter, protracted battles
      raged at the gates of farmyards, everything that could be converted into a
      barricade had its defenders, from whom the assailants tried to wrest it;
      all with the utmost fury and vindictiveness. And all at once they came out
      upon the Fond de Givonne road, not far from Sedan.
    

      For the third time Jean raised his eyes toward the western sky, that was
      all aflame with a bright, rosy light; and he heaved a sigh of unspeakable
      relief.
    

      “Ah, that pig of a sun! at last he is going to bed!”
     

      And they ran with might and main, all three of them, never once stopping
      to draw breath. About them, filling the road in all its breadth, was the
      rear-guard of fugitives from the battlefield, still flowing onward with
      the irresistible momentum of an unchained mountain torrent. When they came
      to the Balan gate they had a long period of waiting in the midst of the
      impatient, ungovernable throng. The chains of the drawbridge had given
      way, and the only path across the fosse was by the foot-bridge, so that
      the guns and horses had to turn back and seek admission by the bridge of
      the chateau, where the jam was said to be even still more fearful. At the
      gate of la Cassine, too, people were trampled to death in their eagerness
      to gain admittance. From all the adjacent heights the terror-stricken
      fragments of the army came tumbling into the city, as into a cesspool,
      with the hollow roar of pent-up water that has burst its dam. The fatal
      attraction of those walls had ended by making cowards of the bravest; men
      trod one another down in their blind haste to be under cover.
    

      Maurice had caught Henriette in his arms, and in a voice that trembled
      with suspense:
    

      “It cannot be,” he said, “that they will have the cruelty to close the
      gate and shut us out.”
     

      That was what the crowd feared would be done. To right and left, however,
      upon the glacis soldiers were already arranging their bivouacs, while
      entire batteries, guns, caissons, and horses, in confusion worse
      confounded, had thrown themselves pell-mell into the fosse for safety.
    

      But now shrill, impatient bugle calls rose on the evening air, followed
      soon by the long-drawn strains of retreat. They were summoning the belated
      soldiers back to their comrades, who came running in, singly and in
      groups. A dropping fire of musketry still continued in the faubourgs, but
      it was gradually dying out. Heavy guards were stationed on the banquette
      behind the parapet to protect the approaches, and at last the gate was
      closed. The Prussians were within a hundred yards of the sally-port; they
      could be seen moving on the Balan road, tranquilly establishing themselves
      in the houses and gardens.
    

      Maurice and Jean, pushing Henriette before them to protect her from the
      jostling of the throng, were among the last to enter Sedan. Six o'clock
      was striking. The artillery fire had ceased nearly an hour ago. Soon the
      distant musketry fire, too, was silenced. Then, to the deafening uproar,
      to the vengeful thunder that had been roaring since morning, there
      succeeded a stillness as of death. Night came, and with it came a boding
      silence, fraught with terror.
    

      
 
    

      At half-past five o'clock, after the closing of the gates, Delaherche, in
      his eager thirst for news, now that he knew the battle lost, had again
      returned to the Sous-Prefecture. He hung persistently about the approaches
      of the janitor's lodge, tramping up and down the paved courtyard with
      feverish impatience, for more than three hours, watching for every officer
      who came up and interviewing him, and thus it was that he had become
      acquainted, piecemeal, with the rapid series of events; how General de
      Wimpffen had tendered his resignation and then withdrawn it upon the
      peremptory refusal of Generals Ducrot and Douay to append their names to
      the articles of capitulation, how the Emperor had thereupon invested the
      General with full authority to proceed to the Prussian headquarters and
      treat for the surrender of the vanquished army on the most advantageous
      terms obtainable; how, finally, a council of war had been convened with
      the object of deciding what possibilities there were of further
      protracting the struggle successfully by the defense of the fortress.
      During the deliberations of this council, which consisted of some twenty
      officers of the highest rank and seemed to him as if it would never end,
      the cloth manufacturer climbed the steps of the huge public building at
      least twenty times, and at last his curiosity was gratified by beholding
      General de Wimpffen emerge, very red in the face and his eyelids puffed
      and swollen with tears, behind whom came two other generals and a colonel.
      They leaped into the saddle and rode away over the Pont de Meuse. The
      bells had struck eight some time before; the inevitable capitulation was
      now to be accomplished, from which there was no escape.
    

      Delaherche, somewhat relieved in mind by what he had heard and seen,
      remembered that it was a long time since he had tasted food and resolved
      to turn his steps homeward, but the terrific crowd that had collected
      since he first came made him pause in dismay. It is no exaggeration to say
      that the streets and squares were so congested, so thronged, so densely
      packed with horses, men, and guns, that one would have declared the
      closely compacted mass could only have been squeezed and wedged in there
      thus by the effort of some gigantic mechanism. While the ramparts were
      occupied by the bivouacs of such regiments as had fallen back in good
      order, the city had been invaded and submerged by an angry, surging,
      desperate flood, the broken remnants of the various corps, stragglers and
      fugitives from all arms of the service, and the dammed-up tide made it
      impossible for one to stir foot or hand. The wheels of the guns, of the
      caissons, and the innumerable vehicles of every description, had
      interlocked and were tangled in confusion worse confounded, while the poor
      horses, flogged unmercifully by their drivers and pulled, now in this
      direction, now in that, could only dance in their bewilderment, unable to
      move a step either forward or back. And the men, deaf to reproaches and
      threats alike, forced their way into the houses, devoured whatever they
      could lay hands on, flung themselves down to sleep wherever they could
      find a vacant space, it might be in the best bedroom or in the cellar.
      Many of them had fallen in doorways, where they blocked the vestibule;
      others, without strength to go farther, lay extended on the sidewalks and
      slept the sleep of death, not even rising when some by-passer trod on them
      and bruised an arm or leg, preferring the risk of death to the fatigue of
      changing their location.
    

      These things all helped to make Delaherche still more keenly conscious of
      the necessity of immediate capitulation. There were some quarters in which
      numerous caissons were packed so close together that they were in contact,
      and a single Prussian shell alighting on one of them must inevitably have
      exploded them all, entailing the immediate destruction of the city by
      conflagration. Then, too, what could be accomplished with such an
      assemblage of miserable wretches, deprived of all their powers, mental and
      physical, by reason of their long-endured privations, and destitute of
      either ammunition or subsistence? Merely to clear the streets and reduce
      them to a condition of something like order would require a whole day. The
      place was entirely incapable of defense, having neither guns nor
      provisions.
    

      These were the considerations that had prevailed at the council among
      those more reasonable officers who, in the midst of their grief and sorrow
      for their country and the army, had retained a clear and undistorted view
      of the situation as it was; and the more hot-headed among them, those who
      cried with emotion that it was impossible for an army to surrender thus,
      had been compelled to bow their head upon their breast in silence and
      admit that they had no practicable scheme to offer whereby the conflict
      might be recommenced on the morrow.
    

      In the Place Turenne and Place du Rivage, Delaherche succeeded with the
      greatest difficulty in working his way through the press. As he passed the
      Hotel of the Golden Cross a sorrowful vision greeted his eyes, that of the
      generals seated in the dining room, gloomily silent, around the empty
      board; there was nothing left to eat in the house, not even bread. General
      Bourgain-Desfeuilles, however, who had been storming and vociferating in
      the kitchen, appeared to have found something, for he suddenly held his
      peace and ran away swiftly up the stairs, holding in his hands a large
      paper parcel of a greasy aspect. Such was the crowd assembled there, to
      stare through the lighted windows upon the guests assembled around that
      famine-stricken table d'hote, that the manufacturer was obliged to
      make vigorous play with his elbows, and was frequently driven back by some
      wild rush of the mob and lost all the distance, and more, that he had just
      gained. In the Grande Rue, however, the obstacles became actually
      impassable, and there was a moment when he was inclined to give up in
      despair; a complete battery seemed to have been driven in there and the
      guns and materiel piled, pell-mell, on top of one another. Deciding
      finally to take the bull by the horns, he leaped to the axle of a piece
      and so pursued his way, jumping from wheel to wheel, straddling the guns,
      at the imminent risk of breaking his legs, if not his neck. Afterward it
      was some horses that blocked his way, and he made himself lowly and
      stooped, creeping among the feet and underneath the bellies of the sorry
      jades, who were ready to die of inanition, like their masters. Then, when
      after a quarter of an hour's laborious effort he reached the junction of
      the Rue Saint-Michel, he was terrified at the prospect of the dangers and
      obstacles that he had still to face, and which, instead of diminishing,
      seemed to be increasing, and made up his mind to turn down the street
      above mentioned, which would take him into the Rue des Laboureurs; he
      hoped that by taking these usually quiet and deserted passages he should
      escape the crowd and reach his home in safety. As luck would have it he
      almost directly came upon a house of ill-fame to which a band of drunken
      soldiers were in process of laying siege, and considering that a stray
      shot, should one reach him in the fracas, would be equally as unpleasant
      as one intended for him, he made haste to retrace his steps. Resolving to
      have done with it he pushed on to the end of the Grande Rue, now gaining a
      few feet by balancing himself, rope-walker fashion, along the pole of some
      vehicle, now climbing over an army wagon that barred his way. At the Place
      du College he was carried along—bodily on the shoulders of the
      throng for a space of thirty paces; he fell to the ground, narrowly
      escaped a set of fractured ribs, and saved himself only by the proximity
      of a friendly iron railing, by the bars of which he pulled himself to his
      feet. And when at last he reached the Rue Maqua, inundated with
      perspiration, his clothing almost torn from his back, he found that he had
      been more than an hour in coming from the Sous-Prefecture, a distance
      which in ordinary times he was accustomed to accomplish in less than five
      minutes.
    

      Major Bouroche, with the intention of keeping the ambulance and garden
      from being overrun with intruders, had caused two sentries to be mounted
      at the door. This measure was a source of great comfort to Delaherche, who
      had begun to contemplate the possibilities of his house being subjected to
      pillage. The sight of the ambulance in the garden, dimly lighted by a few
      candles and exhaling its fetid, feverish emanations, caused him a fresh
      constriction of the heart; then, stumbling over the body of a soldier who
      was stretched in slumber on the stone pavement of the walk, he supposed
      him to be one of the fugitives who had managed to find his way in there
      from outside, until, calling to mind the 7th corps treasure that had been
      deposited there and the sentry who had been set over it, he saw how
      matters stood: the poor fellow, stationed there since early morning, had
      been overlooked by his superiors and had succumbed to his fatigue.
      Besides, the house seemed quite deserted; the ground floor was black as
      Egypt, and the doors stood wide open. The servants were doubtless all at
      the ambulance, for there was no one in the kitchen, which was faintly
      illuminated by the light of a wretched little smoky lamp. He lit a candle
      and ascended the main staircase very softly, in order not to awaken his
      wife and mother, whom he had begged to go to bed early after a day where
      the stress, both mental and physical, had been so intense.
    

      On entering his study, however, he beheld a sight that caused his eyes to
      dilate with astonishment. Upon the sofa on which Captain Beaudoin had
      snatched a few hours' repose the day before a soldier lay outstretched;
      and he could not understand the reason of it until he had looked and
      recognized young Maurice Levasseur, Henriette's brother. He was still more
      surprised when, on turning his head, he perceived, stretched on the floor
      and wrapped in a bed quilt, another soldier, that Jean, whom he had seen
      for a moment just before the battle. It was plain that the poor fellows,
      in their distress and fatigue after the conflict, not knowing where else
      to bestow themselves, had sought refuge there; they were crushed,
      annihilated, like dead men. He did not linger there, but pushed on to his
      wife's chamber, which was the next room on the corridor. A lamp was
      burning on a table in a corner; the profound silence seemed to shudder.
      Gilberte had thrown herself crosswise on the bed, fully dressed, doubtless
      in order to be prepared for any catastrophe, and was sleeping peacefully,
      while, seated on a chair at her side with her head declined and resting
      lightly on the very edge of the mattress, Henriette was also slumbering,
      with a fitful, agitated sleep, while big tears welled up beneath her
      swollen eyelids. He contemplated them silently for a moment, strongly
      tempted to awake and question the young woman in order to ascertain what
      she knew. Had she succeeded in reaching Bazeilles? and why was it that she
      was back there? Perhaps she would be able to give him some tidings of his
      dyehouse were he to ask her? A feeling of compassion stayed him, however,
      and he was about to leave the room when his mother, ghost-like, appeared
      at the threshold of the open door and beckoned him to follow her.
    

      As they were passing through the dining room he expressed his surprise.
    

      “What, have you not been abed to-night?”
     

      She shook her head, then said below her breath:
    

      “I cannot sleep; I have been sitting in an easy-chair beside the colonel.
      He is very feverish; he awakes at every instant, almost, and then plies me
      with questions. I don't know how to answer them. Come in and see him,
      you.”
     

      M. de Vineuil had fallen asleep again. His long face, now brightly red,
      barred by the sweeping mustache that fell across it like a snowy
      avalanche, was scarce distinguishable on the pillow. Mme. Delaherche had
      placed a newspaper before the lamp and that corner of the room was lost in
      semi-darkness, while all the intensity of the bright lamplight was
      concentrated on her where she sat, uncompromisingly erect, in her
      fauteuil, her hands crossed before her in her lap, her vague eyes bent on
      space, in sorrowful reverie.
    

      “I think he must have heard you,” she murmured; “he is awaking again.”
     

      It was so; the colonel, without moving his head, had reopened his eyes and
      bent them on Delaherche. He recognized him, and immediately asked in a
      voice that his exhausted condition made tremulous:
    

      “It is all over, is it not? We have capitulated.”
     

      The manufacturer, who encountered the look his mother cast on him at that
      moment, was on the point of equivocating. But what good would it do? A
      look of discouragement passed across his face.
    

      “What else remained to do? A single glance at the streets of the city
      would convince you. General de Wimpffen has just set out for Prussian
      general headquarters to discuss conditions.”
     

      M. de Vineuil's eyes closed again, his long frame was shaken with a
      protracted shiver of supremely bitter grief, and this deep, long-drawn
      moan escaped his lips:
    

      “Ah! merciful God, merciful God!” And without opening his eyes he went on
      in faltering, broken accents: “Ah! the plan I spoke of yesterday—they
      should have adopted it. Yes, I knew the country; I spoke of my
      apprehensions to the general, but even him they would not listen to.
      Occupy all the heights up there to the north, from Saint-Menges to
      Fleigneux, with your army looking down on and commanding Sedan, able at
      any time to move on Vrigne-aux-Bois, mistress of Saint-Albert's pass—and
      there we are; our positions are impregnable, the Mezieres road is under
      our control—”
     

      His speech became more confused as he proceeded; he stammered a few more
      unintelligible words, while the vision of the battle that had been born of
      his fever little by little grew blurred and dim and at last was effaced by
      slumber. He slept, and in his sleep perhaps the honest officer's dreams
      were dreams of victory.
    

      “Does the major speak favorably of his case?” Delaherche inquired in a
      whisper.
    

      Madame Delaherche nodded affirmatively.
    

      “Those wounds in the foot are dreadful things, though,” he went on. “I
      suppose he is likely to be laid up for a long time, isn't he?”
     

      She made him no answer this time, as if all her being, all her faculties
      were concentrated on contemplating the great calamity of their defeat. She
      was of another age; she was a survivor of that strong old race of frontier
      burghers who defended their towns so valiantly in the good days gone by.
      The clean-cut lines of her stern, set face, with its fleshless,
      uncompromising nose and thin lips, which the brilliant light of the lamp
      brought out in high relief against the darkness of the room, told the full
      extent of her stifled rage and grief and the wound sustained by her
      antique patriotism, the revolt of which refused even to let her sleep.
    

      About that time Delaherche became conscious of a sensation of isolation,
      accompanied by a most uncomfortable feeling of physical distress. His
      hunger was asserting itself again, a griping, intolerable hunger, and he
      persuaded himself that it was debility alone that was thus robbing him of
      courage and resolution. He tiptoed softly from the room and, with his
      candle, again made his way down to the kitchen, but the spectacle he
      witnessed there was even still more cheerless; the range cold and
      fireless, the closets empty, the floor strewn with a disorderly litter of
      towels, napkins, dish-clouts and women's aprons; as if the hurricane of
      disaster had swept through that place as well, bearing away on its wings
      all the charm and cheer that appertain naturally to the things we eat and
      drink. At first he thought he was not going to discover so much as a
      crust, what was left over of the bread having all found its way to the
      ambulance in the form of soup. At last, however, in the dark corner of a
      cupboard he came across the remainder of the beans from yesterday's
      dinner, where they had been forgotten, and ate them. He accomplished his
      luxurious repast without the formality of sitting down, without the
      accompaniment of salt and butter, for which he did not care to trouble
      himself to ascend to the floor above, desirous only to get away as
      speedily as possible from that dismal kitchen, where the blinking, smoking
      little lamp perfumed the air with fumes of petroleum.
    

      It was not much more than ten o'clock, and Delaherche had no other
      occupation than to speculate on the various probabilities connected with
      the signing of the capitulation. A persistent apprehension haunted him; a
      dread lest the conflict might be renewed, and the horrible thought of what
      the consequences must be in such an event, of which he could not speak,
      but which rested on his bosom like an incubus. When he had reascended to
      his study, where he found Maurice and Jean in exactly the same position he
      had left them in, it was all in vain that he settled himself comfortably
      in his favorite easy-chair; sleep would not come to him; just as he was on
      the point of losing himself the crash of a shell would arouse him with a
      great start. It was the frightful cannonade of the day, the echoes of
      which were still ringing in his ears; and he would listen breathlessly for
      a moment, then sit and shudder at the equally appalling silence by which
      he was now surrounded. As he could not sleep he preferred to move about;
      he wandered aimlessly among the rooms, taking care to avoid that in which
      his mother was sitting by the colonel's bedside, for the steady gaze with
      which she watched him as he tramped nervously up and down had finally had
      the effect of disconcerting him. Twice he returned to see if Henriette had
      not awakened, and he paused an instant to glance at his wife's pretty
      face, so calmly peaceful, on which seemed to be flitting something like
      the faint shadow of a smile. Then, knowing not what to do, he went
      downstairs again, came back, moved about from room to room, until it was
      nearly two in the morning, wearying his ears with trying to decipher some
      meaning in the sounds that came to him from without.
    

      This condition of affairs could not last. Delaherche resolved to return
      once more to the Sous-Prefecture, feeling assured that all rest would be
      quite out of the question for him so long as his ignorance continued. A
      feeling of despair seized him, however, when he went downstairs and looked
      out upon the densely crowded street, where the confusion seemed to be
      worse than ever; never would he have the strength to fight his way to the
      Place Turenne and back again through obstacles the mere memory of which
      caused every bone in his body to ache again. And he was mentally
      discussing matters, when who should come up but Major Bouroche, panting,
      perspiring, and swearing.
    

      “Tonnerre de Dieu! I wonder if my head's on my shoulders or not!”
     

      He had been obliged to visit the Hotel de Ville to see the mayor about his
      supply of chloroform, and urge him to issue a requisition for a quantity,
      for he had many operations to perform, his stock of the drug was
      exhausted, and he was afraid, he said, that he should be compelled to
      carve up the poor devils without putting them to sleep.
    

      “Well?” inquired Delaherche.
    

      “Well, they can't even tell whether the apothecaries have any or not!”
     

      But the manufacturer was thinking of other things than chloroform. “No,
      no,” he continued. “Have they brought matters to a conclusion yet? Have
      they signed the agreement with the Prussians?”
     

      The major made a gesture of impatience. “There is nothing concluded,” he
      cried. “It appears that those scoundrels are making demands out of all
      reason. Ah, well; let 'em commence afresh, then, and we'll all leave our
      bones here. That will be best!”
     

      Delaherche's face grew very pale as he listened. “But are you quite sure
      these things are so?”
     

      “I was told them by those fellows of the municipal council, who are in
      permanent session at the city hall. An officer had been dispatched from
      the Sous-Prefecture to lay the whole affair before them.”
     

      And he went on to furnish additional details. The interview had taken
      place at the Chateau de Bellevue, near Donchery, and the participants were
      General de Wimpffen, General von Moltke, and Bismarck. A stern and
      inflexible man was that von Moltke, a terrible man to deal with! He began
      by demonstrating that he was perfectly acquainted with the hopeless
      situation of the French army; it was destitute of ammunition and
      subsistence, demoralization and disorder pervaded its ranks, it was
      utterly powerless to break the iron circle by which it was girt about;
      while on the other hand the German armies occupied commanding positions
      from which they could lay the city in ashes in two hours. Coldly,
      unimpassionedly, he stated his terms: the entire French army to surrender
      arms and baggage and be treated as prisoners of war. Bismarck took no part
      in the discussion beyond giving the general his support, occasionally
      showing his teeth, like a big mastiff, inclined to be pacific on the
      whole, but quite ready to rend and tear should there be occasion for it.
      General de Wimpffen in reply protested with all the force he had at his
      command against these conditions, the most severe that ever were imposed
      on a vanquished army. He spoke of his personal grief and ill-fortune, the
      bravery of the troops, the danger there was in driving a proud nation to
      extremity; for three hours he spoke with all the energy and eloquence of
      despair, alternately threatening and entreating, demanding that they
      should content themselves with interning their prisoners in France, or
      even in Algeria; and in the end the only concession granted was, that the
      officers might retain their swords, and those among them who should enter
      into a solemn arrangement, attested by a written parole, to serve no more
      during the war, might return to their homes. Finally, the armistice to be
      prolonged until the next morning at ten o'clock; if at that time the terms
      had not been accepted, the Prussian batteries would reopen fire and the
      city would be burned.
    

      “That's stupid!” exclaimed Delaherche; “they have no right to burn a city
      that has done nothing to deserve it!”
     

      The major gave him still further food for anxiety by adding that some
      officers whom he had met at the Hotel de l'Europe were talking of making a
      sortie en masse just before daylight. An extremely excited state of
      feeling had prevailed since the tenor of the German demands had become
      known, and measures the most extravagant were proposed and discussed. No
      one seemed to be deterred by the consideration that it would be
      dishonorable to break the truce, taking advantage of the darkness and
      giving the enemy no notification, and the wildest, most visionary schemes
      were offered; they would resume the march on Carignan, hewing their way
      through the Bavarians, which they could do in the black night; they would
      recapture the plateau of Illy by a surprise; they would raise the blockade
      of the Mezieres road, or, by a determined, simultaneous rush, would force
      the German lines and throw themselves into Belgium. Others there were,
      indeed, who, feeling the hopelessness of their position, said nothing;
      they would have accepted any terms, signed any paper, with a glad cry of
      relief, simply to have the affair ended and done with.
    

      “Good-night!” Bouroche said in conclusion. “I am going to try to sleep a
      couple of hours; I need it badly.”
     

      When left by himself Delaherche could hardly breathe. What, could it be
      true that they were going to fight again, were going to burn and raze
      Sedan! It was certainly to be, soon as the morrow's sun should be high
      enough upon the hills to light the horror of the sacrifice. And once again
      he almost unconsciously climbed the steep ladder that led to the roofs and
      found himself standing among the chimneys, at the edge of the narrow
      terrace that overlooked the city; but at that hour of the night the
      darkness was intense and he could distinguish absolutely nothing amid the
      swirling waves of the Cimmerian sea that lay beneath him. Then the
      buildings of the factory below were the first objects which, one by one,
      disentangled themselves from the shadows and stood out before his vision
      in indistinct masses, which he had no difficulty in recognizing: the
      engine-house, the shops, the drying rooms, the storehouses, and when he
      reflected that within twenty-four hours there would remain of that
      imposing block of buildings, his fortune and his pride, naught save
      charred timbers and crumbling walls, he overflowed with pity for himself.
      He raised his glance thence once more to the horizon, and sent it
      traveling in a circuit around that profound, mysterious veil of blackness
      behind which lay slumbering the menace of the morrow. To the south, in the
      direction of Bazeilles, a few quivering little flames that rose fitfully
      on the air told where had been the site of the unhappy village, while
      toward the north the farmhouse in the wood of la Garenne, that had been
      fired late in the afternoon, was burning still, and the trees about were
      dyed of a deep red with the ruddy blaze. Beyond the intermittent flashing
      of those two baleful fires no light to be seen; the brooding silence
      unbroken by any sound save those half-heard mutterings that pass through
      the air like harbingers of evil; about them, everywhere, the unfathomable
      abyss, dead and lifeless. Off there in the distance, very far away,
      perhaps, perhaps upon the ramparts, was a sound of someone weeping. It was
      all in vain that he strained his eyes to pierce the veil, to see something
      of Liry, la Marfee, the batteries of Frenois, and Wadelincourt, that
      encircling belt of bronze monsters of which he could instinctively feel
      the presence there, with their outstretched necks and yawning, ravenous
      muzzles. And as he recalled his glance and let it fall upon the city that
      lay around and beneath him, he heard its frightened breathing. It was not
      alone the unquiet slumbers of the soldiers who had fallen in the streets,
      the blending of inarticulate sounds produced by that gathering of guns,
      men, and horses; what he fancied he could distinguish was the insomnia,
      the alarmed watchfulness of his bourgeois neighbors, who, no more than he,
      could sleep, quivering with feverish terrors, awaiting anxiously the
      coming of the day. They all must be aware that the capitulation had not
      been signed, and were all counting the hours, quaking at the thought that
      should it not be signed the sole resource left them would be to go down
      into their cellars and wait for their own walls to tumble in on them and
      crush the life from their bodies. The voice of one in sore straits came
      up, it seemed to him, from the Rue des Voyards, shouting: “Help! murder!”
       amid the clash of arms. He bent over the terrace to look, then remained
      aloft there in the murky thickness of the night where there was not a star
      to cheer him, wrapped in such an ecstasy of terror that the hairs of his
      body stood erect.
    

      Below-stairs, at early daybreak, Maurice awoke upon his sofa. He was sore
      and stiff as if he had been racked; he did not stir, but lay looking
      listlessly at the windows, which gradually grew white under the light of a
      cloudy dawn. The hateful memories of the day before all came back to him
      with that distinctness that characterizes the impressions of our first
      waking, how they had fought, fled, surrendered. It all rose before his
      vision, down to the very least detail, and he brooded with horrible
      anguish on the defeat, whose reproachful echoes seemed to penetrate to the
      inmost fibers of his being, as if he felt that all the responsibility of
      it was his. And he went on to reason on the cause of the evil, analyzing
      himself, reverting to his old habit of bitter and unavailing
      self-reproach. He would have felt so brave, so glorious had victory
      remained with them! And now, in defeat, weak and nervous as a woman, he
      once again gave way to one of those overwhelming fits of despair in which
      the entire world, seemed to him to be foundering. Nothing was left them;
      the end of France was come. His frame was shaken by a storm of sobs, he
      wept hot tears, and joining his hands, the prayers of his childhood rose
      to his lips in stammering accents.
    

      “O God! take me unto Thee! O God! take unto Thyself all those who are
      weary and heavy-laden!”
     

      Jean, lying on the floor wrapped in his bed-quilt, began to show some
      signs of life. Finally, astonished at what he heard, he arose to a sitting
      posture.
    

      “What is the matter, youngster? Are you ill?” Then, with a glimmering
      perception of how matters stood, he adopted a more paternal tone. “Come,
      tell me what the matter is. You must not let yourself be worried by such a
      little thing as this, you know.”
     

      “Ah!” exclaimed Maurice, “it is all up with us, va! we are
      Prussians now, and we may as well make up our mind to it.”
     

      As the peasant, with the hard-headedness of the uneducated, expressed
      surprise to hear him talk thus, he endeavored to make it clear to him
      that, the race being degenerate and exhausted, it must disappear and make
      room for a newer and more vigorous strain. But the other, with an
      obstinate shake of the head, would not listen to the explanation.
    

      “What! would you try to make me believe that my bit of land is no longer
      mine? that I would permit the Prussians to take it from me while I am
      alive and my two arms are left to me? Come, come!”
     

      Then painfully, in such terms as he could command, he went on to tell how
      affairs looked to him. They had received an all-fired good basting, that
      was sure as sure could be! but they were not all dead yet, he didn't
      believe; there were some left, and those would suffice to rebuild the
      house if they only behaved themselves, working hard and not drinking up
      what they earned. When a family has trouble, if its members work and put
      by a little something, they will pull through, in spite of all the bad
      luck in the world. And further, it is not such a bad thing to get a good
      cuffing once in a way; it sets one thinking. And, great heavens! if a man
      has something rotten about him, if he has gangrene in his arms or legs
      that is spreading all the time, isn't it better to take a hatchet and lop
      them off rather than die as he would from cholera?
    

      “All up, all up! Ah, no, no! no, no!” he repeated several times. “It is
      not all up with me, I know very well it is not.”
     

      And notwithstanding his seedy condition and demoralized appearance, his
      hair all matted and pasted to his head by the blood that had flowed from
      his wound, he drew himself up defiantly, animated by a keen desire to
      live, to take up the tools of his trade or put his hand to the plow, in
      order, to use his own expression, to “rebuild the house.” He was of the
      old soil where reason and obstinacy grow side by side, of the land of toil
      and thrift.
    

      “All the same, though,” he continued, “I am sorry for the Emperor. Affairs
      seemed to be going on well; the farmers were getting a good price for
      their grain. But surely it was bad judgment on his part to allow himself
      to become involved in this business!”
     

      Maurice, who was still in “the blues,” spoke regretfully: “Ah, the
      Emperor! I always liked him in my heart, in spite of my republican ideas.
      Yes, I had it in the blood, on account of my grandfather, I suppose. And
      now that that limb is rotten and we shall have to lop it off, what is
      going to become of us?”
     

      His eyes began to wander, and his voice and manner evinced such distress
      that Jean became alarmed and was about to rise and go to him, when
      Henriette came into the room. She had just awakened on hearing the sound
      of voices in the room adjoining hers. The pale light of a cloudy morning
      now illuminated the apartment.
    

      “You come just in time to give him a scolding,” he said, with an
      affectation of liveliness. “He is not a good boy this morning.”
     

      But the sight of his sister's pale, sad face and the recollection of her
      affliction had had a salutary effect on Maurice by determining a sudden
      crisis of tenderness. He opened his arms and took her to his bosom, and
      when she rested her head upon his shoulder, when he held her locked in a
      close embrace, a feeling of great gentleness pervaded him and they mingled
      their tears.
    

      “Ah, my poor, poor darling, why have I not more strength and courage to
      console you! for my sorrows are as nothing compared with yours. That good,
      faithful Weiss, the husband who loved you so fondly! What will become of
      you? You have always been the victim; always, and never a murmur from your
      lips. Think of the sorrow I have already caused you, and who can say that
      I shall not cause you still more in the future!”
     

      She was silencing him, placing her hand upon his mouth, when Delaherche
      came into the room, beside himself with indignation. While still on the
      terrace he had been seized by one of those uncontrollable nervous fits of
      hunger that are aggravated by fatigue, and had descended to the kitchen in
      quest of something warm to drink, where he had found, keeping company with
      his cook, a relative of hers, a carpenter of Bazeilles, whom she was in
      the act of treating to a bowl of hot wine. This person, who had been one
      of the last to leave the place while the conflagrations were at their
      height, had told him that his dyehouse was utterly destroyed, nothing left
      of it but a heap of ruins.
    

      “The robbers, the thieves! Would you have believed it, hein?” he
      stammered, addressing Jean and Maurice. “There is no hope left; they mean
      to burn Sedan this morning as they burned Bazeilles yesterday. I'm ruined,
      I'm ruined!” The scar that Henriette bore on her forehead attracted his
      attention, and he remembered that he had not spoken to her yet. “It is
      true, you went there, after all; you got that wound—Ah! poor Weiss!”
     

      And seeing by the young woman's tears that she was acquainted with her
      husband's fate, he abruptly blurted out the horrible bit of news that the
      carpenter had communicated to him among the rest.
    

      “Poor Weiss! it seems they burned him. Yes, after shooting all the
      civilians who were caught with arms in their hands, they threw their
      bodies into the flames of a burning house and poured petroleum over them.”
     

      Henriette was horror-stricken as she listened. Her tears burst forth, her
      frame was shaken by her sobs. My God, my God, not even the poor comfort of
      going to claim her dear dead and give him decent sepulture; his ashes were
      to be scattered by the winds of heaven! Maurice had again clasped her in
      his arms and spoke to her endearingly, calling her his poor Cinderella,
      beseeching her not to take the matter so to heart, a brave woman as she
      was.
    

      After a time, during which no word was spoken, Delaherche, who had been
      standing at the window watching the growing day, suddenly turned and
      addressed the two soldiers:
    

      “By the way, I was near forgetting. What I came up here to tell you is
      this: down in the courtyard, in the shed where the treasure chests were
      deposited, there is an officer who is about to distribute the money among
      the men, so as to keep the Prussians from getting it. You had better go
      down, for a little money may be useful to you, that is, provided we are
      all alive a few hours hence.”
     

      The advice was good, and Maurice and Jean acted on it, having first
      prevailed on Henriette to take her brother's place on the sofa. If she
      could not go to sleep again, she would at least be securing some repose.
      As for Delaherche, he passed through the adjoining chamber, where Gilberte
      with her tranquil, pretty face was slumbering still as soundly as a child,
      neither the sound of conversation nor even Henriette's sobs having availed
      to make her change her position. From there he went to the apartment where
      his mother was watching at Colonel de Vineuil's bedside, and thrust his
      head through the door; the old lady was asleep in her fauteuil, while the
      colonel, his eyes closed, was like a corpse. He opened them to their full
      extent and asked:
    

      “Well, it's all over, isn't it?”
     

      Irritated by the question, which detained him at the very moment when he
      thought he should be able to slip away unobserved, Delaherche gave a
      wrathful look and murmured, sinking his voice:
    

      “Oh, yes, all over! until it begins again! There is nothing signed.”
     

      The colonel went on in a voice scarcely higher than a whisper; delirium
      was setting in.
    

      “Merciful God, let me die before the end! I do not hear the guns. Why have
      they ceased firing? Up there at Saint-Menges, at Fleigneux, we have
      command of all the roads; should the Prussians dare turn Sedan and attack
      us, we will drive them into the Meuse. The city is there, an
      insurmountable obstacle between us and them; our positions, too, are the
      stronger. Forward! the 7th corps will lead, the 12th will protect the
      retreat—”
     

      And his fingers kept drumming on the counterpane with a measured movement,
      as if keeping time with the trot of the charger he was riding in his
      vision. Gradually the motion became slower and slower as his words became
      more indistinct and he sank off into slumber. It ceased, and he lay
      motionless and still, as if the breath had left his body.
    

      “Lie still and rest,” Delaherche whispered; “when I have news I will
      return.”
     

      Then, having first assured himself that he had not disturbed his mother's
      slumber, he slipped away and disappeared.
    

      Jean and Maurice, on descending to the shed in the courtyard, had found
      there an officer of the pay department, seated on a common kitchen chair
      behind a little unpainted pine table, who, without pen, ink, or paper,
      without taking receipts or indulging in formalities of any kind, was
      dispensing fortunes. He simply stuck his hand into the open mouth of the
      bags filled with bright gold pieces, and as the sergeants of the 7th corps
      passed in line before him he filled their kepis, never counting
      what he bestowed with such rapid liberality. The understanding was that
      the sergeants were subsequently to divide what they received with the
      surviving men of their half-sections. Each of them received his portion
      awkwardly, as if it had been a ration of meat or coffee, then stalked off
      in an embarrassed, self-conscious sort of way, transferring the contents
      of the kepi to his trousers' pockets so as not to display his
      wealth to the world at large. And not a word was spoken; there was not a
      sound to be heard but the crystalline chink and rattle of the coin as it
      was received by those poor devils, dumfounded to see the responsibility of
      such riches thrust on them when there was not a place in the city where
      they could purchase a loaf of bread or a quart of wine.
    

      When Jean and Maurice appeared before him the officer, who was holding
      outstretched his hand filled, as usual, with louis, drew it back.
    

      “Neither of you fellows is a sergeant. No one except sergeants is entitled
      to receive the money.” Then, in haste to be done with his task, he changed
      his mind: “Never mind, though; here, you corporal, take this. Step lively,
      now. Next man!”
     

      And he dropped the gold coins into the kepi that Jean held out to
      him. The latter, oppressed by the magnitude of the amount, nearly six
      hundred francs, insisted that Maurice should take one-half. No one could
      say what might happen; they might be parted from each other.
    

      They made the division in the garden, before the ambulance, and when they
      had concluded their financial business they entered, having recognized on
      the straw near the entrance the drummer-boy of their company, Bastian, a
      fat, good-natured little fellow, who had had the ill-luck to receive a
      spent ball in the groin about five o'clock the day before, when the battle
      was ended. He had been dying by inches for the last twelve hours.
    

      In the dim, white light of morning, at that hour of awakening, the sight
      of the ambulance sent a chill of horror through them. Three more patients
      had died during the night, without anyone being aware of it, and the
      attendants were hurriedly bearing away the corpses in order to make room
      for others. Those who had been operated on the day before opened wide
      their eyes in their somnolent, semi-conscious state, and looked with dazed
      astonishment on that vast dormitory of suffering, where the victims of the
      knife, only half-slaughtered, rested on their straw. It was in vain that
      some attempts had been made the night before to clean up the room after
      the bloody work of the operations; there were great splotches of blood on
      the ill-swept floor; in a bucket of water a great sponge was floating,
      stained with red, for all the world like a human brain; a hand, its
      fingers crushed and broken, had been overlooked and lay on the floor of
      the shed. It was the parings and trimmings of the human butcher shop, the
      horrible waste and refuse that ensues upon a day of slaughter, viewed in
      the cold, raw light of dawn.
    

      Bouroche, who, after a few hours of repose, had already resumed his
      duties, stopped in front of the wounded drummer-boy, Bastian, then passed
      on with an imperceptible shrug of his shoulders. A hopeless case; nothing
      to be done. The lad had opened his eyes, however, and emerging from the
      comatose state in which he had been lying, was eagerly watching a sergeant
      who, his kepi filled with gold in his hand, had come into the room
      to see if there were any of his men among those poor wretches. He found
      two, and to each of them gave twenty francs. Other sergeants came in, and
      the gold began to fall in showers upon the straw, among the dying men.
      Bastian, who had managed to raise himself, stretched out his two hands,
      even then shaking in the final agony.
    

      “Don't forget me! don't forget me!”
     

      The sergeant would have passed on and gone his way, as Bouroche had done.
      What good could money do there? Then yielding to a kindly impulse, he
      threw some coins, never stopping to count them, into the poor hands that
      were already cold.
    

      “Don't forget me! don't forget me!”
     

      Bastian fell backward on his straw. For a long time he groped with
      stiffening fingers for the elusive gold, which seemed to avoid him. And
      thus he died.
    

      “The gentleman has blown his candle out; good-night!” said a little,
      black, wizened zouave, who occupied the next bed. “It's vexatious, when
      one has the wherewithal to pay for wetting his whistle!”
     

      He had his left foot done up in splints. Nevertheless he managed to raise
      himself on his knees and elbows and in this posture crawl over to the dead
      man, whom he relieved of all his money, forcing open his hands, rummaging
      among his clothing and the folds of his capote. When he got back to his
      place, noticing that he was observed, he simply said:
    

      “There's no use letting the stuff be wasted, is there?”
     

      Maurice, sick at heart in that atmosphere of human distress and suffering,
      had long since dragged Jean away. As they passed out through the shed
      where the operations were performed they saw Bouroche preparing to
      amputate the leg of a poor little man of twenty, without chloroform, he
      having been unable to obtain a further supply of the anaesthetic. And they
      fled, running, so as not to hear the poor boy's shrieks.
    

      Delaherche, who came in from the street just then, beckoned to them and
      shouted:
    

      “Come upstairs, come, quick! we are going to have breakfast. The cook has
      succeeded in procuring some milk, and it is well she did, for we are all
      in great need of something to warm our stomachs.” And notwithstanding his
      efforts to do so, he could not entirely repress his delight and
      exultation. With a radiant countenance he added, lowering his voice: “It
      is all right this time. General de Wimpffen has set out again for the
      German headquarters to sign the capitulation.”
     

      Ah, how much those words meant to him, what comfort there was in them,
      what relief! his horrid nightmare dispelled, his property saved from
      destruction, his daily life to be resumed, under changed conditions, it is
      true, but still it was to go on, it was not to cease! It was little Rose
      who had told him of the occurrences of the morning at the Sous-Prefecture;
      the girl had come hastening through the streets, now somewhat less choked
      than they had been, to obtain a supply of bread from an aunt of hers who
      kept a baker's shop in the quarter; it was striking nine o'clock. As early
      as eight General de Wimpffen had convened another council of war,
      consisting of more than thirty generals, to whom he related the results
      that had been reached so far, the hard conditions imposed by the
      victorious foe, and his own fruitless efforts to secure a mitigation of
      them. His emotion was such that his hands shook like a leaf, his eyes were
      suffused with tears. He was still addressing the assemblage when a colonel
      of the German staff presented himself, on behalf of General von Moltke, to
      remind them that, unless a decision were arrived at by ten o'clock, their
      guns would open fire on the city of Sedan. With this horrible alternative
      before them the council could do nothing save authorize the general to
      proceed once more to the Chateau of Bellevue and accept the terms of the
      victors. He must have accomplished his mission by that time, and the
      entire French army were prisoners of war.
    

      When she had concluded her narrative Rose launched out into a detailed
      account of the tremendous excitement the tidings had produced in the city.
      At the Sous-Prefecture she had seen officers tear the epaulettes from
      their shoulders, weeping meanwhile like children. Cavalrymen had thrown
      their sabers from the Pont de Meuse into the river; an entire regiment of
      cuirassiers had passed, each man tossing his blade over the parapet and
      sorrowfully watching the water close over it. In the streets many soldiers
      grasped their muskets by the barrel and smashed them against a wall, while
      there were artillerymen who removed the mechanism from the mitrailleuses
      and flung it into the sewer. Some there were who buried or burned the
      regimental standards. In the Place Turenne an old sergeant climbed upon a
      gate-post and harangued the throng as if he had suddenly taken leave of
      his senses, reviling the leaders, stigmatizing them as poltroons and
      cowards. Others seemed as if dazed, shedding big tears in silence, and
      others also, it must be confessed (and it is probable that they were in
      the majority), betrayed by their laughing eyes and pleased expression the
      satisfaction they felt at the change in affairs. There was an end to their
      suffering at last; they were prisoners of war, they could not be obliged
      to fight any more! For so many days they had been distressed by those
      long, weary marches, with never food enough to satisfy their appetite! And
      then, too, they were the weaker; what use was there in fighting? If their
      chiefs had betrayed them, had sold them to the enemy, so much the better;
      it would be the sooner ended! It was such a delicious thing to think of,
      that they were to have white bread to eat, were to sleep between sheets!
    

      As Delaherche was about to enter the dining room in company with Maurice
      and Jean, his mother called to him from above.
    

      “Come up here, please; I am anxious about the colonel.”
     

      M. de Vineuil, with wide-open eyes, was talking rapidly and excitedly of
      the subject that filled his bewildered brain.
    

      “The Prussians have cut us off from Mezieres, but what matters it! See,
      they have outmarched us and got possession of the plain of Donchery; soon
      they will be up with the wood of la Falizette and flank us there, while
      more of them are coming up along the valley of the Givonne. The frontier
      is behind us; let us kill as many of them as we can and cross it at a
      bound. Yesterday, yes, that is what I would have advised—”
     

      At that moment his burning eyes lighted on Delaherche. He recognized him;
      the sight seemed to sober him and dispel the hallucination under which he
      was laboring, and coming back to the terrible reality, he asked for the
      third time:
    

      “It is all over, is it not?”
     

      The manufacturer explosively blurted out the expression of his
      satisfaction; he could not restrain it.
    

      “Ah, yes, God be praised! it is all over, completely over. The
      capitulation must be signed by this time.”
     

      The colonel raised himself at a bound to a sitting posture,
      notwithstanding his bandaged foot; he took his sword from the chair by the
      bedside where it lay and made an attempt to break it, but his hands
      trembled too violently, and the blade slipped from his fingers.
    

      “Look out! he will cut himself!” Delaherche cried in alarm. “Take that
      thing away from him; it is dangerous!”
     

      Mme. Delaherche took possession of the sword. With a feeling of
      compassionate respect for the poor colonel's grief and despair she did not
      conceal it, as her son bade her do, but with a single vigorous effort
      snapped it across her knee, with a strength of which she herself would
      never have supposed her poor old hands capable. The colonel laid himself
      down again, casting a look of extreme gentleness upon his old friend, who
      went back to her chair and seated herself in her usual rigid attitude.
    

      In the dining room the cook had meantime served bowls of hot coffee and
      milk for the entire party. Henriette and Gilberte had awakened, the
      latter, completely restored by her long and refreshing slumber, with
      bright eyes and smiling face; she embraced most tenderly her friend, whom
      she pitied, she said, from the bottom of her heart. Maurice seated himself
      beside his sister, while Jean, who was unused to polite society, but could
      not decline the invitation that was extended to him, was Delaherche's
      right-hand neighbor. It was Mme. Delaherche's custom not to come to the
      table with the family; a servant carried her a bowl, which she drank while
      sitting by the colonel. The party of five, however, who sat down together,
      although they commenced their meal in silence, soon became cheerful and
      talkative. Why should they not rejoice and be glad to find themselves
      there, safe and sound, with food before them to satisfy their hunger, when
      the country round about was covered with thousands upon thousands of poor
      starving wretches? In the cool, spacious dining room the snow-white
      tablecloth was a delight to the eye and the steaming cafe au lait
      seemed delicious.
    

      They conversed, Delaherche, who had recovered his assurance and was again
      the wealthy manufacturer, the condescending patron courting popularity,
      severe only toward those who failed to succeed, spoke of Napoleon III.,
      whose face as he saw it last continued to haunt his memory. He addressed
      himself to Jean, having that simple-minded young man as his neighbor.
      “Yes, sir, the Emperor has deceived me, and I don't hesitate to say so.
      His henchmen may put in the plea of mitigating circumstances, but it won't
      go down, sir; he is evidently the first, the only cause of our
      misfortunes.”
     

      He had quite forgotten that only a few months before he had been an ardent
      Bonapartist and had labored to ensure the success of the plebiscite, and
      now he who was henceforth to be known as the Man of Sedan was not even
      worthy to be pitied; he ascribed to him every known iniquity.
    

      “A man of no capacity, as everyone is now compelled to admit; but let that
      pass, I say nothing of that. A visionary, a theorist, an unbalanced mind,
      with whom affairs seemed to succeed as long as he had luck on his side.
      And there's no use, don't you see, sir, in attempting to work on our
      sympathies and excite our commiseration by telling us that he was
      deceived, that the opposition refused him the necessary grants of men and
      money. It is he who has deceived us, he whose crimes and blunders have
      landed us in the horrible muddle where we are.”
     

      Maurice, who preferred to say nothing on the subject, could not help
      smiling, while Jean, embarrassed by the political turn the conversation
      had taken and fearful lest he might make some ill-timed remark, simply
      replied:
    

      “They say he is a brave man, though.”
     

      But those few words, modestly expressed, fairly made Delaherche jump. All
      his past fear and alarm, all the mental anguish he had suffered, burst
      from his lips in a cry of concentrated passion, closely allied to hatred.
    

      “A brave man, forsooth; and what does that amount to! Are you aware, sir,
      that my factory was struck three times by Prussian shells, and that it is
      no fault of the Emperor's that it was not burned! Are you aware that I, I
      shall lose a hundred thousand francs by this idiotic business! No, no;
      France invaded, pillaged, and laid waste, our industries compelled to shut
      down, our commerce ruined; it is a little too much, I tell you! One brave
      man like that is quite sufficient; may the Lord preserve us from any more
      of them! He is down in the blood and mire, and there let him remain!”
     

      And he made a forcible gesture with his closed fist as if thrusting down
      and holding under the water some poor wretch who was struggling to save
      himself, then finished his coffee, smacking his lips like a true gourmand.
      Gilberte waited on Henriette as if she had been a child, laughing a little
      involuntary laugh when the latter made some exhibition of
      absent-mindedness. And when at last the coffee had all been drunk they
      still lingered on in the peaceful quiet of the great cool dining room.
    

      And at that same hour Napoleon III. was in the weaver's lowly cottage on
      the Donchery road. As early as five o'clock in the morning he had insisted
      on leaving the Sous-Prefecture; he felt ill at ease in Sedan, which was at
      once a menace and a reproach to him, and moreover he thought he might, in
      some measure, alleviate the sufferings of his tender heart by obtaining
      more favorable terms for his unfortunate army. His object was to have a
      personal interview with the King of Prussia. He had taken his place in a
      hired caleche and been driven along the broad highway, with its row of
      lofty poplars on either side, and this first stage of his journey into
      exile, accomplished in the chill air of early dawn, must have reminded him
      forcibly of the grandeur that had been his and that he was putting behind
      him forever. It was on this road that he had his encounter with Bismarck,
      who came hurrying to meet him in an old cap and coarse, greased boots,
      with the sole object of keeping him occupied and preventing him from
      seeing the King until the capitulation should have been signed. The King
      was still at Vendresse, some nine miles away. Where was he to go? What
      roof would afford him shelter while he waited? In his own country, so far
      away, the Palace of the Tuileries had disappeared from his sight,
      swallowed up in the bosom of a storm-cloud, and he was never to see it
      more. Sedan seemed already to have receded into the distance, leagues and
      leagues, and to be parted from him by a river of blood. In France there
      were no longer imperial chateaus, nor official residences, nor even a
      chimney-nook in the house of the humblest functionary, where he would have
      dared to enter and claim hospitality. And it was in the house of the
      weaver that he determined to seek shelter, the squalid cottage that stood
      close to the roadside, with its scanty kitchen-garden inclosed by a hedge
      and its front of a single story with little forbidding windows. The room
      above-stairs was simply whitewashed and had a tiled floor; the only
      furniture was a common pine table and two straw-bottomed chairs. He spent
      two hours there, at first in company with Bismarck, who smiled to hear him
      speak of generosity, after that alone in silent misery, flattening his
      ashy face against the panes, taking his last look at French soil and at
      the Meuse, winding in and out, so beautiful, among the broad fertile
      fields.
    

      Then the next day and the days that came after were other wretched stages
      of that journey; the Chateau of Bellevue, a pretty bourgeois retreat
      overlooking the river, where he rested that night, where he shed tears
      after his interview with King William; the sorrowful departure, that most
      miserable flight in a hired caleche over remote roads to the north of the
      city, which he avoided, not caring to face the wrath of the vanquished
      troops and the starving citizens, making a wide circuit over cross-roads
      by Floing, Fleigneux, and Illy and crossing the stream on a bridge of
      boats, laid down by the Prussians at Iges; the tragic encounter, the story
      of which has been so often told, that occurred on the corpse-cumbered
      plateau of Illy: the miserable Emperor, whose state was such that his
      horse could not be allowed to trot, had sunk under some more than usually
      violent attack of his complaint, mechanically smoking, perhaps, his
      everlasting cigarette, when a band of haggard, dusty, blood-stained
      prisoners, who were being conducted from Fleigneux to Sedan, were forced
      to leave the road to let the carriage pass and stood watching it from the
      ditch; those who were at the head of the line merely eyed him in silence;
      presently a hoarse, sullen murmur began to make itself heard, and finally,
      as the caleche proceeded down the line, the men burst out with a storm of
      yells and cat-calls, shaking their fists and calling down maledictions on
      the head of him who had been their ruler. After that came the interminable
      journey across the battlefield, as far as Givonne, amid scenes of havoc
      and devastation, amid the dead, who lay with staring eyes upturned that
      seemed to be full of menace; came, too, the bare, dreary fields, the great
      silent forest, then the frontier, running along the summit of a ridge,
      marked only by a stone, facing a wooden post that seemed ready to fall,
      and beyond the soil of Belgium, the end of all, with its road bordered
      with gloomy hemlocks descending sharply into the narrow valley.
    

      And that first night of exile, that he spent at a common inn, the Hotel de
      la Poste at Bouillon, what a night it was! When the Emperor showed himself
      at his window in deference to the throng of French refugees and
      sight-seers that filled the place, he was greeted with a storm of hisses
      and hostile murmurs. The apartment assigned him, the three windows of
      which opened on the public square and on the Semoy, was the typical tawdry
      bedroom of the provincial inn with its conventional furnishings: the
      chairs covered with crimson damask, the mahogany armoire a glace,
      and on the mantel the imitation bronze clock, flanked by a pair of conch
      shells and vases of artificial flowers under glass covers. On either side
      of the door was a little single bed, to one of which the wearied
      aide-de-camp betook himself at nine o'clock and was immediately wrapped in
      soundest slumber. On the other the Emperor, to whom the god of sleep was
      less benignant, tossed almost the whole night through, and if he arose to
      try to quiet his excited nerves by walking, the sole distraction that his
      eyes encountered was a pair of engravings that were hung to right and left
      of the chimney, one depicting Rouget de Lisle singing the Marseillaise,
      the other a crude representation of the Last Judgment, the dead rising
      from their graves at the sound of the Archangel's trump, the resurrection
      of the victims of the battlefield, about to appear before their God to
      bear witness against their rulers.
    

      The imperial baggage train, cause in its day of so much scandal, had been
      left behind at Sedan, where it rested in ignominious hiding behind the
      Sous-Prefet's lilac bushes. It puzzled the authorities somewhat to devise
      means for ridding themselves of what was to them a bete noire, for
      getting it away from the city unseen by the famishing multitude, upon whom
      the sight of its flaunting splendor would have produced much the same
      effect that a red rag does on a maddened bull. They waited until there
      came an unusually dark night, when horses, carriages, and baggage-wagons,
      with their silver stew-pans, plate, linen, and baskets of fine wines, all
      trooped out of Sedan in deepest mystery and shaped their course for
      Belgium, noiselessly, without beat of drum, over the least frequented
      roads like a thief stealing away in the night.
    

      
 

 
    

      All the long, long day of the battle Silvine, up on Remilly hill, where
      Father Fouchard's little farm was situated, but her heart and soul absent
      with Honore amid the dangers of the conflict, never once took her eyes
      from off Sedan, where the guns were roaring. The following day, moreover,
      her anxiety was even greater still, being increased by her inability to
      obtain any definite tidings, for the Prussians who were guarding the roads
      in the vicinity refused to answer questions, as much from reasons of
      policy as because they knew but very little themselves. The bright sun of
      the day before was no longer visible, and showers had fallen, making the
      valley look less cheerful than usual in the wan light.
    

      Toward evening Father Fouchard, who was also haunted by a sensation of
      uneasiness in the midst of his studied taciturnity, was standing on his
      doorstep reflecting on the probable outcome of events. His son had no
      place in his thoughts, but he was speculating how he best might convert
      the misfortunes of others into fortune for himself, and as he revolved
      these considerations in his mind he noticed a tall, strapping young
      fellow, dressed in the peasant's blouse, who had been strolling up and
      down the road for the last minute or so, looking as if he did not know
      what to do with himself. His astonishment on recognizing him was so great
      that he called him aloud by name, notwithstanding that three Prussians
      happened to be passing at the time.
    

      “Why, Prosper! Is that you?”
     

      The chasseur d'Afrique imposed silence on him with an emphatic gesture;
      then, coming closer, he said in an undertone:
    

      “Yes, it is I. I have had enough of fighting for nothing, and I cut my
      lucky. Say, Father Fouchard, you don't happen to be in need of a laborer
      on your farm, do you?”
     

      All the old man's prudence came back to him in a twinkling. He was
      looking for someone to help him, but it would be better not to say so at
      once.
    

      “A lad on the farm? faith, no—not just now. Come in, though, all the
      same, and have a glass. I shan't leave you out on the road when you're in
      trouble, that's sure.”
     

      Silvine, in the kitchen, was setting the pot of soup on the fire, while
      little Charlot was hanging by her skirts, frolicking and laughing. She did
      not recognize Prosper at first, although they had formerly served together
      in the same household, and it was not until she came in, bringing a bottle
      of wine and two glasses, that she looked him squarely in the face. She
      uttered a cry of joy and surprise; her sole thought was of Honore.
    

      “Ah, you were there, weren't you? Is Honore all right?”
     

      Prosper's answer was ready to slip from his tongue; he hesitated. For the
      last two days he had been living in a dream, among a rapid succession of
      strange, ill-defined events which left behind them no precise memory, as a
      man starts, half-awakened, from a slumber peopled with fantastic visions.
      It was true, doubtless, he believed he had seen Honore lying upon a
      cannon, dead, but he would not have cared to swear to it; what use is
      there in afflicting people when one is not certain?
    

      “Honore,” he murmured, “I don't know, I couldn't say.”
     

      She continued to press him with her questions, looking at him steadily.
    

      “You did not see him, then?”
     

      He waved his hands before him with a slow, uncertain motion and an
      expressive shake of the head.
    

      “How can you expect one to remember! There were such lots of things, such
      lots of things. Look you, of all that d——-d battle, if I was
      to die for it this minute, I could not tell you that much—no, not
      even the place where I was. I believe men get to be no better than idiots,
      'pon my word I do!” And tossing off a glass of wine, he sat gloomily
      silent, his vacant eyes turned inward on the dark recesses of his memory.
      “All that I remember is that it was beginning to be dark when I recovered
      consciousness. I went down while we were charging, and then the sun was
      very high. I must have been lying there for hours, my right leg caught
      under poor old Zephyr, who had received a piece of shell in the middle of
      his chest. There was nothing to laugh at in my position, I can tell you;
      the dead comrades lying around me in piles, not a living soul in sight,
      and the certainty that I should have to kick the bucket too unless someone
      came to put me on my legs again. Gently, gently, I tried to free my leg,
      but it was no use; Zephyr's weight must have been fully up to that of the
      five hundred thousand devils. He was warm still. I patted him, I spoke to
      him, saying all the pretty things I could think of, and here's a thing, do
      you see, that I shall never forget as long as I live: he opened his eyes
      and made an effort to raise his poor old head, which was resting on the
      ground beside my own. Then we had a talk together: 'Poor old fellow,' says
      I, 'I don't want to say a word to hurt your feelings, but you must want to
      see me croak with you, you hold me down so hard.' Of course he didn't say
      he did; he couldn't, but for all that I could read in his great sorrowful
      eyes how bad he felt to have to part with me. And I can't say how the
      thing happened, whether he intended it or whether it was part of the death
      struggle, but all at once he gave himself a great shake that sent him
      rolling away to one side. I was enabled to get on my feet once more, but
      ah! in what a pickle; my leg was swollen and heavy as a leg of lead. Never
      mind, I took Zephyr's head in my arms and kept on talking to him, telling
      him all the kind thoughts I had in my heart, that he was a good horse,
      that I loved him dearly, that I should never forget him. He listened to
      me, he seemed to be so pleased! Then he had another long convulsion, and
      so he died, with his big vacant eyes fixed on me till the last. It is very
      strange, though, and I don't suppose anyone will believe me; still, it is
      the simple truth that great, big tears were standing in his eyes. Poor old
      Zephyr, he cried just like a man—”
     

      At this point Prosper's emotion got the better of him; tears choked his
      utterance and he was obliged to break off. He gulped down another glass of
      wine and went on with his narrative in disjointed, incomplete sentences.
      It kept growing darker and darker, until there was only a narrow streak of
      red light on the horizon at the verge of the battlefield; the shadows of
      the dead horses seemed to be projected across the plain to an infinite
      distance. The pain and stiffness in his leg kept him from moving; he must
      have remained for a long time beside Zephyr. Then, with his fears as an
      incentive, he had managed to get on his feet and hobble away; it was an
      imperative necessity to him not to be alone, to find comrades who would
      share his fears with him and make them less. Thus from every nook and
      corner of the battlefield, from hedges and ditches and clumps of bushes,
      the wounded who had been left behind dragged themselves painfully in
      search of companionship, forming when possible little bands of four or
      five, finding it less hard to agonize and die in the company of their
      fellow-beings. In the wood of la Garenne Prosper fell in with two men of
      the 43d regiment; they were not wounded, but had burrowed in the
      underbrush like rabbits, waiting for the coming of the night. When they
      learned that he was familiar with the roads they communicated to him their
      plan, which was to traverse the woods under cover of the darkness and make
      their escape into Belgium. At first he declined to share their
      undertaking, for he would have preferred to proceed direct to Remilly,
      where he was certain to find a refuge, but where was he to obtain the
      blouse and trousers that he required as a disguise? to say nothing of the
      impracticability of getting past the numerous Prussian pickets and
      outposts that filled the valley all the way from la Garenne to Remilly. He
      therefore ended by consenting to act as guide to the two comrades. His leg
      was less stiff than it had been, and they were so fortunate as to secure a
      loaf of bread at a farmhouse. Nine o'clock was striking from the church of
      a village in the distance as they resumed their way. The only point where
      they encountered any danger worth mentioning was at la Chapelle, where
      they fell directly into the midst of a Prussian advanced post before they
      were aware of it; the enemy flew to arms and blazed away into the
      darkness, while they, throwing themselves on the ground and alternately
      crawling and running until the fire slackened, ultimately regained the
      shelter of the trees. After that they kept to the woods, observing the
      utmost vigilance. At a bend in the road, they crept up behind an out-lying
      picket and, leaping on his back, buried a knife in his throat. Then the
      road was free before them and they no longer had to observe precaution;
      they went ahead, laughing and whistling. It was about three in the morning
      when they reached a little Belgian village, where they knocked up a worthy
      farmer, who at once opened his barn to them; they snuggled among the hay
      and slept soundly until morning.
    

      The sun was high in the heavens when Prosper awoke. As he opened his eyes
      and looked about him, while the two comrades were still snoring, he beheld
      their entertainer engaged in hitching a horse to a great carriole loaded
      with bread, rice, coffee, sugar, and all sorts of eatables, the whole
      concealed under sacks of charcoal, and a little questioning elicited from
      the good man the fact that he had two married daughters living at
      Raucourt, in France, whom the passage of the Bavarian troops had left
      entirely destitute, and that the provisions in the carriole were intended
      for them. He had procured that very morning the safe-conduct that was
      required for the journey. Prosper was immediately seized by an
      uncontrollable desire to take a seat in that carriole and return to the
      country that he loved so and for which his heart was yearning with such a
      violent nostalgia. It was perfectly simple; the farmer would have to pass
      through Remilly to reach Raucourt; he would alight there. The matter was
      arranged in three minutes; he obtained a loan of the longed-for blouse and
      trousers, and the farmer gave out, wherever they stopped, that he was his
      servant; so that about six o'clock he got down in front of the church, not
      having been stopped more than two or three times by the German outposts.
    

      They were all silent for a while, then: “No, I had enough of it!” said
      Prosper. “If they had but set us at work that amounted to something, as
      out there in Africa! but this going up the hill only to come down again,
      the feeling that one is of no earthly use to anyone, that is no kind of a
      life at all. And then I should be lonely, now that poor Zephyr is dead;
      all that is left me to do is to go to work on a farm. That will be better
      than living among the Prussians as a prisoner, don't you think so? You
      have horses, Father Fouchard; try me, and see whether or not I will love
      them and take good care of them.”
     

      The old fellow's eyes gleamed, but he touched glasses once more with the
      other and concluded the arrangement without any evidence of eagerness.
    

      “Very well; I wish to be of service to you as far as lies in my power; I
      will take you. As regards the question of wages, though, you must not
      speak of it until the war is over, for really I am not in need of anyone
      and the times are too hard.”
     

      Silvine, who had remained seated with Charlot on her lap, had never once
      taken her eyes from Prosper's face. When she saw him rise with the
      intention of going to the stable and making immediate acquaintance with
      its four-footed inhabitants, she again asked:
    

      “Then you say you did not see Honore?”
     

      The question repeated thus abruptly made him start, as if it had suddenly
      cast a flood of light in upon an obscure corner of his memory. He
      hesitated for a little, but finally came to a decision and spoke.
    

      “See here, I did not wish to grieve you just now, but I don't believe
      Honore will ever come back.”
     

      “Never come back—what do you mean?”
     

      “Yes, I believe that the Prussians did his business for him. I saw him
      lying across his gun, his head erect, with a great wound just beneath the
      heart.”
     

      There was silence in the room. Silvine's pallor was frightful to behold,
      while Father Fouchard displayed his interest in the narrative by replacing
      upon the table his glass, into which he had just poured what wine remained
      in the bottle.
    

      “Are you quite certain?” she asked in a choking voice.
    

      “Dame! as certain as one can be of a thing he has seen with his own
      two eyes. It was on a little hillock, with three trees in a group right
      beside it; it seems to me I could go to the spot blindfolded.”
     

      If it was true she had nothing left to live for. That lad who had been so
      good to her, who had forgiven her her fault, had plighted his troth and
      was to marry her when he came home at the end of the campaign! and they
      had robbed her of him, they had murdered him, and he was lying out there
      on the battlefield with a wound under the heart! She had never known how
      strong her love for him had been, and now the thought that she was to see
      him no more, that he who was hers was hers no longer, aroused her almost
      to a pitch of madness and made her forget her usual tranquil resignation.
      She set Charlot roughly down upon the floor, exclaiming:
    

      “Good! I shall not believe that story until I see the evidence of it,
      until I see it with my own eyes. Since you know the spot you shall conduct
      me to it. And if it is true, if we find him, we will bring him home with
      us.”
     

      Her tears allowed her to say no more; she bowed her head upon the table,
      her frame convulsed by long-drawn, tumultuous sobs that shook her from
      head to foot, while the child, not knowing what to make of such unusual
      treatment at his mother's hands, also commenced to weep violently. She
      caught him up and pressed him to her heart, with distracted, stammering
      words:
    

      “My poor child! my poor child!”
     

      Consternation was depicted on old Fouchard's face. Appearances
      notwithstanding, he did love his son, after a fashion of his own. Memories
      of the past came back to him, of days long vanished, when his wife was
      still living and Honore was a boy at school, and two big tears appeared in
      his small red eyes and trickled down his old leathery cheeks. He had not
      wept before in more than ten years. In the end he grew angry at the
      thought of that son who was his and upon whom he was never to set eyes
      again; he rapped out an oath or two.
    

      “Nom de Dieu! it is provoking all the same, to have only one boy,
      and that he should be taken from you!”
     

      When their agitation had in a measure subsided, however, Fouchard was
      annoyed that Silvine still continued to talk of going to search for
      Honore's body out there on the battlefield. She made no further noisy
      demonstration, but harbored her purpose with the dogged silence of
      despair, and he failed to recognize in her the docile, obedient servant
      who was wont to perform her daily tasks without a murmur; her great,
      submissive eyes, in which lay the chief beauty of her face, had assumed an
      expression of stern determination, while beneath her thick brown hair her
      cheeks and brow wore a pallor that was like death. She had torn off the
      red kerchief that was knotted about her neck, and was entirely in black,
      like a widow in her weeds. It was all in vain that he tried to impress on
      her the difficulties of the undertaking, the dangers she would be
      subjected to, the little hope there was of recovering the corpse; she did
      not even take the trouble to answer him, and he saw clearly that unless he
      seconded her in her plan she would start out alone and do some unwise
      thing, and this aspect of the case worried him on account of the
      complications that might arise between him and the Prussian authorities.
      He therefore finally decided to go and lay the matter before the mayor of
      Remilly, who was a kind of distant cousin of his, and they two between
      them concocted a story: Silvine was to pass as the actual widow of Honore,
      Prosper became her brother, so that the Bavarian colonel, who had his
      quarters in the Hotel of the Maltese Cross down in the lower part of the
      village, made no difficulty about granting a pass which authorized the
      brother and sister to bring home the body of the husband, provided they
      could find it. By this time it was night; the only concession that could
      be obtained from the young woman was that she would delay starting on her
      expedition until morning.
    

      When morning came old Fouchard could not be prevailed on to allow one of
      his horses to be taken, fearing he might never set eyes on it again. What
      assurance had he that the Prussians would not confiscate the entire
      equipage? At last he consented, though with very bad grace, to loan her
      the donkey, a little gray animal, and his cart, which, though small, would
      be large enough to hold a dead man. He gave minute instructions to
      Prosper, who had had a good night's sleep, but was anxious and thoughtful
      at the prospect of the expedition now that, being rested and refreshed, he
      attempted to remember something of the battle. At the last moment Silvine
      went and took the counterpane from her own bed, folding and spreading it
      on the floor of the cart. Just as she was about to start she came running
      back to embrace Charlot.
    

      “I entrust him to your care, Father Fouchard; keep an eye on him and see
      that he doesn't get hold of the matches.”
     

      “Yes, yes; never fear!”
     

      They were late in getting off; it was near seven o'clock when the little
      procession, the donkey, hanging his head and drawing the narrow cart,
      leading, descended the steep hill of Remilly. It had rained heavily during
      the night, and the roads were become rivers of mud; great lowering clouds
      hung in the heavens, imparting an air of cheerless desolation to the
      scene.
    

      Prosper, wishing to save all the distance he could, had determined on
      taking the route that lay through the city of Sedan, but before they
      reached Pont-Maugis a Prussian outpost halted the cart and held it for
      over an hour, and finally, after their pass had been referred, one after
      another, to four or five officials, they were told they might resume their
      journey, but only on condition of taking the longer, roundabout route by
      way of Bazeilles, to do which they would have to turn into a cross-road on
      their left. No reason was assigned; their object was probably to avoid
      adding to the crowd that encumbered the streets of the city. When Silvine
      crossed the Meuse by the railroad bridge, that ill-starred bridge that the
      French had failed to destroy and which, moreover, had been the cause of
      such slaughter among the Bavarians, she beheld the corpse of an
      artilleryman floating lazily down with the sluggish current. It caught
      among some rushes near the bank, hung there a moment, then swung clear and
      started afresh on its downward way.
    

      Bazeilles, through which they passed from end to end at a slow walk,
      afforded a spectacle of ruin and desolation, the worst that war can
      perpetrate when it sweeps with devastating force, like a cyclone, through
      a land. The dead had been removed; there was not a single corpse to be
      seen in the village streets, and the rain had washed away the blood; pools
      of reddish water were to be seen here and there in the roadway, with
      repulsive, frowzy-looking debris, matted masses that one could not help
      associating in his mind with human hair. But what shocked and saddened one
      more than all the rest was the ruin that was visible everywhere; that
      charming village, only three days before so bright and smiling, with its
      pretty houses standing in their well-kept gardens, now razed, demolished,
      annihilated, nothing left of all its beauties save a few smoke-stained
      walls. The church was burning still, a huge pyre of smoldering beams and
      girders, whence streamed continually upward a column of dense black smoke
      that, spreading in the heavens, overshadowed the city like a gigantic
      funeral pall. Entire streets had been swept away, not a house left on
      either side, nor any trace that houses had ever been there, save the
      calcined stone-work lying in the gutter in a pasty mess of soot and ashes,
      the whole lost in the viscid, ink-black mud of the thoroughfare. Where
      streets intersected the corner houses were razed down to their
      foundations, as if they had been carried away bodily by the fiery blast
      that blew there. Others had suffered less; one in particular, owing to
      some chance, had escaped almost without injury, while its neighbors on
      either hand, literally torn to pieces by the iron hail, were like gaunt
      skeletons. An unbearable stench was everywhere, noticeable, the nauseating
      odor that follows a great fire, aggravated by the penetrating smell of
      petroleum, that had been used without stint upon floors and walls. Then,
      too, there was the pitiful, mute spectacle of the household goods that the
      people had endeavored to save, the poor furniture that had been thrown
      from windows and smashed upon the sidewalk, crazy tables with broken legs,
      presses with cloven sides and split doors, linen, also, torn and soiled,
      that was trodden under foot; all the sorry crumbs, the unconsidered
      trifles of the pillage, of which the destruction was being completed by
      the dissolving rain. Through the breach in a shattered house-front a clock
      was visible, securely fastened high up on the wall above the mantel-shelf,
      that had miraculously escaped intact.
    

      “The beasts! the pigs!” growled Prosper, whose blood, though he was no
      longer a soldier, ran hot at the sight of such atrocities.
    

      He doubled his fists, and Silvine, who was white as a ghost, had to exert
      the influence of her glance to calm him every time they encountered a
      sentry on their way. The Bavarians had posted sentinels near all the
      houses that were still burning, and it seemed as if those men, with loaded
      muskets and fixed bayonets, were guarding the fires in order that the
      flames might finish their work. They drove away the mere sightseers who
      strolled about in the vicinity, and the persons who had an interest there
      as well, employing first a menacing gesture, and in case that was not
      sufficient, uttering a single brief, guttural word of command. A young
      woman, her hair streaming about her shoulders, her gown plastered with
      mud, persisted in hanging about the smoking ruins of a little house, of
      which she desired to search the hot ashes, notwithstanding the prohibition
      of the sentry. The report ran that the woman's little baby had been burned
      with the house. And all at once, as the Bavarian was roughly thrusting her
      aside with his heavy hand, she turned on him, vomiting in his face all her
      despair and rage, lashing him with taunts and insults that were redolent
      of the gutter, with obscene words which likely afforded her some
      consolation in her grief and distress. He could not have understood her,
      for he drew back a pace or two, eying her with apprehension. Three
      comrades came running up and relieved him of the fury, whom they led away
      screaming at the top of her voice. Before the ruins of another house a man
      and two little girls, all three so weary and miserable that they could not
      stand, lay on the bare ground, sobbing as if their hearts would break;
      they had seen their little all go up in smoke and flame, and had no place
      to go, no place to lay their head. But just then a patrol went by,
      dispersing the knots of idlers, and the street again assumed its deserted
      aspect, peopled only by the stern, sullen sentries, vigilant to see that
      their iniquitous instructions were enforced.
    

      “The beasts! the pigs!” Prosper repeated in a stifled voice. “How I should
      like, oh! how I should like to kill a few of them!”
     

      Silvine again made him be silent. She shuddered. A dog, shut up in a
      carriage-house that the flames had spared and forgotten there for the last
      two days, kept up an incessant, continuous howling, in a key so
      inexpressibly mournful that a brooding horror seemed to pervade the low,
      leaden sky, from which a drizzling rain had now begun to fall. They were
      then just abreast of the park of Montivilliers, and there they witnessed a
      most horrible sight. Three great covered carts, those carts that pass
      along the streets in the early morning before it is light and collect the
      city's filth and garbage, stood there in a row, loaded with corpses; and
      now, instead of refuse, they were being filled with dead, stopping
      wherever there was a body to be loaded, then going on again with the heavy
      rumbling of their wheels to make another stop further on, threading
      Bazeilles in its every nook and corner until their hideous cargo
      overflowed. They were waiting now upon the public road to be driven to the
      place of their discharge, the neighboring potter's field. Feet were seen
      projecting from the mass into the air. A head, half-severed from its
      trunk, hung over the side of the vehicle. When the three lumbering vans
      started again, swaying and jolting over the inequalities of the road, a
      long, white hand was hanging outward from one of them; the hand caught
      upon the wheel, and little by little the iron tire destroyed it, eating
      through skin and flesh clean down to the bones.
    

      By the time they reached Balan the rain had ceased, and Prosper prevailed
      on Silvine to eat a bit of the bread he had had the foresight to bring
      with them. When they were near Sedan, however, they were brought to a halt
      by another Prussian post, and this time the consequences threatened to be
      serious; the officer stormed at them, and even refused to restore their
      pass, which he declared, in excellent French, to be a forgery. Acting on
      his orders some soldiers had run the donkey and the little cart under a
      shed. What were they to do? were they to be forced to abandon their
      undertaking? Silvine was in despair, when all at once she thought of M.
      Dubreuil, Father Fouchard's relative, with whom she had some slight
      acquaintance and whose place, the Hermitage, was only a few hundred yards
      distant, on the summit of the eminence that overlooked the faubourg.
      Perhaps he might have some influence with the military, seeing that he was
      a citizen of the place. As they were allowed their freedom, conditionally
      upon abandoning their equipage, she left the donkey and cart under the
      shed and bade Prosper accompany her. They ascended the hill on a run,
      found the gate of the Hermitage standing wide open, and on turning into
      the avenue of secular elms beheld a spectacle that filled them with
      amazement.
    

      “The devil!” said Prosper; “there are a lot of fellows who seem to be
      taking things easy!”
     

      On the fine-crushed gravel of the terrace, at the bottom of the steps that
      led to the house, was a merry company. Arranged in order around a
      marble-topped table were a sofa and some easy-chairs in sky-blue satin,
      forming a sort of fantastic open-air drawing-room, which must have been
      thoroughly soaked by the rain of the preceding day. Two zouaves, seated in
      a lounging attitude at either end of the sofa, seemed to be laughing
      boisterously. A little infantryman, who occupied one of the fauteuils, his
      head bent forward, was apparently holding his sides to keep them from
      splitting. Three others were seated in a negligent pose, their elbows
      resting on the arms of their chairs, while a chasseur had his hand
      extended as if in the act of taking a glass from the table. They had
      evidently discovered the location of the cellar, and were enjoying
      themselves.
    

      “But how in the world do they happen to be here?” murmured Prosper, whose
      stupefaction increased as he drew nearer to them. “Have the rascals
      forgotten there are Prussians about?”
     

      But Silvine, whose eyes had dilated far beyond their natural size,
      suddenly uttered an exclamation of horror. The soldiers never moved hand
      or foot; they were stone dead. The two zouaves were stiff and cold; they
      both had had the face shot away, the nose was gone, the eyes were torn
      from their sockets. If there appeared to be a laugh on the face of him who
      was holding his sides, it was because a bullet had cut a great furrow
      through the lower portion of his countenance, smashing all his teeth. The
      spectacle was an unimaginably horrible one, those poor wretches laughing
      and conversing in their attitude of manikins, with glassy eyes and open
      mouths, when Death had laid his icy hand on them and they were never more
      to know the warmth and motion of life. Had they dragged themselves, still
      living, to that place, so as to die in one another's company? or was it
      not rather a ghastly prank of the Prussians, who had collected the bodies
      and placed them in a circle about the table, out of derision for the
      traditional gayety of the French nation?
    

      “It's a queer start, though, all the same,” muttered Prosper, whose face
      was very pale. And casting a look at the other dead who lay scattered
      about the avenue, under the trees and on the turf, some thirty brave
      fellows, among them Lieutenant Rochas, riddled with wounds and surrounded
      still by the shreds of the flag, he added seriously and with great
      respect: “There must have been some very pretty fighting about here! I
      don't much believe we shall find the bourgeois for whom you are looking.”
     

      Silvine entered the house, the doors and windows of which had been
      battered in and afforded admission to the damp, cold air from without. It
      was clear enough that there was no one there; the masters must have taken
      their departure before the battle. She continued to prosecute her search,
      however, and had entered the kitchen, when she gave utterance to another
      cry of terror. Beneath the sink were two bodies, fast locked in each
      other's arms in mortal embrace, one of them a zouave, a handsome,
      brown-bearded man, the other a huge Prussian with red hair. The teeth of
      the former were set in the latter's cheek, their arms, stiff in death, had
      not relaxed their terrible hug, binding the pair with such a bond of
      everlasting hate and fury that ultimately it was found necessary to bury
      them in a common grave.
    

      Then Prosper made haste to lead Silvine away, since they could accomplish
      nothing in that house where Death had taken up his abode, and upon their
      return, despairing, to the post where the donkey and cart had been
      detained, it so chanced that they found, in company with the officer who
      had treated them so harshly, a general on his way to visit the
      battlefield. This gentleman requested to be allowed to see the pass, which
      he examined attentively and restored to Silvine; then, with an expression
      of compassion on his face, he gave directions that the poor woman should
      have her donkey returned to her and be allowed to go in quest of her
      husband's body. Stopping only long enough to thank her benefactor, she and
      her companion, with the cart trundling after them, set out for the Fond de
      Givonne, obedient to the instructions that were again given them not to
      pass through Sedan.
    

      After that they bent their course to the left in order to reach the
      plateau of Illy by the road that crosses the wood of la Garenne, but here
      again they were delayed; twenty times they nearly abandoned all hope of
      getting through the wood, so numerous were the obstacles they encountered.
      At every step their way was barred by huge trees that had been laid low by
      the artillery fire, stretched on the ground like mighty giants fallen. It
      was the part of the forest that had suffered so severely from the
      cannonade, where the projectiles had plowed their way through the secular
      growths as they might have done through a square of the Old Guard, meeting
      in either case with the sturdy resistance of veterans. Everywhere the
      earth was cumbered with gigantic trunks, stripped of their leaves and
      branches, pierced and mangled, even as mortals might have been, and this
      wholesale destruction, the sight of the poor limbs, maimed, slaughtered
      and weeping tears of sap, inspired the beholder with the sickening horror
      of a human battlefield. There were corpses of men there, too; soldiers,
      who had stood fraternally by the trees and fallen with them. A lieutenant,
      from whose mouth exuded a bloody froth, had been tearing up the grass by
      handfuls in his agony, and his stiffened fingers were still buried in the
      ground. A little farther on a captain, prone on his stomach, had raised
      his head to vent his anguish in yells and screams, and death had caught
      and fixed him in that strange attitude. Others seemed to be slumbering
      among the herbage, while a zouave; whose blue sash had taken fire, had had
      his hair and beard burned completely from his head. And several times it
      happened, as they traversed those woodland glades, that they had to remove
      a body from the path before the donkey could proceed on his way. Presently
      they came to a little valley, where the sights of horror abruptly ended.
      The battle had evidently turned at this point and expended its force in
      another direction, leaving this peaceful nook of nature untouched. The
      trees were all uninjured; the carpet of velvety moss was undefiled by
      blood. A little brook coursed merrily among the duckweed, the path that
      ran along its bank was shaded by tall beeches. A penetrating charm, a
      tender peacefulness pervaded the solitude of the lovely spot, where the
      living waters gave up their coolness to the air and the leaves whispered
      softly in the silence.
    

      Prosper had stopped to let the donkey drink from the stream.
    

      “Ah, how pleasant it is here!” he involuntarily exclaimed in his delight.
    

      Silvine cast an astonished look about her, as if wondering how it was that
      she, too, could feel the influence of the peaceful scene. Why should there
      be repose and happiness in that hidden nook, when surrounding it on every
      side were sorrow and affliction? She made a gesture of impatience.
    

      “Quick, quick, let us be gone. Where is the spot? Where did you tell me
      you saw Honore?”
     

      And when, at some fifty paces from there, they at last came out on the
      plateau of Illy, the level plain unrolled itself in its full extent before
      their vision. It was the real, the true battlefield that they beheld now,
      the bare fields stretching away to the horizon under the wan, cheerless
      sky, whence showers were streaming down continually. There were no piles
      of dead visible; all the Prussians must have been buried by this time, for
      there was not a single one to be seen among the corpses of the French that
      were scattered here and there, along the roads and in the fields, as the
      conflict had swayed in one direction or another. The first that they
      encountered was a sergeant, propped against a hedge, a superb man, in the
      bloom of his youthful vigor; his face was tranquil and a smile seemed to
      rest on his parted lips. A hundred paces further on, however, they beheld
      another, lying across the road, who had been mutilated most frightfully,
      his head almost entirely shot away, his shoulders covered with great
      splotches of brain matter. Then, as they advanced further into the field,
      after the single bodies, distributed here and there, they came across
      little groups; they saw seven men aligned in single rank, kneeling and
      with their muskets at the shoulder in the position of aim, who had been
      hit as they were about to fire, while close beside them a subaltern had
      also fallen as he was in the act of giving the word of command. After that
      the road led along the brink of a little ravine, and there they beheld a
      spectacle that aroused their horror to the highest pitch as they looked
      down into the chasm, into which an entire company seemed to have been
      blown by the fiery blast; it was choked with corpses, a landslide, an
      avalanche of maimed and mutilated men, bent and twisted in an inextricable
      tangle, who with convulsed fingers had caught at the yellow clay of the
      bank to save themselves in their descent, fruitlessly. And a dusky flock
      of ravens flew away, croaking noisily, and swarms of flies, thousands upon
      thousands of them, attracted by the odor of fresh blood, were buzzing over
      the bodies and returning incessantly.
    

      “Where is the spot?” Silvine asked again.
    

      They were then passing a plowed field that was completely covered with
      knapsacks. It was manifest that some regiment had been roughly handled
      there, and the men, in a moment of panic, had relieved themselves of their
      burdens. The debris of every sort with which the ground was thickly strewn
      served to explain the episodes of the conflict. There was a stubble field
      where the scattered kepis, resembling huge poppies, shreds of
      uniforms, epaulettes, and sword-belts told the story of one of those
      infrequent hand-to-hand contests in the fierce artillery duel that had
      lasted twelve hours. But the objects that were encountered most
      frequently, at every step, in fact, were abandoned weapons, sabers,
      bayonets, and, more particularly, chassepots; and so numerous were they
      that they seemed to have sprouted from the earth, a harvest that had
      matured in a single ill-omened day. Porringers and buckets, also, were
      scattered along the roads, together with the heterogeneous contents of
      knapsacks, rice, brushes, clothing, cartridges. The fields everywhere
      presented an uniform scene of devastation: fences destroyed, trees
      blighted as if they had been struck by lightning, the very soil itself
      torn by shells, compacted and hardened by the tramp of countless feet, and
      so maltreated that it seemed as if seasons must elapse before it could
      again become productive. Everything had been drenched and soaked by the
      rain of the preceding day; an odor arose and hung in the air persistently,
      that odor of the battlefield that smells like fermenting straw and burning
      cloth, a mixture of rottenness and gunpowder.
    

      Silvine, who was beginning to weary of those fields of death over which
      she had tramped so many long miles, looked about her with increasing
      distrust and uneasiness.
    

      “Where is the spot? where is it?”
     

      But Prosper made no answer; he also was becoming uneasy. What distressed
      him even more than the sights of suffering among his fellow-soldiers was
      the dead horses, the poor brutes that lay outstretched upon their side,
      that were met with in great numbers. Many of them presented a most pitiful
      spectacle, in all sorts of harrowing attitudes, with heads torn from the
      body, with lacerated flanks from which the entrails protruded. Many were
      resting on their back, with their four feet elevated in the air like
      signals of distress. The entire extent of the broad plain was dotted with
      them. There were some that death had not released after their two days'
      agony; at the faintest sound they would raise their head, turning it
      eagerly from right to left, then let it fall again upon the ground, while
      others lay motionless and momentarily gave utterance to that shrill scream
      which one who has heard it can never forget, the lament of the dying
      horse, so piercingly mournful that earth and heaven seemed to shudder in
      unison with it. And Prosper, with a bleeding heart, thought of poor
      Zephyr, and told himself that perhaps he might see him once again.
    

      Suddenly he became aware that the ground was trembling under the
      thundering hoof-beats of a headlong charge. He turned to look, and had
      barely time to shout to his companion:
    

      “The horses, the horses! Get behind that wall!”
     

      From the summit of a neighboring eminence a hundred riderless horses, some
      of them still bearing the saddle and master's kit, were plunging down upon
      them at break-neck speed. They were cavalry mounts that had lost their
      masters and remained on the battlefield, and instinct had counseled them
      to associate together in a band. They had had neither hay nor oats for two
      days, and had cropped the scanty grass from off the plain, shorn the
      hedge-rows of leaves and twigs, gnawed the bark from the trees, and when
      they felt the pangs of hunger pricking at their vitals like a keen spur,
      they started all together at a mad gallop and charged across the deserted,
      silent fields, crushing the dead out of all human shape, extinguishing the
      last spark of life in the wounded.
    

      The band came on like a whirlwind; Silvine had only time to pull the
      donkey and cart to one side where they would be protected by the wall.
    

      “Mon Dieu! we shall be killed!”
     

      But the horses had taken the obstacle in their stride and were already
      scouring away in the distance on the other side with a rumble like that of
      a receding thunder-storm; striking into a sunken road they pursued it as
      far as the corner of a little wood, behind which they were lost to sight.
    

      Silvine, when she had brought the cart back into the road, insisted that
      Prosper should answer her question before they proceeded further.
    

      “Come, where is it? You told me you could find the spot with your eyes
      bandaged; where is it? We have reached the ground.”
     

      He, drawing himself up and anxiously scanning the horizon in every
      direction, seemed to become more and more perplexed.
    

      “There were three trees, I must find those three trees in the first place.
      Ah, dame! see here, one's sight is not of the clearest when he is
      fighting, and it is no such easy matter to remember afterward the roads
      one has passed over!”
     

      Then perceiving people to his left, two men and a woman, it occurred to
      him to question them, but the woman ran away at his approach and the men
      repulsed him with threatening gestures; and he saw others of the same
      stripe, clad in sordid rags, unspeakably filthy, with the ill-favored
      faces of thieves and murderers, and they all shunned him, slinking away
      among the corpses like jackals or other unclean, creeping beasts. Then he
      noticed that wherever these villainous gentry passed the dead behind them
      were shoeless, their bare, white feet exposed, devoid of covering, and he
      saw how it was: they were the tramps and thugs who followed the German
      armies for the sake of plundering the dead, the detestable crew who
      followed in the wake of the invasion in order that they might reap their
      harvest from the field of blood. A tall, lean fellow arose in front of him
      and scurried away on a run, a sack slung across his shoulder, the watches
      and small coins, proceeds of his robberies, jingling in his pockets.
    

      A boy about fourteen or fifteen years old, however, allowed Prosper to
      approach him, and when the latter, seeing him to be French, rated him
      soundly, the boy spoke up in his defense. What, was it wrong for a poor
      fellow to earn his living? He was collecting chassepots, and received five
      sous for every chassepot he brought in. He had run away from his village
      that morning, having eaten nothing since the day before, and engaged
      himself to a contractor from Luxembourg, who had an arrangement with the
      Prussians by virtue of which he was to gather the muskets from the field
      of battle, the Germans fearing that should the scattered arms be collected
      by the peasants of the frontier, they might be conveyed into Belgium and
      thence find their way back to France. And so it was that there was quite a
      flock of poor devils hunting for muskets and earning their five sous,
      rummaging among the herbage, like the women who may be seen in the
      meadows, bent nearly double, gathering dandelions.
    

      “It's a dirty business,” Prosper growled.
    

      “What would you have! A chap must eat,” the boy replied. “I am not robbing
      anyone.”
     

      Then, as he did not belong to that neighborhood and could not give the
      information that Prosper wanted, he pointed out a little farmhouse not far
      away where he had seen some people stirring.
    

      Prosper thanked him and was moving away to rejoin Silvine when he caught
      sight of a chassepot, partially buried in a furrow. His first thought was
      to say nothing of his discovery; then he turned about suddenly and
      shouted, as if he could not help it:
    

      “Hallo! here's one; that will make five sous more for you.”
     

      As they approached the farmhouse Silvine noticed other peasants engaged
      with spades and picks in digging long trenches; but these men were under
      the direct command of Prussian officers, who, with nothing more formidable
      than a light walking-stick in their hands, stood by, stiff and silent, and
      superintended the work. They had requisitioned the inhabitants of all the
      villages of the vicinity in this manner, fearing that decomposition might
      be hastened, owing to the rainy weather. Two cart-loads of dead bodies
      were standing near, and a gang of men was unloading them, laying the
      corpses side by side in close contiguity to one another, not searching
      them, not even looking at their faces, while two men followed after,
      equipped with great shovels, and covered the row with a layer of earth, so
      thin that the ground had already begun to crack beneath the showers. The
      work was so badly and hastily done that before two weeks should have
      elapsed each of those fissures would be breathing forth pestilence.
      Silvine could not resist the impulse to pause at the brink of the trench
      and look at those pitiful corpses as they were brought forward, one after
      another. She was possessed by a horrible fear that in each fresh body the
      men brought from the cart she might recognize Honore. Was not that he,
      that poor wretch whose left eye had been destroyed? No! Perhaps that one
      with the fractured jaw was he? The one thing certain to her mind was that
      if she did not make haste to find him, wherever he might be on that
      boundless, indeterminate plateau, they would pick him up and bury him in a
      common grave with the others. She therefore hurried to rejoin Prosper, who
      had gone on to the farmhouse with the cart.
    

      “Mon Dieu! how is it that you are not better informed? Where is the
      place? Ask the people, question them.”
     

      There were none but Prussians at the farm, however, together with a woman
      servant and her child, just come in from the woods, where they had been
      near perishing of thirst and hunger. The scene was one of patriarchal
      simplicity and well-earned repose after the fatigues of the last few days.
      Some of the soldiers had hung their uniforms from a clothes-line and were
      giving them a thorough brushing, another was putting a patch on his
      trousers, with great neatness and dexterity, while the cook of the
      detachment had built a great fire in the middle of the courtyard on which
      the soup was boiling in a huge pot from which ascended a most appetizing
      odor of cabbage and bacon. There is no denying that the Prussians
      generally displayed great moderation toward the inhabitants of the country
      after the conquest, which was made the easier to them by the spirit of
      discipline that prevailed among the troops. These men might have been
      taken for peaceable citizens just come in from their daily avocations,
      smoking their long pipes. On a bench beside the door sat a stout,
      red-bearded man, who had taken up the servant's child, a little urchin
      five or six years old, and was dandling it and talking baby-talk to it in
      German, delighted to see the little one laugh at the harsh syllables which
      it could not understand.
    

      Prosper, fearing there might be more trouble in store for them, had turned
      his back on the soldiers immediately on entering, but those Prussians were
      really good fellows; they smiled at the little donkey, and did not even
      trouble themselves to ask for a sight of the pass.
    

      Then ensued a wild, aimless scamper across the bosom of the great,
      sinister plain. The sun, now sinking rapidly toward the horizon, showed
      its face for a moment from between two clouds. Was night to descend and
      surprise them in the midst of that vast charnel-house? Another shower came
      down; the sun was obscured, the rain and mist formed an impenetrable
      barrier about them, so that the country around, roads, fields, trees, was
      shut out from their vision. Prosper knew not where they were; he was lost,
      and admitted it: his memory was all astray, he could recall nothing
      precise of the occurrences of that terrible day but one before. Behind
      them, his head lowered almost to the ground, the little donkey trotted
      along resignedly, dragging the cart, with his customary docility. First
      they took a northerly course, then they returned toward Sedan. They had
      lost their bearings and could not tell in which direction they were going;
      twice they noticed that they were passing localities that they had passed
      before and retraced their steps. They had doubtless been traveling in a
      circle, and there came a moment when in their exhaustion and despair they
      stopped at a place where three roads met, without courage to pursue their
      search further, the rain pelting down on them, lost and utterly miserable
      in the midst of a sea of mud.
    

      But they heard the sound of groans, and hastening to a lonely little house
      on their left, found there, in one of the bedrooms, two wounded men. All
      the doors were standing open; the two unfortunates had succeeded in
      dragging themselves thus far and had thrown themselves on the beds, and
      for the two days that they had been alternately shivering and burning,
      their wounds having received no attention, they had seen no one, not a
      living soul. They were tortured by a consuming thirst, and the beating of
      the rain against the window-panes added to their torment, but they could
      not move hand or foot. Hence, when they heard Silvine approaching, the
      first word that escaped their lips was: “Drink! Give us to drink!” that
      longing, pathetic cry, with which the wounded always pursue the by-passer
      whenever the sound of footsteps arouses them from their lethargy. There
      were many cases similar to this, where men were overlooked in remote
      corners, whither they had fled for refuge. Some were picked up even five
      and six days later, when their sores were filled with maggots and their
      sufferings had rendered them delirious.
    

      When Silvine had given the wretched men a drink Prosper, who, in the more
      sorely injured of the twain, had recognized a comrade of his regiment, a
      chasseur d'Afrique, saw that they could not be far from the ground over
      which Margueritte's division had charged, inasmuch as the poor devil had
      been able to drag himself to that house. All the information he could get
      from him, however, was of the vaguest; yes, it was over that way; you
      turned to the left, after passing a big field of potatoes.
    

      Immediately she was in possession of this slender clue Silvine insisted on
      starting out again. An inferior officer of the medical department chanced
      to pass with a cart just then, collecting the dead; she hailed him and
      notified him of the presence of the wounded men, then, throwing the
      donkey's bridle across her arm, urged him along over the muddy road, eager
      to reach the designated spot, beyond the big potato field. When they had
      gone some distance she stopped, yielding to her despair.
    

      “My God, where is the place! Where can it be?”
     

      Prosper looked about him, taxing his recollection fruitlessly.
    

      “I told you, it is close beside the place where we made our charge. If
      only I could find my poor Zephyr—”
     

      And he cast a wistful look on the dead horses that lay around them. It had
      been his secret hope, his dearest wish, during the entire time they had
      been wandering over the plateau, to see his mount once more, to bid him a
      last farewell.
    

      “It ought to be somewhere in this vicinity,” he suddenly said. “See! over
      there to the left, there are the three trees. You see the wheel-tracks?
      And, look, over yonder is a broken-down caisson. We have found the spot;
      we are here at last!”
     

      Quivering with emotion, Silvine darted forward and eagerly scanned the
      faces of two corpses, two artillerymen who had fallen by the roadside.
    

      “He is not here! He is not here! You cannot have seen aright. Yes, that is
      it; some delusion must have cheated your eyes.” And little by little an
      air-drawn hope, a wild delight crept into her mind. “If you were mistaken,
      if he should be alive! And be sure he is alive, since he is not here!”
     

      Suddenly she gave utterance to a low, smothered cry. She had turned, and
      was standing on the very position that the battery had occupied. The scene
      was most frightful, the ground torn and fissured as by an earthquake and
      covered with wreckage of every description, the dead lying as they had
      fallen in every imaginable attitude of horror, arms bent and twisted, legs
      doubled under them, heads thrown back, the lips parted over the white
      teeth as if their last breath had been expended in shouting defiance to
      the foe. A corporal had died with his hands pressed convulsively to his
      eyes, unable longer to endure the dread spectacle. Some gold coins that a
      lieutenant carried in a belt about his body had been spilled at the same
      time as his life-blood, and lay scattered among his entrails. There were
      Adolphe, the driver, and the gunner, Louis, clasped in each other's arms
      in a fierce embrace, their sightless orbs starting from their sockets,
      mated even in death. And there, at last, was Honore, recumbent on his
      disabled gun as on a bed of honor, with the great rent in his side that
      had let out his young life, his face, unmutilated and beautiful in its
      stern anger, still turned defiantly toward the Prussian batteries.
    

      “Oh! my friend,” sobbed Silvine, “my friend, my friend—”
     

      She had fallen to her knees on the damp, cold ground, her hands joined as
      if in prayer, in an outburst of frantic grief. The word friend, the only
      name by which it occurred to her to address him, told the story of the
      tender affection she had lost in that man, so good, so loving, who had
      forgiven her, had meant to make her his wife, despite the ugly past. And
      now all hope was dead within her bosom, there was nothing left to make
      life desirable. She had never loved another; she would put away her love
      for him at the bottom of her heart and hold it sacred there. The rain had
      ceased; a flock of crows that circled above the three trees, croaking
      dismally, affected her like a menace of evil. Was he to be taken from her
      again, her cherished dead, whom she had recovered with such difficulty?
      She dragged herself along upon her knees, and with a trembling hand
      brushed away the hungry flies that were buzzing about her friend's
      wide-open eyes.
    

      She caught sight of a bit of blood-stained paper between Honore's
      stiffened fingers. It troubled her; she tried to gain possession of the
      paper, pulling at it gently, but the dead man would not surrender it,
      seemingly tightening his hold on it, guarding it so jealously that it
      could not have been taken from him without tearing it in bits. It was the
      letter she had written him, that he had always carried next his heart, and
      that he had taken from its hiding place in the moment of his supreme
      agony, as if to bid her a last farewell. It seemed so strange, was such a
      revelation, that he should have died thinking of her; when she saw what it
      was a profound delight filled her soul in the midst of her affliction.
      Yes, surely, she would leave it with him, the letter that was so dear to
      him! she would not take it from him, since he was so bent on carrying it
      with him to the grave. Her tears flowed afresh, but they were beneficent
      tears this time, and brought healing and comfort with them. She arose and
      kissed his hands, kissed him on the forehead, uttering meanwhile but that
      one word, which was in itself a prolonged caress:
    

      “My friend! my friend—”
     

      Meantime the sun was declining; Prosper had gone and taken the counterpane
      from the cart, and between them they raised Honore's body, slowly,
      reverently, and laid it on the bed-covering, which they had stretched upon
      the ground; then, first wrapping him in its folds, they bore him to the
      cart. It was threatening to rain again, and they had started on their
      return, forming, with the donkey, a sorrowful little cortege on the broad
      bosom of the accursed plain, when a deep rumbling as of thunder was heard
      in the distance. Prosper turned his head and had only time to shout:
    

      “The horses! the horses!”
     

      It was the starving, abandoned cavalry mounts making another charge. They
      came up this time in a deep mass across a wide, smooth field, manes and
      tails streaming in the wind, froth flying from their nostrils, and the
      level rays of the fiery setting sun sent the shadow of the infuriated herd
      clean across the plateau. Silvine rushed forward and planted herself
      before the cart, raising her arms above her head as if her puny form might
      have power to check them. Fortunately the ground fell off just at that
      point, causing them to swerve to the left; otherwise they would have
      crushed donkey, cart, and all to powder. The earth trembled, and their
      hoofs sent a volley of clods and small stones flying through the air, one
      of which struck the donkey on the head and wounded him. The last that was
      seen of them they were tearing down a ravine.
    

      “It's hunger that starts them off like that,” said Prosper. “Poor beasts!”
     

      Silvine, having bandaged the donkey's ear with her handkerchief, took him
      again by the bridle, and the mournful little procession began to retrace
      its steps across the plateau, to cover the two leagues that lay between it
      and Remilly. Prosper had turned and cast a look on the dead horses, his
      heart heavy within him to leave the field without having seen Zephyr.
    

      A little below the wood of la Garenne, as they were about to turn off to
      the left to take the road that they had traversed that morning, they
      encountered another German post and were again obliged to exhibit their
      pass. And the officer in command, instead of telling them to avoid Sedan,
      ordered them to keep straight on their course and pass through the city;
      otherwise they would be arrested. This was the most recent order; it was
      not for them to question it. Moreover, their journey would be shortened by
      a mile and a quarter, which they did not regret, weary and foot-sore as
      they were.
    

      When they were within Sedan, however, they found their progress retarded
      owing to a singular cause. As soon as they had passed the fortifications
      their nostrils were saluted by such a stench, they were obliged to wade
      through such a mass of abominable filth, reaching almost to their knees,
      as fairly turned their stomachs. The city, where for three days a hundred
      thousand men had lived without the slightest provision being made for
      decency or cleanliness, had become a cesspool, a foul sewer, and this
      devil's broth was thickened by all sorts of solid matter, rotting hay and
      straw, stable litter, and the excreta of animals. The carcasses of the
      horses, too, that were knocked on the head, skinned, and cut up in the
      public squares, in full view of everyone, had their full share in
      contaminating the atmosphere; the entrails lay decaying in the hot
      sunshine, the bones and heads were left lying on the pavement, where they
      attracted swarms of flies. Pestilence would surely break out in the city
      unless they made haste to rid themselves of all that carrion, of that
      stratum of impurity, which, in the Rue de Minil, the Rue Maqua, and even
      on the Place Turenne, reached a depth of twelve inches. The Prussian
      authorities had taken the matter up, and their placards were to be seen
      posted about the city, requisitioning the inhabitants, irrespective of
      rank, laborers, merchants, bourgeois, magistrates, for the morrow; they
      were ordered to assemble, armed with brooms and shovels, and apply
      themselves to the task, and were warned that they would be subjected to
      heavy penalties if the city was not clean by night. The President of the
      Tribunal had taken time by the forelock, and might even then be seen
      scraping away at the pavement before his door and loading the results of
      his labors upon a wheelbarrow with a fire-shovel.
    

      Silvine and Prosper, who had selected the Grande Rue as their route for
      traversing the city, advanced but slowly through that lake of malodorous
      slime. In addition to that the place was in a state of ferment and
      agitation that made it necessary for them to pull up almost at every
      moment. It was the time that the Prussians had selected for searching the
      houses in order to unearth those soldiers, who, determined that they would
      not give themselves up, had hidden themselves away. When, at about two
      o'clock of the preceding day, General de Wimpffen had returned from the
      chateau of Bellevue after signing the capitulation, the report immediately
      began to circulate that the surrendered troops were to be held under guard
      in the peninsula of Iges until such time as arrangements could be
      perfected for sending them off to Germany. Some few officers had expressed
      their intention of taking advantage of that stipulation which accorded
      them their liberty conditionally on their signing an agreement not to
      serve again during the campaign. Only one general, so it was said,
      Bourgain-Desfeuilles, alleging his rheumatism as a reason, had bound
      himself by that pledge, and when, that very morning, his carriage had
      driven up to the door of the Hotel of the Golden Cross and he had taken
      his seat in it to leave the city, the people had hooted and hissed him
      unmercifully. The operation of disarming had been going on since break of
      day; the manner of its performance was, the troops defiled by battalions
      on the Place Turenne, where each man deposited his musket and bayonet on
      the pile, like a mountain of old iron, which kept rising higher and
      higher, in a corner of the place. There was a Prussian detachment there
      under the command of a young officer, a tall, pale youth, wearing a
      sky-blue tunic and a cap adorned with a cock's feather, who superintended
      operations with a lofty but soldier-like air, his hands encased in white
      gloves. A zouave, in a fit of insubordination, having refused to give up
      his chassepot, the officer ordered that he be taken away, adding, in the
      same even tone of voice: “And let him be shot forthwith!” The rest of the
      battalion continued to defile with a sullen and dejected air, throwing
      down their arms mechanically, as if in haste to have the ceremony ended.
      But who could estimate the number of those who had disarmed themselves
      voluntarily, those whose muskets lay scattered over the country, out
      yonder on the field of battle? And how many, too, within the last
      twenty-four hours had concealed themselves, flattering themselves with the
      hope that they might escape in the confusion that reigned everywhere!
      There was scarcely a house but had its crew of those headstrong idiots who
      refused to respond when called on, hiding away in corners and shamming
      death; the German patrols that were sent through the city even discovered
      them stowed away under beds. And as many, even after they were unearthed,
      stubbornly persisted in remaining in the cellars whither they had fled for
      shelter, the patrols were obliged to fire on them through the coal-holes.
      It was a man-hunt, a brutal and cruel battue, during which the city
      resounded with rifle-shots and outlandish oaths.
    

      At the Pont du Meuse they found a throng which the donkey was unable to
      penetrate and were brought to a stand-still. The officer commanding the
      guard at the bridge, suspecting they were endeavoring to carry on an
      illicit traffic in bread or meat, insisted on seeing with his own eyes
      what was contained in the cart; drawing aside the covering, he gazed for
      an instant on the corpse with a feeling expression, then motioned them to
      go their way. Still, however, they were unable to get forward, the crowd
      momentarily grew denser and denser; one of the first detachments of French
      prisoners was being conducted to the peninsula of Iges under escort of a
      Prussian guard. The sorry band streamed on in long array, the men in their
      tattered, dirty uniforms crowding one another, treading on one another's
      heels, with bowed heads and sidelong, hang-dog looks, the dejected gait
      and bearing of the vanquished to whom had been left not even so much as a
      knife with which to cut their throat. The harsh, curt orders of the guard
      urging them forward resounded like the cracking of a whip in the silence,
      which was unbroken save for the plashing of their coarse shoes through the
      semi-liquid mud. Another shower began to fall, and there could be no more
      sorrowful sight than that band of disheartened soldiers, shuffling along
      through the rain, like beggars and vagabonds on the public highway.
    

      All at once Prosper, whose heart was beating as if it would burst his
      bosom with repressed sorrow and indignation, nudged Silvine and called her
      attention to two soldiers who were passing at the moment. He had
      recognized Maurice and Jean, trudging along with their companions, like
      brothers, side by side. They were near the end of the line, and as there
      was now no impediment in their way, he was enabled to keep them in view as
      far as the Faubourg of Torcy, as they traversed the level road which leads
      to Iges between gardens and truck farms.
    

      “Ah!” murmured Silvine, distressed by what she had just seen, fixing her
      eyes on Honore's body, “it may be that the dead have the better part!”
     

      Night descended while they were at Wadelincourt, and it was pitchy dark
      long before they reached Remilly. Father Fouchard was greatly surprised to
      behold the body of his son, for he had felt certain that it would never be
      recovered. He had been attending to business during the day, and had
      completed an excellent bargain; the market price for officers' chargers
      was twenty francs, and he had bought three for forty-five francs.
    

      
 
    

      The crush was so great as the column of prisoners was leaving Torcy that
      Maurice, who had stopped a moment to buy some tobacco, was parted from
      Jean, and with all his efforts was unable thereafter to catch up with his
      regiment through the dense masses of men that filled the road. When he at
      last reached the bridge that spans the canal which intersects the
      peninsula of Iges at its base, he found himself in a mixed company of
      chasseurs d'Afrique and troops of the infanterie de marine.
    

      There were two pieces of artillery stationed at the bridge, their muzzles
      turned upon the interior of the peninsula; it was a place easy of access,
      but from which exit would seem to be attended with some difficulties.
      Immediately beyond the canal was a comfortable house, where the Prussians
      had established a post, commanded by a captain, upon which devolved the
      duty of receiving and guarding the prisoners. The formalities observed
      were not excessive; they merely counted the men, as if they had been
      sheep, as they came streaming in a huddle across the bridge, without
      troubling themselves overmuch about uniforms or organizations, after which
      the prisoners were free of the fields and at liberty to select their
      dwelling-place wherever chance and the road they were on might direct.
    

      The first thing that Maurice did was to address a question to a Bavarian
      officer, who was seated astride upon a chair, enjoying a tranquil smoke.
    

      “The 106th of the line, sir, can you tell me where I shall find it?”
     

      Either the officer was unlike most German officers and did not understand
      French, or thought it a good joke to mystify a poor devil of a soldier. He
      smiled and raised his hand, indicating by his motion that the other was to
      keep following the road he was pursuing.
    

      Although Maurice had spent a good part of his life in the neighborhood he
      had never before been on the peninsula; he proceeded to explore his new
      surroundings, as a mariner might do when cast by a tempest on the shore of
      a desolate island. He first skirted the Tour a Glaire, a very handsome
      country-place, whose small park, situated as it was on the bank of the
      Meuse, possessed a peculiarly attractive charm. After that the road ran
      parallel with the river, of which the sluggish current flowed on the right
      hand at the foot of high, steep banks. The way from there was a gradually
      ascending one, until it wound around the gentle eminence that occupied the
      central portion of the peninsula, and there were abandoned quarries there
      and excavations in the ground, in which a network of narrow paths had
      their termination. A little further on was a mill, seated on the border of
      the stream. Then the road curved and pursued a descending course until it
      entered the village of Iges, which was built on the hillside and connected
      by a ferry with the further shore, just opposite the rope-walk at
      Saint-Albert. Last of all came meadows and cultivated fields, a broad
      expanse of level, treeless country, around which the river swept in a
      wide, circling bend. In vain had Maurice scrutinized every inch of uneven
      ground on the hillside; all he could distinguish there was cavalry and
      artillery, preparing their quarters for the night. He made further
      inquiries, applying among others to a corporal of chasseurs d'Afrique, who
      could give him no information. The prospect for finding his regiment
      looked bad; night was coming down, and, leg-weary and disheartened, he
      seated himself for a moment on a stone by the wayside.
    

      As he sat there, abandoning himself to the sensation of loneliness and
      despair that crept over him, he beheld before him, across the Meuse, the
      accursed fields where he had fought the day but one before. Bitter
      memories rose to his mind, in the fading light of that day of gloom and
      rain, as he surveyed the saturated, miry expanse of country that rose from
      the river's bank and was lost on the horizon. The defile of Saint-Albert,
      the narrow road by which the Prussians had gained their rear, ran along
      the bend of the stream as far as the white cliffs of the quarries of
      Montimont. The summits of the trees in the wood of la Falizette rose in
      rounded, fleecy masses over the rising ground of Seugnon. Directly before
      his eyes, a little to the left, was Saint-Menges, the road from which
      descended by a gentle slope and ended at the ferry; there, too, were the
      mamelon of Hattoy in the center, and Illy, in the far distance, in the
      background, and Fleigneux, almost hidden in its shallow vale, and Floing,
      less remote, on the right. He recognized the plateau where he had spent
      interminable hours among the cabbages, and the eminences that the reserve
      artillery had struggled so gallantly to hold, where he had seen Honore
      meet his death on his dismounted gun. And it was as if the baleful scene
      were again before him with all its abominations, steeping his mind in
      horror and disgust, until he was sick at heart.
    

      The reflection that soon it would be quite dark and it would not do to
      loiter there, however, caused him to resume his researches. He said to
      himself that perhaps the regiment was encamped somewhere beyond the
      village on the low ground, but the only ones he encountered there were
      some prowlers, and he decided to make the circuit of the peninsula,
      following the bend of the stream. As he was passing through a field of
      potatoes he was sufficiently thoughtful to dig a few of the tubers and put
      them in his pockets; they were not ripe, but he had nothing better, for
      Jean, as luck would have it, had insisted on carrying both the two loaves
      of bread that Delaherche had given them when they left his house. He was
      somewhat surprised at the number of horses he met with, roaming about the
      uncultivated lands, that fell off in an easy descent from the central
      elevation to the Meuse, in the direction of Donchery. Why should they have
      brought all those animals with them? how were they to be fed? And now it
      was night in earnest, and quite dark, when he came to a small piece of
      woods on the water's brink, in which he was surprised to find the
      cent-gardes of the Emperor's escort, providing for their creature comforts
      and drying themselves before roaring fires. These gentlemen, who had a
      separate encampment to themselves, had comfortable tents; their kettles
      were boiling merrily, there was a milch cow tied to a tree. It did not
      take Maurice long to see that he was not regarded with favor in that
      quarter, poor devil of an infantryman that he was, with his ragged,
      mud-stained uniform. They graciously accorded him permission to roast his
      potatoes in the ashes of their fires, however, and he withdrew to the
      shelter of a tree, some hundred yards away, to eat them. It was no longer
      raining; the sky was clear, the stars were shining brilliantly in the dark
      blue vault. He saw that he should have to spend the night in the open air
      and defer his researches until the morrow. He was so utterly used up that
      he could go no further; the trees would afford him some protection in case
      it came on to rain again.
    

      The strangeness of his situation, however, and the thought of his vast
      prison house, open to the winds of heaven, would not let him sleep. It had
      been an extremely clever move on the part of the Prussians to select that
      place of confinement for the eighty thousand men who constituted the
      remnant of the army of Chalons. The peninsula was approximately three
      miles long by one wide, affording abundant space for the broken fragments
      of the vanquished host, and Maurice could not fail to observe that it was
      surrounded on every side by water, the bend of the Meuse encircling it on
      the north, east and west, while on the south, at the base, connecting the
      two arms of the loop at the point where they drew together most closely,
      was the canal. Here alone was an outlet, the bridge, that was defended by
      two guns; wherefore it may be seen that the guarding of the camp was a
      comparatively easy task, notwithstanding its great extent. He had already
      taken note of the chain of sentries on the farther bank, a soldier being
      stationed by the waterside at every fifty paces, with orders to fire on
      any man who should attempt to escape by swimming. In the rear the
      different posts were connected by patrols of uhlans, while further in the
      distance, scattered over the broad fields, were the dark lines of the
      Prussian regiments; a threefold living, moving wall, immuring the captive
      army.
    

      Maurice, in his sleeplessness, lay gazing with wide-open eyes into the
      blackness of the night, illuminated here and there by the smoldering
      watch-fires; the motionless forms of the sentinels were dimly visible
      beyond the pale ribbon of the Meuse. Erect they stood, duskier spots
      against the dusky shadows, beneath the faint light of the twinkling stars,
      and at regular intervals their guttural call came to his ears, a menacing
      watch-cry that was drowned in the hoarse murmur of the river in the
      distance. At sound of those unmelodious phrases in a foreign tongue,
      rising on the still air of a starlit night in the sunny land of France,
      the vision of the past again rose before him: all that he had beheld in
      memory an hour before, the plateau of Illy cumbered still with dead, the
      accursed country round about Sedan that had been the scene of such dire
      disaster; and resting on the ground in that cool, damp corner of a wood,
      his head pillowed on a root, he again yielded to the feeling of despair
      that had overwhelmed him the day before while lying on Delaherche's sofa.
      And that which, intensifying the suffering of his wounded pride, now
      harassed and tortured him, was the question of the morrow, the feverish
      longing to know how deep had been their fall, how great the wreck and ruin
      sustained by their world of yesterday. The Emperor had surrendered his
      sword to King William; was not, therefore, the abominable war ended? But
      he recalled the remark he had heard made by two of the Bavarians of the
      guard who had escorted the prisoners to Iges: “We're all in France, we're
      all bound for Paris!” In his semi-somnolent, dreamy state the vision of
      what was to be suddenly rose before his eyes: the empire overturned and
      swept away amid a howl of universal execration, the republic proclaimed
      with an outburst of patriotic fervor, while the legend of '92 would incite
      men to emulate the glorious past, and, flocking to the standards, drive
      from the country's soil the hated foreigner with armies of brave
      volunteers. He reflected confusedly upon all the aspects of the case, and
      speculations followed one another in swift succession through his poor
      wearied brain: the harsh terms imposed by the victors, the bitterness of
      defeat, the determination of the vanquished to resist even to the last
      drop of blood, the fate of those eighty thousand men, his companions, who
      were to be captives for weeks, months, years, perhaps, first on the
      peninsula and afterward in German fortresses. The foundations were giving
      way, and everything was going down, down to the bottomless depths of
      perdition.
    

      The call of the sentinels, now loud, now low, seemed to sound more faintly
      in his ears and to be receding in the distance, when suddenly, as he
      turned on his hard couch, a shot rent the deep silence. A hollow groan
      rose on the calm air of night, there was a splashing in the water, the
      brief struggle of one who sinks to rise no more. It was some poor wretch
      who had attempted to escape by swimming the Meuse and had received a
      bullet in his brain.
    

      The next morning Maurice was up and stirring with the sun. The sky was
      cloudless; he was desirous to rejoin Jean and his other comrades of the
      company with the least possible delay. For a moment he had an idea of
      going to see what there was in the interior of the peninsula, then
      resolved he would first complete its circuit. And on reaching the canal
      his eyes were greeted with the sight of the 106th—or rather what was
      left of it—a thousand men, encamped along the river bank among some
      waste lands, with no protection save a row of slender poplars. If he had
      only turned to the left the night before instead of pursuing a straight
      course he could have been with his regiment at once. And he noticed that
      almost all the line regiments were collected along that part of the bank
      that extends from the Tour a Glaire to the Chateau of Villette—another
      bourgeois country place, situated more in the direction of Donchery and
      surrounded by a few hovels—all of them having selected their bivouac
      near the bridge, sole issue from their prison, as sheep will instinctively
      huddle together close to the door of their fold, knowing that sooner or
      later it will be opened for them.
    

      Jean uttered a cry of pleasure. “Ah, so it's you, at last! I had begun to
      think you were in the river.”
     

      He was there with what remained of the squad, Pache and Lapoulle, Loubet
      and Chouteau. The last named had slept under doorways in Sedan until the
      attention of the Prussian provost guard had finally restored them to their
      regiment. The corporal, moreover, was the only surviving officer of the
      company, death having taken away Sergeant Sapin, Lieutenant Rochas and
      Captain Beaudoin, and although the victors had abolished distinction of
      rank among the prisoners, deciding that obedience was due to the German
      officers alone, the four men had, nevertheless, rallied to him, knowing
      him to be a leader of prudence and experience, upon whom they could rely
      in circumstances of difficulty. Thus it was that peace and harmony reigned
      among them that morning, notwithstanding the stupidity of some and the
      evil designs of others. In the first place, the night before he had found
      them a place to sleep in that was comparatively dry, where they had
      stretched themselves on the ground, the only thing they had left in the
      way of protection from the weather being the half of a shelter-tent. After
      that he had managed to secure some wood and a kettle, in which Loubet made
      coffee for them, the comforting warmth of which had fortified their
      stomachs. The rain had ceased, the day gave promise of being bright and
      warm, they had a small supply of biscuit and bacon left, and then, as
      Chouteau said, it was a comfort to have no orders to obey, to have their
      fill of loafing. They were prisoners, it was true, but there was plenty of
      room to move about. Moreover, they would be away from there in two or
      three days. Under these circumstances the day, which was Sunday, the 4th,
      passed pleasantly enough.
    

      Maurice, whose courage had returned to him now that he was with the
      comrades once more, found nothing to annoy him except the Prussian bands,
      which played all the afternoon beyond the canal. Toward evening there was
      vocal music, and the men sang in chorus. They could be seen outside the
      chain of sentries, walking to and fro in little groups and singing solemn
      melodies in a loud, ringing voice in honor of the Sabbath.
    

      “Confound those bands!” Maurice at last impatiently exclaimed. “They will
      drive me wild!”
     

      Jean, whose nerves were less susceptible, shrugged his shoulders.
    

      “Dame! they have reason to feel good; and then perhaps they think
      it affords us pleasure. It hasn't been such a bad day; don't let's find
      fault.”
     

      As night approached, however, the rain began to fall again. Some of the
      men had taken possession of what few unoccupied houses there were on the
      peninsula, others were provided with tents that they erected, but by far
      the greater number, without shelter of any sort, destitute of blankets
      even, were compelled to pass the night in the open air, exposed to the
      pouring rain.
    

      About one o'clock Maurice, who had been sleeping soundly as a result of
      his fatigue, awoke and found himself in the middle of a miniature lake.
      The trenches, swollen by the heavy downpour, had overflowed and inundated
      the ground where he lay. Chouteau's and Loubet's wrath vented itself in a
      volley of maledictions, while Pache shook Lapoulle, who, unmindful of his
      ducking, slept through it all as if he was never to wake again. Then Jean,
      remembering the row of poplars on the bank of the canal, collected his
      little band and ran thither for shelter; and there they passed the
      remainder of that wretched night, crouching with their backs to the trees,
      their legs doubled under them, so as to expose as little of their persons
      as might be to the big drops.
    

      The next day, and the day succeeding it, the weather was truly detestable,
      what with the continual showers, that came down so copiously and at such
      frequent intervals that the men's clothing had not time to dry on their
      backs. They were threatened with famine, too; there was not a biscuit left
      in camp, and the coffee and bacon were exhausted. During those two days,
      Monday and Tuesday, they existed on potatoes that they dug in the adjacent
      fields, and even those vegetables had become so scarce toward the end of
      the second day that those soldiers who had money paid as high as five sous
      apiece for them. It was true that the bugles sounded the call for
      “distribution”; the corporal had nearly run his legs off trying to be the
      first to reach a great shed near the Tour a Glaire, where it was reported
      that rations of bread were to be issued, but on the occasion of a first
      visit he had waited there three hours and gone away empty-handed, and on a
      second had become involved in a quarrel with a Bavarian. It was well known
      that the French officers were themselves in deep distress and powerless to
      assist their men; had the German staff driven the vanquished army out
      there in the mud and rain with the intention of letting them starve to
      death? Not the first step seemed to have been taken, not an effort had
      been made, to provide for the subsistence of those eighty thousand men in
      that hell on earth that the soldiers subsequently christened Camp Misery,
      a name that the bravest of them could never hear mentioned in later days
      without a shudder.
    

      On his return from his wearisome and fruitless expedition to the shed,
      Jean forgot his usual placidity and gave way to anger.
    

      “What do they mean by calling us up when there's nothing for us? I'll be
      hanged if I'll put myself out for them another time!”
     

      And yet, whenever there was a call, he hurried off again. It was inhuman
      to sound the bugles thus, merely because regulations prescribed certain
      calls at certain hours, and it had another effect that was near breaking
      Maurice's heart. Every time that the trumpets sounded the French horses,
      that were running free on the other side of the canal, came rushing up and
      dashed into the water to rejoin their squadron, as excited at the
      well-known sound as they would be at the touch of the spur; but in their
      exhausted condition they were swept away by the current and few attained
      the shore. It was a cruel sight to see their struggles; they were drowned
      in great numbers, and their bodies, decomposing and swelling in the hot
      sunshine, drifted on the bosom of the canal. As for those of them that got
      to land, they seemed as if stricken with sudden madness, galloping wildly
      off and hiding among the waste places of the peninsula.
    

      “More bones for the crows to pick!” sorrowfully said Maurice, remembering
      the great droves of horses that he had encountered on a previous occasion.
      “If we remain here a few days we shall all be devouring one another. Poor
      brutes!”
     

      The night between Tuesday and Wednesday was most terrible of all, and
      Jean, who was beginning to feel seriously alarmed for Maurice's feverish
      state, made him wrap himself in an old blanket that they had purchased
      from a zouave for ten francs, while he, with no protection save his
      water-soaked capote, cheerfully took the drenching of the deluge which
      that night pelted down without cessation. Their position under the poplars
      had become untenable; it was a streaming river of mud, the water rested in
      deep puddles on the surface of the saturated ground. What was worst of all
      was that they had to suffer on an empty stomach, the evening meal of the
      six men having consisted of two beets which they had been compelled to eat
      raw, having no dry wood to make a fire with, and the sweet taste and
      refreshing coolness of the vegetables had quickly been succeeded by an
      intolerable burning sensation. Some cases of dysentery had appeared among
      the men, caused by fatigue, improper food and the persistent humidity of
      the atmosphere. More than ten times that night did Jean stretch forth his
      hand to see that Maurice had not uncovered himself in the movements of his
      slumber, and thus he kept watch and ward over his friend—his back
      supported by the same tree-trunk, his legs in a pool of water—with
      tenderness unspeakable. Since the day that on the plateau of Illy his
      comrade had carried him off in his arms and saved him from the Prussians
      he had repaid the debt a hundred-fold. He stopped not to reason on it; it
      was the free gift of all his being, the total forgetfulness of self for
      love of the other, the finest, most delicate, grandest exhibition of
      friendship possible, and that, too, in a peasant, whose lot had always
      been the lowly one of a tiller of the soil and who had never risen far
      above the earth, who could not find words to express what he felt, acting
      purely from instinct, in all simplicity of soul. Many a time already he
      had taken the food from his mouth, as the men of the squad were wont to
      say; now he would have divested himself of his skin if with it he might
      have covered the other, to protect his shoulders, to warm his feet. And in
      the midst of the savage egoism that surrounded them, among that
      aggregation of suffering humanity whose worst appetites were inflamed and
      intensified by hunger, he perhaps owed it to his complete abnegation of
      self that he had preserved thus far his tranquillity of mind and his
      vigorous health, for he among them all, his great strength unimpaired,
      alone maintained his composure and something like a level head.
    

      After that distressful night Jean determined to carry into execution a
      plan that he had been reflecting over since the day previous.
    

      “See here, little one, we can get nothing to eat, and everyone seems to
      have forgotten us here in this beastly hole; now unless we want to die the
      death of dogs, it behooves us to stir about a bit. How are your legs?”
     

      The sun had come out again, fortunately, and Maurice was warmed and
      comforted.
    

      “Oh, my legs are all right!”
     

      “Then we'll start off on an exploring expedition. We've money in our
      pockets, and the deuce is in it if we can't find something to buy. And we
      won't bother our heads about the others; they don't deserve it. Let them
      take care of themselves.”
     

      The truth was that Loubet and Chouteau had disgusted him by their
      trickiness and low selfishness, stealing whatever they could lay hands on
      and never dividing with their comrades, while no good was to be got out of
      Lapoulle, the brute, and Pache, the sniveling devotee.
    

      The pair, therefore, Maurice and Jean, started out by the road along the
      Meuse which the former had traversed once before, on the night of his
      arrival. At the Tour a Glaire the park and dwelling-house presented a
      sorrowful spectacle of pillage and devastation, the trim lawns cut up and
      destroyed, the trees felled, the mansion dismantled. A ragged, dirty crew
      of soldiers, with hollow cheeks and eyes preternaturally bright from
      fever, had taken possession of the place and were living like beasts in
      the filthy chambers, not daring to leave their quarters for a moment lest
      someone else might come along and occupy them. A little further on they
      passed the cavalry and artillery, encamped on the hillsides, once so
      conspicuous by reason of the neatness and jauntiness of their appearance,
      now run to seed like all the rest, their organization gone, demoralized by
      that terrible, torturing hunger that drove the horses wild and sent the
      men straggling through the fields in plundering bands. Below them, to the
      right, they beheld an apparently interminable line of artillerymen and
      chasseurs d'Afrique defiling slowly before the mill; the miller was
      selling them flour, measuring out two handfuls into their handkerchiefs
      for a franc. The prospect of the long wait that lay before them, should
      they take their place at the end of the line, determined them to pass on,
      in the hope that some better opportunity would present itself at the
      village of Iges; but great was their consternation when they reached it to
      find the little place as bare and empty as an Algerian village through
      which has passed a swarm of locusts; not a crumb, not a fragment of
      anything eatable, neither bread, nor meat, nor vegetables, the wretched
      inhabitants utterly destitute. General Lebrun was said to be there,
      closeted with the mayor. He had been endeavoring, ineffectually, to
      arrange for an issue of bonds, redeemable at the close of the war, in
      order to facilitate the victualing of the troops. Money had ceased to have
      any value when there was nothing that it could purchase. The day before
      two francs had been paid for a biscuit, seven francs for a bottle of wine,
      a small glass of brandy was twenty sous, a pipeful of tobacco ten sous.
      And now officers, sword in hand, had to stand guard before the general's
      house and the neighboring hovels, for bands of marauders were constantly
      passing, breaking down doors and stealing even the oil from the lamps and
      drinking it.
    

      Three zouaves invited Maurice and Jean to join them. Five would do the
      work more effectually than three.
    

      “Come along. There are horses dying in plenty, and if we can but get some
      dry wood—”
     

      Then they fell to work on the miserable cabin of a poor peasant, smashing
      the closet doors, tearing the thatch from the roof. Some officers, who
      came up on a run, threatened them with their revolvers and put them to
      flight.
    

      Jean, who saw that the few villagers who had remained at Iges were no
      better off than the soldiers, perceived he had made a mistake in passing
      the mill without buying some flour.
    

      “There may be some left; we had best go back.”
     

      But Maurice was so reduced from inanition and was beginning to suffer so
      from fatigue that he left him behind in a sheltered nook among the
      quarries, seated on a fragment of rock, his face turned upon the wide
      horizon of Sedan. He, after waiting in line for two long hours, finally
      returned with some flour wrapped in a piece of rag. And they ate it
      uncooked, dipping it up in their hands, unable to devise any other way. It
      was not so very bad; It had no particular flavor, only the insipid taste
      of dough. Their breakfast, such as it was, did them some good, however.
      They were even so fortunate as to discover a little pool of rain-water,
      comparatively pure, in a hollow of a rock, at which they quenched their
      thirst with great satisfaction.
    

      But when Jean proposed that they should spend the remainder of the
      afternoon there, Maurice negatived the motion with a great display of
      violence.
    

      “No, no; not here! I should be ill if I were to have that scene before my
      eyes for any length of time—” With a hand that trembled he pointed
      to the remote horizon, the hill of Hattoy, the plateaux of Floing and
      Illy, the wood of la Garenne, those abhorred, detested fields of slaughter
      and defeat. “While you were away just now I was obliged to turn my back on
      it, else I should have broken out and howled with rage. Yes, I should have
      howled like a dog tormented by boys—you can't imagine how it hurts
      me; it drives me crazy!”
     

      Jean looked at him in surprise; he could not understand that pride,
      sensitive as a raw sore, that made defeat so bitter to him; he was alarmed
      to behold in his eyes that wandering, flighty look that he had seen there
      before. He affected to treat the matter lightly.
    

      “Good! we'll seek another country; that's easy enough to do.”
     

      Then they wandered as long as daylight lasted, wherever the paths they
      took conducted them. They visited the level portion of the peninsula in
      the hope of finding more potatoes there, but the artillerymen had obtained
      a plow and turned up the ground, and not a single potato had escaped their
      sharp eyes. They retraced their steps, and again they passed through
      throngs of listless, glassy-eyed, starving soldiers, strewing the ground
      with their debilitated forms, falling by hundreds in the bright sunshine
      from sheer exhaustion. They were themselves many times overcome by fatigue
      and forced to sit down and rest; then their deep-seated sensation of
      suffering would bring them to their feet again and they would recommence
      their wandering, like animals impelled by instinct to move on perpetually
      in quest of pasturage. It seemed to them to last for years, and yet the
      moments sped by rapidly. In the more inland region, over Donchery way,
      they received a fright from the horses and sought the protection of a
      wall, where they remained a long time, too exhausted to rise, watching
      with vague, lack-luster eyes the wild course of the crazed beasts as they
      raced athwart the red western sky where the sun was sinking.
    

      As Maurice had foreseen, the thousands of horses that shared the captivity
      of the army, and for which it was impossible to provide forage,
      constituted a peril that grew greater day by day. At first they had
      nibbled the vegetation and gnawed the bark off trees, then had attacked
      the fences and whatever wooden structures they came across, and now they
      seemed ready to devour one another. It was a frequent occurrence to see
      one of them throw himself upon another and tear out great tufts from his
      mane or tail, which he would grind between his teeth, slavering meanwhile
      at the mouth profusely. But it was at night that they became most
      terrible, as if they were visited by visions of terror in the darkness.
      They collected in droves, and, attracted by the straw, made furious rushes
      upon what few tents there were, overturning and demolishing them. It was
      to no purpose that the men built great fires to keep them away; the device
      only served to madden them the more. Their shrill cries were so full of
      anguish, so dreadful to the ear, that they might have been mistaken for
      the howls of wild beasts. Were they driven away, they returned, more
      numerous and fiercer than before. Scarce a moment passed but out in the
      darkness could be heard the shriek of anguish of some unfortunate soldier
      whom the crazed beasts had crushed in their wild stampede.
    

      The sun was still above the horizon when Jean and Maurice, on their way
      back to the camp, were astonished by meeting with the four men of the
      squad, lurking in a ditch, apparently for no good purpose. Loubet hailed
      them at once, and Chouteau constituted himself spokesman:
    

      “We are considering ways and means for dining this evening. We shall die
      if we go on this way; it is thirty-six hours since we have had anything to
      put in our stomach—so, as there are horses plenty, and horse-meat
      isn't such bad eating—”
     

      “You'll join us, won't you, corporal?” said Loubet, interrupting, “for,
      with such a big, strong animal to handle, the more of us there are the
      better it will be. See, there is one, off yonder, that we've been keeping
      an eye on for the last hour; that big bay that is in such a bad way. He'll
      be all the easier to finish.”
     

      And he pointed to a horse that was dying of starvation, on the edge of
      what had once been a field of beets. He had fallen on his flank, and every
      now and then would raise his head and look about him pleadingly, with a
      deep inhalation that sounded like a sigh.
    

      “Ah, how long we have to wait!” grumbled Lapoulle, who was suffering
      torment from his fierce appetite. “I'll go and kill him—shall I?”
     

      But Loubet stopped him. Much obliged! and have the Prussians down on them,
      who had given notice that death would be the penalty for killing a horse,
      fearing that the carcass would breed a pestilence. They must wait until it
      was dark. And that was the reason why the four men were lurking in the
      ditch, waiting, with glistening, hungry eyes fixed on the dying brute.
    

      “Corporal,” asked Pache, in a voice that faltered a little, “you have lots
      of ideas in your head; couldn't you kill him painlessly?”
     

      Jean refused the cruel task with a gesture of disgust. What, kill that
      poor beast that was even then in its death agony! oh, no, no! His first
      impulse had been to fly and take Maurice with him, that neither of them
      might be concerned in the revolting butchery; but looking at his companion
      and beholding him so pale and faint, he reproached himself for such an
      excess of sensibility. What were animals created for after all, mon
      Dieu, unless to afford sustenance to man! They could not allow
      themselves to starve when there was food within reach. And it rejoiced him
      to see Maurice cheer up a little at the prospect of eating; he said in his
      easy, good-natured way:
    

      “Faith, you're wrong there; I've no ideas in my head, and if he has got to
      be killed without pain—”
     

      “Oh! that's all one to me,” interrupted Lapoulle. “I'll show you.”
     

      The two newcomers seated themselves in the ditch and joined the others in
      their expectancy. Now and again one of the men would rise and make certain
      that the horse was still there, its neck outstretched to catch the cool
      exhalations of the Meuse and the last rays of the setting sun, as if
      bidding farewell to life. And when at last twilight crept slowly o'er the
      scene the six men were erect upon their feet, impatient that night was so
      tardy in its coming, casting furtive, frightened looks about them to see
      they were not observed.
    

      “Ah, zut!” exclaimed Chouteau, “the time is come!”
     

      Objects were still discernible in the fields by the uncertain, mysterious
      light “between dog and wolf,” and Lapoulle went forward first, followed by
      the five others. He had taken from the ditch a large, rounded boulder,
      and, with it in his two brawny hands, rushing upon the horse, commenced to
      batter at his skull as with a club. At the second blow, however, the
      horse, stung by the pain, attempted to get on his feet. Chouteau and
      Loubet had thrown themselves across his legs and were endeavoring to hold
      him down, shouting to the others to help them. The poor brute's cries were
      almost human in their accent of terror and distress; he struggled
      desperately to shake off his assailants, and would have broken them like a
      reed had he not been half dead with inanition. The movements of his head
      prevented the blows from taking effect; Lapoulle was unable to despatch
      him.
    

      “Nom de Dieu! how hard his bones are! Hold him, somebody, until I
      finish him.”
     

      Jean and Maurice stood looking at the scene in silent horror; they heard
      not Chouteau's appeals for assistance; were powerless to raise a hand. And
      Pache, in a sudden outburst of piety and pity, dropped on his knees,
      joined his hands, and began to mumble the prayers that are repeated at the
      bedside of the dying.
    

      “Merciful God, have pity on him. Let him, good Lord, depart in peace—”
     

      Again Lapoulle struck ineffectually, with no other effect than to destroy
      an ear of the wretched creature, that threw back its head and gave
      utterance to a loud, shrill scream.
    

      “Hold on!” growled Chouteau; “this won't do; he'll get us all in the
      lockup. We must end the matter. Hold him fast, Loubet.”
     

      He took from his pocket a penknife, a small affair of which the blade was
      scarcely longer than a man's finger, and casting himself prone on the
      animal's body and passing an arm about its neck, began to hack away at the
      live flesh, cutting away great morsels, until he found and severed the
      artery. He leaped quickly to one side; the blood spurted forth in a
      torrent, as when the plug is removed from a fountain, while the feet
      stirred feebly and convulsive movements ran along the skin, succeeding one
      another like waves of the sea. It was near five minutes before the horse
      was dead. His great eyes, dilated wide and filled with melancholy and
      affright, were fixed upon the wan-visaged men who stood waiting for him to
      die; then they grew dim and the light died from out them.
    

      “Merciful God,” muttered Pache, still on his knees, “keep him in thy holy
      protection—succor him, Lord, and grant him eternal rest.”
     

      Afterward, when the creature's movements had ceased, they were at a loss
      to know where the best cut lay and how they were to get at it. Loubet, who
      was something of a Jack-of-all-trades, showed them what was to be done in
      order to secure the loin, but as he was a tyro at the butchering business
      and, moreover, had only his small penknife to work with, he quickly lost
      his way amid the warm, quivering flesh. And Lapoulle, in his impatience,
      having attempted to be of assistance by making an incision in the belly,
      for which there was no necessity whatever, the scene of bloodshed became
      truly sickening. They wallowed in the gore and entrails that covered the
      ground about them, like a pack of ravening wolves collected around the
      carcass of their prey, fleshing their keen fangs in it.
    

      “I don't know what cut that may be,” Loubet said at last, rising to his
      feet with a huge lump of meat in his hands, “but by the time we've eaten
      it, I don't believe any of us will be hungry.”
     

      Jean and Maurice had averted their eyes in horror from the disgusting
      spectacle; still, however, the pangs of hunger were gnawing at their
      vitals, and when the band slunk rapidly away, so as not to be caught in
      the vicinity of the incriminating carcass, they followed it. Chouteau had
      discovered three large beets, that had somehow been overlooked by previous
      visitors to the field, and carried them off with him. Loubet had loaded
      the meat on Lapoulle's shoulders so as to have his own arms free, while
      Pache carried the kettle that belonged to the squad, which they had
      brought with them on the chance of finding something to cook in it. And
      the six men ran as if their lives were at stake, never stopping to take
      breath, as if they heard the pursuers at their heels.
    

      Suddenly Loubet brought the others to a halt.
    

      “It's idiotic to run like this; let's decide where we shall go to cook the
      stuff.”
     

      Jean, who was beginning to recover his self-possession, proposed the
      quarries. They were only three hundred yards distant, and in them were
      secret recesses in abundance where they could kindle a fire without being
      seen. When they reached the spot, however, difficulties of every
      description presented themselves. First, there was the question of wood;
      fortunately a laborer, who had been repairing the road, had gone home and
      left his wheelbarrow behind him; Lapoulle quickly reduced it to fragments
      with the heel of his boot. Then there was no water to be had that was fit
      to drink; the hot sunshine had dried up all the pools of rain-water. True
      there was a pump at the Tour a Glaire, but that was too far away, and
      besides it was never accessible before midnight; the men forming in long
      lines with their bowls and porringers, only too happy when, after waiting
      for hours, they could escape from the jam with their supply of the
      precious fluid unspilled. As for the few wells in the neighborhood, they
      had been dry for the last two days, and the bucket brought up nothing save
      mud and slime. Their sole resource appeared to be the water of the Meuse,
      which was parted from them by the road.
    

      “I'll take the kettle and go and fill it,” said Jean.
    

      The others objected.
    

      “No, no! We don't want to be poisoned; it is full of dead bodies!”
     

      They spoke the truth. The Meuse was constantly bringing down corpses of
      men and horses; they could be seen floating with the current at any moment
      of the day, swollen and of a greenish hue, in the early stages of
      decomposition. Often they were caught in the weeds and bushes on the bank,
      where they remained to poison the atmosphere, swinging to the tide with a
      gentle, tremulous motion that imparted to them a semblance of life. Nearly
      every soldier who had drunk that abominable water had suffered from nausea
      and colic, often succeeded afterward by dysentery. It seemed as if they
      must make up their mind to use it, however, as there was no other; Maurice
      explained that there would be no danger in drinking it after it was
      boiled.
    

      “Very well, then; I'll go,” said Jean. And he started, taking Lapoulle
      with him to carry the kettle.
    

      By the time they got the kettle filled and on the fire it was quite dark.
      Loubet had peeled the beets and thrown them into the water to cook—a
      feast fit for the gods, he declared it would be—and fed the fire
      with fragments of the wheelbarrow, for they were all suffering so from
      hunger that they could have eaten the meat before the pot began to boil.
      Their huge shadows danced fantastically in the firelight on the rocky
      walls of the quarry. Then they found it impossible longer to restrain
      their appetite, and threw themselves upon the unclean mess, tearing the
      flesh with eager, trembling fingers and dividing it among them, too
      impatient even to make use of the knife. But, famishing as they were,
      their stomachs revolted; they felt the want of salt, they could not
      swallow that tasteless, sickening broth, those chunks of half-cooked,
      viscid meat that had a taste like clay. Some among them had a fit of
      vomiting. Pache was very ill. Chouteau and Loubet heaped maledictions on
      that infernal old nag, that had caused them such trouble to get him to the
      pot and then given them the colic. Lapoulle was the only one among them
      who ate abundantly, but he was in a very bad way that night when, with his
      three comrades, he returned to their resting-place under the poplars by
      the canal.
    

      On their way back to camp Maurice, without uttering a word, took advantage
      of the darkness to seize Jean by the arm and drag him into a by-path.
      Their comrades inspired him with unconquerable disgust; he thought he
      should like to go and sleep in the little wood where he had spent his
      first night on the peninsula. It was a good idea, and Jean commended it
      highly when he had laid himself down on the warm, dry ground, under the
      shelter of the dense foliage. They remained there until the sun was high
      in the heavens, and enjoyed a sound, refreshing slumber, which restored to
      them something of their strength.
    

      The following day was Thursday, but they had ceased to note the days; they
      were simply glad to observe that the weather seemed to be coming off fine
      again. Jean overcame Maurice's repugnance and prevailed on him to return
      to the canal, to see if their regiment was not to move that day. Not a day
      passed now but detachments of prisoners, a thousand to twelve hundred
      strong, were sent off to the fortresses in Germany. The day but one before
      they had seen, drawn up in front of the Prussian headquarters, a column of
      officers of various grades, who were going to Pont-a-Mousson, there to
      take the railway. Everyone was possessed with a wild, feverish longing to
      get away from that camp where they had seen such suffering. Ah! if it but
      might be their turn! And when they found the 106th still encamped on the
      bank of the canal, in the inevitable disorder consequent upon such
      distress, their courage failed them and they despaired.
    

      Jean and Maurice that day thought they saw a prospect of obtaining
      something to eat. All the morning a lively traffic had been going on
      between the prisoners and the Bavarians on the other side of the canal;
      the former would wrap their money in a handkerchief and toss it across to
      the opposite shore, the latter would return the handkerchief with a loaf
      of coarse brown bread, or a plug of their common, damp tobacco. Even
      soldiers who had no money were not debarred from participating in this
      commerce, employing, instead of currency, their white uniform gloves, for
      which the Germans appeared to have a weakness. For two hours packages were
      flying across the canal in its entire length under this primitive system
      of exchanges. But when Maurice dispatched his cravat with a five-franc
      piece tied in it to the other bank, the Bavarian who was to return him a
      loaf of bread gave it, whether from awkwardness or malice, such an
      ineffectual toss that it fell in the water. The incident elicited shouts
      of laughter from the Germans. Twice again Maurice repeated the experiment,
      and twice his loaf went to feed the fishes. At last the Prussian officers,
      attracted by the uproar, came running up and prohibited their men from
      selling anything to the prisoners, threatening them with dire penalties
      and punishments in case of disobedience. The traffic came to a sudden end,
      and Jean had hard work to pacify Maurice, who shook his fists at the
      scamps, shouting to them to give him back his five-franc pieces.
    

      This was another terrible day, notwithstanding the warm, bright sunshine.
      Twice the bugle sounded and sent Jean hurrying off to the shed whence
      rations were supposed to be issued, but on each occasion he only got his
      toes trod on and his ribs racked in the crush. The Prussians, whose
      organization was so wonderfully complete, continued to manifest the same
      brutal inattention to the necessities of the vanquished army. On the
      representations of Generals Douay and Lebrun, they had indeed sent in a
      few sheep as well as some wagon-loads of bread, but so little care was
      taken to guard them that the sheep were carried off bodily and the wagons
      pillaged as soon as they reached the bridge, the consequence of which was
      that the troops who were encamped a hundred yards further on were no
      better off than before; it was only the worst element, the plunderers and
      bummers, who benefited by the provision trains. And thereon Jean, who, as
      he said, saw how the trick was done, brought Maurice with him to the
      bridge to keep an eye on the victuals.
    

      It was four o'clock, and they had not had a morsel to eat all that
      beautiful bright Thursday, when suddenly their eyes were gladdened by the
      sight of Delaherche. A few among the citizens of Sedan had with infinite
      difficulty obtained permission to visit the prisoners, to whom they
      carried provisions, and Maurice had on several occasions expressed his
      surprise at his failure to receive any tidings of his sister. As soon as
      they recognized Delaherche in the distance, carrying a large basket and
      with a loaf of bread under either arm, they darted forward fast as their
      legs could carry them, but even thus they were too late; a crowding,
      jostling mob closed in, and in the confusion the dazed manufacturer was
      relieved of his basket and one of his loaves, which vanished from his
      sight so expeditiously that he was never able to tell the manner of their
      disappearance.
    

      “Ah, my poor friends!” he stammered, utterly crestfallen in his
      bewilderment and stupefaction, he who but a moment before had come through
      the gate with a smile on his lips and an air of good-fellowship,
      magnanimously forgetting his superior advantages in his desire for
      popularity.
    

      Jean had taken possession of the remaining loaf and saved it from the
      hungry crew, and while he and Maurice, seated by the roadside, were making
      great inroads in it, Delaherche opened his budget of news for their
      benefit. His wife, the Lord be praised! was very well, but he was greatly
      alarmed for the colonel, who had sunk into a condition of deep
      prostration, although his mother continued to bear him company from
      morning until night.
    

      “And my sister?” Maurice inquired.
    

      “Ah, yes! your sister; true. She insisted on coming with me; it was she
      who brought the two loaves of bread. She had to remain over yonder,
      though, on the other side of the canal; the sentries wouldn't let her pass
      the gate. You know the Prussians have strictly prohibited the presence of
      women in the peninsula.”
     

      Then he spoke of Henriette, and of her fruitless attempts to see her
      brother and come to his assistance. Once in Sedan chance had brought her
      face to face with Cousin Gunther, the man who was captain in the Prussian
      Guards. He had passed her with his haughty, supercilious air, pretending
      not to recognize her. She, also, with a sensation of loathing, as if she
      were in the presence of one of her husband's murderers, had hurried on
      with quickened steps; then, with a sudden change of purpose for which she
      could not account, had turned back and told him all the manner of Weiss's
      death, in harsh accents of reproach. And he, thus learning how horribly a
      relative had met his fate, had taken the matter coolly; it was the fortune
      of war; the same thing might have happened to himself. His face, rendered
      stoically impassive by the discipline of the soldier, had barely betrayed
      the faintest evidence of interest. After that, when she informed him that
      her brother was a prisoner and besought him to use his influence to obtain
      for her an opportunity of seeing him, he had excused himself on the ground
      that he was powerless in the matter; the instructions were explicit and
      might not be disobeyed. He appeared to place the regimental orderly book
      on a par with the Bible. She left him with the clearly defined impression
      that he believed he was in the country for the sole purpose of sitting in
      judgment on the French people, with all the intolerance and arrogance of
      the hereditary enemy, swollen by his personal hatred for the nation whom
      it had devolved on him to chastise.
    

      “And now,” said Delaherche in conclusion, “you won't have to go to bed
      supperless to-night; you have had a little something to eat. The worst is
      that I am afraid I shall not be able to secure another pass.”
     

      He asked them if there was anything he could do for them outside, and
      obligingly consented to take charge of some pencil-written letters
      confided to him by other soldiers, for the Bavarians had more than once
      been seen to laugh as they lighted their pipes with missives which they
      had promised to forward. Then, when Jean and Maurice had accompanied him
      to the gate, he exclaimed:
    

      “Look! over yonder, there's Henriette! Don't you see her waving her
      handkerchief?”
     

      True enough, among the crowd beyond the line of sentinels they
      distinguished a little, thin, pale face, a white dot that trembled in the
      sunshine. Both were deeply affected, and, with moist eyes, raising their
      hands above their head, answered her salutation by waving them frantically
      in the air.
    

      The following day was Friday, and it was then that Maurice felt that his
      cup of horror was full to overflowing. After another night of tranquil
      slumber in the little wood he was so fortunate as to secure another meal,
      Jean having come across an old woman at the Chateau of Villette who was
      selling bread at ten francs the pound. But that day they witnessed a
      spectacle of which the horror remained imprinted on their minds for many
      weeks and months.
    

      The day before Chouteau had noticed that Pache had ceased complaining and
      was going about with a careless, satisfied air, as a man might do who had
      dined well. He immediately jumped at the conclusion that the sly fox must
      have a concealed treasure somewhere, the more so that he had seen him
      absent himself for near an hour that morning and come back with a smile
      lurking on his face and his mouth filled with unswallowed food. It must be
      that he had had a windfall, had probably joined some marauding party and
      laid in a stock of provisions. And Chouteau labored with Loubet and
      Lapoulle to stir up bad feeling against the comrade, with the latter more
      particularly. Hein! wasn't he a dirty dog, if he had something to
      eat, not to go snacks with the comrades! He ought to have a lesson that he
      would remember, for his selfishness.
    

      “To-night we'll keep a watch on him, don't you see. We'll learn whether he
      dares to stuff himself on the sly, when so many poor devils are starving
      all around him.”
     

      “Yes, yes, that's the talk! we'll follow him,” Lapoulle angrily declared.
      “We'll see about it!”
     

      He doubled his fists; he was like a crazy man whenever the subject of
      eating was mentioned in his presence. His enormous appetite caused him to
      suffer more than the others; his torment at times was such that he had
      been known to stuff his mouth with grass. For more than thirty-six hours,
      since the night when they had supped on horseflesh and he had contracted a
      terrible dysentery in consequence, he had been without food, for he was so
      little able to look out for himself that, notwithstanding his bovine
      strength, whenever he joined the others in a marauding raid he never got
      his share of the booty. He would have been willing to give his blood for a
      pound of bread.
    

      As it was beginning to be dark Pache stealthily made his way to the Tour a
      Glaire and slipped into the park, while the three others cautiously
      followed him at a distance.
    

      “It won't do to let him suspect anything,” said Chouteau. “Be on your
      guard in case he should look around.”
     

      But when he had advanced another hundred paces Pache evidently had no idea
      there was anyone near, for he began to hurry forward at a swift gait, not
      so much as casting a look behind. They had no difficulty in tracking him
      to the adjacent quarries, where they fell on him as he was in the act of
      removing two great flat stones, to take from the cavity beneath part of a
      loaf of bread. It was the last of his store; he had enough left for one
      more meal.
    

      “You dirty, sniveling priest's whelp!” roared Lapoulle, “so that is why
      you sneak away from us! Give me that; it's my share!”
     

      Why should he give his bread? Weak and puny as he was, his slight form
      dilated with anger, while he clutched the loaf against his bosom with all
      the strength he could master. For he also was hungry.
    

      “Let me alone. It's mine.”
     

      Then, at sight of Lapoulle's raised fist, he broke away and ran, sliding
      down the steep banks of the quarries, making his way across the bare
      fields in the direction of Donchery, the three others after him in hot
      pursuit. He gained on them, however, being lighter than they, and
      possessed by such overmastering fear, so determined to hold on to what was
      his property, that his speed seemed to rival the wind. He had already
      covered more than half a mile and was approaching the little wood on the
      margin of the stream when he encountered Jean and Maurice, who were on
      their way back to their resting-place for the night. He addressed them an
      appealing, distressful cry as he passed; while they, astounded by the wild
      hunt that went fleeting by, stood motionless at the edge of a field, and
      thus it was that they beheld the ensuing tragedy.
    

      As luck would have it, Pache tripped over a stone and fell. In an instant
      the others were on top of him—shouting, swearing, their passion
      roused to such a pitch of frenzy that they were like wolves that had run
      down their prey.
    

      “Give me that,” yelled Lapoulle, “or by G-d I'll kill you!”
     

      And he had raised his fist again when Chouteau, taking from his pocket the
      penknife with which he had slaughtered the horse and opening it, placed it
      in his hand.
    

      “Here, take it! the knife!”
     

      But Jean meantime had come hurrying up, desirous to prevent the mischief
      he saw brewing, losing his wits like the rest of them, indiscreetly
      speaking of putting them all in the guardhouse; whereon Loubet, with an
      ugly laugh, told him he must be a Prussian, since they had no longer any
      commanders, and the Prussians were the only ones who issued orders.
    

      “Nom de Dieu!” Lapoulle repeated, “will you give me that?”
     

      Despite the terror that blanched his cheeks Pache hugged the bread more
      closely to his bosom, with the obstinacy of the peasant who never cedes a
      jot or tittle of that which is his.
    

      “No!”
     

      Then in a second all was over; the brute drove the knife into the other's
      throat with such violence that the wretched man did not even utter a cry.
      His arms relaxed, the bread fell to the ground, into the pool of blood
      that had spurted from the wound.
    

      At sight of the imbecile, uncalled-for murder, Maurice, who had until then
      been a silent spectator of the scene, appeared as if stricken by a sudden
      fit of madness. He raved and gesticulated, shaking his fist in the face of
      the three men and calling them murderers, assassins, with a violence that
      shook his frame from head to foot. But Lapoulle seemed not even to hear
      him. Squatted on the ground beside the corpse, he was devouring the
      bloodstained bread, an expression of stupid ferocity on his face, with a
      loud grinding of his great jaws, while Chouteau and Loubet, seeing him
      thus terrible in the gratification of his wild-beast appetite, did not
      even dare claim their portion.
    

      By this time night had fallen, a pleasant night with a clear sky thick-set
      with stars, and Maurice and Jean, who had regained the shelter of their
      little wood, presently perceived Lapoulle wandering up and down the river
      bank. The two others had vanished, had doubtless returned to the
      encampment by the canal, their mind troubled by reason of the corpse they
      left behind them. He, on the other hand, seemed to dread going to rejoin
      the comrades. When he was more himself and his brutish, sluggish intellect
      showed him the full extent of his crime, he had evidently experienced a
      twinge of anguish that made motion a necessity, and not daring to return
      to the interior of the peninsula, where he would have to face the body of
      his victim, had sought the bank of the stream, where he was now tramping
      to and fro with uneven, faltering steps. What was going on within the
      recesses of that darkened mind that guided the actions of that creature,
      so degraded as to be scarce higher than the animal? Was it the awakening
      of remorse? or only the fear lest his crime might be discovered? He could
      not remain there; he paced his beat as a wild beast shambles up and down
      its cage, with a sudden and ever-increasing longing to fly, a longing that
      ached and pained like a physical hurt, from which he felt he should die,
      could he do nothing to satisfy it. Quick, quick, he must fly, must fly at
      once, from that prison where he had slain a fellow-being. And yet, the
      coward in him, it may be, gaining the supremacy, he threw himself on the
      ground, and for a long time lay crouched among the herbage.
    

      And Maurice said to Jean in his horror and disgust:
    

      “See here, I cannot remain longer in this place; I tell you plainly I
      should go mad. I am surprised that the physical part of me holds out as it
      does; my bodily health is not so bad, but the mind is going; yes! it is
      going, I am certain of it. If you leave me another day in this hell I am
      lost. I beg you, let us go away, let us start at once!”
     

      And he went on to propound the wildest schemes for getting away. They
      would swim the Meuse, would cast themselves on the sentries and strangle
      them with a cord he had in his pocket, or would beat out their brains with
      rocks, or would buy them over with the money they had left and don their
      uniform to pass through the Prussian lines.
    

      “My dear boy, be silent!” Jean sadly answered; “it frightens me to hear
      you talk so wildly. Is there any reason in what you say, are any of your
      plans feasible? Wait; to-morrow we'll see about it. Be silent!”
     

      He, although his heart, no less than his friend's, was wrung by the
      horrors that surrounded them on every side, had preserved his mental
      balance amid the debilitating effects of famine, among the grisly visions
      of that existence than which none could approach more nearly the depth of
      human misery. And as his companion's frenzy continued to increase and he
      talked of casting himself into the Meuse, he was obliged to restrain him,
      even to the point of using violence, scolding and supplicating, tears
      standing in his eyes. Then suddenly he said:
    

      “See! look there!”
     

      A splash was heard coming from the river, and they saw it was Lapoulle,
      who had finally decided to attempt to escape by the stream, first removing
      his capote in order that it might not hinder his movements; and his white
      shirt made a spot of brightness that was distinctly visible upon the dusky
      bosom of the moving water. He was swimming up-stream with a leisurely
      movement, doubtless on the lookout for a place where he might land with
      safety, while on the opposite shore there was no difficulty in discerning
      the shadowy forms of the sentries, erect and motionless in the
      semi-obscurity. There came a sudden flash that tore the black veil of
      night, a report that went with bellowing echoes and spent itself among the
      rocks of Montimont. The water boiled and bubbled for an instant, as it
      does under the wild efforts of an unpracticed oarsman. And that was all;
      Lapoulle's body, the white spot on the dusky stream, floated away,
      lifeless, upon the tide.
    

      The next day, which was Saturday, Jean aroused Maurice as soon as it was
      day and they returned to the camp of the 106th, with the hope that they
      might move that day, but there were no orders; it seemed as though the
      regiment's existence were forgotten. Many of the troops had been sent
      away, the peninsula was being depopulated, and sickness was terribly
      prevalent among those who were left behind. For eight long days disease
      had been germinating in that hell on earth; the rains had ceased, but the
      blazing, scorching sunlight had only wrought a change of evils. The
      excessive heat completed the exhaustion of the men and gave to the
      numerous cases of dysentery an alarmingly epidemic character. The excreta
      of that army of sick poisoned the air with their noxious emanations. No
      one could approach the Meuse or the canal, owing to the overpowering
      stench that rose from the bodies of drowned soldiers and horses that lay
      festering among the weeds. And the horses, that dropped in the fields from
      inanition, were decomposing so rapidly and forming such a fruitful source
      of pestilence that the Prussians, commencing to be alarmed on their own
      account, had provided picks and shovels and forced the prisoners to bury
      them.
    

      That day, however, was the last on which they suffered from famine. As
      their numbers were so greatly reduced and provisions kept pouring in from
      every quarter, they passed at a single bound from the extreme of
      destitution to the most abundant plenty. Bread, meat, and wine, even, were
      to be had without stint; eating went on from morning till night, until
      they were ready to drop. Darkness descended, and they were eating still;
      in some quarters the gorging was continued until the next morning. To many
      it proved fatal.
    

      That whole day Jean made it his sole business to keep watch over Maurice,
      who he saw was ripe for some rash action. He had been drinking; he spoke
      of his intention of cuffing a Prussian officer in order that he might be
      sent away. And at night Jean, having discovered an unoccupied corner in
      the cellar of one of the outbuildings at the Tour a Glaire, thought it
      advisable to go and sleep there with his companion, thinking that a good
      night's rest would do him good, but it turned out to be the worst night in
      all their experience, a night of terror during which neither of them
      closed an eye. The cellar was inhabited by other soldiers; lying in the
      same corner were two who were dying of dysentery, and as soon as it was
      fairly dark they commenced to relieve their sufferings by moans and
      inarticulate cries, a hideous death-rattle that went on uninterruptedly
      until morning. These sounds finally became so horrific there in the
      intense darkness, that the others who were resting there, wishing to
      sleep, allowed their anger to get the better of them and shouted to the
      dying men to be silent. They did not hear; the rattle went on, drowning
      all other sounds, while from without came the drunken clamor of those who
      were eating and drinking still, with insatiable appetite.
    

      Then commenced for Maurice a period of agony unspeakable. He would have
      fled from the awful sounds that brought the cold sweat of anguish in great
      drops to his brow, but when he arose and attempted to grope his way out he
      trod on the limbs of those extended there, and finally fell to the ground,
      a living man immured there in the darkness with the dying. He made no
      further effort to escape from this last trial. The entire frightful
      disaster arose before his mind, from the time of their departure from
      Rheims to the crushing defeat of Sedan. It seemed to him that in that
      night, in the inky blackness of that cellar, where the groans of two dying
      soldiers drove sleep from the eyelids of their comrades, the ordeal of the
      army of Chalons had reached its climax. At each of the stations of its
      passion the army of despair, the expiatory band, driven forward to the
      sacrifice, had spent its life-blood in atonement for the faults of others;
      and now, unhonored amid disaster, covered with contumely, it was enduring
      martyrdom in that cruel scourging, the severity of which it had done
      nothing to deserve. He felt it was too much; he was heartsick with rage
      and grief, hungering for justice, burning with a fierce desire to be
      avenged on destiny.
    

      When daylight appeared one of the soldiers was dead, the other was
      lingering on in protracted agony.
    

      “Come along, little one,” Jean gently said; “we'll go and get a breath of
      fresh air; it will do us good.”
     

      But when the pair emerged into the pure, warm morning air and, pursuing
      the river bank, were near the village of Iges, Maurice grew flightier
      still, and extending his hand toward the vast expanse of sunlit
      battlefield, the plateau of Illy in front of them, Saint-Menges to the
      left, the wood of la Garenne to the right, he cried:
    

      “No, I cannot, I cannot bear to look on it! The sight pierces my heart and
      drives me mad. Take me away, oh! take me away, at once, at once!”
     

      It was Sunday once more; the bells were pealing from the steeples of
      Sedan, while the music of a German military band floated on the air in the
      distance. There were still no orders for their regiment to move, and Jean,
      alarmed to see Maurice's deliriousness increasing, determined to attempt
      the execution of a plan that he had been maturing in his mind for the last
      twenty-four hours. On the road before the tents of the Prussians another
      regiment, the 5th of the line, was drawn up in readiness for departure.
      Great confusion prevailed in the column, and an officer, whose knowledge
      of the French language was imperfect, had been unable to complete the
      roster of the prisoners. Then the two friends, having first torn from
      their uniform coat the collar and buttons in order that the number might
      not betray their identity, quietly took their place in the ranks and soon
      had the satisfaction of crossing the bridge and leaving the chain of
      sentries behind them. The same idea must have presented itself to Loubet
      and Chouteau, for they caught sight of them somewhat further to the rear,
      peering anxiously about them with the guilty eyes of murderers.
    

      Ah, what comfort there was for them in that first blissful moment! Outside
      their prison the sunlight was brighter, the air more bracing; it was like
      a resurrection, a bright renewal of all their hopes. Whatever evil fortune
      might have in store for them, they dreaded it not; they snapped their
      fingers at it in their delight at having seen the last of the horrors of
      Camp Misery.
    

      
 
    

      That morning Maurice and Jean listened for the last time to the gay,
      ringing notes of the French bugles, and now they were on their way to
      Pont-a-Mousson, marching in the ranks of the convoy of prisoners, which
      was guarded front and rear by platoons of Prussian infantry, while a file
      of men with fixed bayonets flanked the column on either side. Whenever
      they came to a German post they heard only the lugubrious, ear-piercing
      strains of the Prussian trumpets.
    

      Maurice was glad to observe that the column took the left-hand road and
      would pass through Sedan; perhaps he would have an opportunity of seeing
      his sister Henriette. All the pleasure, however, that he had experienced
      at his release from that foul cesspool where he had spent nine days of
      agony was dashed to the ground and destroyed during the three-mile march
      from the peninsula of Iges to the city. It was but another form of his old
      distress to behold that array of prisoners, shuffling timorously through
      the dust of the road, like a flock of sheep with the dog at their heels.
      There is no spectacle in all the world more pitiful than that of a column
      of vanquished troops being marched off into captivity under guard of their
      conquerors, without arms, their empty hands hanging idly at their sides;
      and these men, clad in rags and tatters, besmeared with the filth in which
      they had lain for more than a week, gaunt and wasted after their long
      fast, were more like vagabonds than soldiers; they resembled loathsome,
      horribly dirty tramps, whom the gendarmes would have picked up along the
      highways and consigned to the lockup. As they passed through the Faubourg
      of Torcy, where men paused on the sidewalks and women came to their doors
      to regard them with mournful, compassionate interest, the blush of shame
      rose to Maurice's cheek, he hung his head and a bitter taste came to his
      mouth.
    

      Jean, whose epidermis was thicker and mind more practical, thought only of
      their stupidity in not having brought off with them a loaf of bread
      apiece. In the hurry of their abrupt departure they had even gone off
      without breakfasting, and hunger soon made its presence felt by the
      nerveless sensation in their legs. Others among the prisoners appeared to
      be in the same boat, for they held out money, begging the people of the
      place to sell them something to eat. There was one, an extremely tall man,
      apparently very ill, who displayed a gold piece, extending it above the
      heads of the soldiers of the escort; and he was almost frantic that he
      could purchase nothing. Just at that time Jean, who had been keeping his
      eyes open, perceived a bakery a short distance ahead, before which were
      piled a dozen loaves of bread; he immediately got his money ready and, as
      the column passed, tossed the baker a five-franc piece and endeavored to
      secure two of the loaves; then, when the Prussian who was marching at his
      side pushed him back roughly into the ranks, he protested, demanding that
      he be allowed to recover his money from the baker. But at that juncture
      the captain commanding the detachment, a short, bald-headed man with a
      brutal expression of face, came hastening up; he raised his revolver over
      Jean's head as if about to strike him with the butt, declaring with an
      oath that he would brain the first man that dared to lift a finger. And
      the rest of the captives continued to shamble on, stirring up the dust of
      the road with their shuffling feet, with eyes averted and shoulders bowed,
      cowed and abjectly submissive as a drove of cattle.
    

      “Oh! how good it would seem to slap the fellow's face just once!” murmured
      Maurice, as if he meant it. “How I should like to let him have just one
      from the shoulder, and drive his teeth down his dirty throat!”
     

      And during the remainder of their march he could not endure to look on
      that captain, with his ugly, supercilious face.
    

      They had entered Sedan and were crossing the Pont de Meuse, and the scenes
      of violence and brutality became more numerous than ever. A woman darted
      forward and would have embraced a boyish young sergeant—likely she
      was his mother—and was repulsed with a blow from a musket-butt that
      felled her to the ground. On the Place Turenne the guards hustled and
      maltreated some citizens because they cast provisions to the prisoners. In
      the Grande Rue one of the convoy fell in endeavoring to secure a bottle
      that a lady extended to him, and was assisted to his feet with kicks. For
      a week now Sedan had witnessed the saddening spectacle of the defeated
      driven like cattle through its streets, and seemed no more accustomed to
      it than at the beginning; each time a fresh detachment passed the city was
      stirred to its very depths by a movement of pity and indignation.
    

      Jean had recovered his equanimity; his thoughts, like Maurice's, reverted
      to Henriette, and the idea occurred to him that they might see Delaherche
      somewhere among the throng. He gave his friend a nudge of the elbow.
    

      “Keep your eyes open if we pass through their street presently, will you?”
     

      They had scarce more than struck into the Rue Maqua, indeed, when they
      became aware of several pairs of eyes turned on the column from one of the
      tall windows of the factory, and as they drew nearer recognized Delaherche
      and his wife Gilberte, their elbows resting on the railing of the balcony,
      and behind them the tall, rigid form of old Madame Delaherche. They had a
      supply of bread with them, and the manufacturer was tossing the loaves
      down into the hands that were upstretched with tremulous eagerness to
      receive them. Maurice saw at once that his sister was not there, while
      Jean anxiously watched the flying loaves, fearing there might none be left
      for them. They both had raised their arms and were waving them frantically
      above their head, shouting meanwhile with all the force of their lungs:
    

      “Here we are! This way, this way!”
     

      The Delaherches seemed delighted to see them in the midst of their
      surprise. Their faces, pallid with emotion, suddenly brightened, and they
      displayed by the warmth of their gestures the pleasure they experienced in
      the encounter. There was one solitary loaf left, which Gilberte insisted
      on throwing with her own hands, and pitched it into Jean's extended arms
      in such a charmingly awkward way that she gave a winsome laugh at her own
      expense. Maurice, unable to stop on account of the pressure from the rear,
      turned his head and shouted, in a tone of anxious inquiry:
    

      “And Henriette? Henriette?”
     

      Delaherche replied with a long farrago, but his voice was inaudible in the
      shuffling tramp of so many feet. He seemed to understand that the young
      man had failed to catch his meaning, for he gesticulated like a semaphore;
      there was one gesture in particular that he repeated several times,
      extending his arm with a sweeping motion toward the south, apparently
      intending to convey the idea of some point in the remote distance: Off
      there, away off there. Already the head of the column was wheeling into
      the Rue du Minil, the facade of the factory was lost to sight, together
      with the kindly faces of the three Delaherches; the last the two friends
      saw of them was the fluttering of the white handkerchief with which
      Gilberte waved them a farewell.
    

      “What did he say?” asked Jean.
    

      Maurice, in a fever of anxiety, was still looking to the rear where there
      was nothing to be seen. “I don't know; I could not understand him; I shall
      have no peace of mind until I hear from her.”
     

      And the trailing, shambling line crept slowly onward, the Prussians urging
      on the weary men with the brutality of conquerors; the column left the
      city by the Minil gate in straggling, long-drawn array, hastening their
      steps, like sheep at whose heels the dogs are snapping.
    

      When they passed through Bazeilles Jean and Maurice thought of Weiss, and
      cast their eyes about in an effort to distinguish the site of the little
      house that had been defended with such bravery. While they were at Camp
      Misery they had heard the woeful tale of slaughter and conflagration that
      had blotted the pretty village from existence, and the abominations that
      they now beheld exceeded all they had dreamed of or imagined. At the
      expiration of twelve days the ruins were smoking still; the tottering
      walls had fallen in, there were not ten houses standing. It afforded them
      some small comfort, however, to meet a procession of carts and
      wheelbarrows loaded with Bavarian helmets and muskets that had been
      collected after the conflict. That evidence of the chastisement that had
      been inflicted on those murderers and incendiaries went far toward
      mitigating the affliction of defeat.
    

      The column was to halt at Douzy to give the men an opportunity to eat
      breakfast. It was not without much suffering that they reached that place;
      already the prisoners' strength was giving out, exhausted as they were by
      their ten days of fasting. Those who the day before had availed of the
      abundant supplies to gorge themselves were seized with vertigo, their
      enfeebled legs refused to support their weight, and their gluttony, far
      from restoring their lost strength, was a further source of weakness to
      them. The consequence was that, when the train was halted in a meadow to
      the left of the village, these poor creatures flung themselves upon the
      ground with no desire to eat. Wine was wanting; some charitable women who
      came, bringing a few bottles, were driven off by the sentries. One of them
      in her affright fell and sprained her ankle, and there ensued a painful
      scene of tears and hysterics, during which the Prussians confiscated the
      bottles and drank their contents amid jeers and insulting laughter. This
      tender compassion of the peasants for the poor soldiers who were being led
      away into captivity was manifested constantly along the route, while it
      was said the harshness they displayed toward the generals amounted almost
      to cruelty. At that same Douzy, only a few days previously, the villagers
      had hooted and reviled a number of paroled officers who were on their way
      to Pont-a-Mousson. The roads were not safe for general officers; men
      wearing the blouse—escaped soldiers, or deserters, it may be—fell
      on them with pitch-forks and endeavored to take their life as traitors,
      credulously pinning their faith to that legend of bargain and sale which,
      even twenty years later, was to continue to shed its opprobrium upon those
      leaders who had commanded armies in that campaign.
    

      Maurice and Jean ate half their bread, and were so fortunate as to have a
      mouthful of brandy with which to wash it down, thanks to the kindness of a
      worthy old farmer. When the order was given to resume their advance,
      however, the distress throughout the convoy was extreme. They were to halt
      for the night at Mouzon, and although the march was a short one, it seemed
      as if it would tax the men's strength more severely than they could bear;
      they could not get on their feet without giving utterance to cries of
      pain, so stiff did their tired legs become the moment they stopped to
      rest. Many removed their shoes to relieve their galled and bleeding feet.
      Dysentery continued to rage; a man fell before they had gone half a mile,
      and they had to prop him against a wall and leave him. A little further on
      two others sank at the foot of a hedge, and it was night before an old
      woman came along and picked them up. All were stumbling, tottering, and
      dragging themselves along, supporting their forms with canes, which the
      Prussians, perhaps in derision, had suffered them to cut at the margin of
      a wood. They were a straggling array of tramps and beggars, covered with
      sores, haggard, emaciated, and footsore; a sight to bring tears to the
      eyes of the most stony-hearted. And the guards continued to be as brutally
      strict as ever; those who for any purpose attempted to leave the ranks
      were driven back with blows, and the platoon that brought up the rear had
      orders to prod with their bayonets those who hung back. A sergeant having
      refused to go further, the captain summoned two of his men and instructed
      them to seize him, one by either arm, and in this manner the wretched man
      was dragged over the ground until he agreed to walk. And what made the
      whole thing more bitter and harder to endure was the utter insignificance
      of that little pimply-faced, bald-headed officer, so insufferably
      consequential in his brutality, who took advantage of his knowledge of
      French to vituperate the prisoners in it in curt, incisive words that cut
      and stung like the lash of a whip.
    

      “Oh!” Maurice furiously exclaimed, “to get the puppy in my hands and drain
      him of his blood, drop by drop!”
     

      His powers of endurance were almost exhausted, but it was his rage that he
      had to choke down, even more than his fatigue, that was cause of his
      suffering. Everything exasperated him and set on edge his tingling nerves;
      the harsh notes of the Prussian trumpets particularly, which inspired him
      with a desire to scream each time he heard them. He felt he should never
      reach the end of their cruel journey without some outbreak that would
      bring down on him the utmost severity of the guard. Even now, when
      traversing the smallest hamlets, he suffered horribly and felt as if he
      should die with shame to behold the eyes of the women fixed pityingly on
      him; what would it be when they should enter Germany, and the populace of
      the great cities should crowd the streets to laugh and jeer at them as
      they passed? And he pictured to himself the cattle cars into which they
      would be crowded for transportation, the discomforts and humiliations they
      would have to suffer on the journey, the dismal life in German fortresses
      under the leaden, wintry sky. No, no; he would have none of it; better to
      take the risk of leaving his bones by the roadside on French soil than go
      and rot off yonder, for months and months, perhaps, in the dark depths of
      a casemate.
    

      “Listen,” he said below his breath to Jean, who was walking at his side;
      “we will wait until we come to a wood; then we'll break through the guards
      and run for it among the trees. The Belgian frontier is not far away; we
      shall have no trouble in finding someone to guide us to it.”
     

      Jean, accustomed as he was to look at things coolly and calculate chances,
      put his veto on the mad scheme, although he, too, in his revolt, was
      beginning to meditate the possibilities of an escape.
    

      “Have you taken leave of your senses! the guard will fire on us, and we
      shall both be killed.”
     

      But Maurice replied there was a chance the soldiers might not hit them,
      and then, after all, if their aim should prove true, it would not matter
      so very much.
    

      “Very well!” rejoined Jean, “but what is going to become of us afterward,
      dressed in uniform as we are? You know perfectly well that the country is
      swarming in every direction with Prussian troops; we could not go far
      unless we had other clothes to put on. No, no, my lad, it's too risky;
      I'll not let you attempt such an insane project.”
     

      And he took the young man's arm and held it pressed against his side, as
      if they were mutually sustaining each other, continuing meanwhile to chide
      and soothe him in a tone that was at once rough and affectionate.
    

      Just then the sound of a whispered conversation close behind them caused
      them to turn and look around. It was Chouteau and Loubet, who had left the
      peninsula of Iges that morning at the same time as they, and whom they had
      managed to steer clear of until the present moment. Now the two worthies
      were close at their heels, and Chouteau must have overheard Maurice's
      words, his plan for escaping through the mazes of a forest, for he had
      adopted it on his own behalf. His breath was hot upon their neck as he
      murmured:
    

      “Say, comrades, count us in on that. That's a capital idea of yours, to
      skip the ranch. Some of the boys have gone already, and sure we're not
      going to be such fools as to let those bloody pigs drag us away like dogs
      into their infernal country. What do you say, eh? Shall we four make a
      break for liberty?”
     

      Maurice's excitement was rising to fever-heat again; Jean turned and said
      to the tempter:
    

      “If you are so anxious to get away, why don't you go? there's nothing to
      prevent you. What are you up to, any way?”
     

      He flinched a little before the corporal's direct glance, and allowed the
      true motive of his proposal to escape him.
    

      “Dame! it would be better that four should share the undertaking.
      One or two of us might have a chance of getting off.”
     

      Then Jean, with an emphatic shake of the head, refused to have anything
      whatever to do with the matter; he distrusted the gentleman, he said, as
      he was afraid he would play them some of his dirty tricks. He had to exert
      all his authority with Maurice to retain him on his side, for at that very
      moment an opportunity presented itself for attempting the enterprise; they
      were passing the border of a small but very dense wood, separated from the
      road only by the width of a field that was covered by a thick growth of
      underbrush. Why should they not dash across that field and vanish in the
      thicket? was there not safety for them in that direction?
    

      Loubet had so far said nothing. His mind was made up, however, that he was
      not going to Germany to run to seed in one of their dungeons, and his
      nose, mobile as a hound's, was sniffing the atmosphere, his shifty eyes
      were watching for the favorable moment. He would trust to his legs and his
      mother wit, which had always helped him out of his scrapes thus far. His
      decision was quickly made.
    

      “Ah, zut! I've had enough of it; I'm off!”
     

      He broke through the line of the escort, and with a single bound was in
      the field, Chouteau following his example and running at his side. Two of
      the Prussian soldiers immediately started in pursuit, but the others
      seemed dazed, and it did not occur to them to send a ball after the
      fugitives. The entire episode was so soon over that it was not easy to
      note its different phases. Loubet dodged and doubled among the bushes and
      it appeared as if he would certainly succeed in getting off, while
      Chouteau, less nimble, was on the point of being captured, but the latter,
      summoning up all his energies in a supreme burst of speed, caught up with
      his comrade and dexterously tripped him; and while the two Prussians were
      lumbering up to secure the fallen man, the other darted into the wood and
      vanished. The guard, finally remembering that they had muskets, fired a
      few ineffectual shots, and there was some attempt made to search the
      thicket, which resulted in nothing.
    

      Meantime the two soldiers were pummeling poor Loubet, who had not regained
      his feet. The captain came running up, beside himself with anger, and
      talked of making an example, and with this encouragement kicks and cuffs
      and blows from musket-butts continued to rain down upon the wretched man
      with such fury that when at last they stood him on his feet he was found
      to have an arm broken and his skull fractured. A peasant came along,
      driving a cart, in which he was placed, but he died before reaching
      Mouzon.
    

      “You see,” was all that Jean said to Maurice.
    

      The two friends cast a look in the direction of the wood that sufficiently
      expressed their sentiments toward the scoundrel who had gained his freedom
      by such base means, while their hearts were stirred with feelings of
      deepest compassion for the poor devil whom he had made his victim, a
      guzzler and a toper, who certainly did not amount to much, but a merry,
      good-natured fellow all the same, and nobody's fool. And that was always
      the way with those who kept bad company, Jean moralizingly observed: they
      might be very fly, but sooner or later a bigger rascal was sure to come
      along and make a meal of them.
    

      Notwithstanding this terrible lesson Maurice, upon reaching Mouzon, was
      still possessed by his unalterable determination to attempt an escape. The
      prisoners were in such an exhausted condition when they reached the place
      that the Prussians had to assist them to set up the few tents that were
      placed at their disposal. The camp was formed near the town, on low and
      marshy ground, and the worst of the business was that another convoy
      having occupied the spot the day before, the field was absolutely
      invisible under the superincumbent filth; it was no better than a common
      cesspool, of unimaginable foulness. The sole means the men had of
      self-protection was to scatter over the ground some large flat stones, of
      which they were so fortunate as to find a number in the vicinity. By way
      of compensation they had a somewhat less hard time of it that evening; the
      strictness of their guardians was relaxed a little once the captain had
      disappeared, doubtless to seek the comforts of an inn. The sentries began
      by winking at the irregularity of the proceeding when some children came
      along and commenced to toss fruit, apples and pears, over their heads to
      the prisoners; the next thing was they allowed the people of the
      neighborhood to enter the lines, so that in a short time the camp was
      swarming with impromptu merchants, men and women, offering for sale bread,
      wine, cigars, even. Those who had money had no trouble in supplying their
      needs so far as eating, drinking, and smoking were concerned. A bustling
      animation prevailed in the dim twilight; it was like a corner of the
      market place in a town where a fair is being held.
    

      But Maurice drew Jean behind their tent and again said to him in his
      nervous, flighty way:
    

      “I can't stand it; I shall make an effort to get away as soon as it is
      dark. To-morrow our course will take us away from the frontier; it will be
      too late.”
     

      “Very well, we'll try it,” Jean replied, his powers of resistance
      exhausted, his imagination, too, seduced by the pleasing idea of freedom.
      “They can't do more than kill us.”
     

      After that he began to scrutinize more narrowly the venders who surrounded
      him on every side. There were some among the comrades who had succeeded in
      supplying themselves with blouse and trousers, and it was reported that
      some of the charitable people of the place had regular stocks of garments
      on hand, designed to assist prisoners in escaping. And almost immediately
      his attention was attracted to a pretty girl, a tall blonde of sixteen
      with a pair of magnificent eyes, who had on her arm a basket containing
      three loaves of bread. She was not crying her wares like the rest; an
      anxious, engaging smile played on her red lips, her manner was hesitating.
      He looked her steadily in the face; their glances met and for an instant
      remained confounded. Then she came up, with the embarrassed smile of a
      girl unaccustomed to such business.
    

      “Do you wish to buy some bread?”
     

      He made no reply, but questioned her by an imperceptible movement of the
      eyelids. On her answering yes, by an affirmative nod of the head, he asked
      in a very low tone of voice:
    

      “There is clothing?”
     

      “Yes, under the loaves.”
     

      Then she began to cry her merchandise aloud: “Bread! bread! who'll buy my
      bread?” But when Maurice would have slipped a twenty-franc piece into her
      fingers she drew back her hand abruptly and ran away, leaving the basket
      with them. The last they saw of her was the happy, tender look in her
      pretty eyes, as in the distance she turned and smiled on them.
    

      When they were in possession of the basket Jean and Maurice found
      difficulties staring them in the face. They had strayed away from their
      tent, and in their agitated condition felt they should never succeed in
      finding it again. Where were they to bestow themselves? and how effect
      their change of garments? It seemed to them that the eyes of the entire
      assemblage were focused on the basket, which Jean carried with an awkward
      air, as if it contained dynamite, and that its contents must be plainly
      visible to everyone. It would not do to waste time, however; they must be
      up and doing. They stepped into the first vacant tent they came to, where
      each of them hurriedly slipped on a pair of trousers and donned a blouse,
      having first deposited their discarded uniforms in the basket, which they
      placed on the ground in a dark corner of the tent and abandoned to its
      fate. There was a circumstance that gave them no small uneasiness,
      however; they found only one head-covering, a knitted woolen cap, which
      Jean insisted Maurice should wear. The former, fearing his bare-headedness
      might excite suspicion, was hanging about the precincts of the camp on the
      lookout for a covering of some description, when it occurred to him to
      purchase his hat from an extremely dirty old man who was selling cigars.
    

      “Brussels cigars, three sous apiece, two for five!”
     

      Customs regulations were in abeyance since the battle of Sedan, and the
      imports of Belgian merchandise had been greatly stimulated. The old man
      had been making a handsome profit from his traffic, but that did not
      prevent him from driving a sharp bargain when he understood the reason why
      the two men wanted to buy his hat, a greasy old affair of felt with a
      great hole in its crown. He finally consented to part with it for two
      five-franc pieces, grumbling that he should certainly have a cold in his
      head.
    

      Then Jean had another idea, which was neither more nor less than to buy
      out the old fellow's stock in trade, the two dozen cigars that remained
      unsold. The bargain effected, he pulled his hat down over his eyes and
      began to cry in the itinerant hawker's drawling tone:
    

      “Here you are, Brussels cigars, two for three sous, two for three sous!”
     

      Their safety was now assured. He signaled Maurice to go on before. It
      happened to the latter to discover an umbrella lying on the grass; he
      picked it up and, as a few drops of rain began to fall just then, opened
      it tranquilly as they were about to pass the line of sentries.
    

      “Two for three sous, two for three sous, Brussels cigars!”
     

      It took Jean less than two minutes to dispose of his stock of merchandise.
      The men came crowding about him with chaff and laughter: a reasonable
      fellow, that; he didn't rob poor chaps of their money! The Prussians
      themselves were attracted by such unheard-of bargains, and he was
      compelled to trade with them. He had all the time been working his way
      toward the edge of the enceinte, and his last two cigars went to a big
      sergeant with an immense beard, who could not speak a word of French.
    

      “Don't walk so fast, confound it!” Jean breathed in a whisper behind
      Maurice's back. “You'll have them after us.”
     

      Their legs seemed inclined to run away with them, although they did their
      best to strike a sober gait. It caused them a great effort to pause a
      moment at a cross-roads, where a number of people were collected before an
      inn. Some villagers were chatting peaceably with German soldiers, and the
      two runaways made a pretense of listening, and even hazarded a few
      observations on the weather and the probability of the rain continuing
      during the night. They trembled when they beheld a man, a fleshy
      gentleman, eying them attentively, but as he smiled with an air of great
      good-nature they thought they might venture to address him, asking in a
      whisper:
    

      “Can you tell us if the road to Belgium is guarded, sir?”
     

      “Yes, it is; but you will be safe if you cross this wood and afterward cut
      across the fields, to the left.”
     

      Once they were in the wood, in the deep, dark silence of the slumbering
      trees, where no sound reached their ears, where nothing stirred and they
      believed their safety was assured them, they sank into each other's arms
      in an uncontrollable impulse of emotion. Maurice was sobbing violently,
      while big tears trickled slowly down Jean's cheeks. It was the natural
      revulsion of their overtaxed feelings after the long-protracted ordeal
      they had passed through, the joy and delight of their mutual assurance
      that their troubles were at an end, and that thenceforth suffering and
      they were to be strangers. And united by the memory of what they had
      endured together in ties closer than those of brotherhood, they clasped
      each other in a wild embrace, and the kiss that they exchanged at that
      moment seemed to them to possess a savor and a poignancy such as they had
      never experienced before in all their life; a kiss such as they never
      could receive from lips of woman, sealing their undying friendship, giving
      additional confirmation to the certainty that thereafter their two hearts
      would be but one, for all eternity.
    

      When they had separated at last: “Little one,” said Jean, in a trembling
      voice, “it is well for us to be here, but we are not at the end. We must
      look about a bit and try to find our bearings.”
     

      Maurice, although he had no acquaintance with that part of the frontier,
      declared that all they had to do was to pursue a straight course, whereon
      they resumed their way, moving among the trees in Indian file with the
      greatest circumspection, until they reached the edge of the thicket.
      There, mindful of the injunction of the kind-hearted villager, they were
      about to turn to the left and take a short cut across the fields, but on
      coming to a road, bordered with a row of poplars on either side they
      beheld directly in their path the watch-fire of a Prussian detachment. The
      bayonet of the sentry, pacing his beat, gleamed in the ruddy light, the
      men were finishing their soup and conversing; the fugitives stood not upon
      the order of their going, but plunged into the recesses of the wood again,
      in mortal terror lest they might be pursued. They thought they heard the
      sound of voices, of footsteps on their trail, and thus for over an hour
      they wandered at random among the copses, until all idea of locality was
      obliterated from their brain; now racing like affrighted animals through
      the underbrush, again brought up all standing, the cold sweat trickling
      down their face, before a tree in which they beheld a Prussian. And the
      end of it was that they again came out on the poplar-bordered road not
      more than ten paces from the sentry, and quite near the soldiers, who were
      toasting their toes in tranquil comfort.
    

      “Hang the luck!” grumbled Jean. “This must be an enchanted wood.”
     

      This time, however, they had been heard. The sound of snapping twigs and
      rolling stones betrayed them. And as they did not answer the challenge of
      the sentry, but made off at the double-quick, the men seized their muskets
      and sent a shower of bullets crashing through the thicket, into which the
      fugitives had plunged incontinently.
    

      “Nom de Dieu!” ejaculated Jean, with a stifled cry of pain.
    

      He had received something that felt like the cut of a whip in the calf of
      his left leg, but the impact was so violent that it drove him up against a
      tree.
    

      “Are you hurt?” Maurice anxiously inquired.
    

      “Yes, and in the leg, worse luck!”
     

      They both stood holding their breath and listening, in dread expectancy of
      hearing their pursuers clamoring at their heels; but the firing had ceased
      and nothing stirred amid the intense stillness that had again settled down
      upon the wood and the surrounding country. It was evident that the
      Prussians had no inclination to beat up the thicket.
    

      Jean, who was doing his best to keep on his feet; forced back a groan.
      Maurice sustained him with his arm.
    

      “Can't you walk?”
     

      “I should say not!” He gave way to a fit of rage, he, always so
      self-contained. He clenched his fists, could have thumped himself. “God in
      Heaven, if this is not hard luck! to have one's legs knocked from under
      him at the very time he is most in need of them! It's too bad, too bad, by
      my soul it is! Go on, you, and put yourself in safety!”
     

      But Maurice laughed quietly as he answered:
    

      “That is silly talk!”
     

      He took his friend's arm and helped him along, for neither of them had any
      desire to linger there. When, laboriously and by dint of heroic effort,
      they had advanced some half-dozen paces further, they halted again with
      renewed alarm at beholding before them a house, standing at the margin of
      the wood, apparently a sort of farmhouse. Not a light was visible at any
      of the windows, the open courtyard gate yawned upon the dark and deserted
      dwelling. And when they plucked up their courage a little and ventured to
      enter the courtyard, great was their surprise to find a horse standing
      there with a saddle on his back, with nothing to indicate the why or
      wherefore of his being there. Perhaps it was the owner's intention to
      return, perhaps he was lying behind a bush with a bullet in his brain.
      They never learned how it was.
    

      But Maurice had conceived a new scheme, which appeared to afford him great
      satisfaction.
    

      “See here, the frontier is too far away; we should never succeed in
      reaching it without a guide. What do you say to changing our plan and
      going to Uncle Fouchard's, at Remilly? I am so well acquainted with every
      inch of the road that I'm sure I could take you there with my eyes
      bandaged. Don't you think it's a good idea, eh? I'll put you on this
      horse, and I suppose Uncle Fouchard will grumble, but he'll take us in.”
     

      Before starting he wished to take a look at the injured leg. There were
      two orifices; the ball appeared to have entered the limb and passed out,
      fracturing the tibia in its course. The flow of blood had not been great;
      he did nothing more than bandage the upper part of the calf tightly with
      his handkerchief.
    

      “Do you fly, and leave me here,” Jean said again.
    

      “Hold your tongue; you are silly!”
     

      When Jean was seated firmly in the saddle Maurice took the bridle and they
      made a start. It was somewhere about eleven o'clock, and he hoped to make
      the journey in three hours, even if they should be unable to proceed
      faster than a walk. A difficulty that he had not thought of until then,
      however, presented itself to his mind and for a moment filled him with
      consternation: how were they to cross the Meuse in order to get to the
      left bank? The bridge at Mouzon would certainly be guarded. At last he
      remembered that there was a ferry lower down the stream, at Villers, and
      trusting to luck to befriend him, he shaped his course for that village,
      striking across the meadows and tilled fields of the right bank. All went
      well enough at first; they had only to dodge a cavalry patrol which forced
      them to hide in the shadow of a wall and remain there half an hour. Then
      the rain began to come down in earnest and his progress became more
      laborious, compelled as he was to tramp through the sodden fields beside
      the horse, which fortunately showed itself to be a fine specimen of the
      equine race, and perfectly gentle. On reaching Villers he found that his
      trust in the blind goddess, Fortune, had not been misplaced; the ferryman,
      who, at that late hour, had just returned from setting a Bavarian officer
      across the river, took them at once and landed them on the other shore
      without delay or accident.
    

      And it was not until they reached the village, where they narrowly escaped
      falling into the clutches of the pickets who were stationed along the
      entire length of the Remilly road, that their dangers and hardships really
      commenced; again they were obliged to take to the fields, feeling their
      way along blind paths and cart-tracks that could scarcely be discerned in
      the darkness. The most trivial obstacle sufficed to drive them a long way
      out of their course. They squeezed through hedges, scrambled down and up
      the steep banks of ditches, forced a passage for themselves through the
      densest thickets. Jean, in whom a low fever had developed under the
      drizzling rain, had sunk down crosswise on his saddle in a condition of
      semi-consciousness, holding on with both hands by the horse's mane, while
      Maurice, who had slipped the bridle over his right arm, had to steady him
      by the legs to keep him from tumbling to the ground. For more than a
      league, for two long, weary hours that seemed like an eternity, did they
      toil onward in this fatiguing way; floundering, stumbling, slipping in
      such a manner that it seemed at every moment as if men and beast must land
      together in a heap at the bottom of some descent. The spectacle they
      presented was one of utter, abject misery, besplashed with mud, the horse
      trembling in every limb, the man upon his back a helpless mass, as if at
      his last gasp, the other, wild-eyed and pale as death, keeping his feet
      only by an effort of fraternal love. Day was breaking; it was not far from
      five o'clock when at last they came to Remilly.
    

      In the courtyard of his little farmhouse, which was situated at the
      extremity of the pass of Harancourt, overlooking the village, Father
      Fouchard was stowing away in his carriole the carcasses of two sheep that
      he had slaughtered the day before. The sight of his nephew, coming to him
      at that hour and in that sorry plight, caused him such perturbation of
      spirit that, after the first explanatory words, he roughly cried:
    

      “You want me to take you in, you and your friend? and then settle matters
      with the Prussians afterward, I suppose. I'm much obliged to you, but no!
      I might as well die right straight off and have done with it.”
     

      He did not go so far, however, as to prohibit Maurice and Prosper from
      taking Jean from the horse and laying him on the great table in the
      kitchen. Silvine ran and got the bolster from her bed and slipped it
      beneath the head of the wounded man, who was still unconscious. But it
      irritated the old fellow to see the man lying on his table; he grumbled
      and fretted, saying that the kitchen was no place for him; why did they
      not take him away to the hospital at once? since there fortunately was a
      hospital at Remilly, near the church, in the old schoolhouse; and there
      was a big room in it, with everything nice and comfortable.
    

      “To the hospital!” Maurice hotly replied, “and have the Prussians pack him
      off to Germany as soon as he is well, for you know they treat all the
      wounded as prisoners of war. Do you take me for a fool, uncle? I did not
      bring him here to give him up.”
     

      Things were beginning to look dubious, the uncle was threatening to pitch
      them out upon the road, when someone mentioned Henriette's name.
    

      “What about Henriette?” inquired the young man.
    

      And he learned that his sister had been an inmate of the house at Remilly
      for the last two days; her affliction had weighed so heavily on her that
      life at Sedan, where her existence had hitherto been a happy one, was
      become a burden greater than she could bear. Chancing to meet with Doctor
      Dalichamp of Raucourt, with whom she was acquainted, her conversation with
      him had been the means of bringing her to take up her abode with Father
      Fouchard, in whose house she had a little bedroom, in order to devote
      herself entirely to the care of the sufferers in the neighboring hospital.
      That alone, she said, would serve to quiet her bitter memories. She paid
      her board and was the means of introducing many small comforts into the
      life of the farmhouse, which caused Father Fouchard to regard her with an
      eye of favor. The weather was always fine with him, provided he was making
      money.
    

      “Ah! so my sister is here,” said Maurice. “That must have been what M.
      Delaherche wished to tell me, with his gestures that I could not
      understand. Very well; if she is here, that settles it; we shall remain.”
     

      Notwithstanding his fatigue he started off at once in quest of her at the
      ambulance, where she had been on duty during the preceding night, while
      the uncle cursed his luck that kept him from being off with the carriole
      to sell his mutton among the neighboring villages, so long as the
      confounded business that he had got mixed up in remained unfinished.
    

      When Maurice returned with Henriette they caught the old man making a
      critical examination of the horse, that Prosper had led away to the
      stable. The animal seemed to please him; he was knocked up, but showed
      signs of strength and endurance. The young man laughed and told his uncle
      he might have him as a gift if he fancied him, while Henriette, taking her
      relative aside, assured him Jean should be no expense to him; that she
      would take charge of him and nurse him, and he might have the little room
      behind the cow-stables, where no Prussian would ever think to look for
      him. And Father Fouchard, still wearing a very sulky face and but half
      convinced that there was anything to be made out of the affair, finally
      closed the discussion by jumping into his carriole and driving off,
      leaving her at liberty to act as she pleased.
    

      It took Henriette but a few minutes, with the assistance of Silvine and
      Prosper, to put the room in order; then she had Jean brought in and they
      laid him on a cool, clean bed, he giving no sign of life during the
      operation save to mutter some unintelligible words. He opened his eyes and
      looked about him, but seemed not to be conscious of anyone's presence in
      the room. Maurice, who was just beginning to be aware how utterly
      prostrated he was by his fatigue, was drinking a glass of wine and eating
      a bit of cold meat, left over from the yesterday's dinner, when Doctor
      Dalichamp came in, as was his daily custom previous to visiting the
      hospital, and the young man, in his anxiety for his friend, mustered up
      his strength to follow him, together with his sister, to the bedside of
      the patient.
    

      The doctor was a short, thick-set man, with a big round head, on which the
      hair, as well as the fringe of beard about his face, had long since begun
      to be tinged with gray. The skin of his ruddy, mottled face was tough and
      indurated as a peasant's, spending as he did most of his time in the open
      air, always on the go to relieve the sufferings of his fellow-creatures;
      while the large, bright eyes, the massive nose, indicative of obstinacy,
      and the benignant if somewhat sensual mouth bore witness to the lifelong
      charities and good works of the honest country doctor; a little brusque at
      times, not a man of genius, but whom many years of practice in his
      profession had made an excellent healer.
    

      When he had examined Jean, still in a comatose state, he murmured:
    

      “I am very much afraid that amputation will be necessary.”
     

      The words produced a painful impression on Maurice and Henriette.
      Presently, however, he added:
    

      “Perhaps we may be able to save the leg, but it will require the utmost
      care and attention, and will take a very long time. For the moment his
      physical and mental depression is such that the only thing to do is to let
      him sleep. To-morrow we shall know more.”
     

      Then, having applied a dressing to the wound, he turned to Maurice, whom
      he had known in bygone days, when he was a boy.
    

      “And you, my good fellow, would be better off in bed than sitting there.”
     

      The young man continued to gaze before him into vacancy, as if he had not
      heard. In the confused hallucination that was due to his fatigue he
      developed a kind of delirium, a supersensitive nervous excitation that
      embraced all he had suffered in mind and body since the beginning of the
      campaign. The spectacle of his friend's wretched state, his own condition,
      scarce less pitiful, defeated, his hands tied, good for nothing, the
      reflection that all those heroic efforts had culminated in such disaster,
      all combined to incite him to frantic rebellion against destiny. At last
      he spoke.
    

      “It is not ended; no, no! we have not seen the end, and I must go away.
      Since he must lie there on his back for weeks, for months, perhaps,
      I cannot stay; I must go, I must go at once. You will assist me, won't
      you, doctor? you will supply me with the means to escape and get back to
      Paris?”
     

      Pale and trembling, Henriette threw her arms about him and caught him to
      her bosom.
    

      “What words are those you speak? enfeebled as you are, after all the
      suffering you have endured! but think not I shall let you go; you shall
      stay here with me! Have you not paid the debt you owe your country? and
      should you not think of me, too, whom you would leave to loneliness? of
      me, who have nothing now in all the wide world save you?”
     

      Their tears flowed and were mingled. They held each other in a wild
      tumultuous embrace, with that fond affection which, in twins, often seems
      as if it antedated existence. But for all that his exaltation did not
      subside, but assumed a higher pitch.
    

      “I tell you I must go. Should I not go I feel I should die of grief and
      shame. You can have no idea how my blood boils and seethes in my veins at
      the thought of remaining here in idleness. I tell you that this business
      is not going to end thus, that we must be avenged. On whom, on what? Ah!
      that I cannot tell; but avenged we must and shall be for such misfortune,
      in order that we may yet have courage to live on!”
     

      Doctor Dalichamp, who had been watching the scene with intense interest,
      cautioned Henriette by signal to make no reply. Maurice would doubtless be
      more rational after he should have slept; and sleep he did, all that day
      and all the succeeding night, for more than twenty hours, and never
      stirred hand or foot. When he awoke next morning, however, he was as
      inflexible as ever in his determination to go away. The fever had
      subsided; he was gloomy and restless, in haste to withdraw himself from
      influences that he feared might weaken his patriotic fervor. His sister,
      with many tears, made up her mind that he must be allowed to have his way,
      and Doctor Dalichamp, when he came to make his morning visit, promised to
      do what he could to facilitate the young man's escape by turning over to
      him the papers of a hospital attendant who had died recently at Raucourt.
      It was arranged that Maurice should don the gray blouse with the red cross
      of Geneva on its sleeve and pass through Belgium, thence to make his way
      as best he might to Paris, access to which was as yet uninterrupted.
    

      He did not leave the house that day, keeping himself out of sight and
      waiting for night to come. He scarcely opened his mouth, although he did
      make an attempt to enlist the new farm-hand in his enterprise.
    

      “Say, Prosper, don't you feel as if you would like to go back and have one
      more look at the Prussians?”
     

      The ex-chasseur d'Afrique, who was eating a cheese sandwich, stopped and
      held his knife suspended in the air.
    

      “It don't strike me that it is worth while, from what we were allowed to
      see of them before. Why should you wish me to go back there, when the only
      use our generals can find for the cavalry is to send it in after the
      battle is ended and let it be cut to pieces? No, faith, I'm sick of the
      business, giving us such dirty work as that to do!” There was silence
      between them for a moment; then he went on, doubtless to quiet the
      reproaches of his conscience as a soldier: “And then the work is too heavy
      here just now; the plowing is just commencing, and then there'll be the
      fall sowing to be looked after. We must think of the farm work, mustn't
      we? for fighting is well enough in its way, but what would become of us if
      we should cease to till the ground? You see how it is; I can't leave my
      work. Not that I am particularly in love with Father Fouchard, for I doubt
      very strongly if I shall ever see the color of his money, but the beasties
      are beginning to take to me, and faith! when I was up there in the Old
      Field this morning, and gave a look at that d——d Sedan lying
      yonder in the distance, you can't tell how good it made me feel to be
      guiding my oxen and driving the plow through the furrow, all alone in the
      bright sunshine.”
     

      As soon as it was fairly dark, Doctor Dalichamp came driving up in his old
      gig. It was his intention to see Maurice to the frontier. Father Fouchard,
      well pleased to be rid of one of his guests at least, stepped out upon the
      road to watch and make sure there were none of the enemy's patrols
      prowling in the neighborhood, while Silvine put a few stitches in the
      blouse of the defunct ambulance man, on the sleeve of which the red cross
      of the corps was prominently displayed. The doctor, before taking his
      place in the vehicle, examined Jean's leg anew, but could not as yet
      promise that he would be able to save it. The patient was still in a
      profound lethargy, recognizing no one, never opening his mouth to speak,
      and Maurice was about to leave him without the comfort of a farewell,
      when, bending over to give him a last embrace, he saw him open his eyes to
      their full extent; the lips parted, and in a faint voice he said:
    

      “You are going away?” And in reply to their astonished looks: “Yes, I
      heard what you said, though I could not stir. Take the remainder of the
      money, then. Put your hand in my trousers' pocket and take it.”
     

      Each of them had remaining nearly two hundred francs of the sum they had
      received from the corps paymaster.
    

      But Maurice protested. “The money!” he exclaimed. “Why, you have more need
      of it than I, who have the use of both my legs. Two hundred francs will be
      abundantly sufficient to see me to Paris, and to get knocked in the head
      afterward won't cost me a penny. I thank you, though, old fellow, all the
      same, and good-by and good-luck to you; thanks, too, for having always
      been so good and thoughtful, for, had it not been for you, I should
      certainly be lying now at the bottom of some ditch, like a dead dog.”
     

      Jean made a deprecating gesture. “Hush. You owe me nothing; we are quits.
      Would not the Prussians have gathered me in out there the other day had
      you not picked me up and carried me off on your back? and yesterday again
      you saved me from their clutches. Twice have I been beholden to you for my
      life, and now I am in your debt. Ah, how unhappy I shall be when I am no
      longer with you!” His voice trembled and tears rose to his eyes. “Kiss me,
      dear boy!”
     

      They embraced, and, as it had been in the wood the day before, that kiss
      set the seal to the brotherhood of dangers braved in each other's company,
      those few weeks of soldier's life in common that had served to bind their
      hearts together with closer ties than years of ordinary friendship could
      have done. Days of famine, sleepless nights, the fatigue of the weary
      march, death ever present to their eyes, these things made the foundation
      on which their affection rested. When two hearts have thus by mutual gift
      bestowed themselves the one upon the other and become fused and molten
      into one, is it possible ever to sever the connection? But the kiss they
      had exchanged the day before, among the darkling shadows of the forest,
      was replete with the joy of their new-found safety and the hope that their
      escape awakened in their bosom, while this was the kiss of parting, full
      of anguish and doubt unutterable. Would they meet again some day? and how,
      under what circumstances of sorrow or of gladness?
    

      Doctor Dalichamp had clambered into his gig and was calling to Maurice.
      The young man threw all his heart and soul into the embrace he gave his
      sister Henriette, who, pale as death in her black mourning garments,
      looked on his face in silence through her tears.
    

      “He whom I leave to your care is my brother. Watch over him, love him as I
      love him!”
     

      
 
    

      Jean's chamber was a large room, with floor of brick and whitewashed
      walls, that had once done duty as a store-room for the fruit grown on the
      farm. A faint, pleasant odor of pears and apples lingered there still, and
      for furniture there was an iron bedstead, a pine table and two chairs, to
      say nothing of a huge old walnut clothes-press, tremendously deep and
      wide, that looked as if it might hold an army. A lazy, restful quiet
      reigned there all day long, broken only by the deadened sounds that came
      from the adjacent stables, the faint lowing of the cattle, the occasional