# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2004
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    Mrs. F.L. Gillette, The Whitehouse Cookbook (1887)
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13923/13923-h/13923-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

    SCALLOPED POTATOES. (Kentucky Style.)
Peel and slice raw potatoes thin, the same as for frying. Butter
an earthen dish, put in a layer of potatoes, and season with salt,
pepper, butter, a bit of onion chopped fine, if liked; sprinkle a
little flour. Now put another layer of potatoes and the seasoning.
Continue in this way till the dish is filled. Just before putting
into the oven, pour a quart of hot milk over. Bake three-quarters
of an hour.
Cold boiled potatoes may be cooked the same. It requires less
time to bake them; they are delicious either way. If the onion is
disliked it can be omitted.
STEAMED POTATOES.
This mode of cooking potatoes is now much in vogue, particularly
where they are wanted on a large scale, it being so very
convenient. Pare the potatoes, throw them into cold water as they
are peeled, then put them in a steamer. Place the steamer over a
saucepan of boiling water, and steam the potatoes from twenty to
forty minutes, according to the size and sort. When the fork goes
easily through them, they are done; then take them up, dish and
serve very quickly.
POTATO SNOW.
Choose some mealy potatoes that will boil exceedingly white;
pare them and cook them well, but not so as to be watery; drain
them, and mash and season them well. Put in the saucepan in which
they were [Pg 195]dressed, so as to keep them as hot as possible;
then press them through a wire sieve into the dish in which they
are to be served; strew a little fine salt upon them previous to
sending them to table. French cooks also add a small quantity of
pounded loaf sugar while they are being mashed.
HASTY COOKED POTATOES.
Wash and peel some potatoes; cut them into slices of about a
quarter of an inch in thickness; throw them into boiling
salted water, and, if of good quality, they will be done in about
ten minutes.
Strain off the water, put the potatoes into a hot dish, chop
them slightly, add pepper, salt, and a few small pieces of fresh
butter, and serve without loss of time.
FAVORITE WARMED POTATOES.
The potatoes should be boiled whole with the skins on in
plenty of water, well salted, and are much better for being
boiled the day before needed. Care should be taken that they are
not over cooked. Strip off the skins (not pare them with a knife)
and slice them nearly a quarter of an inch thick. Place them in a
chopping-bowl and sprinkle over them sufficient salt and pepper to
season them well; chop them all one way, then turn the
chopping-bowl half way around and chop across them, cutting them
into little square pieces the shape of dice. About twenty-five
minutes before serving time, place on the stove a saucepan (or any
suitable dish) containing a piece of butter the size of an egg;
when it begins to melt and run over the bottom of the dish, put in
a cup of rich sweet milk. When this boils up put in the chopped
potatoes; there should be about a quart of them; stir them a little
so that they become moistened through with the milk; then cover and
place them on the back of the stove, or in a moderate oven, where
they will heat through gradually. When heated through, stir
carefully from the bottom with a spoon and cover tightly again.
Keep hot until ready to serve. Baked potatoes are very good warmed
in this manner.
CRISP POTATOES.
Cut cold raw potatoes into shavings, cubes, or any small shape;
throw them, a few at a time, into boiling fat and toss them about
with a knife until they are a uniform light brown; drain and season
with salt and pepper. Fat is never hot enough while
bubbling—when it is ready it is still and smoking, but should
never burn.
LYONNAISE POTATOES.
Take eight or ten good-sized cold boiled potatoes, slice them
end-wise, then crosswise, making them like dice in small squares.
When you are ready to cook them, heat some butter or good drippings
in a frying pan; fry in it one small onion (chopped fine) until it
begins to change color and look yellow. Now put in your potatoes,
sprinkle well with salt and pepper, stir well and cook about five
minutes, taking care that you do not break them. They must not
brown. Just before taking up stir in a tablespoonful of minced
parsley. Drain dry by shaking in a heated colander. Serve very
hot.
POTATO FILLETS.
Pare and slice the potatoes thin; cut them if you like in small
fillets about a quarter of an inch square, and as long as the
potato will admit; keep them in cold water until wanted, then drop
them into boiling lard; when nearly done, take them out with a
skimmer and drain them, boil up the lard again, drop the potatoes
back and fry till done; this operation causes the fillets to swell
up and puff.
POTATO CROQUETTES. No. 1.
Wash, peel and put four large potatoes in cold water, with a
pinch of salt, and set them over a brisk fire; when they are done
pour off all the water and mash them. Take another saucepan, and
put in it ten tablespoonfuls of milk and a lump of butter half the
size of an egg; put it over a brisk fire; as soon as the milk comes
to a boil, pour the potatoes into it, and stir them very fast with
a wooden spoon; when thoroughly mixed, take them from the fire and
put them on a dish. Take a tablespoonful and roll it in a clean
towel, making it oval in shape; dip it in a well-beaten egg, and
then in bread crumbs, and drop it in hot drippings or lard. Proceed
in this manner till all the potato is used, four potatoes making
six croquettes. Fry them a light brown all over, turning them
gently as may be necessary. When they are done, lay them on brown
paper or a hair sieve, to drain off all fat; then serve on a
napkin.
POTATO CROQUETTES. No. 2.
Take two cups of cold mashed potatoes, season with a pinch of
salt, pepper and a tablespoonful of butter. Beat up the whites of
two eggs, [Pg 197]and work all together thoroughly; make it into
small balls slightly flattened, dip them in the beaten yolks of the
eggs, then roll either in flour or cracker crumbs; fry the same as
fish-balls.
POTATOES Á LA DELMONICO.
Cut the potatoes with a vegetable cutter into small balls about
the size of a marble; put them into a stewpan with plenty of butter
and a good sprinkling of salt; keep the saucepan covered, and shake
occasionally until they are quite done, which will be in about an
hour.
FRIED POTATOES WITH EGGS.
Slice cold boiled potatoes and fry in good butter until brown;
beat up one or two eggs, and stir into them just as you dish them
for the table; do not leave them a moment on the fire after the
eggs are in, for if they harden they are not half so nice; one egg
is enough for three or four persons, unless they are very fond of
potatoes; if they are, have plenty and put in two.
BAKED POTATOES.
Potatoes are either baked in their jackets or peeled; in either
case they should not be exposed to a fierce heat, which is
wasteful, inasmuch as thereby a great deal of vegetable is scorched
and rendered uneatable. They should be frequently turned while
being baked and kept from touching each other in the oven or dish.
When done in their skins, be particular to wash and brush them
before baking them. If convenient, they may be baked in wood-ashes,
or in a Dutch oven in front of the fire. When pared they should be
baked in a dish and fat of some kind added to prevent their
outsides from becoming burnt; they are ordinarily baked thus as an
accessory to baked meat.
Never serve potatoes, boiled or baked whole, in a closely
covered dish. They become sodden and clammy. Cover with a folded
napkin that allows the steam to escape, or absorbs the moisture.
They should be served promptly when done and require about
three-quarters of an hour to one hour to bake them, if of a good
size.
BROWNED POTATOES WITH A ROAST. No. 1.
About three-quarters of an hour before taking up your roasts,
peel middling-sized potatoes, boil them until partly done, then
arrange [Pg 198]them in the roasting-pan around the roast, basting
them with the drippings at the same time you do the meat, browning
them evenly. Serve hot with the meat. Many cooks partly boil the
potatoes before putting around the roast. New potatoes are very
good cooked around a roast.
BROWNED POTATOES WITH A ROAST. No. 2.
Peel, cook and mash the required quantity, adding while hot a
little chopped onion, pepper and salt; form it into small oval
balls and dredge them with flour; then place around the meat about
twenty minutes before it is taken from the oven. When nicely
browned, drain dry and serve hot with the meat.
SWEET POTATOES.
Boiled, steamed and baked the same as Irish potatoes; generally
cooked with their jackets on. Cold sweet potatoes may be cut in
slices across or lengthwise, and fried as common potatoes; or may
be cut in half and served cold.
Boiled sweet potatoes are very nice. Boil until partly done,
peel them and bake brown, basting them with butter or beef
drippings several times. Served hot. They should be a nice
brown.
BAKED SWEET POTATOES.
Wash and scrape them, split them lengthwise. Steam or boil them
until nearly done. Drain, and put them in a baking dish, placing
over them lumps of butter, pepper and salt; sprinkle thickly with
sugar, and bake in the oven to a nice brown.
Hubbard squash is nice cooked in the same manner.
ONIONS BOILED.
The white silver-skins are the best species. To boil them peel
off the outside, cut off the ends, put them into cold water, and
into a stewpan and let them scald two minutes; then turn off that
water, pour on cold water salted a little, and boil slowly till
tender, which will be in thirty or forty minutes, according to
their size; when done drain them quite dry, pour a little melted
butter over them, sprinkle them with pepper and salt and serve
hot.
An excellent way to peel onions so as not to affect the eyes is
to take a pan full of water and hold and peel them under the
water.
ONIONS STEWED.
Cook the same as boiled onions, and, when quite done, turn off
all the water; add a teacupful of milk, a piece of butter the size
of an egg, pepper and salt to taste, a tablespoonful of flour
stirred to a cream; let all boil up once and serve in a vegetable
dish hot.
ONIONS BAKED.
Use the large Spanish onion, as best for this purpose; wash them
clean, but do not peel, and put into a saucepan with slightly
salted water; boil an hour, replacing the water with more boiling
hot as it evaporates; turn off the water and lay the onions on a
cloth to dry them well; roll each one in a piece of buttered tissue
paper, twisting it at the top to keep it on, and bake in a slow
oven about an hour, or until tender all through; peel them; place
in a deep dish and brown slightly, basting well with butter for
fifteen minutes; season with salt and pepper and pour some melted
butter over them.
FRIED ONIONS.
Peel, slice and fry them brown in equal quantities of butter and
lard or nice drippings; cover until partly soft, remove the cover
and brown them; salt and pepper.
SCALLOPED ONIONS.
Take eight or ten onions of good size, slice them and boil until
tender. Lay them in a baking-dish, put in bread crumbs, butter in
small bits, pepper and salt, between each layer until the dish is
full, putting bread crumbs last; add milk or cream until full. Bake
twenty minutes or half an hour.
A little onion is not an injurious article of food, as many
believe. A judicious use of plants of the onion family is quite as
important a factor in successful cookery as salt and pepper. When
carefully concealed by manipulation in food, it affords zest and
enjoyment to many who could not otherwise taste of it were its
presence known. A great many successful compounds derive their
excellence from the partly concealed flavor of the onion, which
imparts a delicate appetizing aroma highly prized by epicures.
CAULIFLOWER.
When cleaned and washed, drop them into boiling water, into
which you have put salt and a teaspoonful of flour, or a slice of
bread; boil till tender; take off, drain and dish them; serve with
a sauce spread over and made with melted butter, salt, pepper,
grated nutmeg, chopped parsley and vinegar.
Another way is to make a white sauce (see SAUCES) and when the
cauliflowers are dished as above, turn the white sauce over, and
serve warm. They may also be served in the same way with a milk,
cream, or tomato sauce, or with brown butter.
It is a very good plan to loosen the leaves of a head of
cauliflower and let lie, the top downward, in a pan of cold salt
water, to remove any insects that might be hidden between them.
FRIED CAULIFLOWER.
Boil the cauliflower till about half done. Mix two
tablespoonfuls of flour with two yolks of eggs, then add water
enough to make a rather thin paste; add salt to taste; the two
whites are beaten till stiff, and then mixed with the yolks, flour
and water. Dip each branch of the cauliflower into the mixture, and
fry them in hot fat. When done, take them off with a skimmer, turn
into a colander, dust salt all over and serve warm. Asparagus,
celery, egg-plant, oyster plant are all fine when fried in this
manner.
CABBAGE BOILED.
Great care is requisite in cleaning a cabbage for boiling, as it
frequently harbors numerous insects. The large drumhead cabbage
requires an hour to boil; the green savory cabbage will boil in
twenty minutes. Add considerable salt to the water when boiling. Do
not let a cabbage boil too long—by a long boiling it becomes
watery. Remove it from the water into a colander to drain and serve
with drawn butter, or butter poured over it.
Red cabbage is used for slaw, as is also the white winter
cabbage. For directions to prepare these varieties, see articles
SLAW and SOURCROUT.
CABBAGE WITH CREAM.
Remove the outer leaves from a solid, small-sized head of
cabbage, and cut the remainder as fine as for slaw. Have on the
fire a spider [Pg 201]or deep skillet, and when it is hot
put in the cut cabbage, pouring over it right away a pint of
boiling water. Cover closely and allow it to cook rapidly for ten
minutes. Drain off the water and add half a pint of new milk, or
part milk and cream; when it boils, stir in a large teaspoonful of
either wheat or rice flour moistened with milk; add salt and
pepper, and as soon as it comes to a boil, serve. Those who find
slaw and other dishes prepared from cabbage indigestible will not
complain of this.
STEAMED CABBAGE.
Take a sound, solid cabbage, and with a large sharp knife shave
it very fine. Put it in a saucepan, pour in half a teacupful
of water, or just enough to keep it from burning; cover it very
tightly, so as to confine the steam; watch it closely, add a little
water now and then, until it begins to be tender; then put into it
a large tablespoonful of butter; salt and pepper to taste, dish it
hot. If you prefer to give it a tart taste, just before taking from
the fire add a third of a cup of good vinegar.
LADIES' CABBAGE.
Boil a firm white cabbage fifteen minutes, changing the water
then for more from the boiling tea-kettle. When tender, drain and
set aside until perfectly cold. Chop fine and add two beaten eggs,
a tablespoonful of butter, pepper, salt, three tablespoonfuls of
rich milk or cream. Stir all well together, and bake in a buttered
pudding-dish until brown. Serve very hot. This dish resembles
cauliflower and is very digestible and palatable.
FRIED CABBAGE.
Place in a frying pan an ounce of butter and heat it boiling
hot. Then take cold boiled cabbage chopped fine, or cabbage hot,
cooked the same as steamed cabbage, put it into the hot butter and
fry a light brown, adding two tablespoonfuls of vinegar. Very
good.
FRENCH WAY OF COOKING CABBAGE.
Chop cold boiled white cabbage and let it drain till perfectly
dry: stir in some melted butter to taste; pepper, salt and four
tablespoonfuls of cream; after it is heated through add two
well-beaten eggs; then turn the mixture into a buttered frying pan,
stirring until it is very hot and becomes a delicate brown on the
under side. Place a [Pg 202]hot dish over the pan, which must be
reversed when turned out to be served.
SOURCROUT.
Barrels having held wine or vinegar are used to prepare
sourcrout in. It is better, however, to have a special barrel for
the purpose. Strasburg, as well as all Alsace, has a well-acquired
fame for preparing the cabbages. They slice very white and firm
cabbages in fine shreds with a machine made for the purpose. At the
bottom of a small barrel they place a layer of coarse salt and
alternately layers of cabbage and salt, being careful to have one
of salt on the top. As each layer of cabbage is added, it must be
pressed down by a large and heavy pestle and fresh layers are added
as soon as the juice floats on the surface. The cabbage must be
seasoned with a few grains of coriander, juniper berries, etc. When
the barrel is full it must be put in a dry cellar, covered with a
cloth, under a plank, and on this heavy weights are placed. At the
end of a few days it will begin to ferment, during which time the
pickle must be drawn off and replaced by fresh, until the liquor
becomes clear. This should be done every day. Renew the cloth and
wash the cover, put the weights back and let stand for a month. By
that time the sourcrout will be ready for use. Care must be taken
to let the least possible air enter the sourcrout and to have the
cover perfectly clean. Each time the barrel has to be opened it
must be properly closed again. These precautions must not be
neglected.
This is often fried in the same manner as fried cabbage,
excepting it is first boiled until soft in just water enough to
cook it, then fry and add vinegar.
TO BOIL RICE.
Pick over the rice carefully, wash it in warm water, rubbing it
between the hands, rinsing it in several waters, then let it remain
in cold water until ready to be cooked. Have a saucepan of water
slightly salted; when it is boiling hard, pour off the cold water
from the rice, and sprinkle it in the boiling water by degrees, so
as to keep the particles separated. Boil it steadily for twenty
minutes, then take it off from the fire and drain off all the
water. Place the saucepan with the lid partly off, on the back part
of the stove, where it is only moderately warm, to allow the rice
to dry. The moisture will pass off and each grain of rice will be
separated, so that if shaken the [Pg
203]grains will fall
apart. This is the true way of serving rice as a vegetable and is
the mode of cooking it in the Southern States where it is
raised.
PARSNIPS, BOILED.
Wash, scrape and split them. Put them into a pot of boiling
water; add a little salt, and boil them till quite tender, which
will be in from two to three hours, according to their size. Dry
them in a cloth when done and pour melted butter or white sauce
(see SAUCES) over them in the dish. Serve them up with any sort of
boiled meat or with salt cod.
Parsnips are very good baked or stewed with meat.
FRIED PARSNIPS.
Boil tender in a little hot water salted; scrape, cut into long
slices, dredge with flour; fry in hot lard or dripping, or in
butter and lard mixed; fry quite brown. Drain off fat and
serve.
Parsnips may be boiled and mashed the same as potatoes.
STEWED PARSNIPS.
After washing and scraping the parsnips slice them about half of
an inch thick. Put them in a saucepan of boiling water containing
just enough to barely cook them; add a tablespoonful of butter,
season with salt and pepper, then cover closely. Stew them until
the water has cooked away, watching carefully and stirring often to
prevent burning, until they are soft. When they are done they will
be of a creamy light straw color and deliciously sweet, retaining
all the goodness of the vegetable.
PARSNIP FRITTERS.
Boil four or five parsnips; when tender take off the skin and
mash them fine; add to them a teaspoonful of wheat flour and a
beaten egg; put a tablespoonful of lard or beef drippings in a
frying pan over the fire, add to it a saltspoonful of salt; when
boiling hot put in the parsnips; make it in small cakes with a
spoon; when one side is a delicate brown turn the other; when both
are done take them on a dish, put a very little of the fat in which
they were fried over and serve hot. These resemble very nearly the
taste of the salsify or oyster plant, and will generally be
preferred.
CREAMED PARSNIPS.
Boil tender, scrape and slice lengthwise. Put over the fire with
two tablespoonfuls of butter, pepper and salt and a little minced
parsley. Shake until the mixture boils. Dish the parsnips, add to
the sauce three tablespoonfuls of cream or milk in which has been
stirred a quarter of a spoonful of flour. Boil once and pour over
the parsnips.
STEWED TOMATOES.
Pour boiling water over a dozen sound ripe tomatoes; let them
remain for a few moments; then peel off the skins, slice them and
put them over the fire in a well-lined tin or granite-ware
saucepan. Stew them about twenty minutes, then add a tablespoonful
of butter, salt and pepper to taste; let them stew fifteen minutes
longer and serve hot. Some prefer to thicken tomatoes with a little
grated bread, adding a teaspoonful of sugar; and others who like
the flavor of onion chop up one and add while stewing; then again,
some add as much green corn as there are tomatoes.
TO PEEL TOMATOES.
Put the tomatoes into a frying basket and plunge them into hot
water for three or four minutes. Drain and peel. Another way is to
place them in a flat baking-tin and set them in a hot oven about
five minutes; this loosens the skins so that they readily slip
off.
SCALLOPED TOMATOES.
Butter the sides and bottom of a pudding-dish. Put a layer of
bread crumbs in the bottom; on them put a layer of sliced tomatoes;
sprinkle with salt, pepper and some bits of butter, and a very
little white sugar. Then repeat with another layer of
crumbs, another of tomato and seasoning until full, having the top
layer of slices of tomato, with bits of butter on each. Bake
covered until well cooked through; remove the cover and brown
quickly.
STUFFED BAKED TOMATOES.
From the blossom end of a dozen tomatoes—smooth, ripe and
solid—cut a thin slice and with a small spoon scoop out the
pulp without breaking the rind surrounding it; chop a small head of
cabbage and a good-sized onion fine and mix with them fine bread
crumbs [Pg 205]and the pulp; season with pepper, salt and sugar and
add a cup of sweet cream; when all is well mixed, fill the tomato
shells, replace the slices and place the tomatoes in a buttered
baking-dish, cut ends up and put in the pan just enough water to
keep from burning; drop a small lump of butter on each tomato and
bake half an hour or so, till well done; place another bit of
butter on each and serve in same dish. Very fine.
Another stuffing which is considered quite fine. Cut a slice
from the stem of each and scoop out the soft pulp. Mince one small
onion and fry it slightly; add a gill of hot water, the tomato pulp
and two ounces of cold veal or chicken chopped fine, simmer slowly
and season with salt and pepper. Stir into the pan cracker dust or
bread crumbs enough to absorb the moisture; take off from the fire
and let it cool; stuff the tomatoes with this mass, sprinkle dry
crumbs over the top; add a small piece of butter to the top of each
and bake until slightly browned on top.
BAKED TOMATOES. (Plain.)
Peel and slice quarter of an inch thick; place in layers in a
pudding-dish, seasoning each layer with salt, pepper, butter and a
very little white sugar. Cover with a lid or large plate and bake
half an hour. Remove the lid and brown for fifteen minutes. Just
before taking from the oven pour over the top three or four
tablespoonfuls of whipped cream with melted butter.
TO PREPARE TOMATOES. (Raw.)
Carefully remove the peelings. Only perfectly ripe tomatoes
should ever be eaten raw and if ripe the skins easily peel off.
Scalding injures the flavor. Slice them and sprinkle generously
with salt, more sparingly with black pepper, and to a dish holding
one quart, add a light tablespoonful of sugar to give a piquant
zest to the whole. Lastly, add a gill of best cider vinegar;
although, if you would have a dish yet better suited to please an
epicurean palate, you may add a teaspoonful of made mustard and two
tablespoonfuls of rich sweet cream.
FRIED AND BROILED TOMATOES.
Cut firm, large, ripe tomatoes into thick slices, rather more
than a quarter of an inch thick. Season with salt and pepper,
dredge well [Pg 206]with flour, or roll in egg and crumbs, and fry
them brown on both sides evenly, in hot butter and lard mixed. Or,
prepare them the same as for frying, broiling on a well-greased
gridiron, seasoning afterward the same as beefsteak. A good
accompaniment to steak. Or, having prepared the following sauce, a
pint of milk, a tablespoonful of flour and one beaten egg, salt,
pepper and a very little mace; cream an ounce of butter, whisk into
it the milk and let it simmer until it thickens; pour the sauce on
a hot side-dish and arrange the tomatoes in the centre.
SCRAMBLED TOMATOES.
Remove the skins from a dozen tomatoes; cut them up in a
saucepan; add a little butter, pepper and salt; when sufficiently
boiled, beat up five or six eggs and just before you serve turn
them into the saucepan with the tomatoes, and stir one way for two
minutes, allowing them time to be done thoroughly.
CUCUMBER Á LA CRÊME.
Peel and cut into slices (lengthwise) some fine cucumbers. Boil
them until soft; salt to taste, and serve with delicate cream
sauce. For Tomato Salad, see SALADS, also for Raw Cucumbers.
FRIED CUCUMBERS.
Pare them and cut lengthwise in very thick slices; wipe them dry
with a cloth; sprinkle with salt and pepper, dredge with flour, and
fry in lard and butter, a tablespoonful of each mixed. Brown both
sides and serve warm.
GREEN CORN, BOILED.
This should be cooked on the same day it is gathered; it loses
its sweetness in a few hours and must be artificially supplied.
Strip off the husks, pick out all the silk and put it in boiling
water; if not entirely fresh, add a tablespoonful of sugar to the
water, but no salt; boil twenty minutes, fast, and serve; or
you may cut it from the cob, put in plenty of butter and a little
salt, and serve in a covered vegetable dish. The corn is much
sweeter when cooked with the husks on, but requires longer time to
boil. Will generally boil in twenty minutes.
Green corn left over from dinner makes a nice breakfast dish,
prepared as follows: Cut the corn from the cob, and put into a bowl
with a cup of milk to every cup of corn, a half cup of flour, one
egg, a pinch of salt, and a little butter. Mix well into a thick
batter, and fry in small cakes in very hot butter. Serve with
plenty of butter and powdered sugar.
CORN PUDDING.
This is a Virginia dish. Scrape the substance out of twelve ears
of tender, green, uncooked corn (it is better scraped than grated,
as you do not get those husky particles which you cannot avoid with
a grater); add yolks and whites, beaten separately, of four eggs, a
teaspoonful of sugar, the same of flour mixed in a tablespoonful of
butter, a small quantity of salt and pepper, and one pint of milk.
Bake about half or three-quarters of an hour.
STEWED CORN.
Take a dozen ears of green sweet corn, very tender and juicy;
cut off the kernels, cutting with a large sharp knife from the top
of the cob down; then scrape the cob. Put the corn in a saucepan
over the fire with just enough water to make it cook without
burning; boil about twenty minutes, then add a teacupful of milk or
cream, a tablespoonful of cold butter, and season with pepper and
salt. Boil ten minutes longer and dish up hot in a vegetable dish.
The corn would be much sweeter if the scraped cobs were boiled
first in the water that the corn is cooked in.
Many like corn cooked in this manner, putting half corn and half
tomatoes; either way is very good.
FRIED CORN.
Cut the corn off the cob, taking care not to bring off any of
the husk with it and to have the grains as separate as possible.
Fry in a little butter—just enough to keep it from sticking
to the pan; stir very often. When nicely browned, add salt and
pepper and a little rich cream. Do not set it near the stove after
the cream is added, as it will be apt to turn. This makes a nice
dinner or breakfast dish.
ROASTED GREEN CORN.
Strip off all the husk from green corn and roast it on a
gridiron over a bright fire of coals, turning it as one side is
done. Or, if a [Pg 208]wood fire is used, make a place clean
in front of the fire, lay the corn down, turn it when one side is
done; serve with salt and butter.
SUCCOTASH.
Take a pint of fresh shelled Lima beans, or any large fresh
beans, put them in a pot with cold water, rather more than will
cover them. Scrape the kernels from twelve ears of young sweet
corn; put the cobs in with the beans, boiling from half to
three-quarters of an hour. Now take out the cobs and put in the
scraped corn; boil again fifteen minutes, then season with salt and
pepper to taste, a piece of butter the size of an egg and half a
cup of cream. Serve hot.
FRIED EGG-PLANT.
Take fresh, purple egg-plants of a middling size; cut them in
slices a quarter of an inch thick, and soak them for half an hour
in cold water, with a teaspoonful of salt in it. Have ready some
cracker or bread crumbs and one beaten egg; drain off the water
from the slices, lay them on a napkin, dip them in the crumbs and
then in the egg, put another coat of crumbs on them and fry them in
butter to a light brown. The frying pan must be hot before the
slices are put in—they will fry in ten minutes.
You may pare them before you put them into the frying pan, or
you may pull off the skins when you take them up. You must not
remove them from the water until you are ready to cook them, as the
air will turn them black.
STUFFED EGG-PLANT.
Cut the egg-plant in two; scrape out all the inside and put it
in a saucepan with a little minced ham; cover with water and boil
until soft; drain off the water; add two tablespoonfuls of grated
crumbs, a tablespoonful of butter, half a minced onion, salt and
pepper; stuff each half of the hull with the mixture; add a small
lump of butter to each and bake fifteen minutes. Minced veal or
chicken in the place of ham, is equally as good and many prefer
it.
STRING BEANS.
Break off the end that grew to the vine, drawing off at the same
time the string upon the edge; repeat the same process from the
other [Pg 209]end; cut them with a sharp knife into pieces half an
inch long, and boil them in just enough water to
cover them. They usually require one hour's boiling; but
this depends upon their age and freshness. After they have boiled
until tender and the water boiled nearly out, add pepper and
salt, a tablespoonful of butter and a half a cup of cream; if you
have not the cream add more butter.
Many prefer to drain them before adding the seasoning; in that
case they lose the real goodness of the vegetable.
LIMA AND KIDNEY BEANS.
These beans should be put into boiling water, a little more than
enough to cover them, and boiled till tender—from half an
hour to two hours; serve with butter and salt upon them.
These beans are in season from the last of July to the last of
September. There are several other varieties of beans used as
summer vegetables, which are cooked as above.
For Baked Beans, see PORK AND BEANS.
CELERY.
This is stewed the same as green corn, by boiling, adding cream,
butter, salt and pepper.
STEWED SALSIFY OR OYSTER-PLANT.
Wash the roots and scrape off their skins, throwing them, as you
do so, into cold water, for exposure to the air causes them to
immediately turn dark. Then cut crosswise into little thin slices;
throw into fresh water, enough to cover; add a little salt and stew
in a covered vessel until tender, or about one hour. Pour off a
little of the water, add a small lump of butter, a little pepper,
and a gill of sweet cream and a teaspoonful of flour stirred to a
paste. Boil up and serve hot.
Salsify may be simply boiled and melted butter turned over
them.
FRIED SALSIFY.
Stew the salsify as usual till very tender; then with the back
of a spoon or a potato jammer mash it very fine. Beat up an egg,
add a teacupful of milk, a little flour, butter and seasoning of
pepper and salt. Make into little cakes, and fry a light brown in
boiling lard.
BEETS BOILED.
Select small-sized, smooth roots. They should be carefully
washed, but not cut before boiling, as the juice will escape and
the sweetness of the vegetable be impaired, leaving it white and
hard. Put them into boiling water, and boil them until tender,
which requires often from one to two hours. Do not probe them, but
press them with the finger to ascertain if they are sufficiently
done. When satisfied of this, take them up, and put them into a pan
of cold water, and slip off the outside. Cut them into thin slices,
and while hot season with butter, salt, a little pepper and very
sharp vinegar.
BAKED BEETS.
Beets retain their sugary, delicate flavor to perfection if they
are baked instead of boiled. Turn them frequently while in the
oven, using a knife, as the fork allows the juice to run out. When
done remove the skin, and serve with butter, salt and pepper on the
slices.
STEWED BEETS.
Boil them first and then scrape and slice them. Put them into a
stewpan with a piece of butter rolled in flour, some boiled onion
and parsley chopped fine, and a little vinegar, salt and pepper.
Set the pan on the fire, and let the beets stew for a quarter of an
hour.
OKRA.
This grows in the shape of pods, and is of a gelatinous
character, much used for soup, and is also pickled; it may be
boiled as follows: Put the young and tender pods of long white okra
in salted boiling water in granite, porcelain or a tin-lined
saucepan—as contact with Iron will discolor it; boil fifteen
minutes; remove the stems, and serve with butter, pepper, salt and
vinegar if preferred.
ASPARAGUS.
Scrape the stems of the asparagus lightly, but very clean; throw
them into cold water and when they are all scraped and very clean,
tie them in bunches of equal size; cut the large ends evenly, that
the stems may be all of the same length, and put the asparagus into
plenty of boiling water, well salted. While it is boiling, cut
several slices of [Pg 211]bread half an inch thick, pare off the
crust and toast it a delicate brown on both sides. When the stalks
of the asparagus are tender (it will usually cook in twenty to
forty minutes) lift it out directly, or it will lose both its color
and flavor and will also be liable to break; dip the toast quickly
into the liquor in which it was boiled and dish the vegetable upon
it, the heads all lying one way. Pour over white sauce, or melted
butter.
ASPARAGUS WITH EGGS.
Boil a bunch of asparagus twenty minutes; cut off the tender
tops and lay them in a deep-pie plate, buttering, salting and
peppering well. Beat up four eggs, the yolks and whites separately
to a stiff froth; add two tablespoonfuls of milk or cream, a
tablespoonful of warm butter, pepper and salt to taste. Pour evenly
over the asparagus mixture. Bake eight minutes or until the eggs
are set. Very good.
GREEN PEAS.
Shell the peas and wash in cold water. Put in boiling water just
enough to cover them well and keep them from burning; boil from
twenty minutes to half an hour, when the liquor should be nearly
boiled out; season with pepper and salt and a good allowance of
butter; serve very hot.
This is a very much better way than cooking in a larger quantity
of water and draining off the liquor, as that diminishes the
sweetness, and much of the fine flavor of the peas is lost. The
salt should never be put in the peas before they are tender, unless
very young, as it tends to harden them.
STEWED GREEN PEAS.
Into a saucepan of boiling water put two or three pints of young
green peas and when nearly done and tender drain in a colander dry;
then melt two ounces of butter in two of flour; stir well and boil
five minutes longer; should the pods be quite clean and fresh boil
them first in the water, remove and put in the peas. The Germans
prepare a very palatable dish of sweet young pods alone by simply
stirring in a little butter with some savory herbs.
SQUASHES, OR CYMBLINGS.
The green or summer squash is best when the outside is beginning
to turn yellow, as it is then less watery and insipid than when
younger. [Pg 212]Wash them, cut them into pieces and take out the
seeds. Boil them about three-quarters of an hour, or till quite
tender. When done, drain and squeeze them well till you have
pressed out all the water; mash them with a little butter, pepper
and salt. Then put the squash thus prepared into a stewpan, set it
on hot coals and stir it very frequently till it becomes dry. Take
care not to let it burn.
Summer squash is very nice steamed, then prepared the same as
boiled.
BOILED WINTER SQUASH.
This is much finer than the summer squash. It is fit to eat in
August, and, in a dry warm place, can be kept well all winter. The
color is a very bright yellow. Pare it, take out the seeds, cut it
in pieces, and stew it slowly till quite soft in a very little
water. Afterwards drain, squeeze and press it well; then mash it
with a very little butter, pepper and salt. They will boil in from
twenty to forty minutes.
BAKED WINTER SQUASH.
Cut open the squash, take out the seeds and without paring cut
it up into large pieces; put the pieces on tins or in a
dripping-pan, place in a moderately hot oven and bake about an
hour. When done, peel and mash like mashed potatoes, or serve the
pieces hot on a dish, to be eaten warm with butter like sweet
potatoes. It retains its sweetness much better baked this way than
when boiled.
VEGETABLE HASH.
Chop rather coarsely the remains of vegetables left from a
boiled dinner, such as cabbage, parsnips, potatoes, etc.; sprinkle
over them a little pepper, place in a saucepan or frying pan over
the fire; put in a piece of butter the size of a hickory nut; when
it begins to melt, tip the dish so as to oil the bottom and around
the sides; then put in the chopped vegetables, pour in a spoonful
or two of hot water from the tea-kettle, cover quickly so as to
keep in the steam. When heated thoroughly take off the cover and
stir occasionally until well cooked. Serve hot. Persons fond of
vegetables will relish this dish very much.
SPINACH.
It should be cooked so as to retain its bright green color and
not sent to table, as it so often is, of a dull brown or olive
color; to retain its fresh appearance, do not cover the vessel
while it is cooking.
Spinach requires dose examination and picking, as insects are
frequently found among it and it is often gritty. Wash it through
three or four waters. Then drain it and put it in boiling water.
Fifteen to twenty minutes is generally sufficient time to boil
spinach. Be careful to remove the scum. When it is quite tender,
take it up, and drain and squeeze it well. Chop it fine, and put it
into a saucepan with a piece of butter and a little pepper and
salt. Set it on the fire and let it stew five minutes, stirring it
all the time, until quite dry. Turn it into a vegetable dish, shape
it into a mound, slice some hard-boiled eggs and lay around the
top.
GREENS.
About a peck of greens are enough for a mess for a family of
six, such as dandelions, cowslips, burdock, chicory and other
greens. All greens should be carefully examined, the tough ones
thrown out, then be thoroughly washed through several waters until
they are entirely free from sand. The addition of a handful of salt
to each pan of water used in washing the greens will free them from
insects and worms, especially if after the last watering they are
allowed to stand in salted water for a half hour or longer. When
ready to boil the greens, put them into a large pot half full of
boiling water, with a handful of salt, and boil them steadily until
the stalks are tender; this will be in from five to twenty minutes,
according to the maturity of the greens; but remember that
long-continued boiling wastes the tender substances of the leaves,
and so diminishes both the bulk and the nourishment of the dish;
for this reason it is best to cut away any tough stalks before
beginning to cook the greens. As soon as they are tender drain them
in a colander, chop them a little and return them to the fire long
enough to season them with salt, pepper and butter; vinegar may be
added if it is liked; the greens should be served as soon as they
are hot.
All kinds of greens can be cooked in this manner.
STEWED CARROTS.
Wash and scrape the carrots and divide them into strips; put
them into a stewpan with water enough to cover them; add a spoonful
of salt and let them boil slowly until tender; then drain and
replace them in the pan, with two tablespoons of butter rolled in
flour, shake over a little pepper and salt, then add enough cream
or milk to moisten the whole; let it come to a boil and serve
hot.
CARROTS MASHED.
Scrape and wash them; cook them tender in boiling water salted
slightly. Drain well and mash them. Work in a good piece of butter
and season with pepper and salt. Heap up on a vegetable dish and
serve hot.
Carrots are also good simply boiled in salted water and dished
up hot with melted butter over them.
TURNIPS.
Turnips are boiled plain with or without meat, also mashed like
potatoes and stewed like parsnips. They should always be served
hot. They require from forty minutes to an hour to cook.
STEWED PUMPKINS.
See stewed pumpkin for pie. Cook the same, then after stewing
season the same as mashed potatoes. Pumpkin is good baked in the
same manner as baked winter squash.
STEWED ENDIVE.
Ingredients.—Six heads of endive, salt and water,
one pint of broth, thickening of butter and flour, one
tablespoonful of lemon juice, a small lump of sugar.
Mode.—Wash and free the endive thoroughly from
insects, remove the green part of the leaves, and put it into
boiling water, slightly salted. Let it remain for ten minutes; then
take it out, drain it till there is no water remaining and chop it
very fine. Put it into a stewpan with the broth, add a little salt
and a lump of sugar, and boil until the endive is perfectly tender.
When done, which may be ascertained by squeezing a piece between
the thumb and finger, add a thickening of butter and flour and the
lemon juice; let the sauce boil up and serve.
Time.—Ten minutes to boil, five minutes to simmer
in the broth.
BAKED MUSHROOMS.
Prepare them the same as for stewing. Place them in a baking-pan
in a moderate oven. Season with salt, pepper, lemon juice and
chopped parsley. Cook in the oven fifteen minutes, baste with
butter. Arrange on a dish and pour the gravy over them. Serve with
[Pg 215]sauce made by heating a cup of cream, two ounces of
butter, a tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a little cayenne
pepper, salt, a tablespoonful of white sauce and two tablespoonfuls
of lemon juice. Put in a saucepan and set on the fire. Stir until
thick, but do not let boil. Mushrooms are very nice placed on
slices of well-buttered toast when set into the oven to bake. They
cook in about fifteen minutes.
STEWED MUSHROOMS.
Time, twenty-one minutes. Button mushrooms, salt to taste, a
little butter rolled in flour, two tablespoonfuls of cream or the
yolk of one egg. Choose buttons of uniform size. Wipe them clean
and white with a wet flannel; put them in a stewpan with a little
water and let them stew very gently for a quarter of an hour. Add
salt to taste, work in a little flour and butter, to make the
liquor about as thick as cream, and let it boil for five minutes.
When you are ready to dish it up, stir in two tablespoonfuls of
cream or the yolk of an egg; stir it over the fire for a minute,
but do not let it boil, and serve. Stewed button mushrooms are very
nice, either in fish stews or ragouts, or served apart to eat with
fish. Another way of doing them is to stew them in milk and water
(after they are rubbed white), add to them a little veal gravy,
mace and salt and thicken the gravy with cream or the yolks of
eggs.
Mushrooms can be cooked in the same manner as the recipes for
oysters, either stewed, fried, broiled, or as a soup. They are also
used to flavor sauces, catsups, meat gravies, game and soups.
CANNED MUSHROOMS.
Canned mushrooms may be served with good effect with game and
even with beefsteak if prepared in this way: Open the can and pour
off every drop of the liquid found there; let the mushrooms drain,
then put them in a saucepan with a little cream and butter, pepper
and salt; let them simmer gently for from five to ten minutes, and
when the meat is on the platter pour the mushrooms over it. If
served with steak, that should be very tender and be broiled, never
in any case fried.
MUSHROOMS FOR WINTER USE.
Wash and wipe free from grit the small fresh button mushrooms.
Put into a frying pan a quarter of a pound of the very best butter.
[Pg 216]Add to it two whole cloves, a saltspoonful of salt
and a tablespoonful of lemon juice. When hot add a quart of the
small mushrooms, toss them about in the butter for a moment only,
then put them in jars; fill the top of each jar with an inch or two
of the butter and let it cool. Keep the jars in a cool place, and
when the butter is quite firm add a top layer of salt. Cover to
keep out dust.
The best mushrooms grow on uplands or in high open fields, where
the air is pure.
TRUFFLES.
The truffle belongs to the family of the mushrooms; they are
used principally in this country as a condiment for boned turkey
and chicken, scrambled eggs, fillets of beef, game and fish. When
mixed in due proportion, they add a peculiar zest and flavor to
sauces that cannot be found in any other plant in the vegetable
kingdom.
ITALIAN STYLE OF DRESSING TRUFFLES.
Ten truffles, a quarter of a pint of salad oil, pepper and salt
to taste, one tablespoonful of minced parsley, a very little finely
minced garlic, two blades of pounded mace, one tablespoonful of
lemon juice.
After cleansing and brushing the truffles, cut them into thin
slices and put them in a baking-dish, on a seasoning of oil or
butter, pepper, salt, parsley, garlic and mace in the above
proportion. Bake them for nearly an hour, and just before serving
add the lemon juice and send them to the table very hot.
TRUFFLES AU NATUREL.
Select some fine truffles; cleanse them by washing them in
several waters with a brush until not a particle of sand or grit
remains on them; wrap each truffle in buttered paper and bake in a
hot oven for quite an hour; take off the paper; wipe the truffles
and serve them in a hot napkin.
MACARONI Á LA ITALIENNE.
Divide a quarter of a pound of macaroni into four-inch pieces.
Simmer fifteen minutes in plenty of boiling water, salted. Drain.
[Pg 217]Put the macaroni into a saucepan and turn over it a
strong soup stock, enough to prevent burning. Strew over it an
ounce of grated cheese; when the cheese is melted, dish. Put
alternate layers of macaroni and cheese, then turn over the soup
stock and bake half an hour.
MACARONI AND CHEESE.
Break half a pound of macaroni into pieces an inch or two long;
cook it in boiling water, enough to cover it well; put in a good
teaspoonful of salt; let it boil about twenty minutes. Drain it
well and then put a layer in the bottom of a well-buttered
pudding-dish; upon this some grated cheese and small pieces of
butter, a bit of salt, then more macaroni, and so on, filling the
dish; sprinkle the top layer with a thick layer of cracker crumbs.
Pour over the whole a teacupful of cream or milk. Set it in the
oven and bake half an hour. It should be nicely browned on top.
Serve in the same dish in which it was baked with a clean napkin
pinned around it.
TIMBALE OF MACARONI.
Break in very short lengths small macaroni (vermicelli,
spaghetti, tagliarini). Let it be rather overdone; dress it with
butter and grated cheese; then work into it one or two eggs,
according to quantity. Butter and bread crumb a plain mold, and
when the macaroni is nearly cold fill the mold with it, pressing it
well down and leaving a hollow in the centre, into which place a
well-flavored mince of meat, poultry or game; then fill up the mold
with more macaroni, pressed well down. Bake in a moderately heated
oven, turn out and serve.
MACARONI Á LA CRÊME.
Boil one-quarter of a pound of macaroni in plenty of hot water,
salted, until tender; put half a pint of milk in a double boiler,
and when it boils stir into it a mixture of two tablespoonfuls of
butter and one of flour. Add two tablespoonfuls of cream, a little
white and cayenne pepper; salt to taste, and from one-quarter to
one-half a pound of grated cheese, according to taste. Drain and
dish the macaroni; pour the boiling sauce over it and serve
immediately.
MACARONI AND TOMATO SAUCE.
Divide half a pound of macaroni into four-inch pieces, put it
into boiling salted water enough to cover it; boil from fifteen to
twenty minutes then drain; arrange it neatly on a hot dish and pour
tomato sauce over it, and serve immediately while hot. See SAUCES
for tomato sauce.
TO MAKE BUTTER.
Thoroughly scald the churn, then cool well with ice or spring
water. Now pour in the thick cream; churn fast at first, then, as
the butter forms, more slowly; always with perfect regularity; in
warm weather, pour a little cold water into the churn, should the
butter form slowly; in the winter, if the cream is too cold, add a
little warm water to bring it to the proper temperature. When the
butter has "come", rinse the sides of the churn down with cold
water and take the butter up with a perforated dasher or a wooden
ladle, turning it dexterously just below the surface of the
buttermilk to catch every stray bit; have ready some very cold
water in a deep wooden tray; and into this plunge the dasher when
you draw it from the churn; the butter will float off, leaving the
dasher free. When you have collected all the butter, gather behind
a wooden butter ladle and drain off the water, squeezing and
pressing the butter with the ladle; then pour on more cold water
and work the butter with the ladle to get the milk out, drain off
the water, sprinkle salt over the butter—a tablespoonful to a
pound; work it in a little and set in a cool place for an hour to
harden, then work and knead it until not another drop of water
exudes, and the butter is perfectly smooth, and close in texture
and polish; then with the ladle make up into rolls, little balls,
stamped pats, etc.
The churn, dasher, tray and ladle should be well scalded before
using, so that the butter will not stick to them, and then cooled
with very cold water.
When you skim cream into your cream jar, stir it well into what
is already there, so that it may all sour alike; and no fresh
cream should be put with it within twelve hours before
churning, or the butter will not come quickly; and perhaps, not at
all.
Butter is indispensable in almost all culinary preparations.
Good fresh butter, used in moderation, is easily digested; it is
softening, nutritious and fattening, and is far more easily
digested than any other of the oleaginous substances sometimes used
in its place.
TO MAKE BUTTER QUICKLY.
Immediately after the cow is milked, strain the milk into clean
pans, and set it over a moderate fire until it is scalding hot; do
not let it boil; then set it aside; when it is cold, skim off the
cream; the milk will still be fit for any ordinary use; when you
have enough cream put it into a clean earthen basin; beat it with a
wooden spoon until the butter is made, which will not be long; then
take it from the milk and work it with a little cold water, until
it is free from milk; then drain off the water, put a small
tablespoonful of fine salt to each pound of butter and work it in.
A small teaspoonful of fine white sugar, worked in with the salt,
will be found an improvement—sugar is a great preservative.
Make the butter in a roll; cover it with a bit of muslin and keep
it in a cool place. A reliable recipe.
A BRINE TO PRESERVE BUTTER.
First work your butter into small rolls, wrapping each one
carefully in a clean muslin cloth, tying them up with a string.
Make a brine, say three gallons, having it strong enough of salt to
bear up an egg; add half a teacupful of pure, white sugar, and one
tablespoonful of saltpetre; boil the brine, and when cold strain it
carefully. Pour it over the rolls so as to more than cover them, as
this excludes the air. Place a weight over all to keep the rolls
under the surface.
PUTTING UP BUTTER TO KEEP.
Take of the best pure common salt two quarts, one ounce of white
sugar and one of saltpetre; pulverize them together completely.
Work the butter well, then thoroughly work in an ounce of this
mixture to every pound of butter. The butter is to be made into
half-pound rolls, and put into the following brine—to three
gallons of brine strong enough to bear an egg, add a quarter of a
pound of white sugar.
CURDS AND CREAM.
One gallon of milk will make a moderate dish. Put one spoonful
of prepared rennet to each quart of milk, and when you find that it
has become curd, tie it loosely in a thin cloth and hang it to
drain; do not wring or press the cloth; when drained, put the curd
into a mug and set in cool water, which must be frequently changed
(a refrigerator saves this trouble). When you dish it, if there is
whey in the mug, lie it gently out without pressing the curd; lay
it on a deep dish, and pour fresh cream over it; have powdered
loaf-sugar to eat with it; also hand the nutmeg grater.
Prepared rennet can be had at almost any druggist's, and at a
reasonable price.
NEW JERSEY CREAM CHEESE.
First scald the quantity of milk desired; let it cool a little,
then add the rennet; the directions for quantity are given on the
packages of "Prepared Rennet." When the curd is formed, take it out
on a ladle without breaking it; lay it on a thin cloth held by two
persons; dash a ladleful of water over each ladleful of curd, to
separate the curd; hang it up to drain the water off, and then put
it under a light press for one hour; cut the curd with a thread
into small pieces; lay a cloth between each two, and press for an
hour; take them out, rub them with fine salt, let them lie on a
board for an hour, and wash them in cold water; let them lie to
drain, and in a day or two the skin will look dry; put some sweet
grass under and over them, and they will soon ripen.
COTTAGE CHEESE.
Put a pan of sour or loppered milk on the stove or range where
it is not too hot; let it scald until the whey rises to the top (be
careful that it does not boil, or the curd will become hard and
tough). Place a clean doth or towel over a sieve and pour this whey
and curd into it, living it covered to drain two or three hours;
then put it into a dish and chop it fine with a spoon, adding a
teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful of butter and enough sweet
cream to make the cheese the consistency of putty. With your hands
make it into little balls flattened. Keep it in a cool place. Many
like it made rather thin with cream, serving it in a deep dish. You
may make this cheese of sweet milk by forming the curd with
prepared rennet.
SLIP.
Slip is bonny-clabber without its acidity, and so delicate is
its flavor that many persons like it just as well as ice cream. It
is prepared thus:—Make a quart of milk moderately warm; then
stir into it one large spoonful of the preparation called rennet;
set it by, and when cool again it will be as stiff as jelly. It
should be made only a few hours before it is to be used, or it will
be tough and watery; in summer set the dish on ice after it has
jellied. It must be served with powdered sugar, nutmeg and
cream.
CHEESE FONDU.
Melt an ounce of butter and whisk into it a pint of boiled milk.
Dissolve two tablespoonfuls of flour in a gill of cold milk, add it
to the boiled milk and let it cool. Beat the yolks of four eggs
with a heaping teaspoonful of salt, half a teaspoonful of pepper
and five ounces of grated cheese. Whip the whites of the eggs and
add them, pour the mixture into a deep tin lined with buttered
paper, and allow for the rising, say four inches. Bake twenty
minutes and serve the moment it leaves the oven.
CHEESE SOUFFLÉ.
Melt an ounce of butter in a saucepan; mix smoothly with it one
ounce of flour, a pinch of salt and cayenne and a quarter of a pint
of milk; simmer the mixture gently over the fire, stirring it all
the time, till it is as thick as melted butter, stir into it about
three ounces of finely-grated parmesan, or any good cheese. Turn it
into a basin and mix with it the yolks of two well-beaten eggs.
Whisk three whites to a solid froth, and just before the souffle is
baked put them into it, and pour the mixture into a small round
tin. It should be only half filled, as the fondu will rise very
high. Pin a napkin around the dish in which it is baked, and serve
the moment it is baked. It would be well to have a metal cover
strongly heated. Time twenty minutes. Sufficient for six
persons.
SCALLOPED CHEESE.
Any person who is fond of cheese could not fail to favor this
recipe.
Take three slices of bread well-buttered, first cutting off the
brown outside crust. Grate fine a quarter of a pound of any kind of
good [Pg 223]cheese; lay the bread in layers in a buttered
baking-dish, sprinkle over it the grated cheese, some salt and
pepper to taste. Mix four well-beaten eggs with three cups of milk;
pour it over the bread and cheese. Bake it in a hot oven as you
would cook a bread pudding. This makes an ample dish for four
people.
PASTRY RAMAKINS.
Take the remains or odd pieces of any light puff paste left from
pies or tarts; gather up the pieces of paste, roll it out evenly,
and sprinkle it with grated cheese of a nice flavor. Fold the paste
in three, roll it out again, and sprinkle more cheese over; fold
the paste, roll it out, and with a paste-cutter shape it in any way
that may be desired. Bake the ramakins in a brisk oven from ten to
fifteen minutes; dish them on a hot napkin and serve quickly. The
appearance of this dish may be very much improved by brushing the
ramakins over with yolk of egg before they are placed in the oven.
Where expense is not objected to, parmesan is the best kind of
cheese to use for making this dish.
Very nice with a cup of coffee for a lunch.
CAYENNE CHEESE STRAWS.
A quarter of a pound of flour, two ounces butter, two ounces
grated parmesan cheese, a pinch of salt and a few grains of cayenne
pepper. Mix into a paste with the yolk of an egg. Roll out to the
thickness of a silver quarter, about four or five inches long; cut
into strips about a third of an inch wide, twist them as you would
a paper spill and lay them on a baking-sheet slightly floured. Bake
in a moderate oven until crisp, but they must not be the least
brown. If put away in a tin these straws will keep a long time.
Serve cold, piled tastefully on a glass dish. You can make the
straws of remnants of puff pastry, rolling in the grated
cheese.
CHEESE CREAM TOAST.
Stale bread may be served as follows: Toast the slices and cover
them slightly with grated cheese; make a cream for ten slices out
of a pint of milk and two tablespoonfuls of plain flour. The milk
should be boiling, and the flour mixed in a little cold water
before stirring in. [Pg 224]When the cream is nicely cooked,
season with salt and butter; set the toast and cheese in the oven
for three or four minutes and then pour the cream over them.
WELSH RAREBIT.
Grate three ounces of dry cheese and mix it with the yolks of
two eggs, put four ounces of grated bread and three of butter; beat
the whole together in a mortar with a dessertspoonful of made
mustard, a little salt and some pepper; toast some slices of bread,
cut off the outside crust, cut it in shapes and spread the paste
thick upon them, and put them in the oven, let them become hot and
slightly browned, serve hot as possible.
There are so many ways of cooking and dressing eggs, that it
seems unnecessary for the ordinary family to use those that are not
the most practical.
To ascertain the freshness of an egg, hold it between your thumb
and forefinger in a horizontal position, with a strong light in
front of you. The fresh egg will have a clear appearance, both
upper and lower sides being the same. The stale egg will have a
clear appearance at the lower side, while the upper side will
exhibit a dark or cloudy appearance.
Another test is to put them in a pan of cold water; those that
are the first to sink are the freshest; the stale will rise and
float on top; or, if the large end turns up in the water, they are
not fresh. The best time for preserving eggs is from July to
September.
TO PRESERVE EGGS.
There are several recipes for preserving eggs and we give first
one which we know to be effectual, keeping them fresh from August
until Spring. Take a piece of quick-lime as large as a good-sized
lemon and two teacupfuls of salt; put it into a large vessel and
slack it with a gallon of boiling water. It will boil and bubble
until thick as cream; when it is cold, pour off the top, which will
be perfectly clear. Drain off this liquor, and pour it over your
eggs; see that the liquor more than covers them. A stone jar is the
most convenient—one that holds about six quarts.
Another manner of preserving eggs is to pack them in a jar with
layers of salt between, the large end of the egg downward, with a
thick layer of salt at the top; cover tightly and set in a cool
place.
Some put them in a wire basket or a piece of mosquito net and
dip them in boiling water half a minute; then pack in sawdust.
Still [Pg 226]another manner is to dissolve a cheap article of gum
arabic, about as thin as muscilage, and brush over each egg with
it; then pack in powdered charcoal; set in a cool, dark place.
Eggs can be kept for some time by smearing the shells with
butter or lard; then packed in plenty of bran or sawdust, the eggs
not allowed to touch one another; or coat the eggs with melted
paraffine.
BOILED EGGS.
Eggs for boiling cannot be too fresh, or boiled too soon after
they are laid; but rather a longer time should be allowed for
boiling a new-laid egg than for one that is three or four days old.
Have ready a saucepan of boiling water; put the eggs into it gently
with a spoon, letting the spoon touch the bottom of the saucepan
before it is withdrawn, that the egg may not fall and consequently
crack. For those who like eggs lightly boiled, three minutes will
be found sufficient; three and three-quarters to four minutes will
be ample time to set the white nicely; and if liked hard, six or
seven minutes will not be found too long. Should the eggs be
unusually large, as those of black Spanish fowls sometimes are,
allow an extra half minute for them. Eggs for salad should be
boiled for ten or fifteen minutes, and should be placed in a basin
of cold water for a few minutes to shrink the meat from the shell;
they should then be rolled on the table with the hand and the shell
will peel off easily.
SOFT BOILED EGGS.
When properly cooked eggs are done evenly through, like any
other food. This result may be obtained by putting the eggs into a
dish with a cover, or a tin pail, and then pouring upon them
boiling water—two quarts or more to a dozen of
eggs—and cover and set them away where they will keep
hot and not boil for ten to twelve minutes. The heat
of the water cooks the eggs slowly, evenly and sufficiently,
leaving the centre or yolk harder than the white, and the egg
tastes as much richer and nicer as a fresh egg is nicer than a
stale egg.
SCALLOPED EGGS.
Hard-boil twelve eggs; slice them thin in rings; in the bottom
of a large well-buttered baking-dish place a layer of grated bread
crumbs, then one of eggs; cover with bits of butter and sprinkle
with pepper [Pg 227]and salt. Continue thus to blend these
ingredients until the dish is full; be sure, though, that the
crumbs cover the eggs upon top. Over the whole pour a large
teacupful of sweet cream or milk and brown nicely in a moderately
heated oven.
SHIRRED EGGS.
Set into the oven until quite hot a common white dish large
enough to hold the number of eggs to be cooked, allowing plenty of
room for each. Melt in it a small piece of butter, and breaking the
eggs carefully in a saucer, one at a time, slip them into the hot
dish; sprinkle over them a small quantity of pepper and salt and
allow them to cook four or five minutes. Adding a tablespoonful of
cream for every two eggs, when the eggs are first slipped in, is a
great improvement.
This is far more delicate than fried eggs.
Or prepare the eggs the same and set them in a steamer over
boiling water.
They are usually served in hotels baked in individual dishes,
about two in a dish, and in the same dish they were baked in.
SCRAMBLED EGGS.
Put a tablespoonful of butter into a hot frying pan; tip around
so that it will touch all sides of the pan. Having ready half a
dozen eggs broken in a dish, salted and peppered, turn them
(without beating) into the hot butter; stir them one way briskly
for five or six minutes or until they are mixed. Be careful that
they do not get too hard. Turn over toast or dish up without.
POACHED OR DROPPED EGGS.
Have one quart of boiling water and one tablespoonful of
salt in a frying pan. Break the eggs, one by one, into a saucer,
and slide carefully into the salted water. Dash with a spoon a
little water over the egg, to keep the top white.
The beauty of a poached egg is for the yolk to be seen blushing
through the white, which should only be just sufficiently hardened
to form a transparent veil for the egg.
Cook until the white is firm, and lift out with a griddle cake
turner and place on toasted bread. Serve immediately.
A tablespoonful of vinegar put into the water keeps the eggs
from spreading.
Open gem rings are nice placed in the water and an egg dropped
into each ring.
FRIED EGGS.
Break the eggs, one at a time, into a saucer, and then slide
them carefully off into a frying pan of lard and butter mixed,
dipping over the eggs the hot grease in spoonfuls, or turn them
over, frying both sides without breaking them. They require about
three minutes' cooking.
Eggs can be fried round like balls, by dropping one at a time
into a quantity of hot lard, the same as for fried cakes, first
stirring the hot lard with a stick until it runs round like a
whirlpool; this will make the eggs look like balls. Take out with a
skimmer. Eggs can be poached the same in boiling water.
EGGS AUX FINES HERBES.
Roll an ounce of butter in a good teaspoonful of flour; season
with pepper, salt and nutmeg; put it into a coffeecupful of fresh
milk, together with two teaspoonfuls of chopped parsley; stir and
simmer it for fifteen minutes, add a teacupful of thick cream.
Hard-boil five eggs and halve them; arrange them in a dish with the
ends upwards, pour the sauce over them, and decorate with little
heaps of fried bread crumbs round the margin of the dish.
POACHED EGGS Á LA CRÊME.
Put a quart of hot water, a tablespoonful of vinegar and a
teaspoonful of salt into a frying pan, and break each egg
separately into a saucer; slip the egg carefully into the hot
water, simmer three or four minutes until the white is set, then
with a skimmer lift them out into a hot dish. Empty the pan of its
contents, put in half a cup of cream, or rich milk; if milk, a
large spoonful of butter; pepper and salt to taste, thicken with a
very little cornstarch; let it boil up once, and turn it over the
dish of poached eggs. It can be served on toast or without.
It is a better plan to warm the cream in butter in a separate
dish, that the eggs may not have to stand.
EGGS IN CASES.
Make little paper cases of buttered writing paper; put a small
piece of butter in each, and a little chopped parsley or onion,
pepper and salt. Place the cases upon a gridiron over a moderate
fire of bright coals, and when the butter melts, break a fresh egg
into each case. Strew in upon them a few seasoned bread crumbs, and
when nearly done, glaze the tops with a hot shovel. Serve in the
paper cases.
MINCED EGGS.
Chop up four or five hard-boiled eggs; do not mince them too
fine. Put over the fire in a suitable dish a cupful of milk, a
tablespoonful of butter, salt and pepper, and some savory chopped
small. When this comes to a boil stir into it a tablespoonful of
flour, dissolved in a little cold milk. When it cooks thick like
cream put in the minced eggs. Stir it gently around and around for
a few moments and serve, garnished with sippets of toast. Any
particular flavor may be given to this dish, such as that of
mushrooms, truffles, catsup, essence of shrimps, etc., or some
shred anchovy may be added to the mince.
MIXED EGGS AND BACON.
Take a nice rasher of mild bacon; cut it into squares no larger
than dice; fry it quickly until nicely browned; but on no account
burn it. Break half a dozen eggs into a basin, strain and season
them with pepper, add them to the bacon, stir the whole about and,
when sufficiently firm, turn it out into a dish. Decorate with hot
pickles.
MIXED EGGS GENERALLY—SAVORY OR SWEET.
Much the same method is followed in mixed eggs generally,
whatever may be added to them; really it is nothing more than an
omelet which is stirred about in the pan while it is being dressed,
instead of being allowed to set as a pancake. Chopped tongue,
oysters, shrimps, sardines, dried salmon, anchovies, herbs, may be
used.
COLD EGGS FOR A PICNIC.
This novel way of preparing cold egg for the lunch-basket fully
repays one for the extra time required. Boil hard several eggs,
halve them lengthwise; remove the yolks and chop them fine with
cold chicken, lamb, veal or any tender, roasted meat; or with bread
soaked [Pg 230]in milk and any salad, as parsley, onion, celery,
the bread being half of the whole; or with grated cheese, a little
olive oil, drawn butter, flavored. Fill the cavity in the egg with
either of these mixtures, or any similar preparation. Press the
halves together, roll twice in beaten egg and bread crumbs, and dip
into boiling lard. When the color rises delicately, drain them and
they are ready for use.
OMELETS.
In making an omelet, care should be taken that the omelet pan is
hot and dry. To insure this, put a small quantity of lard or suet
into a clean frying pan, let it simmer a few minutes, then remove
it; wipe the pan dry with a towel, and then put in a tablespoonful
of butter. The smoothness of the pan is most essential, as the
least particle of roughness will cause the omelet to stick. As a
general rule, a small omelet can be made more successfully than a
large one, it being much better to make two small ones of four eggs
each, than to try double the number of eggs in one omelet and fail.
Allow one egg to a person in making an omelet and one tablespoonful
of milk; this makes an omelet more puffy and tender than one made
without milk. Many prefer them without milk.
Omelets are called by the name of what is added to give them
flavor, as minced ham, salmon, onions, oysters, etc., beaten up in
the eggs in due quantity, which gives as many different kind of
omelets.
They are also served over many kinds of thick sauces or purees,
such as tomato, spinach, endive, lettuce, celery, etc.
If vegetables are to be added, they should be already cooked,
seasoned and hot; place in the centre of the omelet, just before
turning; so with mushroom, shrimps, or any cooked ingredients. All
omelets should be served the moment they are done, as they harden
by standing, and care taken that they do not cook too
much.
Sweet omelets are generally used for breakfast or plain
desserts.
PLAIN OMELET.
Put a smooth, clean, iron frying pan on the fire to heat;
meanwhile, beat four eggs very light, the whites to a stiff froth
and the yolks to a thick batter. Add to the yolks four
tablespoonfuls of milk, pepper and salt; and, lastly, stir in the
whites lightly. Put a piece of butter nearly half the size of an
egg into the heated pan; turn it so that it will [Pg 231]moisten the entire bottom, taking care that it does
not scorch. Just as it begins to boil, pour in the eggs. Hold the
frying pan handle in your left hand, and, as the eggs whiten,
carefully, with a spoon, draw up lightly from the bottom, letting
the raw part run out on the pan, till all be equally cooked; shake
with your left hand, till the omelet be free from the pan, then
turn with a spoon one half of the omelet over the other; let it
remain a moment, but continue shaking, lest it adhere; toss to a
warm platter held in the right hand, or lift with a flat, broad
shovel; the omelet will be firm around the edge, but creamy and
light inside.
MEAT OR FISH OMELETS.
Take cold meat, fish, game or poultry of any kind; remove all
skin, sinew, etc., and either cut it small or pound it to a paste
in a mortar, together with a proper proportion of spices and salt;
then either toss it in a buttered frying pan over a clear fire till
it begins to brown and pour beaten eggs upon it, or beat it up with
the eggs, or spread it upon them after they have begun to set in
the pan. In any case serve hot, with or without a sauce, but
garnish with crisp herbs in branches, pickles, or sliced lemon. The
right proportion is one tablespoonful of meat to four eggs. A
little milk, gravy, water, or white wine, may be advantageously
added to the eggs while they are being beaten.
Potted meats make admirable omelets in the above manner.
VEGETABLE OMELET.
Make a purée by mashing up ready-dressed vegetables,
together with a little milk, cream or gravy and some seasoning. The
most suitable vegetables are cucumbers, artichokes, onions, sorrel,
green peas, tomatoes, lentils, mushrooms, asparagus tops, potatoes,
truffles or turnips. Prepare some eggs by beating them very light.
Pour them into a nice hot frying pan, containing a spoonful of
butter; spread the purée upon the upper side; and when
perfectly hot, turn or fold the omelet together and serve. Or cold
vegetables may be merely chopped small, then tossed in a little
butter, and some beaten and seasoned eggs poured over.
OMELET OF HERBS.
Parsley, thyme and sweet marjoram mixed gives the famous
omelette aux fines herbes so popular at every wayside inn in
the most remote corner of sunny France. An omelet "jardiniere" is
two table[Pg 232]spoonfuls of mixed parsley, onion, chives,
shallots and a few leaves each of sorrel and chevril, minced fine
and stirred into the beaten eggs before cooking. It will take a
little more butter to fry it than a plain one.
CHEESE OMELET.
Beat up three eggs, and add to them a tablespoonful of milk and
a tablespoonful of grated cheese; add a little more cheese before
folding; turn it out on a hot dish; grate a little cheese over it
before serving.
ASPARAGUS OMELET.
Boil with a little salt, and until about half cooked, eight or
ten stalks of asparagus, and cut the eatable part into rather small
pieces; beat the egg and mix the asparagus with them. Make the
omelet as above directed. Omelet with parsley is made by adding a
little chopped parsley.
TOMATO OMELET. No. 1.
Peel a couple of tomatoes, which split into four pieces; remove
the seeds and cut them into small dice; then fry them with a little
butter until nearly done, adding salt and pepper. Beat the eggs and
mix the tomatoes with them, and make the omelet as usual. Or stew a
few tomatoes in the usual way and spread over before folding.
TOMATO OMELET. No. 2.
Cut in slices and place in a stewpan six peeled tomatoes; add a
tablespoonful of cold water, a little pepper and salt. When they
begin to simmer, break in six eggs, stir well, stirring one way,
until the eggs are cooked, but not too hard. Serve warm.
RICE OMELET.
Take a cup of cold boiled rice, turn over it a cupful of warm
milk, add a tablespoonful of butter melted, a level teaspoonful of
salt, a dash of pepper; mix well, then add three well-beaten eggs.
Put a tablespoonful of butter in a hot frying pan, and when it
begins to boil pour in the omelet and set the pan in a hot oven. As
soon as it is cooked through, fold it double, turn it out on a hot
dish, and serve at once. Very good.
HAM OMELET.
Cut raw ham into dice, fry with butter and when cooked enough,
turn the beaten egg over it and cook as a plain omelet.
If boiled ham is used, mince it and mix with the egg after they
are beaten. Bacon may be used instead of raw ham.
CHICKEN OMELET.
Mince rather fine one cupful of cooked chicken, warm in a
teacupful of cream or rich milk a tablespoonful of butter, salt and
pepper; thicken with a large tablespoonful of flour. Make a plain
omelet, then add this mixture just before turning it over. This is
much better than the dry minced chicken. Tongue is equally
good.
MUSHROOM OMELET.
Clean a cupful of large button mushrooms, canned ones may be
used; cut them into bits. Put into a stewpan an ounce of butter and
let it melt; add the mushrooms, a teaspoonful of salt, half a
teaspoonful of pepper and half a cupful of cream or milk. Stir in a
teaspoonful of flour, dissolved in a little milk or water to
thicken, if needed. Boil ten minutes, and set aside until the
omelet is ready.
Make a plain omelet the usual way, and just before doubling it,
turn the mushrooms over the centre and serve hot.
OYSTER OMELET.
Parboil a dozen oysters in their own liquor, skim them out and
let them cool; add them to the beaten eggs, either whole or minced.
Cook the same as a plain omelet.
Thicken the liquid with butter rolled in flour; season with
salt, cayenne pepper and a teaspoonful of chopped parsley. Chop up
the oysters and add to the sauce. Put a few spoonfuls in the centre
of the omelet before folding; when dished, pour the remainder of
the sauce around it.
FISH OMELET.
Make a plain omelet, and when ready to fold, spread over it fish
prepared as follows: Add to a cupful of any kind of cold fish,
broken fine, cream enough to moisten it, seasoned with a
tablespoonful of butter; then pepper and salt to taste. Warm
together.
ONION OMELET.
Make a plain omelet, and when ready to turn spread over it a
teaspoonful each of chopped onion and minced parsley; then fold,
or, if preferred, mix the minces into the eggs before cooking.
JELLY OMELET.
Make a plain omelet, and just before folding together, spread
with some kind of jelly. Turn out on a warm platter. Dust it with
powdered sugar.
BREAD OMELET. No. 1.
Break four eggs into a basin and carefully remove the treadles;
have ready a tablespoonful of grated and sifted bread; soak it in
either milk, water, cream, white wine, gravy, lemon juice, brandy
or rum, according as the omelet is intended to be sweet or savory.
Well beat the eggs together with a little nutmeg, pepper and salt;
add the bread, and, beating constantly (or the omelet will be
crumbly), get ready a frying pan, buttered and made thoroughly hot;
put in the omelet; do it on one side only; turn it upon a dish, and
fold it double to prevent the steam from condensing. Stale
sponge-cake, grated biscuit, or pound cake, may replace the bread
for a sweet omelet, when pounded loaf sugar should be sifted over
it, and the dish decorated with lumps of currant jelly. This makes
a nice dessert.
BREAD OMELET. No. 2.
Let one teacupful of milk come to a boil, pour it over one
teacupful of bread crumbs and let it stand a few minutes. Break six
eggs into a bowl, stir (not beat) till well mixed; then add the
milk and bread, season with pepper and salt, mix all well together
and turn into a hot frying pan, containing a large spoonful of
butter boiling hot. Fry the omelet slowly, and when brown on the
bottom cut in squares and turn again, fry to a delicate brown and
serve hot.
Cracker omelet may be made by substituting three or four rolled
crackers in place of bread.
BAKED OMELET.
Beat the whites and yolks of four or six eggs separately; add to
the yolks a small cup of milk, a tablespoonful of flour or
cornstarch, a teaspoonful of baking powder, one-half teaspoonful of
salt, and, lastly, [Pg 235]the stiff-beaten whites. Bake in a
well-buttered pie-tin or plate about half an hour in a steady oven.
It should be served the moment it is taken from the oven, as it is
liable to fall.
OMELET SOUFFLÉ.
Break six eggs into separate cups; beat four of the yolks, mix
with them one teaspoonful of flour, three tablespoonfuls of
powdered sugar, very little salt. Flavor with extract lemon or any
other of the flavors that may be preferred. Whisk the whites of six
eggs to a firm froth; mix them lightly with the yolks; pour the
mixture into a greased pan or dish; bake in a quick oven. When
well-risen and lightly browned on the top, it is done; roll out in
warm dish, sift pulverized sugar over, and send to table.
RUM OMELET.
Put a small quantity of lard into the pan; let it simmer a few
minutes and remove it; wipe the pan dry with a towel, and put in a
little fresh lard in which the omelet may be fried. Care should be
taken that the lard does not burn, which would spoil the color of
the omelet. Break three eggs separately; put them into a bowl and
whisk them thoroughly with a fork. The longer they are beaten, the
lighter will the omelet be. Beat up a teaspoonful of milk with the
eggs and continue to beat until the last moment before pouring into
the pan, which should be over a hot fire. As soon as the omelet
sets, remove the pan from the hottest part of the fire. Slip a
knife under it to prevent sticking to the pan. When the centre is
almost firm, slant the pan, work the omelet in shape to fold easily
find neatly, and when slightly browned, hold a platter against the
edge of the pan and deftly turn it out on to the hot dish. Dust a
liberal quantity of powdered sugar over it, and singe the sugar
into neat stripes with a hot iron rod, heated in the coals; pour a
glass of warm Jamaica rum around it, and when it is placed on the
table set fire to the rum. With a tablespoon dash the burning rum
over the omelet, put out the fire and serve. Salt mixed with
the eggs prevents them from rising, and when it is so used the
omelet will look flabby, yet without salt it will taste
insipid.
Add a little salt to it just before folding it and turning out
on the dish.
HAM SANDWICHES.
Make a dressing of half a cup of butter, one tablespoonful of
mixed mustard, one of salad oil, a little red or white pepper, a
pinch of salt and the yolk of an egg; rub the butter to a cream,
add the other ingredients and mix thoroughly; then stir in as much
chopped ham as will make it consistent and spread between thin
slices of bread. Omit salad oil and substitute melted butter if
preferred.
HAM SANDWICHES, PLAIN.
Trim the crusts from thin slices of bread; butter them and lay
between every two some thin slices of cold boiled ham. Spread the
meat with a little mustard if liked.
CHICKEN SANDWICHES.
Mince up fine any cold boiled or roasted chicken; put it into a
saucepan with gravy, water or cream enough to soften it; add a good
piece of butter, a pinch of pepper; work it very smooth while it is
heating until it looks almost like a paste. Then spread it on a
plate to cool. Spread it between slices of buttered bread.
SARDINE SANDWICHES.
Take two boxes of sardines and throw the contents into hot
water, having first drained away all the oil. A few minutes will
free the sardines from grease. Pour away the water and dry the fish
in a cloth; then scrape away the skins and pound the sardines in a
mortar till reduced to paste; add pepper, salt and some tiny pieces
of lettuce, and spread on the sandwiches, which have been
previously cut as above. The lettuce adds very much to the flavor
of the sardines.
Or chop the sardines up fine and squeeze a few drops of lemon
juice into them, and spread between buttered bread or cold
biscuits.
WATER CRESS SANDWICHES.
Wash well some water cress and then dry them in a cloth,
pressing out every atom of moisture as far as possible; then mix
with the cress hard-boiled eggs chopped fine, and seasoned with
salt and pepper. Have a stale loaf and some fresh butter, and with
a sharp knife cut as many thin slices as will be required for two
dozen sandwiches; then cut the cress into small pieces, removing
the stems; place it between each slice of bread and butter, with a
slight sprinkling of lemon juice; press down the slices hard, and
cut them sharply on a board into small squares, leaving no
crust.
EGG SANDWICHES.
Hard boil some very fresh eggs and when cold cut them into
moderately thin slices and lay them between some bread and butter
cut as thin as possible; season them with pepper, salt and nutmeg.
For picnic parties, or when one is traveling, these sandwiches are
far preferable to hard-boiled eggs au naturel.
MUSHROOM SANDWICHES.
Mince beef tongue and boiled mushrooms together, add French
mustard and spread between buttered bread.
CHEESE SANDWICHES.
These are extremely nice and are very easily made. Take one
hard-boiled egg, a quarter of a pound of common cheese grated, half
a teaspoonful of salt, half a teaspoonful of pepper, half a
teaspoonful of mustard, one tablespoonful of melted butter, and one
tablespoonful of vinegar or cold water. Take the yolk of the egg
and put it into a small bowl and crumble it down, put into it the
butter and mix it smooth with a spoon, then add the salt, pepper,
mustard and the cheese, mixing each well. Then put in the
tablespoonful of vinegar, which will make it the proper thickness.
If vinegar is not relished, then use cold water instead. Spread
this between two biscuits or pieces of oat-cake, and you could not
require a better sandwich. Some people will prefer the sandwiches
less highly seasoned. In that case, season to taste.
Among all civilized people bread has become an article of food
of the first necessity; and properly so, for it constitutes of
itself a complete life sustainer, the gluten, starch and sugar
which it contains representing ozotized and hydro-carbonated
nutrients, and combining the sustaining powers of the animal and
vegetable kingdoms in one product. As there is no one article of
food that enters so largely into our daily fare as bread, so no
degree of skill in preparing other articles can compensate for lack
of knowledge in the art of making good, palatable and nutritious
bread. A little earnest attention to the subject will enable any
one to comprehend the theory, and then ordinary care in practice
will make one familiar with the process.
GENERAL DIRECTIONS.
The first thing required for making wholesome bread is the
utmost cleanliness; the next is the soundness and sweetness of all
the ingredients used for it; and, in addition to these, there must
be attention and care through the whole process.
Salt is always used in bread-making, not only on account of its
flavor, which destroys the insipid raw state of the flour, but
because it makes the dough rise better.
In mixing with milk, the milk should be boiled—not simply
scalded, but heated to boiling over hot water—then set aside
to cool before mixing. Simple heating will not prevent bread from
turning sour in the rising, while boiling will act as a
preventative. So the milk should be thoroughly scalded, and should
be used when it is just blood warm.
Too small a proportion of yeast, or insufficient time allowed
for the dough to rise, will cause the bread to be heavy.
The yeast must be good and fresh if the bread is to be
digestible and nice. Stale yeast produces, instead of vinous
fermentation, an [Pg 239]acetous fermentation, which flavors
the bread and makes it disagreeable. A poor, thin yeast produces an
imperfect fermentation, the result being a heavy, unwholesome
loaf.
If either the sponge or the dough be permitted to overwork
itself—that is to say, if the mixing and kneading be
neglected when it has reached the proper point for
either—sour bread will probably be the consequence in warm
weather, and bad bread in any. The goodness will also be endangered
by placing it so near a fire as to make any part of it hot, instead
of maintaining the gentle and equal degree of heat required for its
due fermentation.
Heavy bread will also most likely be the result of making the
dough very hard and letting it become quite cold, particularly in
winter.
An almost certain way of spoiling dough is to leave it half
made, and to allow it to become cold before it is finished. The
other most common causes of failure are using yeast which is no
longer sweet, or which has been frozen, or has had hot liquid
poured over it.
As a general rule, the oven for baking bread should be rather
quick and the heat so regulated as to penetrate the dough without
hardening the outside. The oven door should not be opened after the
bread is put in until the dough is set or has become firm, as the
cool air admitted will have an unfavorable effect upon it.
The dough should rise and the bread begin to brown after about
fifteen minutes, but only slightly. Bake from fifty to sixty
minutes and have it brown, not black or whitey brown, but brown all
over when well baked.
When the bread is baked, remove the loaves immediately from the
pans and place them where the air will circulate freely around
them, and thus carry off the gas which has been formed, but is no
longer needed.
Never leave the bread in the pan or on a pin table to absorb the
odor of the wood. If you like crusts that are crisp do not cover
the loaves; but to give the soft, tender, wafer-like consistency
which many prefer, wrap them while still hot in several thicknesses
of bread-cloth. When cold put them in a stone jar, removing the
cloth, as that absorbs the moisture and gives the bread an
unpleasant taste and odor. Keep the jar well covered and carefully
cleansed from crumbs and stale pieces. Scald and dry it thoroughly
every two or three days. A yard [Pg
240]and a half square
of coarse table linen makes the best bread-cloth. Keep in good
supply; use them for no other purpose.
Some people use scalding water in making wheat bread; in that
case the flour must be scalded and allowed to cool before the yeast
is added—then proceed as above. Bread made in this manner
keeps moist in summer much longer than when made in the usual
mode.
Home-made yeast is generally preferred to any other. Compressed
yeast, as now sold in most grocery stores, makes fine light, sweet
bread, and is a much quicker process, and can always be had fresh,
being made fresh every day.
WHEAT BREAD.
Sift the flour into a large bread-pan or bowl; make a hole in
the middle of it, and pour in the yeast in the ratio of half a
teacupful of yeast to two quarts of flour; stir the yeast lightly,
then pour in your "wetting," either milk or water, as you
choose,—which use warm in winter and cold in summer; if you
use water as "wetting," dissolve in it a bit of butter of the size
of an egg,—if you use milk, no butter is necessary; stir in
the "wetting" very lightly, but do not mix all the flour into it;
then cover the pan with a thick blanket or towel, and set it, in
winter, in a warm place to rise,—this is called "putting
the bread in sponge." In summer the bread should not be wet
over night. In the morning add a teaspoonful of salt and mix all
the flour in the pan with the sponge, kneading it well; then let it
stand two hours or more until it has risen quite light; then remove
the dough to the molding-board and mold it for a long time, cutting
it in pieces and molding them together again and again, until the
dough is elastic under the pressure of your hand, using as little
flour as possible; then make it into loaves, put the loaves into
baking-tins. The loaves should come half way up the pan, and they
should be allowed to rise until the bulk is doubled. When the
loaves are ready to put into the oven, the oven should be ready to
receive them. It should be hot enough to brown a teaspoonful of
flour in five minutes. The heat should be greater at the bottom
than at the top of the oven, and the fire so arranged as to give
sufficient strength of heat through the baking without being
replenished. Let them stand ten or fifteen minutes, prick them
three or four times with a fork, bake in a quick oven from
forty-five to sixty minutes.
If these directions are followed, you will obtain sweet, tender
and wholesome bread. If by any mistake the dough becomes sour
before you are ready to bake it, you can rectify it by adding a
little dry super-carbonate of soda, molding the dough a long time
to distribute the soda equally throughout the mass. All bread is
better, if naturally sweet, without the soda; but sour bread
you should never eat, if you desire good health.
Keep well covered in a tin box or large stone crock, which
should be wiped out every day or two, and scalded and dried
thoroughly in the sun once a week.
COMPRESSED YEAST BREAD.
Use for two loaves of bread three quarts of sifted flour, nearly
a quart of warm water, a level tablespoonful of salt and an ounce
of compressed yeast. Dissolve the yeast in a pint of lukewarm
water; then stir into it enough flour to make a thick batter. Cover
the bowl containing the batter or sponge with a thick folded cloth
and set it in a warm place to rise; if the temperature of heat is
properly attended to the sponge will be foamy and light in half an
hour. Now stir into this sponge the salt dissolved in a little warm
water, add the rest of the flour and sufficient warm water to make
the dough stiff enough to knead; then knead it from five to ten
minutes, divide it into loaves, knead again each loaf and put them
into buttered baking tins; cover them with a double thick cloth and
set again in a warm place to rise twice their height, then bake the
same as any bread. This bread has the advantage of that made of
home-made yeast as it is made inside of three hours, whereas the
other requires from twelve to fourteen hours.
HOME-MADE YEAST.
Boil six large potatoes in three pints of water. Tie a handful
of hops in a small muslin bag and boil with the potatoes; when
thoroughly cooked drain the water on enough flour to make a thin
batter; set this on the stove or range and scald it enough to cook
the flour (this makes the yeast keep longer); remove it from the
fire and when cool enough, add the potatoes mashed, also half a cup
of sugar, half a tablespoonful of ginger, two of salt and a
teacupful of yeast. Let it stand in a warm place, until it has
thoroughly risen, then put it in [Pg
242]a large mouthed jug
and cork tightly; set away in a cool place. The jug should be
scalded before putting in the yeast.
Two-thirds of a coffeecupful of this yeast will make four
loaves.
UNRIVALED YEAST.
On one morning boil two ounces of the best hops in four quarts
of water half an hour; strain it, and let the liquor cool to the
consistency of new milk; then put it in an earthen bowl and add
half a cupful of salt and half a cupful of brown sugar; beat up one
quart of flour with some of the liquor; then mix all well together,
and let it stand till the third day after; then add six
medium-sized potatoes, boiled and mashed through a colander; let it
stand a day, then strain and bottle and it is fit for use. It must
be stirred frequently while it is making, and kept near a fire. One
advantage of this yeast is its spontaneous fermentation, requiring
the help of no old yeast; if care be taken to let it ferment well
in the bowl, it may immediately be corked tightly. Be careful to
keep it in a cool place. Before using it shake the bottle up well.
It will keep in a cool place two months, and is best the latter
part of the time. Use about the same quantity as of other
yeast.
DRIED YEAST OR YEAST CAKES.
Make a pan of yeast the same as "Home-Made Yeast;" mix in with
it corn meal that has been sifted and dried, kneading it well until
it is thick enough to roll out, when it can be cut into cakes or
crumble up. Spread out and dry thoroughly in the shade; keep in a
dry place.
When it is convenient to get compressed yeast, it is much better
and cheaper than to make your own, a saving of time and trouble.
Almost all groceries keep it, delivered to them fresh made
daily.
SALT-RAISING BREAD.
While getting breakfast in the morning, as soon as the
tea-kettle has boiled, take a quart tin cup or an earthen quart
milk pitcher, scald it, then fill one-third full of water about as
warm as the finger could be held in; then to this add a teaspoonful
of salt, a pinch of brown sugar and coarse flour enough to make a
batter of about the right consistency for griddle-cakes. Set the
cup, with the spoon in it, in a closed vessel half-filled with
water moderately hot, but not scalding. Keep the tem[Pg 243]perature as nearly even as possible and add a
teaspoonful of flour once or twice during the process of
fermentation. The yeast ought to reach to the top of the bowl in
about five hours. Sift your flour into a pan, make an opening in
the centre and pour in your yeast. Have ready a pitcher of warm
milk, salted, or milk and water (not too hot, or you will scald the
yeast germs), and stir rapidly into a pulpy mass with a spoon.
Cover this sponge closely and keep warm for an hour, then knead
into loaves, adding flour to make the proper consistency. Place in
warm, well-greased pans, cover closely and leave till it is light.
Bake in a steady oven, and when done let all the hot steam escape.
Wrap closely in damp towels and keep in closed earthen jars until
it is wanted.
This, in our grandmothers' time, used to be considered the prize
bread, on account of its being sweet and wholesome and required no
prepared yeast to make it. Nowadays yeast-bread is made with very
little trouble, as the yeast can be procured at almost any
grocery.
BREAD FROM MILK YEAST.
At noon the day before baking, take half a cup of corn meal and
pour over it enough sweet milk boiling hot to make it the thickness
of batter-cakes. In the winter place it where it will keep warm.
The next morning before breakfast pour into a pitcher a pint of
boiling water; add one teaspoonful of soda and one of salt. When
cool enough so that it will not scald the flour, add enough to make
a stiff batter; then add the cup of meal set the day before. This
will be full of little bubbles. Then place the pitcher in a kettle
of warm water, cover the top with a folded towel and put it where
it will keep warm, and you will be surprised to find how soon the
yeast will be at the top of the pitcher. Then pour the yeast into a
bread-pan; add a pint and a half of warm water, or half water and
half milk, and flour enough to knead into loaves. Knead but little
harder than for biscuit and bake as soon as it rises to the top of
the tin. This recipe makes five large loaves. Do not allow it to
get too light before baking, for it will make the bread dry and
crumbling. A cup of this milk yeast is excellent to raise buckwheat
cakes.
GRAHAM BREAD.
One teacupful of wheat flour, one-half teacupful of Porto Rico
molasses, one-half cupful of good yeast, one teaspoonful of salt,
one [Pg 244]pint of warm water; add sufficient Graham flour to
make the dough as stiff as can be stirred with a strong spoon; this
is to be mixed at night; in the morning, add one teaspoonful of
soda, dissolved in a little water; mix well, and pour into two
medium-sized pans; they will be about half full; let it stand in a
warm place until it rises to the top of the pans, then bake one
hour in a pretty hot oven.
This should be covered about twenty minutes when first put into
the oven with a thick brown paper, or an old tin cover; it prevents
the upper crust hardening before the loaf is well-risen. If these
directions are correctly followed the bread will not be heavy or
sodden, as it has been tried for years and never failed.
GRAHAM BREAD. (Unfermented.)
Stir together three heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder, three
cups of Graham flour and one cup of white flour; then add a large
teaspoonful of salt and half a cup of sugar. Mix all thoroughly
with milk or water into as stiff a batter as can be stirred with a
spoon. If water is used, a lump of butter as large as a walnut may
be melted and stirred into it. Bake immediately in well-greased
pans.
BOSTON BROWN BREAD.
One pint of rye flour, one quart of corn meal, one teacupful of
Graham flour, all fresh; half a teacupful of molasses or brown
sugar, a teaspoonful of salt, and two-thirds of a teacupful of
home-made yeast. Mix into as stiff a dough as can be stirred with a
spoon, using warm water for wetting. Let it rise several hours, or
over night; in the morning, or when light, add a teaspoonful of
soda dissolved in a spoonful of warm water; beat it well and turn
it into well-greased, deep bread-pans, and let it rise again. Bake
in a moderate oven from three to four hours.
BOSTON BROWN BREAD. (Unfermented.)
One cupful of rye flour, two cupfuls of corn meal, one cupful of
white flour, half a teacupful of molasses or sugar, a teaspoonful
of salt. Stir all together thoroughly, and wet up with sour
milk; then add a level teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a
tablespoonful of water. The same can be made of sweet milk by
substituting baking powder for soda. The batter to be stirred as
thick as can be with a spoon, and turned into well-greased
pans.
VIRGINIA BROWN BREAD.
One pint of corn meal; pour over enough boiling water to
thoroughly scald it; when cool add one pint of light, white bread
sponge, mix well together, add one cupful of molasses, and Graham
flour enough to mold; this will make two loaves; when light, bake
in a moderate oven one and a half hours.
RHODE ISLAND BROWN BREAD.
Two and one-half cupfuls of corn meal, one and one-half cupfuls
of rye meal, one egg, one cup of molasses, two teaspoonfuls of
cream of tartar, one teaspoonful of soda, a little salt and one
quart of milk. Bake in a covered dish, either earthen or iron, in a
moderately hot oven three hours.
STEAMED BROWN BREAD.
One cup of white flour, two of Graham flour, two of Indian meal,
one teaspoonful of soda, one cup of molasses, three and a half cups
of milk, a little salt. Beat well and steam for four hours. This is
for sour milk; when sweet milk is used, use baking powder in place
of soda.
This is improved by setting it into the oven fifteen minutes
after it is slipped from the mold. To be eaten warm with butter.
Most excellent.
RYE BREAD.
To a quart of warm water stir as much wheat flour as will make a
smooth batter; stir into it half a gill of home-made yeast, and set
it in a warm place to rise; this is called setting a sponge; let it
be mixed in some vessel which will contain twice the quantity; in
the morning, put three pounds and a half of rye flour into a bowl
or tray, make a hollow in the centre, pour in the sponge, add a
dessertspoonful of salt, and half a small teaspoonful of soda,
dissolved in a little water; make the whole into a smooth dough,
with as much warm water as may be necessary; knead it well, cover
it, and let it set in a warm place for three hours; then knead it
again, and make it into two or three loaves; bake in a quick oven
one hour, if made in two loaves, or less if the loaves are
smaller.
RYE AND CORN BREAD.
One quart of rye meal or rye flour, two quarts of Indian meal,
scalded (by placing in a pan and pouring over it just enough
boiling [Pg 246]water to merely wet it, but not enough
to make it into a batter, stirring constantly with a spoon),
one-half cup of molasses, two teaspoonfuls salt, one teacup yeast,
make it as stiff as can be stirred with a spoon, mixing with warm
water and let rise all night. In the morning add a level
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little water; then put it in a
large pan, smooth the top with the hand dipped in cold water; let
it stand a short time and bake five or six hours. If put in the
oven late in the day, let it remain all night.
Graham may be used instead of rye, and baked as above.
This is similar to the "Rye and Injun" of our grandmothers'
days, but that was placed in a kettle, allowed to rise, then placed
in a covered iron pan upon the hearth before the fire, with coals
heaped upon the lid, to bake all night.
FRENCH BREAD.
Beat together one pint of milk, four tablespoonfuls of melted
butter, or half butter and half lard, half a cupful of yeast, one
teaspoonful of salt and two eggs. Stir into this two quarts of
flour. When this dough is risen, make into two large rolls and bake
as any bread. Cut across the top diagonal gashes just before
putting into the oven.
TWIST BREAD.
Let the bread be made as directed for wheat bread, then take
three pieces as large as a pint bowl each; strew a little flour
over the paste-board or table, roll each piece under your hands to
twelve inches length, making it smaller in circumference at the
ends than in the middle; having rolled the three in this way, take
a baking-tin, lay one part on it, joint one end of each of the
other two to it, and braid them together the length of the rolls
and join the ends by pressing them together; dip a brush in milk
and pass it over the top of the loaf; after ten minutes or so, set
it in a quick oven and bake for nearly an hour.
NEW ENGLAND CORN CAKE.
One quart of milk, one pint of corn meal, one teacupful of wheat
flour, a teaspoonful of salt, two tablespoonfuls of melted butter.
Scald the milk and gradually pour it on the meal; when cool add the
butter and salt, also a half cup of yeast. Do this at night; in the
morning beat thoroughly and add two well-beaten eggs, and a half
teaspoon[Pg 247]ful of soda, dissolved in a spoonful of water. Pour
the mixture into buttered deep earthen plates, let it stand fifteen
minutes to rise again, then bake from twenty to thirty minutes.
GERMAN BREAD.
One pint of milk well boiled, one teacupful of sugar, two
tablespoonfuls of nice lard or butter, two-thirds of a teacupful of
baker's yeast. Make a rising with the milk and yeast; when light,
mix in the sugar and shortening, with flour enough to make as soft
a dough as can be handled. Flour the paste-board well, roll out
about one-half inch thick; put this quantity into two large pans;
make about a dozen indentures with the finger on the top; put a
small piece of butter in each, and sift over the whole one
tablespoonful of sugar mixed with one teaspoonful of cinnamon. Let
this stand for a second rising; when perfectly light, bake in a
quick oven fifteen or twenty minutes.
CORN BREAD.
Two cups of sifted meal, half a cup of flour, two cups of sour
milk, two well-beaten eggs, half a cup of molasses or sugar, a
teaspoonful of salt, two tablespoonfuls of melted butter. Mix the
meal and flour smoothly and gradually with the milk, then the
butter, molasses and salt, then the beaten eggs, and lastly
dissolve a level teaspoonful of baking soda in a little milk and
beat thoroughly altogether. Bake nearly an hour in well-buttered
tins, not very shallow. This recipe can be made with sweet milk by
using baking powder in place of soda.
VIRGINIA CORN BREAD.
Three cups of white corn meal, one cup of flour, one
tablespoonful of sugar, one teaspoonful of salt, two heaping
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one tablespoonful of lard, three
cups of milk and three eggs. Sift together the flour, corn meal,
sugar, salt and baking powder; rub in the lard cold, add the eggs
well beaten and then the milk. Mix into a moderately stiff batter;
pour it into well-greased, shallow baking pans (pie-tins are
suitable). Bake from thirty to forty minutes.
BOSTON CORN BREAD.
One cup of sweet milk, two of sour milk, two-thirds of a cup of
molasses, one of wheat flour, four of corn meal and one teaspoonful
of [Pg 248]soda; steam for three hours, and brown a few minutes
in the oven. The same made of sweet milk and baking powder is
equally as good.
INDIAN LOAF CAKE.
Mix a teacupful of powdered white sugar with a quart of rich
milk, and cut up in the milk two ounces of butter, adding a
saltspoonful of salt. Put this mixture into a covered pan or
skillet, and set it on the fire till it is scalding hot. Then take
it off, and scald with it as much yellow Indian meal (previously
sifted) as will make it of the consistency of thick boiled mush.
Beat the whole very hard for a quarter of an hour, and then set it
away to cool.
While it is cooling, beat three eggs very light, and stir them
gradually into the mixture when it is about as warm as new milk.
Add a teacupful of good strong yeast and beat the whole another
quarter of an hour, for much of the goodness of this cake depends
on its being long and well beaten. Then have ready a tin mold or
earthen pan with a pipe in the centre (to diffuse the heat through
the middle of the cake). The pan must be very well-buttered as
Indian meal is apt to stick. Put in the mixture, cover it and set
it in a warm place to rise. It should be light in about four hours.
Then bake it two hours in a moderate oven. When done, turn it out
with the broad surface downwards and send it to table hot and
whole. Cut it into slices and eat it with butter.
This will be found an excellent cake. If wanted for breakfast,
mix it and set it to rise the night before. If properly made,
standing all night will not injure it. Like all Indian cakes (of
which this is one of the best), it should be eaten warm.
JOHNNIE CAKE.
Sift one quart of Indian meal into a pan; make a hole in the
middle and pour in a pint of warm water, adding one teaspoonful of
salt; with a spoon mix the meal and water gradually into a soft
dough; stir it very briskly for a quarter of an hour or more, till
it becomes light and spongy; then spread the dough smoothly and
evenly on a straight, flat board (a piece of the head of a
flour-barrel will serve for this purpose); place the board nearly
upright before an open fire and put an iron against the back to
support it; bake it well; when done, cut it in squares; send it hot
to table, split and buttered.
SPIDER CORN-CAKE.
Beat two eggs and one-fourth cup sugar together. Then add one
cup sweet milk and one cup of sour milk in which you have dissolved
one teaspoonful soda. Add a teaspoonful of salt. Then mix one and
two-thirds cups of granulated corn meal and one-third cup flour
with this. Put a spider or skillet on the range and when it is hot
melt in two tablespoonfuls of butter. Turn the spider so that the
butter can run up on the sides of the pan. Pour in the corn-cake
mixture and add one more cup of sweet milk, but do not stir
afterwards. Put this in the oven and bake from twenty to
thirty-five minutes. When done, there should be a streak of custard
through it.
SOUTHERN CORN MEAL PONE OR CORN DODGERS.
Mix with cold water into a soft dough one quart of southern corn
meal, sifted, a teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful of butter or
lard melted. Mold into oval cakes with the hands and bake in a very
hot oven, in well-greased pans. To be eaten hot. The crust should
be brown.
RAISED POTATO-CAKE.
Potato-cakes, to be served with roast lamb or with game, are
made of equal quantities of mashed potatoes and of flour, say one
quart of each, two tablespoonfuls of butter, a little salt and milk
enough to make a batter as for griddle-cakes; to this allow half a
teacupful of fresh yeast; let it rise till it is light and bubbles
of air form; then dissolve half a teaspoonful of soda in a spoonful
of warm water and add to the batter; bake in muffin tins. These are
good also with fricasseed chicken; take them from the tins and drop
in the gravy just before sending to the table.
GENERAL SUGGESTIONS.
In making batter-cakes, the ingredients should be put together
over night to rise, and the eggs and butter added in the morning;
the butter melted and eggs well beaten. If the batter appears sour
in the least, dissolve a little soda and stir into it; this should
be done early enough to rise some time before baking.
Water can be used in place of milk in all raised dough, and the
dough should be thoroughly light before making into loaves or
biscuits; then when molding them use as little flour as possible;
the kneading to be done when first made from the sponge, and should
be done well and for some length of time, as this makes the pores
fine, the bread cut smooth and tender. Care should be taken not to
get the dough too stiff.
Where any recipe calls for baking powder, and you do not have
it, you can use cream of tartar and soda, in the proportion of one
level teaspoonful of soda to two of cream of tartar.
When the recipe calls for sweet milk or cream, and you do not
have it, you may use in place of it sour milk or cream, and, in
that case, baking powder or cream of tartar must not be
used, but baking-soda, using a level teaspoonful to a quart
of sour milk; the milk is always best when just turned, so that it
is solid, and not sour enough to whey or to be watery.
When making biscuits or bread with baking powder or soda and
cream of tartar, the oven should be prepared first; the dough
handled quickly and put into the oven immediately, as soon as it
becomes the proper lightness, to ensure good success. If the oven
is too slow, the article baked will be heavy and hard.
As in beating cake, never stir ingredients into batter,
but beat them in, by beating down from the bottom, and up, and over
again. This laps the air into the batter which produces little
air-cells and causes the dough to puff and swell as it comes in
contact with the heat while cooking.
TO RENEW STALE ROLLS.
To freshen stale biscuits or rolls, put them into a steamer for
ten minutes, then dry them off in a hot oven; or dip each roll for
an instant in cold water and heat them crisp in the oven.
WARM BREAD FOR BREAKFAST..
Dough after it has become once sufficiently raised and perfectly
light, cannot afterwards be injured by setting aside in any cold
place where it cannot freeze; therefore, biscuits, rolls,
etc., can be made late the day before wanted for breakfast. Prepare
them ready for baking by molding them out late in the evening; lay
them a little apart on buttered tins; cover the tins with a cloth,
then fold around that a [Pg
251]newspaper, so as to
exclude the air, as that has a tendency to cause the crust to be
hard and thick when baked. The best place in summer is to place
them in the ice-box, then all you have to do in the morning (an
hour before breakfast time, and while the oven is heating) is to
bring them from the ice-box, take off the cloth and warm it, and
place it over them again; then set the tins in a warm place near
the fire. This will give them time to rise and bake when needed. If
these directions are followed rightly, you will find it makes no
difference with their lightness and goodness, and you can always be
sure of warm raised biscuits for breakfast in one hour's time.
Stale rolls may be made light and flakey by dipping for a moment
in cold water, and placing immediately in a very hot oven to be
made crisp and hot.
SODA BISCUIT.
One quart of sifted flour, one teaspoonful of soda, two
teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar, one teaspoonful of salt; mix
thoroughly, and rub in two tablespoonfuls of butter and wet with
one pint of sweet milk. Bake in a quick oven.
BAKING POWDER BISCUIT.
Two pints of flour, butter the size of an egg, three heaping
teaspoonfuls of baking powder and one teaspoonful of salt; make a
soft dough of sweet milk or water, knead as little as possible, cut
out with the usual biscuit-cutter and bake in rather a quick
oven.
SOUR MILK BISCUIT.
Rub into a quart of sifted flour a piece of butter the size of
an egg, one teaspoonful of salt; stir into this a pint of sour
milk, dissolve one teaspoonful of soda and stir into the milk just
as you add it to the flour; knead it up quickly, roll it out nearly
half an inch thick and cut out with a biscuit-cutter; bake
immediately in a quick oven.
Very nice biscuit may be made with sour cream without the butter
by the same process.
RAISED BISCUIT.
Sift two quarts of flour in a mixing-pan, make a hole in the
middle of the flour, pour into this one pint of warm water or new
milk, one teaspoonful of salt, half a cup of melted lard or butter,
stir in a little flour, then add half a cupful of yeast, after
which stir in as much flour [Pg
252]as you can
conveniently with your hand, let it rise over night; in the morning
add nearly a teaspoonful of soda, and more flour as is needed to
make a rather soft dough; then mold fifteen to twenty minutes, the
longer the better; let it rise until light again, roll this out
about half an inch thick and cut out with a biscuit-cutter, or make
it into little balls with your hands; cover and set in a warm place
to rise. When light, bake a light brown in a moderate oven. Rub a
little warm butter or sweet lard on the sides of the biscuits when
you place them on the tins, to prevent their sticking together when
baked.
LIGHT BISCUIT. No. 1.
Take a piece of bread dough that will make about as many
biscuits as you wish; lay it out rather flat in a bowl; break into
it two eggs, half a cup of sugar, half a cup of butter; mix this
thoroughly with enough flour to keep it from sticking to the hands
and board. Knead it well for about fifteen or twenty minutes, make
into small biscuits, place in a greased pan, and let them rise
until about even with the top of the pan. Bake in a quick oven for
about half an hour.
These can be made in the form of rolls, which some prefer.
LIGHT BISCUIT. No. 2.
When you bake take a pint of sponge, one tablespoonful of melted
butter, one tablespoonful of sugar, the white of one egg beaten to
a foam. Let rise until light, mold into biscuits, and when light
bake.
GRAHAM BISCUITS, WITH YEAST.
Take one pint of water or milk, one large tablespoonful of
butter, two tablespoonfuls of sugar, a half cup of yeast and a
pinch of salt; take enough wheat flour to use up the water, making
it the consistency of batter-cakes; add the rest of the ingredients
and as much Graham flour as can be stirred in with a spoon; set it
away till morning; in the morning grease a pan, flour your hands,
take a lump of dough the size of an egg, roll it lightly between
the palms of your hands, let them rise twenty minutes, and bake in
a tolerably hot oven.
EGG BISCUIT.
Sift together a quart of dry flour and three heaping
teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Rub into this thoroughly a piece of
butter the size [Pg 253]of an egg; add two well-beaten eggs, a
tablespoonful of sugar, a teaspoonful of salt. Mix all together
quickly into a soft dough, with one cup of milk, or more if needed.
Roll out nearly half of an inch thick. Cut into biscuits, and bake
immediately in a quick oven from fifteen to twenty minutes.
PARKER HOUSE ROLLS.
One pint of milk, boiled and cooled, a piece of butter the size
of an egg, one-half cupful of fresh yeast, one tablespoonful of
sugar, one pinch of salt, and two quarts of sifted flour.
Melt the butter in the warm milk, then add the sugar, salt and
flour, and let it rise over night. Mix rather soft. In the morning,
add to this half of a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a spoonful
of water. Mix in enough flour to make the same stiffness as any
biscuit dough; roll out not more than a quarter of an inch thick.
Cut with a large round cutter; spread soft butter over the tops and
fold one-half over the other by doubling it. Place them apart a
little so that there will be room to rise. Cover and place them
near the fire for fifteen or twenty minutes before baking. Bake in
rather a quick oven.
PARKER HOUSE ROLLS. (Unfermented.)
These rolls are made with baking powder, and are much sooner
made, although the preceding recipe is the old original one from
the "Parker House." Stir into a quart of sifted flour three large
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, a tablespoonful of cold butter, a
teaspoonful of salt and one of sugar, and a well-beaten egg; rub
all well into the flour, pour in a pint of cold milk, mix up
quickly into a smooth dough, roll it out less than half an inch
thick, cut with a large biscuit-cutter, spread soft butter over the
top of each; fold one-half over the other by doubling it, lay them
a little apart on greased tins. Set them immediately in a pretty
hot oven. Rub over the tops with sweet milk before putting in the
oven, to give them a glaze.
FRENCH ROLLS.
Three cups of sweet milk, one cup of butter and lard, mixed in
equal proportions, one-half cup of good yeast, or half a cake of
compressed yeast, and a teaspoonful of salt. Add flour enough to
make a stiff dough. Let it rise over night; in the morning, add two
well-beaten eggs; knead thoroughly and let it rise again. With the
hands, [Pg 254]make it into balls as large as an egg; then roll
between the hands to make long rolls (about three inches).
Place close together in even rows on well-buttered pans. Cover and
let them rise again, then bake in a quick oven to a delicate
brown.
BEATEN BISCUIT.
Two quarts of sifted flour, a teaspoonful of salt, a
tablespoonful of sweet lard, one egg; make up with half a pint of
milk, or if milk is not to be had, plain water will answer; beat
well until the dough blisters and cracks; pull off a two-inch
square of the dough; roll it into a ball with the hand; flatten,
stick with a fork, and bake in a quick oven.
It is not beating hard that makes the biscuit nice, but the
regularity of the motion. Beating hard, the old cooks say,
kills the dough.
POTATO BISCUIT.
Boil six good-sized potatoes with their jackets on; take them
out with a skimmer, drain and squeeze with a towel to ensure being
dry; then remove the skin, mash them perfectly free from lumps, add
a tablespoonful of butter, one egg and a pint of sweet milk. When
cool, beat in half a cup of yeast. Put in just enough flour to make
a stiff dough. When this rises, make into small cakes. Let them
rise the same as biscuit and bake a delicate brown.
This dough is very fine dropped into meat soups for pot-pie.
VINEGAR BISCUITS.
Take two quarts of flour, one large tablespoonful of lard or
butter, one tablespoonful and a half of vinegar and one teaspoonful
of soda; put the soda in the vinegar and stir it well; stir in the
flour; beat two eggs very light and add to it; make a dough with
warm water stiff enough to roll out, and cut with a biscuit-cutter
one inch thick and bake in a quick oven.
GRAFTON MILK BISCUITS.
Boil and mash two white potatoes; add two teaspoonfuls of brown
sugar; pour boiling water over these, enough to soften them. When
tepid, add one small teacupful of yeast; when light, warm three
ounces of butter in one pint of milk, a little salt, a third of a
teaspoonful of soda and flour enough to make stiff sponge; when
risen, work it on the [Pg 255]board, put it back in the tray to rise
again; when risen, roll into cakes and let them stand half an hour.
Bake in a quick oven. These biscuits are fine.
SALLY LUNN.
Warm one-half cupful of butter in a pint of milk; add a
teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful of sugar, and seven cupfuls of
sifted flour; beat thoroughly and when the mixture is blood
warm, add four beaten eggs and last of all, half a cup of good
lively yeast. Beat hard until the batter breaks in blisters. Set it
to rise over night. In the morning, dissolve half a teaspoonful of
soda, stir it into the batter and turn it into a well-buttered,
shallow dish to rise again about fifteen or twenty minutes. Bake
about fifteen to twenty minutes.
The cake should be torn apart, not cut; cutting with a knife
makes warm bread heavy. Bake a light brown. This cake is frequently
seen on Southern tables.
SALLY LUNN. (Unfermented.)
Rub a piece of butter as large as an egg into a quart of flour;
add a tumbler of milk, two eggs, three tablespoonfuls of sugar,
three tablespoonfuls of baking powder and a teaspoonful of salt.
Scatter the baking powder, salt and sugar into the flour; add the
eggs, the butter, melted, the milk. Stir all together and bake in
well-greased round pans. Eat warm with butter.
LONDON HOT-CROSS BUNS.
Three cups of milk, one cup of yeast, or one cake of compressed
yeast dissolved in a cup of tepid water, and flour enough to make a
thick batter; set this as a sponge over night. In the morning add
half a cup of melted butter, one cup of sugar, half a nutmeg
grated, one saltspoonful of salt, half a teaspoonful of soda, and
flour enough to roll out like biscuit. Knead well and set to rise
for five hours. Roll the dough half an inch thick; cut in round
cakes and lay in rows in a buttered baking-pan, and let the cakes
stand half an hour, or until light; then put them in the oven,
having first made a deep cross on each with a knife. Bake a light
brown and brush over with white of egg beaten stiff with powdered
sugar.
RUSKS, WITH YEAST.
In one large coffeecup of warm milk dissolve half a cake of
compressed yeast, or three tablespoonfuls of home-made yeast; to
this add three well-beaten eggs, a small cup of sugar and a
teaspoonful of salt; beat these together. Use flour enough to make
a smooth, light dough, let it stand until very light, then knead it
in the form of biscuits; place them on buttered tins and let them
rise until they are almost up to the edge of the tins; pierce the
top of each one and bake in a quick oven. Glaze the top of each
with sugar and milk, or the white of an egg, before baking. Some
add dried currants, well-washed and dried in the oven.
RUSKS.
Two cups of raised dough, one of sugar, half a cup of butter,
two well-beaten eggs, flour enough to make a stiff dough; set to
rise, and when light mold into high biscuit and let rise again; rub
damp sugar and cinnamon over the top and place in the oven. Bake
about twenty minutes.
RUSKS. (Unfermented.)
Three cups of flour sifted, three teaspoonfuls of baking powder,
one teaspoonful of salt, three tablespoonfuls of sugar, two
tablespoonfuls of butter, three eggs, half a nutmeg grated and a
teaspoonful of ground cinnamon, two small cups of milk; sift
together salt, flour, sugar and baking powder; rub in the butter
cold; add the milk, beaten eggs and spices; mix into a soft dough,
break off pieces about as large as an egg, roll them under the
hands into round balls, rub the tops with sugar and water mixed,
and then sprinkle dry sugar over them. Bake immediately.
SCOTCH SCONES.
Thoroughly mix, while dry, one quart of sifted flour, loosely
measured, with two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder; then rub
into it a tablespoonful of cold butter and a teaspoonful of salt.
Be sure that the butter is well worked in. Add sweet milk enough to
make a very soft paste. Roll out the paste about a quarter
of an inch thick, using plenty of flour on the paste-board and
rolling pin. Cut it into triangular pieces, each side about four
inches long. Flour the sides and bottom of a biscuit tin, and place
the pieces on it. Bake immediately in a quick oven from twenty to
thirty minutes. When half done, [Pg
257]brush over with
sweet milk. Some cooks prefer to bake them on a floured griddle,
and cut them a round shape the size of a saucer, then scarred
across to form four quarters.
CRACKNELS.
Two cups of rich milk, four tablespoonfuls of butter and a gill
of yeast, a teaspoonful of salt; mix warm, add flour enough to make
a light dough. When light, roll thin and cut in long pieces three
inches wide, prick well with a fork and bake in a slow oven. They
are to be mixed rather hard and rolled very thin, like soda
crackers.
RAISED MUFFINS. No. 1.
Make a batter of one pint of sweet milk, one teaspoonful of
sugar, one of salt, a tablespoonful of butter or sweet lard and a
half cup of yeast; add flour enough to make it moderately thick;
keep it in a warm, not hot, place until it is quite light,
then stir in one or two well-beaten eggs, and half a teaspoonful of
soda, dissolved in a little warm water. Let the batter stand
twenty-five or thirty minutes longer to rise a little, turn into
well-greased muffin-rings or gem-pans, and bake in a quick
oven.
To be served hot and torn open, instead of cut with a knife.
RAISED MUFFINS. No. 2.
Three pints of flour, three eggs, a piece of butter the size of
an egg, two heaping teaspoonfuls of white sugar, one-half cake of
compressed yeast and a quart of milk; warm the milk with the butter
in it; cool a little, stir in the sugar and add a little salt; stir
this gradually into the flour, then add the eggs well beaten;
dissolve the yeast in half a cup of lukewarm water and add to the
other ingredients; if the muffins are wanted for luncheon, mix them
about eight o'clock in the morning; if for breakfast, set them at
ten o'clock at night; when ready for baking, stir in half a
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a teaspoonful of hot water; butter
the muffin-rings or gem-irons and bake in a quick oven.
EGG MUFFINS. (Fine.)
One quart of flour, sifted twice; three eggs, the whites and
yolks beaten separately, three teacups of sweet milk, a teaspoonful
of salt, a tablespoonful of sugar, a large tablespoonful of lard or
butter and two [Pg 258]heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder.
Sift together flour, sugar, salt and baking powder; rub in the lard
cold, add the beaten eggs and milk; mix quickly into a smooth
batter, a little firmer than for griddle-cakes. Grease well some
muffin-pans and fill them two-thirds full. Bake in a hot oven
fifteen or twenty minutes. These made of cream, omitting the
butter, are excellent.
PLAIN MUFFINS.
One egg well beaten, a tablespoonful of butter and a
tablespoonful of sugar, with a teaspoonful of salt, all beaten
until very light. One cup of milk, three of sifted flour and three
teaspoonfuls of baking powder. One-half Graham and one-half rye
meal may be used instead of wheat flour, or two cups of corn meal
and one of flour.
Drop on well-greased patty-pans and bake twenty minutes in a
rather quick oven, or bake on a griddle in muffin-rings.
MUFFINS WITHOUT EGGS.
One quart of buttermilk, a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in the
milk, a little salt, and flour enough to make a stiff batter. Drop
in hot gem-pans and bake in a quick oven. Two or three
tablespoonfuls of sour cream will make them a little richer.
TENNESSEE MUFFINS.
One pint of corn meal, one pint of flour, one tablespoonful of
sugar, one teaspoonful of salt, three of baking powder, one
tablespoonful of lard or butter, two eggs and a pint of milk. Sift
together corn meal, flour, sugar, salt and powder; rub in lard or
butter cold, and eggs beaten and milk; mix into batter of
consistency of cup-cake; muffin-rings to be cold and well greased,
then fill two-thirds full. Bake in hot oven fifteen minutes.
CORN MEAL MUFFINS. (Without Eggs.)
One cup of flour, one cup of corn meal, two tablespoonfuls of
sugar, water to make a thick batter, or sour milk is better; mix at
night; in the morning add two tablespoonfuls of melted butter and
one teaspoonful of soda; bake in cake rounds.
HOMINY MUFFINS.
Two cups of boiled hominy; beat it smooth, stir in three cups of
sour milk, half a cup of melted butter, two teaspoonfuls of salt,
two tablespoonfuls of sugar; add three eggs well beaten, one
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in hot water, two cups of flour. Bake
quickly.
Rice muffins may be made in the same manner.
GRAHAM GEMS. No. 1.
Two cupfuls of Graham flour, one cupful of wheat flour, two
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, a tablespoonful of sugar, one of
salt and one well-beaten egg.
Mix with sweet milk to make a thin batter; beat it well. Bake in
gem-irons; have the irons well greased; fill two-thirds full and
bake in a hot oven. Will bake in from fifteen to twenty
minutes.
GRAHAM GEMS. No. 2.
Three cups of sour milk, one teaspoonful of soda, one of salt,
one tablespoonful of brown sugar, one of melted lard or butter, one
or two beaten eggs; to the egg add the milk, then the sugar and
salt, then the Graham flour (with the soda mixed in), together with
the lard or butter; make a stiff batter, so that it will
drop, not pour, from the spoon. Have the gem-pans very hot,
fill and bake fifteen minutes in a hot oven.
The same can be made of sweet milk, using three teaspoonfuls of
baking powder instead of soda, and if you use sweet milk, put in no
shortening. Excellent.
Muffins of all kinds should only be cut just around the edge,
then pulled open with the fingers.
PLAIN GRAHAM GEMS.
Two cupfuls of the best Graham meal, two of water, fresh and
cold, or milk and water, and a little salt. Stir briskly for a
minute or two. Have the gem-pan, hot and well greased, on the top
of the stove while pouring in the batter. Then place in a very hot
oven and bake forty minutes. It is best to check the heat a little
when they are nearly done. As the best prepared gems may be spoiled
if the heat is not sufficient, care and judgment must be used in
order to secure this most healthful as well, as delicious
bread.
WAFFLES.
Take a quart of flour and wet it with a little sweet milk that
has been boiled and cooled, then stir in enough of the milk to form
a thick batter. Add a tablespoonful of melted butter, a teaspoonful
of salt, and yeast to raise it. When light add two well-beaten
eggs, heat your waffle-iron, grease it well and fill it with the
batter. Two or three minutes will suffice to bake on one side; then
turn the iron over, and when brown on both sides the cake is done.
Serve immediately.
CONTINENTAL HOTEL WAFFLES.
Put into one quart of sifted flour three teaspoonfuls of baking
powder, one teaspoonful of salt, one of sugar, all thoroughly
stirred and sifted together; add a tablespoonful of melted butter,
six well-beaten eggs and a pint of sweet milk; cook in waffle-irons
heated and well greased. Serve hot.
NEWPORT WAFFLES.
Make one pint of Indian meal into mush in the usual way. While
hot, put in a small lump of butter and a dessertspoonful of salt.
Set the mush aside to cool. Meanwhile, beat separately till very
light the whites and yolks of four eggs. Add the eggs to the mush,
and cream in gradually one quart of wheaten flour. Add half a pint
of buttermilk, or sour cream, in which has been dissolved half a
teaspoonful of carbonate of soda. Lastly, bring to the consistency
of thin batter by the addition of sweet milk. Waffle-irons should
be put on to heat an hour in advance, that they may be in the
proper condition for baking as soon as the batter is ready. Have a
brisk fire, butter the irons thoroughly, but with nicety, and bake
quickly. Fill the irons only half full of batter, that the waffles
may have room to rise.
CREAM WAFFLES.
One pint of sour cream, two eggs, one pint of flour, one
tablespoonful of corn meal, one teaspoonful of soda, half a
teaspoonful of salt. Beat the eggs separately, mix the cream with
the beaten yolks, stir in the flour, corn meal and salt; add the
soda dissolved in a little sweet milk, and, lastly, the whites
beaten to a stiff froth.
RICE WAFFLES. No. 1.
One quart of flour, half a teaspoonful of salt, one teaspoonful
of sugar, two teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one large
tablespoonful of butter, two eggs, one and a half pints of milk,
one cupful of hot boiled rice. Sift the flour, salt, sugar and
baking powder well together; rub the butter into the flour; beat
the eggs well, separately, and add the stiff whites last of
all.
RICE WAFFLES. No. 2.
Rub through a sieve one pint of boiled rice, add it to a
tablespoonful of dry flour, two-thirds of a teaspoonful of salt,
two teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Beat separately the yolks and
whites of three eggs; add to the yolks a cup and a half of milk,
work it into the flour, then add an ounce of melted butter; beat
the whites of eggs thoroughly; mix the whole together. Heat the
waffle-iron and grease it evenly; pour the batter into the half of
the iron over the range until nearly two-thirds full, cover, allow
to cook a moment, then turn and brown slightly on the other
side.
GERMAN RICE WAFFLES.
Boil a half pound of rice in milk until it becomes thoroughly
soft Then remove it from the fire, stirring it constantly, and
adding, a little at a time, one quart of sifted flour, five beaten
eggs, two spoonfuls of yeast, a half pound of melted butter, a
little salt and a teacupful of warm milk. Set the batter in a warm
place, and, when risen, bake in the ordinary way.
BERRY TEA-CAKES.
Nice little tea-cakes to be baked in muffin-rings are made of
one cup of sugar, two eggs, one and a half cups of milk, one
heaping teaspoonful of baking powder, a piece of butter the size of
an egg and flour sufficient to make a stiff batter. In this batter
stir a pint bowl of fruit—any fresh are nice—or canned
berries with the juice poured off. Serve while warm and they are a
dainty addition to the tea-table. Eaten with butter.
RYE DROP-CAKES.
One pint of warm milk, with half a teaspoonful of soda dissolved
in it, a little salt, four eggs well beaten, and rye flour enough
to make [Pg 262]a thin batter; bake in small cups, buttered, and in
a hot oven, or in small cakes upon a hot griddle.
WHEAT DROP-CAKES.
One pint of cream, six eggs well beaten, a little salt, and
wheat flour enough to make a thin batter; bake in little cups
buttered and in a hot oven fifteen minutes.
POP-OVERS.
Two cups of flour, two cups of sweet milk, two eggs, one
teaspoonful of butter, one teaspoonful of salt, bake in cups in a
quick oven fifteen minutes. Serve hot with a sweet sauce.
FLANNEL CAKES. (With Yeast.)
Heat a pint of sweet milk and into it put two heaping
tablespoonfuls of butter, let it melt, then add a pint of cold milk
and the well-beaten yolks of four eggs—placing the whites in
a cool place; also, a teaspoonful of salt, four tablespoonfuls of
home-made yeast and sufficient flour to make a stiff batter; set it
in a warm place to rise; let it stand three hours or over night;
before baking add the beaten whites; bake like any other
griddle-cakes. Be sure to make the batter stiff enough, for flour
must not be added after it has risen, unless it is allowed to rise
again. These, half corn meal and half wheat, are very nice.
FEATHER GRIDDLE-CAKES. (With Yeast.)
Make a batter, at night, of a pint of water or milk, a
teaspoonful of salt, and half a teacupful of yeast; in the morning,
add to it one teacupful of thick, sour milk, two eggs well beaten,
a level tablespoonful of melted butter, a level teaspoonful of soda
and flour enough to make the consistency of pancake batter; let
stand twenty minutes, then bake.
This is a convenient way, when making sponge for bread over
night, using some of the sponge.
WHEAT GRIDDLE-CAKES.
Three cups of flour, one teaspoonful of salt, three teaspoonfuls
of baking powder sifted together; beat three eggs and add to three
cupfuls of sweet milk, also a tablespoonful of melted butter; mix
all into a smooth batter, as thick as will run in a stream from the
lips of a [Pg 263]pitcher. Bake on a well-greased, hot griddle, a
nice light brown. Very good.
SOUR MILK GRIDDLE-CAKES.
Make a batter of a quart of sour milk and as much sifted flour
as is needed to thicken so that it will run from the dish; add two
beaten eggs, a teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful of melted
butter, and a level teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little milk
or cold water, added last; then bake on a hot griddle, well
greased, brown on both sides.
CORN MEAL GRIDDLE-CAKES. (With Yeast.)
Stir into one quart of boiling milk three cups of corn meal;
after it cools add one cup of white flour, a teaspoonful of salt
and three tablespoonfuls of home-made yeast. Mix this over night.
In the morning add one tablespoonful of melted butter or lard, two
beaten eggs and a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little
water.
This batter should stand a few minutes, after adding the butter
and soda, that it should have time to rise a little; in the
meantime the griddle could be heating. Take a small stick like a
good-sized skewer, wind a bit of cloth around the end of it, fasten
it by winding a piece of thread around that and tying it firm. Melt
together a tablespoonful of butter and lard. Grease the griddle
with this. Between each batch of cakes, wipe the griddle off with a
clean paper or cloth and grease afresh. Put the cakes on by
spoonfuls, or pour them carefully from a pitcher, trying to get
them as near the same size as possible. As soon as they begin to
bubble all over turn them, and cook on the other side till they
stop puffing. The second lot always cooks better than the first, as
the griddle becomes evenly heated.
CORN MEAL GRIDDLE-CAKES.
Scald two cups of sifted meal, mix with a cup of wheat flour and
a teaspoonful of salt. Add three well-beaten eggs; thin the whole
with sour milk enough to make it the right consistency. Beat the
whole till very light and add a teaspoonful of baking soda
dissolved in a little water. If you use sweet milk, use two large
teaspoonfuls of baking powder instead of soda.
GRIDDLE-CAKES. (Very Good.)
One quart of Graham flour, half a pint of Indian meal, one gill
of yeast, a teaspoonful of salt; mix the flour and meal, pour on
enough [Pg 264]warm water to make batter rather thicker than that
for buckwheat cakes, add the yeast, and when light bake on griddle
not too hot.
GRAHAM GRIDDLE-CAKES.
Mix together dry two cups of Graham flour, one cup wheat flour,
two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder and one teaspoonful of
salt. Then add three eggs well beaten, one tablespoonful of lard or
butter melted and three cups of sweet milk. Cook immediately on a
hot griddle.
BREAD GRIDDLE-CAKES.
One quart of milk, boiling hot; two cups fine bread crumbs,
three eggs, one tablespoonful melted butter, one-half teaspoonful
salt, one-half teaspoonful soda dissolved in warm water; break the
bread into the boiling milk, and let stand for ten minutes in a
covered bowl, then beat to a smooth paste; add the yolks of the
eggs well whipped, the butter, salt, soda, and finally the whites
of the eggs previously whipped stiff, and add half of a cupful of
flour. These can also be made of sour milk, soaking the bread in it
over night and using a little more soda.
RICE GRIDDLE-CAKES.
Two cupfuls of cold boiled rice, one pint of flour, one
teaspoonful sugar, one-half teaspoonful salt, one and one-half
teaspoonfuls baking powder, one egg, a little more than half a pint
of milk. Sift together flour, sugar, salt and powder; add rice free
from lumps, diluted with beaten egg and milk; mix into smooth
batter. Have griddle well heated, make cakes large, bake nicely
brown, and serve with maple syrup.
POTATO GRIDDLE-CAKES.
Twelve large potatoes, three heaping tablespoonfuls of flour,
one teaspoonful of baking powder, one-half teaspoonful salt, one or
two eggs, two teacupfuls of boiling milk. The potatoes are peeled,
washed and grated into a little cold water (which keeps them
white), then strain off water and pour on boiling milk, stir in
eggs, salt and flour, mixed with the baking powder; if agreeable,
flavor with a little fine chopped onion; bake like any other
pancakes, allowing a little more lard or butter. Serve with stewed
or preserved fruit, especially with huckleberries.
GREEN CORN GRIDDLE-CAKES.
One pint of milk, two cups grated green corn, a little salt, two
eggs, a teaspoonful of baking powder, flour sufficient to make a
batter to fry on the griddle. Butter them hot and serve.
HUCKLEBERRY GRIDDLE-CAKES.
Made the same as above, leaving out one cup of milk, adding one
tablespoonful of sugar and a pint of huckleberries rolled in flour.
Blackberries or raspberries can be used in the same manner.
FRENCH GRIDDLE-CAKES.
Beat together until smooth six eggs and a pint sifted flour;
melt one ounce of butter and add to the batter, with one ounce of
sugar and a cup of milk; beat until smooth; put a tablespoonful at
a time into a frying pan slightly greased, spreading the batter
evenly over the surface by tipping the pan about; fry to a light
brown; spread with jelly, roll up, dust with powdered sugar and
serve hot.
RAISED BUCKWHEAT CAKES.
Take a small crock or large earthen pitcher, put into it a quart
of warm water or half water and milk, one heaping teaspoonful of
salt; then stir in as much buckwheat flour as will thicken it to
rather a stiff batter; lastly, add half a cup of yeast; make it
smooth, cover it up warm to rise over night; in the morning add a
small, level teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a little warm water;
this will remove any sour taste, if any, and increase the
lightness.
Not a few object to eating buckwheat, as its tendency is to
thicken the blood, and also to produce constipation; this can be
remedied by making the batter one-third corn meal and two-thirds
buckwheat, which makes the cakes equally as good. Many prefer them
in this way.
BUCKWHEAT CAKES WITHOUT YEAST.
Two cups of buckwheat flour, one of wheat flour, a little salt,
three teaspoonfuls baking powder; mix thoroughly and add about
equal parts of milk and water until the batter is of the right
consistency then stir until free from lumps. If they do not brown
well, add a little molasses.
BUCKWHEAT CAKES.
Half a pint of buckwheat flour, a quarter of a pint of corn
meal, a quarter of a pint of wheat flour, a little salt, two eggs
beaten very light, one quart of new milk (made a little warm and
mixed with the eggs before the flour is put in), one tablespoonful
of butter or sweet lard, two large tablespoonfuls of yeast. Set it
to rise at night for the morning. If in the least sour, stir in
before baking just enough soda to correct the acidity. A very nice,
but more expensive, recipe.
SWEDISH GRIDDLE-CAKES.
One pint of white flour, sifted; six eggs, whites and yolks
beaten separately to the utmost; one saltspoonful of salt; one
saltspoonful of soda dissolved in vinegar; milk to make a thin
batter.
Beat the yolks light, add the salt, soda, two cupfuls of milk,
then the flour and beaten whites alternately; thin with more milk
if necessary.
CORN MEAL FRITTERS.
One pint of sour milk, one teaspoonful of salt, three eggs, one
tablespoonful of molasses or sugar, one handful of flour, and corn
meal enough to make a stiff batter; lastly, stir in a small
teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in a little warm water.
This recipe is very nice made of rye flour.
CREAM FRITTERS.
One cup of cream, five eggs—the whites only, two full cups
prepared flour, one saltspoonful of nutmeg, a pinch of salt. Stir
the whites into the cream in turn with the flour, put in nutmeg and
salt, beat all up hard for two minutes. The batter should be rather
thick. Fry in plenty of hot, sweet lard, a spoonful of batter for
each fritter. Drain, and serve upon a hot, clean napkin. Eat with
jelly sauce. Pull, not cut, them open. Very nice.
CURRANT FRITTERS.
Two cupfuls dry, fine bread crumbs, two tablespoonfuls of
prepared flour, two cups of milk, one-half pound currants, washed
and well dried, five eggs whipped very light, one-half cup powdered
sugar, one tablespoonful butter, one-half teaspoonful mixed
cinnamon and [Pg 267]nutmeg. Boil the milk and pour over
the bread. Mix and put in the butter. Let it get cold. Beat in next
the yolks and sugar, the seasoning, flour and stiff whites;
finally, the currants dredged whitely with flour. The batter should
be thick. Drop in great spoonfuls into the hot lard and fry. Drain
them and send hot to table. Eat with a mixture of wine and powdered
sugar.
WHEAT FRITTERS.
Three eggs, one and a half cups of milk, three teaspoonfuls
baking powder, salt, and flour enough to make quite stiff, thicker
than batter cakes. Drop into hot lard and fry like doughnuts.
A Good Sauce for the Above.—One cup of sugar, two
tablespoonfuls of butter, one teaspoonful of flour beaten together;
half a cup boiling water; flavor with extract lemon and boil until
clear. Or serve with maple syrup.
APPLE FRITTERS.
Make a batter in the proportion of one cup sweet milk to two
cups flour, a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder, two eggs beaten
separately, one tablespoonful of sugar and a saltspoon of salt;
heat the milk a little more than milk-warm, add it slowly to the
beaten yolks and sugar; then add flour and whites of the eggs; stir
all together and throw in thin slices of good sour apples, dipping
the batter up over them; drop into boiling hot lard in large
spoonfuls with pieces of apple in each, and fry to a light brown.
Serve with maple syrup, or a nice syrup made with clarified
sugar.
Bananas, peaches, sliced oranges and other fruits can be used in
the same batter.
PINEAPPLE FRITTERS.
Make a batter as for apple fritters; then pare one large
pineapple, cut it in slices a quarter of an inch thick, cut the
slices in halves, dip them into the batter and fry them, and serve
them as above.
PEACH FRITTERS.
Peel the peaches, split each in two and take out the stones;
dust a little powdered sugar over them; dip each piece in the
batter and fry in hot fat. A sauce to be served with them may be
made as follows: Put an ounce of butter in a saucepan and whisk it
to a cream; add four ounces of sugar gradually. Beat the yolks of
two eggs; add to them a [Pg
268]dash of nutmeg and
a gill each of cold water and rum; stir this into the luke-warm
batter and allow it to heat gradually. Stir constantly until of a
smooth, creamy consistency, and serve. The batter is made as
follows: Beat the yolks of three eggs; add to them a gill of milk,
or half of a cupful, a saltspoonful of salt, four ounces of flour;
mix. If old flour is used a little more milk may be found
necessary.
GOLDEN-BALL FRITTERS.
Put into a stewpan a pint of water, a piece of butter as large
as an egg and a tablespoonful of sugar. When it boils stir into it
one pint of sifted flour, stirring briskly and thoroughly. Remove
from the fire, and when nearly cooled beat into it six eggs, each
one beaten separately and added one at a time, beating the batter
between each. Drop the stiff dough into boiling lard by
teaspoonfuls. Eat with syrup, or melted sugar and butter
flavored.
Stirring the boiling lard around and around, so that it whirls
when you drop in the fritters, causes them to assume a round shape
like balls.
CANNELONS, OR FRIED PUFFS.
Half a pound of puff paste, apricot or any kind of preserve that
may be preferred, hot lard.
Cannelons, which are made of puff paste rolled very thin, with
jam enclosed, and cut out in long, narrow rolls or puffs, make a
very pretty and elegant dish. Make some good puff paste, roll it
out very thin, and cut it into pieces of an equal size, about two
inches wide and eight inches long; place upon each piece a spoonful
of jam, wet the edges with the white of egg and fold the paste over
twice; slightly press the edges together, that the jam may
not escape in the frying, and when all are prepared, fry them in
boiling lard until of a nice brown, letting them remain by the side
of the fire after they are colored, that the paste may be
thoroughly done. Drain them before the fire, dish on a d'oyley,
sprinkle over them sifted sugar and serve. These cannelons are very
delicious made with fresh instead of preserved fruit, such as
strawberries, raspberries or currants; they should be laid in the
paste, plenty of pounded sugar sprinkled over and folded and fried
in the same manner as stated above.
GERMAN FRITTERS.
Take slices of stale bread cut in rounds or stale cake; fry them
in hot lard, like crullers, to a light brown. Dip each slice
when fried in boiling milk, to remove the grease; drain quickly,
dust with powdered sugar or spread with preserves. Pile on a hot
plate and serve. Sweet wine sauce poured over them is very
nice.
HOMINY FRITTERS.
Take one pint of hot boiled hominy, two eggs, half a teaspoonful
of salt and a tablespoonful of flour; thin it a little with cold
milk; when cold add a teaspoonful of baking powder, mix thoroughly,
drop tablespoonfuls of it into hot fat and fry to a delicate
brown.
PARSNIP FRITTERS.
Take three or four good-sized parsnips. Boil them until tender.
Mash and season with a little butter, a pinch of salt and a slight
sprinkling of pepper. Have ready a plate with some sifted flour on
it. Drop a tablespoonful of the parsnip in the flour and roll it
about until well coated and formed into a ball. When you have a
sufficient number ready, drop them into boiling drippings or lard,
as you would a fritter; fry a delicate brown and serve hot. Do not
put them in a covered dish, for that would steam them and deprive
them of their crispness, which is one of their great charms.
These are also very good fried in a frying pan with a small
quantity of lard and butter mixed, turning them over so as to fry
both sides brown.
GREEN CORN FRITTERS.
One pint of grated, young and tender, green corn, three eggs,
two tablespoonfuls of milk or cream, one tablespoonful of melted
butter, if milk is used, a teaspoonful of salt. Beat the eggs well,
add the corn by degrees, also the milk and butter; thicken with
just enough flour to hold them together, adding a teaspoonful of
baking powder to the flour. Have ready a kettle of hot lard, drop
the corn from the spoon into the fat and fry a light brown. They
are also nice fried in butter and lard mixed, the same as fried
eggs.
CREAM SHORT-CAKE.
Sift one quart of fine white flour, rub into it three
tablespoonfuls of cold butter, a teaspoonful of salt, a
tablespoonful of white sugar. [Pg
270]Add a beaten egg to
a cup of sour cream, turn it into the other ingredients, dissolve a
teaspoonful of soda in a spoonful of water, mix all together,
handling as little as possible; roll lightly into two round sheets,
place on pie-tins and bake from twenty to twenty-five minutes in a
quick oven.
This crust is delicious for fruit short-cake.
STRAWBERRY SHORT-CAKE.
Make a rule of baking powder biscuit, with the exception of a
little more shortening; divide the dough in half; lay one-half on
the molding board (half the dough makes one short-cake), divide
this half again, and roll each piece large enough to cover a
biscuit-tin, or a large sized pie-tin; spread soft butter over the
lower one and place the other on top of that; proceed with the
other lump of dough the same, by cutting it in halves, and putting
on another tin. Set them in the oven; when sufficiently baked take
them out, separate each one by running a large knife through where
the cold soft butter was spread. Then butter plentifully each
crust, lay the bottom of each on earthen platters or dining-plates;
cover thickly with a quart of strawberries that have been
previously prepared with sugar, lay the top crusts on the fruit. If
there is any juice left pour it around the cake. This makes a
delicious short-cake.
Peaches, raspberries, blackberries and huckleberries can be
substituted for strawberries. Always send to the table with a
pitcher of sweet cream.
ORANGE SHORT-CAKE.
Peel two large oranges, chop them fine, remove the seeds, add
half a peeled lemon and one cup of sugar. Spread between the layers
of short-cake while it is hot.
LEMON SHORT-CAKE.
Make a rich biscuit dough, same as above recipe. While baking,
take a cup and a quarter of water, a cup and a half of sugar, and
two lemons, peel, juice and pulp, throwing away the tough part of
the rind; boil this for some little time; then stir in three
crackers rolled fine; split the short-cakes while hot, spread with
butter, then with the mixture. To be eaten warm.
HUCKLEBERRY SHORT-CAKE.
Two cupfuls of sugar, half a cupful of butter, one pint of sweet
milk, one tablespoonful of salt, two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking
powder sifted into a quart of flour, or enough to form a thick
batter; add a quart of the huckleberries; to be baked in a dripper;
cut into squares for the table and served hot with butter.
Blackberries may be used the same.
FRIED DINNER-ROLLS.
When making light raised bread, save out a piece of dough nearly
the size of a small loaf. Roll it out on the board, spread a
tablespoonful of melted butter over it. Dissolve a quarter of a
teaspoonful of soda in a tablespoonful of water and pour that also
over it; work it all well into the dough, roll it out into a sheet
not quite half an inch thick. Cut it in strips three inches long
and one inch wide. Lay them on buttered tins, cover with a cloth
and set away in a cool place until an hour before dinner time; then
set them by the fire where they will become light. While they are
rising, add to a frying-pan a tablespoonful of cold butter and one
of lard; When it boils clear and is hot, lay as many of the
rolls in as will fry nicely. As soon as they brown on one side turn
them over and brown the other; then turn them on the edges and
brown the sides. Add fresh grease as is needed. Eat them warm in
place of bread. Nice with warm meat dinner.
NEWPORT BREAKFAST-CAKES.
Take one quart of dough from the bread at an early hour in the
morning; break three eggs, separating yolks and whites, both to be
whipped to a light froth; mix them into the dough and gradually add
two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, one of sugar, one teaspoonful
of soda, and enough warm milk with it until it is a batter the
consistency of buckwheat cakes; beat it well and let it rise until
breakfast time. Have the griddle hot and nicely greased, pour on
the batter in small round cakes and bake a light brown, the same as
any griddle cake.
PUFF BALLS.
To a piece of butter as large as an egg stirred until soft; add
three well-beaten eggs, a pinch of salt and half a teacupful of
sour cream. Stir well together, then add enough flour to make a
very thick batter. [Pg 272]Drop a spoonful of this into boiling
water. Cook until the puffs rise to the surface. Dish them hot with
melted butter turned over them. Nice accompaniment to a meat dinner
as a side-dish—similar to plain macaroni.
BREAKFAST PUFFS.
Two cups of sour milk, one teaspoonful of soda, one teaspoonful
of salt, one egg and flour enough to roll out like biscuit dough.
Cut into narrow strips an inch wide and three inches long, fry
brown in hot lard like doughnuts. Serve hot; excellent with coffee.
Or fry in a spider with an ounce each of lard and butter, turning
and browning all four of the sides.
ENGLISH CRUMPETS.
One quart of warm milk, half a cup of yeast, one teaspoonful of
salt, flour enough to make a stiff batter; when light, add half a
cupful of melted butter, a teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a
little water and a very little more flour; let it stand twenty
minutes or until light. Grease some muffin-rings, place them on a
hot griddle and fill them half full of the batter; when done on one
side turn and bake the other side. Butted them while hot; pile one
on another and serve immediately.
PLAIN CRUMPETS.
Mix together thoroughly while dry one quart of sifted flour,
loosely measured, two heaping teaspoonfuls baking powder and a
little salt; then add two tablespoonfuls of melted butter and sweet
milk enough to make a thin dough. Bake quickly in muffin-rings or
patty-pans.
PREPARED BREAD CRUMBS.
Take pieces of stale bread, break them in small bits, put them
on a baking pan and place them in a moderate oven, watching closely
that they do not scorch; then take them while hot and crisp and
roll them, crushing them. Sift them, using the fine crumbs for
breading cutlets, fish, croquettes, etc. The coarse ones may be
used for puddings, pancakes, etc.
CRACKERS.
Sift into a pint of flour a heaping teaspoonful of baking
powder, four tablespoonfuls of melted butter, half a teaspoonful
salt and the white of an egg beaten and one cup of milk; mix it
with more flour, [Pg 273]enough to make a very stiff dough, as
stiff as can be rolled out; pounded and kneaded a long time. Roll
very thin like pie crust and cut out either round or square. Bake a
light brown.
Stale crackers are made crisp and better by placing them in the
oven a few moments before they are needed for the table.
FRENCH CRACKERS.
Six eggs, twelve tablespoonfuls of sweet milk, six
tablespoonfuls of butter, half a teaspoonful of soda; mold with
flour, pounding and working half an hour; roll it thin. Bake with
rather quick fire.
CORN MEAL MUSH OR HASTY PUDDING.
Put two quarts of water into a clean dinner-pot or stewpan,
cover it and let it become boiling hot over the fire; then add a
tablespoonful of salt, take off the light scum from the top, have
sweet, fresh yellow or white corn meal; take a handful of the meal
with the left hand and a pudding-stick in the right, then with the
stick, stir the water around and by degrees let fall the meal; when
one handful is exhausted, refill it; continue to stir and add meal
until it is as thick as you can stir easily, or until the stick
will stand in it; stir it awhile longer; let the fire be gentle;
when it is sufficiently cooked, which will be in half an hour, it
will bubble or puff up; turn it into a deep basin. This is eaten
cold or hot, with milk or with butter and syrup or sugar, or with
meat and gravy, the same as potatoes or rice.
FRIED MUSH.
Make it like the above recipe, turn it into bread tins and when
cold slice it, dip each piece in flour and fry it in lard and
butter mixed in the frying pan, turning to brown well both sides.
Must be served hot.
GRAHAM MUSH.
Sift Graham meal slowly into boiling salted water, stirring
briskly until thick as can be stirred with one hand; serve with
milk or cream and sugar, or butter and syrup. It will be improved
by removing from the kettle to a pan, as soon as thoroughly mixed,
and steaming three or four hours. It may also be eaten cold, or
sliced and fried, like corn meal mush.
OATMEAL.
Soak one cup of oatmeal in a quart of water over night, boil
half an hour in the morning, salted to taste. It is better to cook
it in a dish set into a dish of boiling water.
RICE CROQUETTES.
Boil for thirty minutes one cup of well-washed rice in a pint of
milk; whip into the hot rice the following ingredients: Two ounces
of butter, two ounces of sugar, some salt, and when slightly cool
add the yolks of two eggs well beaten; if too stiff pour in a
little more milk; when cold, roll into small balls and dip in
beaten eggs, roll in fine cracker or bread crumbs, and fry same as
doughnuts. Or they may be fried in the frying pan, with a
tablespoonful each of butter and lard mixed, turning and frying
both sides brown. Serve very hot.
HOMINY.
This form of cereal is very little known and consequently little
appreciated in most Northern households. "Big hominy" and "little
hominy," as they are called in the South, are staple dishes there
and generally take the place of oatmeal, which is apt to be too
heating for the climate. The former is called "samp" here. It must
be boiled for at least eight hours to be properly cooked, and may
then be kept on hand for two or three days and warmed over, made
into croquettes or balls, or fried in cakes. The fine hominy takes
two or three hours for proper cooking, and should be cooked in a
dish set into another of boiling water, and kept steadily boiling
until thoroughly soft.
HOMINY CROQUETTES.
To a cupful of cold boiled hominy, add a teaspoonful of melted
butter, and stir it well, adding by degrees a cupful of milk, till
all is made into a soft, light paste; add a teaspoonful of white
sugar, a pinch of salt, and one well-beaten egg. Roll it into oval
balls with floured hands, dipped in beaten egg, then rolled in
cracker crumbs, and fry in hot lard.
The hominy is best boiled the day or morning before using.
BOILED RICE.
Take half or quarter of a pound of the best quality of rice;
wash it in a strainer, and put it in a saucepan, with a quart of
clean water and a pinch of salt; let it boil slowly till the water
is all evaporated—see that it does not burn—then pour
in a teacupful of new milk; stir carefully from the bottom of the
saucepan, so that the upper grain may go under, but do not smash
it; close the lid on your saucepan carefully down, and set it on a
cooler part of the fire, where it will not boil; as soon as it has
absorbed the added milk, serve it up with fresh new milk, adding
fruit and sugar for those who like them.
Another nice way to cook rice is to take one teacupful of rice
and one quart of milk, place in a steamer, and steam from two to
three hours; when nearly done, stir in a piece of butter as large
as the yolk of an egg, and a pinch of salt. You can use sugar if
you like. The difference in the time of cooking depends on your
rice—the older the rice, the longer it takes to cook.
SAMP, OR HULLED CORN.
An old-fashioned way of preparing hulled corn was to put a peck
of old, dry, ripe corn into a pot filled with water, and with it a
bag of hardwood ashes, say a quart. After soaking a while it was
boiled until the skins or hulls came off easily. The corn was then
washed in cold water to get rid of the taste of potash, and then
boiled until the kernels were soft. Another way was to take the lye
from the leaches where potash was made, dilute it, and boil the
corn in this until the skins or hulls came off. It makes a
delicious dish, eaten with milk or cream.
CRACKED WHEAT.
Soak the wheat over night in cold water, about a quart of water
to a cup of wheat; cook it as directed for oatmeal; should be
thoroughly done. Eaten with sugar and cream.
OAT FLAKES.
This healthful oat preparation may be procured from the leading
grocers and is prepared as follows: Put into a double saucepan or
porcelain-lined pan a quart of boiling water, add a saltspoonful of
salt, and when it is boiling add, or rather stir in gradually,
three [Pg 276]ounces of flakes. Keep stirring to prevent burning.
Let it boil from fifteen to twenty minutes and serve with cream and
sugar.
Ordinarily oatmeal requires two hours' steady cooking to make it
palatable and digestible. Wheaten grits and hominy one hour, but a
half hour longer cooking will not injure them and makes them easier
of digestion. Never be afraid of cooking cereals or preparations
from cereals too long, no matter what the directions on the package
may be.
STEAMED OATMEAL.
To one teacupful oatmeal add a quart of cold water, a
teaspoonful of salt; put in a steamer over a kettle of cold water,
gradually heat and steam an hour and a half after it begins to
cook.
HOMINY.
Hominy is a preparation of Indian corn, broken or ground, either
large or small, and is an excellent breakfast dish in winter or
summer. Wash the hominy thoroughly in on 3 or two waters, then
cover it with twice its depth of cold water and let it come to a
boil slowly. If it be the large hominy, simmer six hours; if the
small hominy, simmer two hours. When the water evaporates add hot
water; when done it may be eaten with cream, or allowed to become
cold and warmed up in the frying pan, using a little butter to
prevent burning.
TOAST.
Toast should be made of stale bread, or at least of bread that
has been baked a day. Cut smoothly in slices, not more than half an
inch thick; if the crust is baked very hard, trim the edges and
brown very evenly, but if it happens to burn, that should be
scraped off. Toast that is to be served with anything turned over
it, should have the slices first dipped quickly in a dish of hot
water turned from the boiling tea-kettle, with a little salt thrown
in. Cold biscuits cut in halves, and the under crust sliced off,
then browned evenly on both sides, make equally as good toast. The
following preparations of toast are almost all of them very nice
dishes, served with a family breakfast.
MILK TOAST.
Put over the fire a quart of milk, put into it a tablespoonful
of cold butter, stir a heaping teaspoonful of flour into half a
gill of milk; as soon as the milk on the fire boils, stir in the
flour, add a teaspoonful of salt; let all boil up once, remove from
the fire, and dip in this slices of toasted bread. When all are
used up, pour what is left of the scalded milk over the toast.
Cover and send to the table hot.
CREAM TOAST.
Heat a pint of milk to boiling and add a piece of butter the
size of an egg; stir a tablespoonful of flour smoothly into a cup
of rich cream, and add some of the boiling milk to this; heat it
gradually and prevent the flour from lumping; then stir into the
boiling milk and let it cook a few moments; salt to taste. After
taking from the fire stir in a beaten egg; strain the mixture on to
toast lightly buttered.
AMERICAN TOAST.
To one egg thoroughly beaten, put one cup of sweet milk and a
little salt. Slice light bread and dip into the mixture, allowing
each slice to absorb some of the milk; then brown on a hot buttered
griddle or thick-bottomed frying pan; spread with butter and serve
hot.
NUNS' TOAST.
Cut four or five hard-boiled eggs into slices. Put a piece of
butter half the size of an egg into a saucepan and when it begins
to bubble add a finely chopped onion. Let the onion cook a little
without taking color, then stir in a teaspoonful of flour. Add a
cupful of milk and stir until it becomes smooth; then put in the
slices of eggs and let them get hot. Pour over neatly trimmed
slices of hot buttered toast. The sauce must be seasoned to taste
with pepper and salt.
CHEESE TOAST. No. 1.
Toast thin slices of bread an even, crisp brown. Place on a warm
plate, allowing one small slice to each person, and pour on enough
melted cheese to cover them. Rich new cheese is best. Serve while
warm. Many prefer a little prepared mustard spread over the toast
before putting on the cheese.
CHEESE TOAST. No. 2.
Put half an ounce of butter in a frying pan; when hot add
gradually four ounces of mild American cheese. Whisk it thoroughly
until melted. Beat together half a pint of cream and two eggs;
whisk into the cheese, add a little salt, pour over the crisp
toast, and serve.
The two above recipes are usually called "Welsh Rarebit."
OYSTER TOAST.
Select the large ones, used for frying, and first dip them in
beaten egg, then in either cracker or bread crumbs and cook upon a
fine wire gridiron, over a quick fire. Toast should be made ready
in advance, and a rich cream sauce poured over the whole. After
pouring on the sauce, finely cut celery strewn over the top adds to
their delicacy.
Or wash oysters in the shell and put them on hot coals, or upon
the top of a hot stove, or bake them in a hot oven; open the shells
with an oyster-knife, taking care to lose none of the liquor. Dip
the toast into hot, salted water quickly and turn out the oyster
and liquor over the toast; season with salt and pepper and a
teaspoonful of melted butter over each.
Oysters steamed in the shell are equally as good.
MUSHROOMS ON TOAST.
Peel a quart of mushrooms and cut off a little of the root end.
Melt an ounce of butter in the frying pan and fry in it half a
pound of raw minced steak; add two saltspoonfuls of salt, a pinch
of cayenne and a gill of hot water; fry until the juices are
extracted from the meat; tilt the pan and squeeze the meat with the
back of the spoon until there is nothing left but dry meat, then
remove it; add the mushrooms to the liquid and if there is not
enough of it, add more butter; toss them about a moment and pour
out on hot toast.
Some add a little sherry to the dish before removing from the
fire.
TOMATO TOAST.
Pare and stew a quart of ripe tomatoes until smooth. Season with
salt, pepper and a tablespoonful of butter. When done, add one cup
[Pg 279]sweet cream and a little flour. Let it scald, but
not boil; remove at once. Pour over slices of dipped toast, well
buttered.
EGGS ON TOAST.
Various preparations of eggs can be served on toast, first
dipping slices of well-toasted bread quickly in hot salted water,
then turning over them scrambled, poached or creamed eggs, all
found in the recipes among EGGS.
BAKED EGGS ON TOAST.
Toast six slices of stale bread, dip them in hot salted water
and butter them lightly. After arranging them on a platter or deep
plate, break enough eggs to cover them, breaking one at a time and
slip over the toast so that they do not break; sprinkle over them
salt and pepper and turn over all some kind of thickened
gravy—either chicken or lamb, cream or a cream sauce made the
same as "White Sauce;" turn this over the toast and eggs and bake
in a hot oven until the eggs are set, or about five minutes. Serve
at once.
HAM TOAST.
Take a quarter of a pound of either boiled or fried ham, chop it
fine, mix it with the yolks of two eggs, well beaten, a
tablespoonful of butter, and enough cream or rich milk to make it
soft, a dash of pepper. Stir it over the fire until it thickens.
Dip the toast for an instant in hot salted water; spread over some
melted butter, then turn over the ham mixture. Serve hot.
REED BIRDS ON TOAST.
Remove the feathers and legs of a dozen reed birds, split them
down the back, remove the entrails, and place them on a double
broiler; brush a little melted butter over them and broil the inner
side thoroughly first; then lightly broil the other side. Melt one
quarter of a pound of butter, season it nicely with salt and
pepper, dip the birds in it, and arrange them nicely on slices of
toast.
MINCED FOWLS ON TOAST.
Remove from the bones all the meat of either cold roast or
boiled fowls. Clean it from the skin, and keep covered from the air
until ready for use. Boil the bones and skin with three-fourths of
a pint of [Pg 280]water until reduced quite half. Strain the gravy
and let it cool. Next, having skimmed off the fat, put it into a
clean saucepan with half a cup of cream, three tablespoonfuls of
butter, well mixed with a tablespoonful of flour. Keep these
stirred until they boil. Then put in the fowl finely minced, with
three hard-boiled eggs, chopped, and sufficient salt and pepper to
season. Shake the mince over the fire until just ready to serve.
Dish it over hot toast and serve.
HASHED BEEF ON TOAST.
Chop a quantity of cold roast beef rather fine and season it
well with pepper and salt. For each pint of meat add a level
tablespoonful of flour. Stir well and add a small teacupful of
soup-stock or water. Put the mixture into a small stewpan and,
after covering it, simmer for twenty minutes. Meanwhile, toast half
a dozen slices of bread nicely and at the end of the twenty minutes
spread the meat upon them. Serve at once on a hot dish. In case
water be used instead of soup-stock, add a tablespoonful of butter
just before spreading the beef upon the toast. Any kind of cold
meat may be prepared in a similar manner.
VEAL HASH ON TOAST.
Take a teacupful of boiling water in a saucepan, stir in an even
teaspoonful of flour, wet in a tablespoonful of cold water, and let
it boil five minutes; add one-half teaspoonful of black pepper, as
much salt and two tablespoonfuls of butter, and let it keep hot,
but not boil. Chop the veal fine and mix with it half as much stale
bread crumbs. Put it in a pan and pour the gravy over it, then let
it simmer ten minutes. Serve this on buttered toast.
CODFISH ON TOAST. (Cuban Style.)
Take a teacupful of freshened codfish picked up fine. Fry a
sliced onion in a tablespoonful of butter; when it has turned a
light brown, put in the fish with water enough to cover it; add
half a can of tomatoes, or half a dozen of fresh ones. Cook all
nearly an hour, seasoning with a little pepper. Serve on slices of
dipped toast, hot. Very fine.
Plain creamed codfish is very nice turned over dipped toast.
HALIBUT ON TOAST.
Put into boiling salted water one pound of fresh halibut; cook
slowly for fifteen minutes, or until done; remove from the water
and chop it fine; then add half a cup of melted butter and eight
eggs well beaten. Season with salt and pepper.
Place over the fire a thick-bottomed frying pan containing a
tablespoonful of cold butter; when it begins to melt, tip the pan
so as to grease the sides; then put in the fish and eggs and stir
one way until the eggs are cooked, but not too hard. Turn
over toast dipped in hot salted water.
CHICKEN HASH WITH RICE TOAST.
Boil a cup of rice the night before; put it into a square,
narrow bread-pan, set it in the ice-box. Next morning cut it in
half inch slices, rub over each slice a little warm butter and
toast them on a broiler to a delicate brown. Arrange the toast on a
warm platter and turn over the whole a chicken hash made from the
remains of cold fowl, the meat picked from the bones, chopped fine,
put into the frying pan with butter and a little water to moisten
it, adding pepper and salt. Heat hot all through. Serve
immediately.
APPLE TOAST.
Cut six apples into quarters, take the core out, peel and cut
them in slices; put in the saucepan an ounce of butter, then throw
over the apples about two ounces of white powdered sugar and two
tablespoonfuls of water; put the saucepan on the fire, let it stew
quickly, toss them up, or stir with a spoon; a few minutes will do
them. When tender cut two or three slices of bread half an inch
thick; put in a frying pan two ounces of butter, put on the fire;
when the butter is melted put in your bread, which fry of a nice
yellowish color; when nice and crisp take them out, place them on a
dish, a little white sugar over, the apples about an inch thick.
Serve hot.
cloth and boil three hours. The same, made a little thinner, with a
few raisins added and baked in a well-greased dish is excellent.
Two teaspoonfuls of baking powder in the flour improves this
pudding. Or if made with sour milk and soda it is equally as
good.
SUET PLUM PUDDING.
One cupful of suet chopped fine, one cupful of cooking molasses,
one cupful of milk, one cupful of raisins, three and one-half
cupfuls of flour, one egg, one teaspoonful of cloves, two of
cinnamon and one of nutmeg, a little salt, one teaspoonful of soda;
boil three hours in a pudding-mold set into a kettle of water; eat
with common sweet sauce. If sour milk is used in place of sweet,
the pudding will be much lighter.
PEACH COBBLER.
Line a deep dish with rich thick crust; pare and cut into halves
or quarters some juicy, rather tart peaches; put in sugar, spices
and flavoring to taste; stew it slightly and put it in the lined
dish; cover with thick crust of rich puff paste and bake a rich
brown; when done, break up the top crust into small pieces and stir
it into the fruit; serve hot or cold; very palatable without sauce,
but more so with plain rich cream or cream sauce, or with a rich
brandy or wine. Other fruits can be used in place of peaches.
Currants are best made in this manner:—
Press the currants through a sieve to free it from pips; to each
pint of the pulp put two ounces of crumbed bread and four ounces of
sugar; bake with a rim of puff paste; serve with cream. White
currants may be used instead of red.
HOMINY PUDDING.
Two-thirds of a cupful of hominy, one and a half pints of milk,
two eggs, one tablespoonful of butter, one teaspoonful of extract
of lemon or vanilla, one cupful of sugar. Boil hominy in milk one
hour; then pour it on the eggs, extract and sugar beaten together;
add butter, pour in buttered pudding-dish, bake in hot oven for
twenty minutes.
BAKED BERRY ROLLS.
Roll rich biscuit dough thin, cut it into little squares four
inches wide and seven inches long. Spread over with berries. Roll
up the crust, and put the rolls in a dripping-pan just a little
apart; put a piece of butter on each roll, spices if you like.
Strew over a large handful of sugar, a little hot water. Set in the
oven and bake like dumplings. Served with sweet sauce.
GREEN CORN PUDDING.
Take two dozen full ears of sweet green corn, score the kernels
and cut them from the cob. Scrape off what remains on the cob with
a knife. Add a pint and a half or one quart of milk, according to
the youngness and juiciness of the corn. Add four eggs well beaten,
a half teacupful of flour, a half teacupful butter, a tablespoonful
of sugar, and salt to taste. Bake in a well-greased earthen dish,
in hot oven two hours. Place it on the table browned and smoking
hot, eat it with plenty of fresh butter. This can be used as a
dessert by serving a sweet sauce with it. If eaten plainly with
butter, it answers as a side vegetable.
GENEVA WAFERS.
Two eggs, three ounces of butter, three ounces of flour, three
ounces of pounded sugar. Well whisk the eggs, put them into a basin
and stir to them the butter, which should be beaten to a cream; add
the flour and sifted sugar gradually, and then mix all well
together. Butter a baking sheet, and drop on it a teaspoonful of
the mixture at a time, leaving a space between each. Bake in a cool
oven; watch the pieces of paste, and, when half done, roll them up
like wafers and put in a small wedge of bread or piece of wood, to
keep them in shape. Return them to the oven until crisp. Before
serving, remove the bread, put a spoonful of preserve in the widest
end, and fill up with whipped cream. This is a very pretty and
ornamental dish for the supper-table, and is very nice and very
easily made.
MINUTE PUDDING. No. 1.
Set saucepan or deep frying pan on the stove, the bottom and
sides well buttered, put into it a quart of sweet milk, a pinch of
salt and a piece of butter as large as half an egg; when it boils
have ready a dish of sifted flour, stir it into the boiling milk,
sifting it through [Pg 415]your fingers, a handful at a time,
until it becomes smooth and quite thick. Turn it into a dish that
has been dipped in water. Make a sauce very sweet to serve with it.
Maple molasses is fine with it. This pudding is much
improved by adding canned berries or fresh ones just before taking
from the stove.
MINUTE PUDDING. No. 2.
One quart of milk, salt, two eggs, about a pint of flour. Beat
the eggs well; add the flour and enough milk to make it smooth.
Butter the saucepan and put in the remainder of the milk well
salted; when it boils, stir in the flour, eggs, etc., lightly; let
it cook well. It should be of the consistency of thick corn mush.
Serve immediately with the following simple sauce, viz: Rich
milk or cream sweetened to taste and flavored with grated
nutmeg.
SUNDERLAND PUDDING.
One cupful of sugar, half a cupful of cold butter, a pint of
milk, two cupfuls of sifted flour and five eggs. Make the milk hot;
stir in the butter and let it cool before the other ingredients are
added to it; then stir in the sugar, flour and eggs, which should
be well whisked and omit the whites of two; flavor with a little
grated lemon rind and beat the mixture well. Butter some small
cups, rather more than half fill them; bake from twenty minutes to
half an hour, according to the size of the puddings, and serve with
fruit, custard or wine sauce, a little of which may be poured over
them. They may be dropped by spoonfuls on buttered tins and baked,
if cups are not convenient.
JELLY PUDDINGS.
Two cupfuls of very fine stale biscuit or bread crumbs,
one cupful of rich milk—half cream, if you can get it; five
eggs beaten very light, half a teaspoonful of soda stirred in
boiling water, one cupful of sweet jelly, jam or marmalade. Scald
the milk and pour over the crumbs. Beat until half cold and stir in
the beaten yolks, then whites, finally the soda. Fill large cups
half full with the batter, set in a quick oven and bake half an
hour. When done, turn out quickly and dexterously; with a sharp
knife make an incision in the side of each; pull partly open, and
put a liberal spoonful of the conserve within. [Pg 416]Close
the slit by pinching the edges with your fingers. Eat warm with
sweetened cream.
QUICK PUDDING.
Soak and split some crackers; lay the surface over with raisins
and citron; put the halves together, tie them in a bag, and boil
fifteen minutes in milk and water; delicious with rich sauce.
READY PUDDING.
Make a batter of one quart of milk and about one pound of flour;
add six eggs, the yolks and whites separately beaten, a teaspoonful
of salt and four tablespoonfuls of sugar. It should be as stiff as
can possibly be stirred with a spoon. Dip a spoonful at a time into
quick boiling water, boil from five to ten minutes, take out. Serve
hot with sauce or syrup.
A ROYAL DESSERT.
Cut a stale cake into slices an inch and a half in thickness;
pour over them a little good sweet cream; then fry lightly
in fresh butter in a smooth frying pan; when done, place over each
slice of cake a layer of preserves or you may make a rich sauce to
be served with it.
Another dish equally as good, is to dip thin slices of bread
into fresh milk; have ready two eggs well beaten; dip the slices in
the egg and fry them in butter to a light brown; when fried, pour
over them a syrup, any kind that you choose, and serve hot.
HUCKLEBERRIES WITH CRACKERS AND CREAM.
Pick over carefully one quart of blueberries and keep them on
ice until wanted. Put into each bowl, for each guest, two soda
crackers, broken in not too small pieces; add a few tablespoonfuls
of berries, a teaspoonful of powdered sugar and fill the bowl with
the richest of cold sweet cream. This is an old-fashioned New
England breakfast dish. It also answers for a dessert.
BRANDY SAUCE, COLD.
Two cupfuls of powdered sugar, half a cupful of butter, one
wine-glassful of brandy, cinnamon and nutmeg, a teaspoonful of
each. Warm the butter slightly and work it to a light cream with
the sugar, then add the brandy and spices; beat it hard and set
aside until wanted. Should be put into a mold to look nicely and
serve on a flat dish.
BRANDY OR WINE SAUCE. No. 1.
Stir a heaping teaspoonful of cornstarch in a little cold water
to a smooth paste (or instead use a tablespoonful of sifted flour);
add to it a cupful of boiling water, with one cupful of sugar, a
piece of butter as large as an egg, boil all together ten minutes.
Remove from the fire and when cool stir into it half of a cupful of
brandy or wine. It should be about as thick as thin syrup.
BRANDY OR WINE SAUCE. No. 2.
Take one cupful of butter, two of powdered sugar, the whites of
two eggs, five tablespoonfuls of sherry wine or brandy and a
quarter of a cupful of boiling water. Beat butter and sugar to a
cream, add the whites of the eggs, one at a time, unbeaten, and
then the wine or brandy. Place the bowl in hot water and stir till
smooth and frothy.
RICH WINE SAUCE.
One cupful of butter, two of powdered sugar, half a cupful of
wine. Beat the butter to a cream. Add the sugar gradually and when
very light add the wine, which has been made hot, a little at a
time, a teaspoonful of grated nutmeg. Place the bowl in a basin of
hot water and stir for two minutes. The sauce should be smooth and
foamy.
SAUCE FOR PLUM PUDDING. (Superior.)
Cream together a cupful of sugar and half a cupful of butter;
when light and creamy, add the well-beaten yolks of four eggs. Stir
into this one wine-glass of wine or one of brandy, a pinch of salt
and one large cupful of hot cream or rich milk. Beat this mixture
well; place it in a saucepan over the fire, stir it until it cooks
sufficiently to thicken like cream. Be sure and not let it boil.
Delicious.
LIQUID BRANDY SAUCE.
Brown over the fire three tablespoonfuls of sugar; add a cupful
of water, six whole cloves and a piece of stick cinnamon, the
yellow rind of a lemon cut very thin; let the sauce boil, strain
while hot, then pour it into a sauce bowl containing the juice of
the lemon and a cup of brandy. Serve warm.
GRANDMOTHERS SAUCE.
Cream together a cupful of sifted sugar and half a cupful of
butter, add a teaspoonful of ground cinnamon and an egg well
beaten. Boil a teacupful of milk and turn it, boiling hot, over the
mixture slowly, stirring all the time; this will cook the egg
smoothly. It may be served cold or hot.
SUGAR SAUCE.
One coffeecupful of granulated sugar, half of a cupful of water,
a piece of butter the size of a walnut. Boil all together until it
becomes the consistency of syrup. Flavor with lemon or vanilla
extract. A tablespoonful of lemon juice is an improvement. Nice
with cottage pudding.
LEMON SAUCE.
One cupful of sugar, half a cupful of butter, one egg beaten
light, one lemon, juice and grated rind, half a cupful of boiling
water; put in a tin basin and thicken over steam.
LEMON CREAM SAUCE, HOT.
Put half a pint of new milk on the fire and when it boils stir
into it one teaspoonful of wheat flour, four ounces of sugar and
the well-beaten yolks of three eggs; remove it from the fire and
add the grated rind and the juice of one lemon; stir it well and
serve hot in a sauce tureen.
ORANGE CREAM SAUCE, HOT.
This is made as LEMON CREAM SAUCE, substituting orange for
lemon.
Creams for puddings, pies and fritters may be made in the same
manner with any other flavoring; if flour is used in making them,
it should boil in the milk three or four minutes.
COLD LEMON SAUCE.
Beat to a cream one teacupful of butter and two teacupfuls of
fine white sugar; then stir in the juice and grated rind of one
lemon; grate nutmeg upon the sauce and serve on a flat dish.
COLD ORANGE SAUCE.
Beat to a cream one teacupful of butter and two teacupfuls of
fine white sugar; then stir in the grated rind of one orange and
the juice of two; stir until all the orange juice is absorbed;
grate nutmeg upon the sauce and serve on a flat dish.
COLD CREAM SAUCE.
Stir to a cream one cupful of sugar, half a cupful of butter,
then add a cupful of sweet, thick cold cream, flavor to taste. Stir
well and set it in a cool place.
CREAM SAUCE, WARM.
Heat a pint of cream slowly in a double boiler; when nearly
boiling, set it off from the fire, put into it half a cupful of
sugar, a little nutmeg or vanilla extract; stir it thoroughly and
add, when cool, the whites of two well-beaten eggs. Set it on the
fire in a dish containing hot water to keep it warm until needed,
stirring once or more.
CARAMEL SAUCE.
Place over the fire a saucepan; when it begins to be hot, put
into it four tablespoonfuls of white sugar and one tablespoonful of
water. Stir it continually for three or four minutes, until all the
water evaporates; then watch it carefully until it becomes a
delicate brown color. Have ready a pint of cold water and cup of
sugar mixed with some flavoring; turn it into the saucepan with the
browned sugar and let it [Pg
420]simmer for ten
minutes; then add half a glass of brandy or a glass of wine. The
wine or brandy may be omitted if preferred.
A GOOD PLAIN SAUCE.
A good sauce to go with plain fruit puddings is made by mixing
one cupful of brown sugar, one cupful of best molasses, half a
cupful of butter, one large teaspoonful of flour; add the juice and
grated rind of one lemon, half a nutmeg grated, half a teaspoonful
of cloves and cinnamon. When these are all stirred together, add a
teacupful of boiling water; stir it constantly, put into a saucepan
and let it boil until clear; then strain.
OLD STYLE SAUCE.
One pint of sour cream, the juice and finely grated rind of a
large lemon; sugar to taste. Beat hard and long until the sauce is
very light. This is delicious with cold "Brown Betty"—a form
of cold farina—cornstarch, blanc mange and the like.
PLAIN COLD, HARD SAUCE.
Stir together one cupful of white sugar and half a cupful of
butter until it is creamy and light; add flavoring to taste. This
is very nice, flavored with the juice of raspberries or
strawberries, or beat into it a cupful of ripe strawberries or
raspberries and the white of an egg beaten stiff.
CUSTARD SAUCE.
One cupful of sugar, two beaten eggs, one pint of milk,
flavoring to taste, brandy or wine, if preferred.
Heat the milk to boiling; add by degrees the beaten eggs and
sugar, put in the flavoring and set within a pan of boiling water;
stir until it begins to thicken; then take it off and stir in the
brandy or wine gradually; set, until wanted, within a pan of
boiling water.
MILK SAUCE.
Dissolve a tablespoonful of flour in cold milk; see that it is
free from lumps. Whisk an ounce of butter and a cupful of sugar to
a cream and add to it a pinch of salt. Mix together half a pint of
milk, one egg and the flour; stir this into the butter and add a
dash of nutmeg, or any flavor; heat until near the boiling point
and serve. Very nice in place of cold cream.
MILK OR CREAM SAUCE.
Cream or rich milk, simply sweetened with plenty of white sugar
and flavored, answers the purpose for some kinds of pudding, and
can be made very quickly.
FRUIT SAUCE.
Two-thirds of a cupful of sugar, a pint of raspberries or
strawberries, a tablespoonful of melted butter and a cupful of hot
water. Boil all together slowly, removing the scum as fast as it
rises; then strain through a sieve. This is very good served with
dumplings or apple puddings.
JELLY SAUCE.
Melt two tablespoonfuls of sugar and half a cupful of jelly over
the fire in a cupful of boiling water, adding also two
tablespoonfuls of butter; then stir into it a teaspoonful of
cornstarch, dissolved in half a cupful of water or wine; add it to
the jelly and let it come to a boil. Set it in a dish of hot water
to keep it warm until time to serve; stir occasionally. Any fruit
jelly can be used.
COMMON SWEET SAUCE.
Into a pint of water stir a paste made of a tablespoonful of
cornstarch or flour (rubbed smooth with a little cold water); add a
cupful of sugar and a tablespoonful of vinegar. Cook well for three
minutes. Take from the fire and add a piece of butter as large as a
small egg; when cool, flavor with a tablespoonful of vanilla or
lemon extract.
SYRUP FOR FRUIT SAUCE.
An excellent syrup for fruit sauce is made of Morello cherries
(red, sour cherries). For each pound of cherry juice, allow half a
pound of sugar and six cherry kernels; seed the cherries and let
them stand in a bowl over night; in the morning, press them through
a fine cloth, which has been dipped in boiling water, weigh the
juice, add the sugar, boil fifteen minutes, removing all the scum.
Fill small bottles that are perfectly dry with the syrup; when it
is cold, cork the bottles tightly, seal them and keep them in a
cool place, standing upright.
Most excellent to put into pudding sauces.
ROSE BRANDY. (For Cakes and Puddings.)
Gather the leaves of roses while the dew is on them, and as soon
as they open put them into a wide-mouthed bottle, and when the
bottle is full pour in the best of fourth proof French brandy.
It will be fit for use in three or four weeks and may be
frequently replenished. It is sometimes considered preferable to
wine as a flavoring to pastries and pudding sauces.
LEMON BRANDY. (For Cakes and Puddings.)
When you use lemons for punch or lemonade, do not throw away the
peels but cut them in small pieces—the thin yellow outside
(the thick part is not good)—and put them in a glass jar or
bottle of brandy. You will find this brandy useful for many
purposes.
In the same way keep for use the kernels of peach and plum
stones, pounding them slightly before you put them into the
brandy.
Fruit for preserving should be sound and free from all defects,
using white sugar, and also that which is dry, which produces the
nicest syrup; dark sugar can be used by being clarified, which is
done by dissolving two pounds of sugar in a pint of water; add to
it the white of an egg and beat it well, put it into a preserving
kettle on the fire and stir with a wooden spoon. As soon as it
begins to swell and boil up, throw in a little cold water; let it
boil up again, take it off and remove the scum; boil it again,
throw in more cold water and remove the scum; repeat until it is
clear and pours like oil from the spoon.
In the old way of preserving, we used pound for pound, when they
were kept in stone jars or crocks; now, as most preserves are put
up in sealed jars or cans, less sugar seems sufficient;
three-quarters of a pound of sugar is generally all that is
required for a pound of fruit.
Fruit should be boiled in a porcelain-lined or granite-ware
dish, if possible; but other utensils, copper or metal, if made
bright and clean, answer as well.
Any of the fruits that have been preserved in syrup may be
converted into dry preserves, by first draining them from the
syrup, and then drying them in a stove or very moderate oven,
adding to them a quantity of powdered loaf sugar, which will
gradually penetrate the fruit, while the fluid parts of the syrup
gently evaporate. They should be dried in the stove or oven on a
sieve, and turned every six or eight hours, fresh powdered sugar
being sifted over them every time they are turned. Afterwards they
are to be kept in a dry situation, in drawers or boxes. Currants
and cherries preserved whole in this manner, in bunches, are
extremely elegant and have a fine flavor. In this way it is, also,
that orange and lemon chips are preserved.
Mold can be prevented from forming on fruit jellies by pouring a
little melted paraffine over the top. When cool, it will harden to
a [Pg 424]solid cake, winch can be easily removed when the
jelly is used, and saved to use over again another year. It is
perfectly harmless and tasteless.
Large glass tumblers are the best for keeping jellies, much
better than large vessels, for by being opened frequently they soon
spoil; a paper should be cut to fit and placed over the jelly; then
put on the lid or cover, with thick paper rubbed over on the inside
with the white of an egg.
There cannot be too much care taken in selecting fruit for
jellies, for if the fruit is over ripe, any amount of time in
boiling will never make it jelly—there is where so many fail
in making good jelly; and another important matter is
overlooked—that of carefully skimming off the juice after it
begins to boil and a scum rises from the bottom to the top; the
juice should not be stirred, but the scum carefully taken off; if
allowed to boil under, the jelly will not be clear.
When either preserves or canned fruits show any indications of
fermentation, they should be immediately re-boiled with more sugar,
to save them. It is much better to be generous with the sugar at
first than to have any losses afterwards. Keep all preserves in a
cool, dry closet.
PRESERVED CHERRIES.
Take large, ripe Morello cherries; weigh them and to each pound
allow a pound of loaf sugar. Stone the cherries (opening them with
a sharp quill) and save the juice that comes from them in the
process. As you stone them, throw them into a large pan or tureen
and strew about half the sugar over them and let them lie in it an
hour or two after they are all stoned. Then put them into a
preserving kettle with the remainder of the sugar and boil and skim
them till the fruit is clear and the syrup thick.
PRESERVED CRANBERRIES.
The cranberries must be large and ripe. Wash them and to six
quarts of cranberries allow nine pounds of the beat loaf sugar.
Take three quarts of the cranberries and put them into a stewpan
with a pint and a half of water. Cover the pan and boil or stew
them till they are all to pieces. Then squeeze the juice through a
jelly bag. Put the sugar into a preserving kettle, pour the
cranberry juice over it and let it stand until it is all melted,
stirring it up frequently. Then place the kettle over the fire and
put in the remaining three quarts of whole [Pg 425]cranberries. Let them boil till they are tender,
clear and of a bright color, skimming them frequently. When done,
put them warm into jars with the syrup, which should be like a
thick jelly.
PRESERVED STRAWBERRIES.
For every pound of fruit weigh a pound of refined sugar; put
them with the sugar over the fire in a porcelain kettle, bring to a
boil slowly about twenty minutes. Take them out carefully with a
perforated skimmer and fill your hot jars nearly full; boil
the juice a few minutes longer and fill up the jars; seal them
hot. Keep in a cool, dry place.
TO PRESERVE BERRIES WHOLE. (Excellent.)
Buy the fruit when not too ripe, pick over immediately,
wash if absolutely necessary and put in glass jars, filling each
one about two-thirds full.
Put in the preserving kettle a pound of sugar and one cupful of
water for every two pounds of fruit, and let it come slowly to a
boil. Pour this syrup into the jars over the berries, filling them
up to the brim; then set the jars in a pot of cold water on
the stove, and let the water boil and the fruit become scalding
hot. Now take them out and seal perfectly tight. If this process is
followed thoroughly, the fruit will keep for several years.
PRESERVED EGG PLUMS.
Use a pound of sugar for a pound of plums; wash the plums and
wipe dry; put the sugar on a slow fire in the preserving kettle,
with as much water as will melt the sugar and let it simmer slowly;
then prick each plum thoroughly with a needle, or a fork with fine
prongs, and place a layer of them in the syrup; let them cook until
they lose their color a little and the skins begin to break; then
lift them out with a perforated skimmer and place them singly in a
large dish to cool; then put another layer of plums in the syrup
and let them cook and cool in the same manner, until the whole are
done; as they cool, carefully replace the broken skins so as not to
spoil the appearance of the plums; when the last layer is finished,
return the first to the kettle, and boil until transparent; do the
same with each layer; while the latest cooked are cooling, place
the first in glass jars; when all are done, pour the hot syrup over
them; when they are cold, close as usual; the jelly should be of
the color and consistency of rich wine jelly.
PRESERVED PEACHES.
Peaches for preserving may be ripe but not soft; cut them in
halves, take out the stones and pare them neatly; take as many
pounds of white sugar as of fruit, put to each pound of sugar a
teacupful of water; stir it until it is dissolved; set it over a
moderate fire; when it is boiling hot, put in the peaches; let them
boil gently until a pure, clear, uniform color; turn those at the
bottom to the top carefully with a skimmer several times; do not
hurry them. When they are clear, take each half up with a spoon and
spread them on flat dishes to become cold. When all are done, let
the syrup boil until it is quite thick; pour it into a large
pitcher and let it set to cool and settle. When the peaches are
cold put them carefully into jars and pour the syrup over them,
leaving any sediment which has settled at the bottom, or strain the
syrup. Some of the kernels from the peach-stones may be put in with
the peaches while boiling. Let them remain open one night, then
cover.
In like manner quince, plum, apricot, apple, cherry, greengage
and other fruit preserves are made; in every case fine large fruit
should be taken, free from imperfections, and the slightest bruises
or other fault should be removed.
PRESERVED GREEN TOMATOES.
Take one peck of green tomatoes. Slice six fresh lemons without
removing the skins, but taking out the seeds; put to this quantity
six pounds of sugar, common white, and boil until transparent and
the syrup thick. Ginger root may be added, if liked.
PRESERVED APPLES. (Whole.)
Peel and core large firm apples (pippins are best). Throw them
into water as you pare them. Boil the parings in water for fifteen
minutes, allowing a pint to one pound of fruit. Then strain and,
adding three-quarters of a pound of sugar to each pint of water, as
measured at first, with enough lemon peel, orange peel or mace, to
impart a pleasant flavor, return to the kettle. When the syrup has
been well skimmed and is clear, pour it boiling hot over the
apples, which must be drained from the water in which they have
hitherto stood. Let them remain in the syrup until both are
perfectly cold. Then, covering closely, let them simmer over a slow
fire until transparent. [Pg
427]When all the
minutiæ of these directions are attended to, the fruit will
remain unbroken and present a beautiful and inviting
appearance.
PRESERVED QUINCES.
Pare, core and quarter your fruit, then weigh it and allow an
equal quantity of white sugar. Take the parings and cores and put
in a preserving kettle; cover them with water and boil for half an
hour; then strain through a hair-sieve, and put the juice back into
the kettle and boil the quinces in it a little at a time until they
are tender; lift out as they are done with a drainer and lay on a
dish; if the liquid seems scarce add more water. When all are
cooked, throw into this liquor the sugar, and allow it to boil ten
minutes before putting in the quinces; let them boil until they
change color, say one hour and a quarter, on a slow fire; while
they are boiling occasionally slip a silver spoon under them to see
that they do not burn, but on no account stir them. Have two fresh
lemons cut in thin slices, and when the fruit is being put in jars
lay a slice or two in each. Quinces may be steamed until
tender.
PRESERVED PEARS.
One pound of fruit, one pound of sugar; pare off the peeling
thin. Make a nice syrup of nearly one cupful of water and one pound
of sugar, and when clarified by boiling and skimming put in the
pears and stew gently until clear. Choose rather pears like the
Seckle for preserving, both on account of the flavor and size. A
nice way is to stick a clove in the blossom end of each pear, for
this fruit seems to require some extraneous flavor to bring out its
own piquancy. Another acceptable addition to pear preserves may be
found instead, by adding the juice and thinly pared rind of one
lemon to each five pounds of fruit. If the pears are hard and
tough, parboil them until tender before beginning to preserve, and
from the same water take what you need for making their syrup.
If you can procure only large pears to preserve, cut them into
halves, or even slices, so that they can get done more quickly, and
lose nothing in appearance, either.
PINEAPPLE PRESERVES.
Twist off the top and bottom and pare off the rough outside of
pineapples; then weigh them and cut them in slices, chips or
quarters, or [Pg 428]cut them in four or six and shape each
piece like a whole pineapple; to each pound of fruit, put a
teacupful of water; put it in a preserving kettle, cover it and set
it over the fire and let them boil gently until they are tender and
clear; then take them from the water, by sticking a fork in the
centre of each slice, or with a skimmer, into a dish.
Put to the water white sugar, a pound for each pound of fruit;
stir it until it is all dissolved; then put in the pineapple, cover
the kettle and boil them gently until transparent throughout; when
it is so, take it out, let it cool and put it in glass jars; let
the syrup boil or simmer gently until it is thick and rich and when
nearly cool, pour it over the fruit. The next day secure the jars,
as before directed.
Pineapple done in this way is a beautiful and delicious
preserve. The usual manner of preserving it by putting it into the
syrup without first boiling it, makes it little better than
sweetened leather.
TO PRESERVE WATERMELON RIND AND CITRON.
Pare off the green skin, cut the watermelon rind into pieces.
Weigh the pieces and allow to each pound a pound and a half of loaf
sugar. Line your kettle with green vine-leaves, and put in the
pieces without the sugar. A layer of vine-leaves must cover
each layer of melon rind. Pour in water to cover the whole and
place a thick cloth over the kettle. Simmer the fruit for two
hours, after scattering a few bits of alum amongst it. Spread the
melon rind on a dish to cool. Melt the sugar, using a pint of water
to a pound and a half of sugar, and mix with it some beaten white
of egg. Boil and skim the sugar. When quite clear, put in the rind
and let it boil two hours; take out the rind, boil the syrup again,
pour it over the rind, and let it remain all night. The next
morning, boil the syrup with lemon juice, allowing one lemon to a
quart of syrup. When it is thick enough to hang in a drop from the
point of a spoon, it is done. Put the rind in jars and pour over it
the syrup. It is not fit for use immediately.
Citrons may be preserved in the same manner, first paring off
the outer skin and cutting them into quarters. Also green
limes.
TO PRESERVE AND DRY GREENGAGES.
To every pound of sugar allow one pound of fruit, one quarter
pint of water.
For this purpose, the fruit must be used before it is quite ripe
and part of the stalk must be left on. Weigh the fruit, rejecting
all that is in the least degree blemished, and put it into a lined
saucepan with the sugar and water, which should have been
previously boiled together to a rich syrup. Boil the fruit in this
for ten minutes, remove it from the fire, and drain the greengages.
The next day boil up the syrup and put in the fruit again, let it
simmer for three minutes, and drain the syrup away. Continue this
process for five or six days, and the last time place the
greengages, when drained, on a hair-sieve, and put them in an oven
or warm spot to dry; keep them in a box, with paper between each
layer, in a place free from damp.
PRESERVED PUMPKINS.
To each pound of pumpkin allow one pound of roughly pounded loaf
sugar, one gill of lemon juice.
Obtain a good, sweet pumpkin; halve it, take out the seeds and
pare off the rind; cut it into neat slices. Weigh the pumpkin, put
the slices in a pan or deep dish in layers, with the sugar
sprinkled between them; pour the lemon juice over the top, and let
the whole remain for two or three days. Boil all together, adding
half a pint of water to every three pounds of sugar used until the
pumpkin becomes tender; then turn the whole into a pan, where let
it remain for a week; then drain off the syrup, boil it until it is
quite thick, skim, and pour it boiling over the pumpkin. A little
bruised ginger and lemon rind, thinly pared, may be boiled in the
syrup to flavor the pumpkin.
PRESERVING FRUIT. (New Mode.)
Housekeepers who dislike the tedious, old-time fashion of
clarifying sugar and boiling the fruit, will appreciate, the
following two recipes, no fire being needed in their preparation.
The first is for "tutti frutti," and has been repeatedly tested
with unvarying success.
Put one quart of white, preserving, fine Batavia brandy into a
two-gallon stone jar that has a tightly fitting top. Then for every
pound of fruit, in prime condition and perfectly dry, which you put
in the brandy, use three-quarters of a pound of granulated sugar;
stir every day so that the sugar will be dissolved, using a clean,
wooden spoon kept for the purpose. Every sort of fruit may be used,
beginning with strawberries and ending with plums. Be sure and have
at least one [Pg 430]pound of black cherries, as they make
the color of the preserve very rich. Strawberries, raspberries,
blackberries, apricots, cherries (sweet and sour), peaches, plums,
are all used, and, if you like, currants and grapes. Plums and
grapes should be peeled and seeded, apricots and peaches peeled and
cut in quarters or eighths or dice; cherries also must be seeded;
quinces may be steamed until tender. The jar must be kept in a
cool, dry place, and the daily stirring must never be forgotten,
for that is the secret of success. You may use as much of one sort
of fruit as you like, and it may be put in from day to day, just as
you happen to have it. Half the quantity of spirits may be used.
The preserve will be ready for use within a week after the last
fruit is put in, and will keep for a number of months. We have
found it good eight months after making.
The second is as follows: Take some pure white vinegar and mix
with it granulated sugar until a syrup is formed quite free from
acidity. Pour this syrup into earthen jars and put in it good,
perfectly ripe fruit, gathered in dry weather. Cover the jars tight
and put them in a dry place. The contents will keep for six or
eight months, and the flavor of the fruit will be excellent.
TO PRESERVE FRUIT WITHOUT 'SUGAR.
Cherries, strawberries, sliced pineapple, plums, apricots,
gooseberries, etc., may be preserved in the following
manner—to be used the same as fresh fruit.
Gather the fruit before it is very ripe; put it in wide-mouthed
bottles made for the purpose; fill them as full as they will hold
and cork them tight; seal the corks; put some hay in a large
saucepan, set in the bottles, with hay between them to prevent
their touching; then fill the saucepan with water to the necks of
the bottles, and set it over the fire until the water is nearly
boiled, then take it off; let it stand until the bottles are cold.
Keep them in a cool place until wanted, when the fruit will be
found equal to fresh.
NEW METHOD OF PRESERVING FRUIT.
A new method of preserving fruit is practiced in England. Pears,
apples and other fruits are reduced to a paste by jamming, which is
then pressed into cakes and gently dried. When required for use it
is only necessary to pour four times their weight of boiling water
over [Pg 431]them and allow them to soak for twenty minutes and
then add sugar to suit the taste. The fine flavor of the fruit is
said to be retained to perfection. The cost of the prepared product
is scarcely greater than that of the original fruit, differing with
the supply and price of the latter; the keeping qualities are
excellent, so that it may be had at any time of the year and bears
long sea-voyages with out detriment. No peeling or coring is
required, so there is no waste.
FRUIT JELLIES.
Take a stone jar and put in the fruit, place this in a kettle of
tepid water and set on the fire; let it boil, closely covered,
until the fruit is broken to pieces; strain, pressing the bag, a
stout, coarse one, hard, putting in a few handfuls each time, and
between each squeezing turning it inside out to scald off the pulp
and skins; to each pint of juice allow a pound of loaf sugar; set
the juice on alone to boil, and, while it is boiling, put the sugar
into shallow dishes or pans, and heat it in the oven, watching and
stirring it to prevent burning; boil the juice just twenty minutes
from the time it begins fairly to boil; by this time the sugar
should be very hot; throw it into the boiling juice,
stirring rapidly all the time; withdraw the spoon when all is
thoroughly dissolved; let the jelly come to a boil to make all
certain; withdraw the kettle instantly from the fire; roll your
glasses and cups in hot water, and fill with the scalding liquid;
the jelly will form within an hour; when cold, close and tie up as
you do preserves.
CURRANT JELLY.
Currants for jelly should be perfectly ripe and gathered the
first week of the season; they lose their jelly property if
they hang on the bushes too long, and become too juicy—the
juice will not be apt to congeal. Strip them from the stalks, put
them into a stone jar, and set in a vessel of hot water over the
fire; keep the water around it boiling until the currants are all
broken, stirring them up occasionally. Then squeeze them through a
coarse cloth or towel. To each pint of juice allow a pound and a
quarter of refined sugar. Put the sugar into a porcelain kettle,
pour the juice over it, stirring frequently. Skim it before it
boils; boil about twenty minutes, or until [Pg 432]it
congeals in the spoon when held in the air. Pour it into hot jelly
glasses and seal when cool.
Wild frost grape jelly is nice made after this recipe.
CURRANT JELLY. (New Method.)
This recipe for making superior jelly without heat is given in a
Parisian journal of chemistry, which may be worth trying by some of
our readers. The currants are to be washed and squeezed in the
usual way, and the juice placed in a stone or earthen vessel, and
set away in a cool place in the cellar. In about twenty-four hours
a considerable amount of froth will cover the surface, produced by
fermentation, and this must be removed and the whole strained again
through the jelly bag, then weighed, and an equal weight of
powdered white sugar is to be added. This is to be stirred
constantly until entirely dissolved, and then put into jars, tied
up tightly and set away. At the end of another twenty-four hours a
perfectly transparent jelly of the most satisfactory flavor will be
formed, which will keep as long as if it had been cooked.
QUINCE JELLY.
Quinces for jelly should not be quite ripe, they should be a
fine yellow; rub off the down from them, core and cut them small;
put them in a preserving kettle with a teacupful of water for each
pound; let them stew gently until soft, without mashing; put them
in a thin muslin bag with the liquor; press them very lightly; to
each pint of the liquor put a pound of sugar; stir it until it is
all dissolved, then set it over the fire and let it boil gently,
until by cooling some on a plate you find it a good jelly; then
turn it into pots or tumblers and, when cold, secure as directed
for jellies.
RASPBERRY JELLY.
To each pint of juice allow one pound of sugar. Let the
raspberries be freshly gathered, quite ripe, pick from the stalks;
put them into a large jar after breaking the fruit a little with a
wooden spoon, and place this jar, covered, in a saucepan of boiling
water. When the juice is well drawn, which will be in from
three-quarters to one hour, strain the fruit through a fine
hair-sieve or cloth; measure the juice, and to every pint allow the
above proportion of white sugar. Put the juice and sugar into a
preserving pan, place it over the fire, [Pg
433]and boil gently
until the jelly thickens, when a little is poured on a plate;
carefully remove all the scum as it rises, pour the jelly into
small pots, cover down, and keep in a dry place. This jelly answers
for making raspberry cream and for flavoring various sweet dishes,
when, in winter, the fresh fruit is not obtainable.
APPLE JELLY.
Select apples that are rather tart and highly flavored; slice
them without paring; place in a porcelain preserving kettle, cover
with water, and let them cook slowly until the apples look red.
Pour into a colander, drain off the juice, and let this run through
a jelly-bag; return to the kettle, which must be carefully washed,
and boil half an hour; measure it and allow to every pint of juice
a pound of sugar and half the juice of a lemon; boil quickly for
ten minutes.
The juice of apples boiled in shallow vessels, without a
particle of sugar, makes the most sparkling, delicious jelly
imaginable. Red apples will give jelly the color and clearness of
claret, while that from light fruit is like amber. Take the cider
just as it is made, not allowing it to ferment at all, and, if
possible, boil it in a pan, flat, very large and shallow.
GRAPE JELLY.
Mash well the berries so as to remove the skins; pour all into a
preserving kettle and cook slowly for a few minutes to extract the
juice; strain through a colander, and then through a flannel
jelly-bag, keeping as hot as possible, for if not allowed to cool
before putting again on the stove the jelly conies much stiffer; a
few quince seeds boiled with the berries the first time tend to
stiffen it; measure the juice, allowing a pound of sugar to every
pint of juice, and boil fast for at least half an hour. Try a
little, and if it seems done, remove and put into glasses.
FLORIDA ORANGE JELLY.
Grate the yellow rind of two Florida oranges and two lemons, and
squeeze the juice into a porcelain-lined preserving kettle, adding
the juice of two more oranges, and removing all the seeds; put in
the grated rind a quarter of a pound of sugar, or more if the fruit
is sour, and a gill of water, and boil these ingredients together
until a rich syrup is formed; meantime, dissolve two ounces of
gelatine in a quart of warm water, stirring it over the fire until
it is entirely dis[Pg 434]solved, then add the syrup, strain the
jelly, and cool it in molds wet in cold water.
CRAB-APPLE JELLY.
The apples should be juicy and ripe. The fruit is then
quartered, the black spots in the cores removed, afterward put into
a preserving kettle over the fire, with a teacupful of water in the
bottom to prevent burning; more water is added as it evaporates
while cooking. When boiled to a pulp, strain the apples through a
coarse flannel, then proceed as for currant jelly.
PEACH JELLY.
Pare the peaches, take out the stones, then slice them; add to
them about a quarter of the kernels. Place them in a kettle with
enough water to cover them. Stir them often until the fruit is well
cooked, then strain, and to every pint of the juice add the juice
of a lemon; measure again, allowing a pound of sugar to each pint
of juice; heat the sugar very hot, and add when the juice has
boiled twenty minutes; let it come to a boil and take instantly
from the fire.
ORANGE SYRUP.
Pare the oranges, squeeze and strain the juice from the pulp. To
one pint of juice allow one pound and three-quarters of loaf sugar.
Put the juice and sugar together, boil and skim it until it is
cream; then strain it through a flannel bag and let it stand until
it becomes cool, then put in bottles and cork tight.
Lemon syrup is made in the same way, except that you scald the
lemons and squeeze out the juice, allowing rather more sugar.
ORANGE MARMALADE.
Allow pound for pound. Pare half the oranges and cut the rind
into shreds. Boil in three waters until tender and set aside. Grate
the rind of the remaining oranges; take off, and throw away every
bit of the thick white inner skin; quarter all the oranges and take
out the seeds. Chop or cut them into small pieces; drain all the
juice that will come away without pressing them over the sugar;
heat this, stirring until the sugar is dissolved, adding a
very little water, unless the oranges are very juicy. Boil
and skim five or six minutes; put in the boiled shreds and cook ten
minutes; then the chopped fruit and [Pg
435]grated peel, and
boil twenty minutes longer. When cold, put into small jars, tied up
with bladder or paper next the fruit, cloths dipped in wax over
all. A nicer way still is to put away in tumblers with
self-adjusting metal tops. Press brandied tissue paper down closely
to the fruit.
LEMON MARMALADE
Is made as you would prepare orange—allowing a pound and a
quarter of sugar to a pound of the fruit, and using but half the
grated peel.
RAISINS. (A French Marmalade.)
This recipe is particularly valuable at seasons when fruit is
scarce. Take six fine large cooking apples, peel them, put them
over a slow fire, together with a wine-glass of Medeira wine and
half a pound of sugar. When well stewed, split and stone two and a
half pounds of raisins, and put them to stew with the apples and
enough water to prevent their burning. When all appears well
dissolved, beat it through a strainer bowl, and lastly through a
sieve. Mold, if you like, or put away in small preserve jars, to
cut in thin slices for the ornamentation of pastry, or to dish up
for eating with cream.
STRAWBERRY JAM.
To each pound of fine and not too ripe berries, allow
three-quarters of a pound of sugar. Put them into a preserving pan
and stir gently, not to break up the fruit; simmer for one-half
hour and put into pots air-tight. An excellent way to seal jellies
and jams is as the German women do: cut round covers from writing
paper a half-inch too large for the tops, smear the inside with the
unbeaten white of an egg, tie over with a cord, and it will dry
quickly and be absolutely preservative. A circular paper dipped in
brandy and laid over the toothsome contents before covering, will
prevent any dampness from affecting the flavor. I have removed
covers heavy with mold to find the preserve intact.
GOOSEBERRY JAM.
Pick the gooseberries just as they begin to turn. Stem, wash and
weigh. To four pounds of fruit add half a teacupful of water; boil
until soft and add four pounds of sugar and boil until clear. If
picked at the right stage the jam will be amber colored and firm,
and very much nicer than if the fruit is preserved when ripe.
BRANDIED PEACHES OR PEARS.
Four pounds of fruit, four pounds of sugar, one pint of best
white brandy. Make a syrup of the sugar and enough water to
dissolve it. Let this come to a boil; put the fruit in and boil
five minutes. Having removed the fruit carefully, let the syrup
boil fifteen minutes longer, or until it thickens well; add the
brandy and take the kettle at once from the fire; pour the hot
syrup over the fruit and seal. If, after the fruit is taken from
the fire, a reddish liquor oozes from it, drain this off before
adding the clear syrup. Put up in glass jars. Peaches and pears
should be peeled for brandying. Plums should be pricked and watched
carefully for fear of bursting.
RASPBERRY JAM.
To five or six pounds of fine red raspberries (not too ripe) add
an equal quantity of the finest quality of white sugar. Mash the
whole well in a preserving kettle; add about one quart of currant
juice (a little less will do) and boil gently till it jellies upon
a cold plate; then put into small jars; cover with brandied paper
and tie a thick white paper over them. Keep in a dark, dry and cool
place.
Blackberry or strawberry jam is made the same way, leaving out
the currant juice.
A NEW WAY OF KEEPING FRUIT.
It is stated that experiments have been made in keeping fruit in
jars covered only with cotton batting, and at the end of two years
the fruit was sound. The following directions are given for the
process: Use crocks, stone butter-jars or any other convenient
dishes. Prepare and cook the fruit precisely as for canning in
glass jars; fill your dishes with fruit while hot and immediately
cover with cotton batting, securely tied on. Remember that all
putrefaction is caused by the invisible creatures in the air.
Cooking the fruit expels all these, and they cannot pass through
the cotton batting. The fruit thus protected will keep an
indefinite period. It will be remembered that Tyndall has proved
that the atmospheric germs cannot pass through a layer of
cotton.
MACEDOINES.
Suspend in the centre of th[Pg
437]e jelly mold a bunch of
grapes, cherries, berries, or currants on their stems, sections of
oranges, pineapples, or brandied fruits, and pour in a little
jelly when quite cold, but not set. It makes a very agreeable
effect. By a little ingenuity you can imbed first one fruit and
then another, arranging in circles, and pour a little jelly
successively over each. Do not re-heat the jelly, but keep it in a
warm place, while the mold is on ice and the first layers are
hardening.
eggs begin to stiffen. Season with pepper and salt.
SCALLOPED MUTTON AND TOMATOES.
Over the bottom of an earthen baking-dish place a layer of bread
crumbs, and over it alternate layers of cold roast mutton cut in
thin slices, and tomatoes peeled and sliced; season each with salt,
pepper and bits of butter, as laid in. The top layer should be of
tomatoes, spread over with bread crumbs. Bake three-quarters of an
hour, and serve immediately.
LAMB SWEETBREADS AND TOMATO SAUCE.
Lamb sweetbreads are not always procurable, but a stroll through
the markets occasionally reveals a small lot of them, which can
invariably be had at a low price, owing to their excellence being
recognized by but few buyers. Wash them well in salted water and
parboil fifteen minutes; when cool, trim neatly and put them in a
pan with just butter enough to prevent their burning; toss them
about until a delicate color; season with salt and pepper and
serve, surrounded with tomato sauce. (See SAUCES.)
ROAST QUARTER OF LAMB.
Procure a nice hind-quarter, remove some of the fat that is
around the kidney, skewer the lower joint up to the fillet, place
it in a moderate oven, let it heat through slowly, then dredge it
with salt and flour; quicken the fire, put half a pint of water
into the dripping-pan, with a teaspoonful of salt. With this liquor
baste the meat occasionally; serve with lettuce, green peas and
mint sauce.
A quarter of lamb weighing seven or eight pounds will require
two hours to roast.
A breast of lamb roasted is very sweet and is considered by many
as preferable to hind-quarter. It requires nearly as long a time to
roast as the quarter, and should be served in the same manner.
Make the gravy from the drippings, thickened with flour.
The mint sauce is made as follows: Take fresh, young spearmint
leaves stripped from stems; wash and drain them or dry on a cloth,
chop very fine, put in a gravy tureen, and to three tablespoonfuls
of mint add two of finely powdered cut-loaf sugar; mix, and let it
stand a few minutes, then pour over it six tablespoonfuls good
cider or white-wine vinegar. The sauce should be made some time
before dinner, so that the flavor of the mint may be well
extracted.
TO BROIL THE FORE-QUARTER OF LAMB.
Take off the shoulder and lay it upon the gridiron with the
breast; cut in two parts, to facilitate its cooking; put a tin
sheet on top of the meat, and a weight upon that; turn the meat
around frequently to prevent its burning; turn over as soon as
cooked on one side; renew the coals occasionally, that all parts
may cook alike; when done, season with butter, pepper and
salt—exactly like beefsteak. It takes some time to broil it
well; but when done it will be found to be equal to broiled
chicken, the flavor being more delicate than when cooked otherwise.
Serve with cream sauce, made as follows: Heat a tablespoonful of
butter in a saucepan, add a teaspoonful of flour and stir until
perfectly smooth; then add, slowly stirring in, a cup of cold milk;
let it boil up once, and season to taste with salt and pepper and a
teaspoonful of finely chopped fresh parsley. Serve in a gravy boat,
all hot.
LAMB STEW.
Cut up the lamb into small pieces (after removing all the fat)
say about two inches square. Wash it well and put it over the fire,
with just enough cold water to cover it well, and let it heat
gradually. It should stew gently until it is partly done; then add
a few thin slices of salt pork, one or two onions sliced up fine,
some pepper and salt if needed, and two or three raw potatoes cut
up into inch pieces. Cover it closely and stew until the meat is
tender. Drop in a few made dumplings, made like short biscuit, cut
out very small. Cook fifteen minutes longer. Thicken the
gravy with a little flour moistened with milk. Serve.
PRESSED LAMB.
The meat, either shoulder or leg, should be put to boil in the
morning with water just enough to cover it; when tender, season
with salt and pepper, then keep it over the fire until very
tender and the juice nearly boiled out. Remove it from the
fire-place in a wooden chopping bowl, season more if necessary,
chop it up like hash. Place it in a bread-pan, press out all the
juice, and put it in a cool place to harden. The pressing is
generally done by placing a dish over the meat and putting a
flat-iron upon that. Nice cut up cold into thin slices, and the
broth left from the meat would make a nice soup served with it,
adding vegetables and spices.
CROQUETTES OF ODDS AND ENDS.
These are made of any scraps or bits of good food that happen to
be left from one or more meals, and in such small quantities that
they cannot be warmed up separately. As, for example, a couple of
spoonfuls of frizzled beef and cream, the lean meat of one mutton
chop, one spoonful of minced beef, two cold hard-boiled eggs, a
little cold chopped potato, a little mashed potato, a chick's leg,
all the gristle and hard outside taken from the meat. These things
well chopped and seasoned, mixed with one raw egg, a little flour
and butter, and boiling water; then made into round cakes, thick
like fish-balls and browned well with butter in a frying pan or on
a griddle.
Scraps of hash, cold rice, boiled oatmeal left from breakfast,
every kind of fresh meat, bits of salt tongue, bacon, pork or ham,
bits of poultry, and crumbs of bread may be used. They should be
put together with care, so as not to have them too dry to be
palatable, or too moist to cook in shape. Most housekeepers would
be surprised at the result, making an addition to the breakfast or
lunch table. Serve on small squares of buttered toast, and with
cold celery if in season.
PORK.
The best parts, and those usually used for roasting, are the
loin, the leg, the shoulder, the sparerib and chine. The hams,
shoulders and middlings are usually salted, pickled and smoked.
Pork requires more thorough cooking than most meats; if the least
underdone it is unwholesome.
To choose pork: If the rind is thick and tough, and cannot be
easily impressed with the finger, it is old; when fresh, it will
look cool and smooth, and only corn-fed pork is good; swill or
still-fed pork is unfit to cure. Fresh pork is in season from
October to April. When dressing or stuffing is used, there are more
or less herbs used for seasoning—sage, summer savory, thyme
and sweet marjoram; these can be found (in the dried, pulverized
form, put up in small, light packages) at most of the best
druggists; still those raised and gathered at home are considered
more fresh.
ROAST PIG.
Prepare your dressing as for DRESSING FOR FOWLS, adding half an
onion, chopped fine; set it inside. Take a young pig about six
weeks old, wash it thoroughly inside and outside; and in another
water put a teaspoonful of baking soda, and rinse out the inside
again; wipe it dry with a fresh towel, salt the inside and stuff it
with the prepared dressing; making it full and plump, giving it its
original size and shape. Sew it up, place it in a kneeling posture
in the dripping-pan, tying the legs in proper position. Pour a
little hot salted water into the dripping-pan, baste with butter
and water a few times as the pig warms, afterwards with gravy from
the dripping-pan. When it begins to smoke all over rub it often
with a rag dipped in melted butter. This will keep the skin from
cracking and it still will be crisp. It will take from two to three
hours to roast. Make the gravy by skimming off most of the grease;
stir into that remaining in the pan a good tablespoonful of flour,
turn in water to make it the right consistency, season with pepper
and let all boil up once. Strain, and if you like wine in it, add
half a glass; turn it into a gravy boat. Place the pig upon a
large, hot platter, surrounded with parsley or celery tops; place a
green wreath around the neck, and a sprig of celery in its mouth.
In carving, cut off its head first; split down the back, take off
its hams and shoulders, and separate the ribs.
ROAST LOIN OF PORK.
Score the skin in strips about a quarter of an inch apart; place
it in a dripping-pan with a very little water under it; cook
it moderately at first, as a high heat hardens the rind before the
meat is heated through. If it is very lean, it should be rubbed
with fresh lard or butter when put into the pan. A stuffing might
be made of bread crumbs, chopped sage and onions, pepper and salt,
and baked separately on a pie dish; this method is better than
putting it in the meat, as many persons have a great aversion to
its flavor. A loin weighing about six pounds will roast in two
hours; allow more time if it should be very fat. Make a gravy with
flour stirred into the pork drippings. Serve with apple sauce and
pickles.
ROAST LEG OF PORK.
Choose a small leg of fine young pork; cut a slit in the knuckle
with a sharp knife, and fill the space with sage and onion chopped,
[Pg 146]and a little pepper and salt. When half done, score
the skin in slices, but do not cut deeper than the outer rind.
Apple sauce and potatoes should be served with it. The gravy is to
be made the same way as for beef roast, by turning off all the
superfluous fat and adding a spoonful of flour stirred with a
little water; add water to make the right consistency. Serve in a
gravy boat.
BOILED LEG OF PORK.
For boiling, choose a small, compact, well-filled leg, and rub
it well with salt; let it remain in pickle for a week or ten days,
turning and rubbing it every day. An hour before dressing it put it
into cold water for an hour, which improves the color. If the pork
is purchased ready salted, ascertain how long the meat has been in
pickle and soak it accordingly. Put it into a boiling-pot, with
sufficient cold water to cover it, let it gradually come to a boil,
and remove the scum as it rises. Simmer it very gently until
tender, and do not allow it to boil fast, or the knuckle will fall
to pieces before the middle of the leg is done. Carrots, turnips or
parsnips may be boiled with the pork, some of which should be laid
around the dish as a garnish.
Time.—A leg of pork weighing eight pounds, three
hours after the water boils, and to be simmered very gently.
FRESH PORK POT-PIE.
Boil a sparerib, after removing all the fat and cracking the
bones, until tender; remove the scum as it rises, and when tender
season with salt and pepper; half an hour before time for serving
the dinner thicken the gravy with a little flour. Have ready
another kettle, into which remove all the bones and most of the
gravy, leaving only sufficient to cover the pot half an inch above
the rim that rests on the stove; put in the crust, cover tight, and
boil steadily forty-five minutes. To prepare the crust, work into
light dough a small bit of butter, roll it out thin, cut it
in small, square cakes, and lay them on the moulding-board until
very light. No steam should possibly escape while the crust is
cooking, and by no means allow the pot to cease boiling.
ROAST SPARERIB.
Trim off the rough ends neatly, crack the ribs across the
middle, rub with salt and sprinkle with pepper, fold over, stuff
with turkey [Pg 147]dressing, sew up tightly, place in a dripping-pan
with a pint of water, baste frequently, turning over once so as to
bake both sides equally until a rich brown.
PORK TENDERLOINS.
The tenderloins are unlike any other part of the pork in flavor.
They may be either fried or broiled; the latter being drier,
require to be well-buttered before serving, which should be done on
a hot platter before the butter becomes oily. Fry them in a little
lard, turning them to have them cooked through; when done, remove,
and keep hot while making a gravy by dredging a little flour into
the hot fat; if not enough add a little butter or lard, stir until
browned, and add a little milk or cream, stir briskly, and pour
over the dish. A little Worcestershire sauce may be added to the
gravy if desired.
PORK CUTLETS.
Cut them from the leg, and remove the skin; trim them and beat
them, and sprinkle on salt and pepper. Prepare some beaten egg in a
pan, and on a flat dish a mixture of bread crumbs, minced onion and
sage. Put some lard or drippings into a frying pan over the fire,
and when it boils put in the cutlets, having dipped every one first
in the egg, and then in the seasoning. Fry them twenty or thirty
minutes, turning them often. After you have taken them out of the
frying pan, skim the gravy, dredge in a little flour, give it one
boil, and then pour it on the dish round the cutlets.
Have apple sauce to eat with them.
Pork cutlets prepared in this manner may be stewed instead of
being fried. Add to them a little water, and stew them slowly till
thoroughly done, keeping them closely covered, except when you
remove the lid to skim them.
PORK CHOPS AND FRIED APPLES.
Season the chops with salt and pepper and a little powdered
sage; dip them into bread crumbs. Fry about twenty minutes or until
they are done. Put them on a hot dish; pour off part of the gravy
into another pan to make a gravy to serve with them, if you choose.
Then fry apples which you have sliced about two-thirds of an inch
thick, cutting them around the apple so that the core is in
[Pg 148]the centre of each piece; then cut out the core.
When they are browned on one side and partly cooked, turn them
carefully with a pancake turner, and finish cooking; dish around
the chops or on a separate dish.
FRIED PORK CHOPS.
Fry them the same as mutton chops. If a sausage flavor is liked,
sprinkle over them a little powdered sage or summer savory, pepper
and salt, and if a gravy is liked, skim off some of the fat in the
pan and stir in a spoonful of flour; stir it until free from lumps,
then season with pepper and salt and turn in a pint of sweet milk.
Boil up and serve in a gravy boat.
PORK PIE.
Make a good plain paste. Take from two and a half to three
pounds of the thick ends of a loin of pork, with very little fat on
it; cut into very thin slices three inches long by two inches wide;
put a layer at the bottom of a pie-dish. Wash and chop finely a
handful of parsley, also an onion. Sprinkle a small portion of
these over the pork, and a little pepper and salt. Add another
layer of pork, and over that some more of the seasoning, only be
sparing of the nutmeg. Continue this till the dish is full. Now
pour into the dish a cupful of stock or water, and a spoonful or
two of catsup. Put a little paste around the edge of the dish; put
on the cover and place the pie in a rather hot oven. When the paste
has risen and begins to take color, place the pie at the bottom of
the oven, with some paper over it, as it will require to be baked
at least two hours. Some prefer to cook the meat until partly done,
before putting into the crust.
PORK POT-PIE.
Take pieces of ribs of lean salt pork, also a slice or two of
the fat of salt pork; scald it well with hot water so as to wash
out the briny taste. Put it into a kettle and cover it with cold
water, enough for the required want. Cover it and boil an hour,
season with pepper; then add half a dozen potatoes cut into
quarters. When it all commences to boil again, drop in dumplings
made from this recipe:—
One pint of sour or buttermilk, two eggs, well beaten, a
teaspoonful of salt, a level teaspoonful of soda; dissolve in a
spoonful of water as much flour as will make a very stiff batter.
Drop this into the kettle or broth by spoonfuls, and cook forty
minutes, closely covered.
PORK AND BEANS. (Baked.)
Take two quarts of white beans, pick them over the night before,
put to soak in cold water; in the morning put them in fresh water
and let them scald, then turn off the water and put on more, hot;
put to cook with them a piece of salt pork, gashed, as much as
would make five or six slices; boil slowly till soft (not mashed),
then add a tablespoonful of molasses, half a teaspoonful of soda,
stir in well, put in a deep pan, and bake one hour and a half. If
you do not like to use pork, salt the beans when boiling, and add a
lump of butter when preparing them for the oven.
BOSTON PORK AND BEANS.
Pick over carefully a quart of small, white beans; let them soak
over night in cold water; in the morning wash and drain in another
water. Put on to boil in plenty of cold water with a piece of soda
the size of a bean; let them come to a boil, then drain again,
cover with water once more, and boil them fifteen minutes, or until
the skin of the beans will crack when taken out and blown upon.
Drain the beans again, put them into an earthen pot, adding a
tablespoonful of salt; cover with hot water, place in the centre a
pound of salt pork, first scalding it with hot water, and scoring
the rind across the top, a quarter of an inch apart to indicate
where the slices are to be cut. Place the pot in the oven, and bake
six hours or longer. Keep the oven a moderate heat; add hot water
from the tea-kettle as needed, on account of evaporation, to keep
the beans moist. When the meat becomes crisp and looks cooked,
remove it, as too long baking the pork destroys its solidity.
FRIED SALT PORK.
Cut in thin slices, and freshen in cold water, roll in flour,
and fry crisp. If required quickly pour boiling water over the
slices, let stand a few minutes, drain and roll in flour as before;
drain off most of the grease from the frying pan; stir in while hot
one or two tablespoonfuls of flour, about half a pint of milk, a
little pepper, and salt if over freshened; let it boil, and pour
into a gravy dish. A teaspoonful of finely-chopped parsley will add
pleasantly to the appearance of the gravy.
GRILLED SALT PORK.
Take quite thin slices of the thick part of side pork, of a
clear white, and thinly streaked with lean; hold one on a toasting
fork before a brisk fire to grill; have at hand a dish of cold
water, in which immerse it frequently while cooking, to remove the
superfluous fat and render it more delicate. Put each slice as
cooked in a warm covered pan; when all are done, serve hot.
FRIED HAM AND EGGS.
Cut slices of ham quite thin, cut off the rind or skin, put them
into a hot frying pan, turning them often until crisp, taking care
not to burn the slices; three minutes will cook them well. Dish
them on a hot platter; then turn off the top of the grease, rinse
out the pan, and put back the clear grease to fry the eggs. Break
the eggs separately in a saucer, that in case a bad one should be
among them it may not mix with the rest. Slip each egg gently into
the frying pan. Do not turn them while they are frying, put keep
pouring some of the hot lard over them with a kitchen spoon; this
will do them sufficiently on the upper side. They will be done
enough in about three minutes; the white must retain its
transparency so that the yolk will be seen through it. When done
take them up with a tin slice; drain off the lard, and if any part
of the white is discolored or ragged, trim it off. Lay a fried egg
upon each slice of the ham, and send to table hot.
COLD BACON AND EGGS.
An economical way of using bacon and eggs that have been left
from a previous meal is to put them in a wooden bowl and chop them
quite fine, adding a little mashed or cold chopped potato, and a
little bacon gravy, if any was left. Mix and mould it into little
balls, roll in raw egg and cracker crumbs, and fry in a spider the
same as frying eggs; fry a light brown on both sides. Serve hot.
Very appetizing.
SCRAPPEL.
Scrappel is a most palatable dish. Take the head, heart and any
lean scraps of pork, and boil until the flesh slips easily from the
bones. Remove the fat, gristle and bones, then chop fine. Set the
liquor in which the meat was boiled aside until cold, take the cake
of fat from the surface and return to the fire. When it boils put
in the chopped [Pg 151]meat and season well with pepper and
salt. Let it boil again, then thicken with corn meal as you would
in making ordinary corn meal mush, by letting it slip through the
fingers slowly to prevent lumps. Cook an hour, stirring constantly
at first, afterwards putting back on the range in a position to
boil gently. When done, pour into a long, square pan, not too deep,
and mould. In cold weather this can be kept several weeks. Cut into
slices when cold, and fried brown, as you do mush, is a cheap and
delicious breakfast dish.
TO BAKE A HAM. (Corned.)
Take a medium-sized ham and place it to soak for ten or twelve
hours. Then cut away the rusty part from underneath, wipe it dry,
and cover it rather thickly over with a paste made of flour and
water. Put it into an earthen dish, and set it in a moderately
heated oven. When done, take off the crust carefully, and peel off
the skin, put a frill of cut paper around the knuckle, and raspings
of bread over the fat of the ham, or serve it glazed and garnished
with cut vegetables. It will take about four or five hours to bake
it.
Cooked in this way the flavor is much finer than when
boiled.
PIGS' FEET PICKLED.
Take twelve pigs' feet, scrape and wash them clean, put them
into a saucepan with enough hot (not boiling) water to cover them.
When partly done, salt them. It requires four to five hours to boil
them soft. Pack them in a stone crock, and pour over them spiced
vinegar made hot. They will be ready to use in a day or two. If you
wish them for breakfast, split them, make a batter of two eggs, a
cup of milk, salt, a teaspoonful of butter, with flour enough to
make a thick batter; dip each piece in this and fry in hot lard.
Or, dip them in beaten egg and flour and fry. Souse is good eaten
cold or warm.
BOILED HAM.
First remove all dust and mold by wiping with a coarse cloth;
soak it for an hour in cold water, then wash it thoroughly. Cut
with a sharp knife the hardened surface from the base and butt of
the ham. Place it over the fire in cold water, and let it
come to a moderate boil, keeping it steadily at this point,
allowing it to cook twenty minutes for every pound of meat. A ham
weighing twelve pounds will require [Pg
152]four hours to cook
properly, as underdone ham is very unwholesome. When the ham is to
be served hot, remove the skin by pealing it off, place it on a
platter, the fat side up, and dot the surface with spots of black
pepper. Stick in also some whole cloves.
If the ham is to be served cold, allow it to remain in the pot
until the water in which it was cooked becomes cold. This makes it
more juicy. Serve it in the same manner as when served hot.
BROILED HAM.
Cut your ham into thin slices, which should be a little less
than one quarter of an inch thick. Trim very closely the skin from
the upper side of each slice, and also trim off the outer edge
where the smoke has hardened the meat. If the ham is very salt lay
it in cold water for one hour before cooking, then wipe with
a dry cloth. Never soak ham in tepid or hot water, as it will
toughen the meat.
Broil over a brisk fire, turning the slices constantly. It will
require about five minutes, and should be served the last thing
directly from the gridiron, placed on a warm platter, with a little
butter and a sprinkle of pepper on the top of each slice. If ham or
bacon is allowed to stand by the fire after it has been broiled or
fried, it will speedily toughen, loosing all its grateful
juices.
Cold boiled ham is very nice for broiling, and many prefer it to
using the raw ham.
POTTED HAM.
To TWO pounds of lean ham allow one pound of fat, two
teaspoonfuls of powdered mace, half a nutmeg, grated, rather more
than half a teaspoonful of cayenne.
Mode.—Mince the ham, fat and lean together, in the
above proportion, and pound it well in a mortar, seasoning it with
cayenne pepper, pounded mace and nutmeg; put the mixture into a
deep baking-dish, and bake for half an hour; then press it well
into a stone jar, fill up the jar with clarified lard, cover it
closely, and paste over it a piece of thick paper. If well
seasoned, it will keep a long time in winter, and will be found
very convenient for sandwiches, etc.
BOLOGNA SAUSAGE. (Cooked.)
Two POUNDS of lean pork, two pounds of lean veal, two pounds of
fresh lean beef, two pounds of fat salt pork, one pound of beef
suet, [Pg 153]ten tablespoonfuls of powdered sage, one ounce each
of parsley, savory, marjoram and thyme mixed. Two teaspoonfuls of
cayenne pepper, the same of black, one grated nutmeg, one
teaspoonful of cloves, one minced onion, salt to taste. Chop or
grind the meat and suet; season, and stuff into beef skins; tie
these up, prick each in several places to allow the escape of
steam; put into hot, not boiling, water, and heat gradually to the
boiling point. Cook slowly for one hour; take out the skins and lay
them to dry in the sun, upon clean sweet straw or hay. Rub the
outside of the skins with oil or melted butter, and place in a
cool, dry cellar. If you wish to keep them more than a week, rub
ginger or pepper on the outside, then wash it off before using.
This is eaten without further cooking. Cut in round slices and lay
sliced lemons around the edge of the dish, as many like to squeeze
a few drops upon the sausage before eating. These are very nice
smoked like hams.
COUNTRY PORK SAUSAGES.
Six pounds lean fresh pork, three pounds of chine fat, three
tablespoonfuls of salt, two of black pepper, four tablespoonfuls of
pounded and sifted sage, two of summer savory. Chop the lean and
fat pork finely, mix the seasoning in with your hands, taste to see
that it has the right flavor, then put them into cases, either the
cleaned intestines of the hog, or make long, narrow bags of stout
muslin, large enough to contain each enough sausage for a family
dish. Fill these with the meat, dip in melted lard, and hang them
in a cool, dry, dark place. Some prefer to pack the meat in jars,
pouring melted lard over it, covering the top, to be taken out as
wanted and made into small round cakes with the hands, then fried
brown. Many like spices added to the seasoning—cloves, mace
and nutmeg. This is a matter of taste.
TO FRY SAUSAGES.
Put a small piece of lard or butter into the frying pan. Prick
the sausages with a fork, lay them in the melted grease, keep
moving them about, turning them frequently to prevent bursting; in
ten or twelve minutes they will be sufficiently browned and cooked.
Another sure way to prevent the cases from bursting is to cover
them with cold water and let it come to the boiling point; turn off
the water and fry them. Sausages are nicely cooked by putting them
in a baking-pan them in the oven, turning them once or twice. In
this [Pg 154]way you avoid all smoke and disagreeable odor. A
pound will cook brown in ten minutes in a hot oven.
HEAD CHEESE.
Boil the forehead, ears and feet, and nice scraps trimmed from
the hams of a fresh pig, until the meat will almost drop from the
bones. Then separate the meat from the bones, put in a large
chopping-bowl, and season with pepper, salt, sage and summer
savory. Chop it rather coarsely; put it back in the same kettle it
was boiled in, with just enough of the liquor in which it was
boiled to prevent its burning; warm it through thoroughly, mixing
it well together. Now pour it into a strong muslin bag, press the
bag between two flat surfaces, with a heavy weight on top; when
cold and solid it can be cut in slices. Good cold, or warmed up in
vinegar.
TO CURE HAMS AND BACON. (A Prize Recipe.)
For each hundred pounds of hams, make a pickle of ten pounds of
salt, two pounds of brown sugar, two ounces of saltpetre, one ounce
of red pepper, and from four to four and a half gallons of water,
or just enough to cover the hams, after being packed in a
water-tight vessel, or enough salt to make a brine to float a fresh
egg high enough, that is to say, out of water. First rub the hams
with common salt and lay them into a tub. Take the above
ingredients, put them into a vessel over the fire, and heat it hot,
stirring it frequently; remove all the scum, allow it to boil ten
minutes, let it cool and pour over the meat. After laying in this
brine five or six weeks, take out, drain and wipe, and smoke from
two to three weeks. Small pieces of bacon may remain in this pickle
two weeks, which would be sufficient.
TO SMOKE HAMS AND FISH AT HOME.
Take an old hogshead, stop up all the crevices, and fix a place
to put a cross-stick near the bottom, to hang the article to be
smoked on. Next, in the side, cut a hole near the top, to introduce
an iron pan filled with hickory wood sawdust and small pieces of
green wood. Having turned the hogshead upside down, hang the
articles upon the cross-stick, introduce the iron pan in the
opening, and place a piece of red-hot iron in the pan, cover it
with sawdust, and all will be complete. Let a large ham remain ten
days, and keep up a good smoke. [Pg
155]The best way for
keeping hams is to sew them in coarse cloths, white-washed on the
outside.
TO CURE ENGLISH BACON.
This process is called the "dry cure," and is considered far
preferable to the New England or Yankee style of putting prepared
brine or pickle over the meat. First the hog should not be too
large or too fat, weighing not over two hundred pounds, then after
it is dressed and cooled cut it up into proper pieces; allow to
every hundred pounds a mixture of four quarts of common salt, one
quarter of a pound of saltpetre and four pounds of sugar. Rub this
preparation thoroughly over and into each piece, then place them
into a tight tub or suitable cask; there will a brine form of
itself from the juices of the meat, enough at least to baste it
with, which should be done two or three times a week; turning each
piece every time.
In smoking this bacon, the sweetest flavor is derived from black
birch chips, but if these are not to be had, the next best wood is
hickory; the smoking with corn-cobs imparts a rank flavor to this
bacon, which is very distasteful to English people visiting this
country. It requires three weeks or a month to smoke this bacon
properly.
TO TRY OUT LARD.
Skin the leaf lard carefully, cut it into small pieces, and put
it into a kettle or saucepan; pour in a cupful of water to prevent
burning; set it over the fire where it will melt slowly. Stir it
frequently and let it simmer until nothing remains but brown
scraps. Remove the scraps with a perforated skimmer, throw in a
little salt to settle the fat, and, when clear, strain through a
coarse cloth into jars. Remember to watch it constantly, stirring
it from the bottom until the salt is thrown in to settle it; then
set it back on the range until clear. If it scorches it gives it a
very bad flavor.
DRAWN BUTTER.
Melted butter is the foundation of most of the common sauces.
Have a covered saucepan for this purpose. One lined with porcelain
will be best. Take a quarter of a pound of the best fresh butter,
cut it up, and mix with it about one tablespoonful of flour. When
it is thoroughly mixed, put it into the saucepan, and add to it
half a teacupful of hot water. Cover the saucepan and set it in a
large tin pan of boiling water. Shake it round continually (always
moving it the same way) till it is entirely melted and begins to
simmer. Then let it rest till it boils up.
If you set it on too hot a fire it will be oily.
If the butter and flour are not well mixed, it will be
lumpy.
If you put in too much water, it will be thin and poor. All
these defects are to be carefully avoided.
In melting butter for sweet or pudding sauce, you may use milk
instead of water.
TARTARE SAUCE.
The raw yolks of two eggs, half a teacupful of pure olive oil,
three tablespoonfuls of vinegar, one of made mustard, one
teaspoonful of sugar, a quarter of a teaspoonful of pepper, one
teaspoonful of salt, one of onion juice, one tablespoonful of
chopped capers, one of chopped cucumber pickle. Put together the
same as mayonnaise dressing, adding the chopped ingredients the
last thing.
This sauce is good for fried or boiled fish, boiled tongue, fish
salad, and may be used with fried and broiled meats.
EGG SAUCE, OR WHITE SAUCE.
Mix two tablespoonfuls of sifted flour with half a teacup of
warm butter. Place over the fire a saucepan containing a pint of
sweet milk and a saltspoon of salt, and a dash of white pepper;
when it [Pg 157]reaches the boiling point, add the butter and flour,
stirring briskly until it thickens and becomes like cream. Have
ready three cold hard-boiled eggs, sliced and chopped, add them to
the sauce; let them heat through thoroughly, and serve in a boat.
If you have plenty of cream, use it and omit the butter. By
omitting the eggs, you have the same as "White Sauce."
OYSTER SAUCE.
Take a pint of oysters and heat them in their own liquor long
enough to come to a boil, or until they begin to ruffle. Skim out
the oysters into a warm dish, put into the liquor a teacup of milk
or cream, two tablespoonfuls of cold butter, a pinch of cayenne and
salt; thicken with a tablespoonful of flour stirred to a paste,
boil up and then add the oysters.
Oyster sauce is used for fish, boiled turkey, chickens and
boiled white meats of most kinds.
LOBSTER SAUCE.
Put the coral and spawn of a boiled lobster into a mortar with a
tablespoonful of butter; pound it to a smooth mass, then rub it
through a sieve; melt nearly a quarter of a pound of sweet butter,
with a wine-glass of water or vinegar; add a teaspoonful of made
mustard, stir in the coral and spawn, and a little salt and pepper;
stir it until it is smooth and serve. Some of the meat of the
lobster may be chopped fine and stirred into it.
SAUCE FOR SALMON AND OTHER FISH.
One cupful of milk heated to a boil and thickened with a
tablespoonful of cornstarch previously wet up with cold water, the
liquor from the salmon, one great spoonful of butter, one raw egg
beaten light, the juice of half a lemon, mace and cayenne pepper to
taste. Add the egg to thickened milk when you have stirred in the
butter and liquor; take from the fire, season and let it stand in
hot water three minutes, covered. Lastly put in lemon juice and
turn out immediately. Pour it all over and around the salmon.
SAUCE FOR BOILED COD.
To one gill of boiling water add as much milk; stir into this
while boiling two tablespoonfuls of butter gradually, one
tablespoonful of [Pg 158]flour wet up with cold water; as it
thickens, the chopped yolk of one boiled egg, and one raw egg
beaten light. Take directly from the fire, season with pepper,
salt, a little chopped parsley and the juice of one lemon, and set
covered in boiling water (but not over fire) five minutes, stirring
occasionally. Pour part of the sauce over fish when dished; the
rest in a boat. Serve mashed potatoes with it.
FISH SAUCE. No. 1.
Make a pint of drawn butter, add one tablespoonful of pepper
sauce or Worcestershire sauce, a little salt and six hard-boiled
eggs chopped fine. Pour over boiled fish and garnish with sliced
lemon.
Very nice.
FISH SAUCE. No. 2.
Half a cupful of melted butter, half a cupful of vinegar, two
tablespoonfuls of tomato catsup, salt, and a tablespoonful of made
mustard. Boil ten minutes.
CELERY SAUCE.
Mix two tablespoonfuls of flour with half a teacupful of butter;
have ready a pint of boiling milk; stir the flour and butter into
the milk; take three heads of celery, cut into small bits, and boil
for a few minutes in water, which strain off; put the celery into
the melted butter, and keep it stirred over the fire for five or
ten minutes. This is very nice with boiled fowl or turkey. Another
way to make celery sauce is: Boil a head of celery until quite
tender, then put it through a sieve; put the yolk of an egg in a
basin, and beat it well with the strained juice of a lemon; add the
celery and a couple of spoonfuls of liquor in which the turkey was
boiled; salt and pepper to taste.
CAPER SAUCE.
Chop the capers a very little, unless quite small; make half a
pint of drawn butter, to which add the capers, with a large
spoonful of the juice from the bottle in which they are sold; let
it just simmer and serve in a tureen. Nasturtiums much resemble
capers in taste, though larger, and may be used, and, in fact, are
preferred by many. They are grown on a climbing vine, and are
cultivated for their blossom and for pickling. When used as capers
they should be chopped [Pg
159]more. If neither
capers nor nasturtiums are at hand, some pickles chopped up form a
very good substitute in the sauce.
BREAD SAUCE.
One cup of stale bread crumbs, one onion, two ounces of butter,
pepper and salt, a little mace. Cut the onion fine, and boil it in
milk till quite soft; then strain the milk on to the stale bread
crumbs, and let it stand an hour. Put it in a saucepan with the
boiled onion, pepper, salt and mace. Give it a boil, and serve in
sauce tureen. This sauce can also be used for grouse, and is very
nice. Roast partridges are nice served with bread crumbs, fried
brown in butter, with cranberry or currant jelly laid beside them
in the platter.
TOMATO SAUCE.
Take a quart can of tomatoes, put it over the fire in a stewpan,
put in one slice of onion and two cloves, a little pepper and salt;
boil about twenty minutes; then remove from the fire and strain it
through a sieve. Now melt in another pan an ounce of butter, and as
it melts, sprinkle in a tablespoonful of flour; stir it until it
browns and froths a little. Mix the tomato pulp with it, and it is
ready for the table.
Excellent for mutton, chops, roast beef, etc.
ONION SAUCE.
Work together until light a heaping tablespoonful of flour and
half a cupful of butter, and gradually add two cups of boiling
milk; stir constantly until it come to a boil; then stir into that
four tender boiled onions that have been chopped fine. Salt and
pepper to taste. Serve with boiled veal, poultry of mutton.
CHILI SAUCE.
Boil together two dozen ripe tomatoes, three small green
peppers, or a half teaspoonful of cayenne pepper, one onion cut
fine, half a cup of sugar. Boil until thick; then add two cups of
vinegar; then strain the whole, set back on the fire and add a
tablespoonful of salt, and a teaspoonful each of ginger, allspice,
cloves and cinnamon; boil all five minutes, remove and seal in
glass bottles. This is very nice.
MINT SAUCE.
Take fresh young spearmint leaves stripped from the stems; wash
and drain them, or dry on a cloth. Chop very fine, put in a gravy
boat, and to three tablespoonfuls of mint put two of white sugar;
mix and let it stand a few minutes, then pour over it six
tablespoonfuls of good cider or white-wine vinegar. The sauce
should be made some time before it is to be used, so that the
flavor of the mint may be well extracted. Fine with roast lamb.
SHARP BROWN SAUCE.
Put in a saucepan one tablespoonful of chopped onion, three
tablespoonfuls of good cider vinegar, six tablespoonfuls of water,
three of tomato catsup, a little pepper and salt, half a cup of
melted butter, in which stir a tablespoonful of sifted flour; put
all together and boil until it thickens. This is most excellent
with boiled meats, fish and poultry.
BECHAMEL SAUCE.
Put three tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan; add three
tablespoonfuls of sifted flour, quarter of a teaspoonful of nutmeg,
ten peppercorns, a teaspoonful of salt; beat all well together;
then add to this three slices of onion, two slices of carrot, two
sprigs of parsley, two of thyme, a bay leaf and half a dozen
mushrooms cut up. Moisten the whole with a pint of stock or water
and a cup of sweet cream. Set it on the stove and cook slowly for
half an hour, watching closely that it does not burn; then strain
through a sieve. Most excellent with roast veal, meats and
fish.
MAITRE D'HOTEL SAUCE.
Make a teacupful of drawn butter; add to it the juice of a
lemon, two tablespoonfuls of minced onion, three tablespoonfuls of
chopped parsley, a teaspoonful of powdered thyme or summer savory,
a pinch of cayenne and salt. Simmer over the fire and stir well.
Excellent with all kinds of fish.
WINE SAUCE FOR GAME.
Half a glass of currant jelly, half a glass of port wine, half a
glass of water, a tablespoonful of cold butter, a teaspoonful of
salt, the juice of half a lemon, a pinch of cayenne pepper and
three cloves. Simmer all together a few minutes, adding the wine
after it is [Pg 161]strained. A few spoonfuls of the gravy from the
game may be added to it. This sauce is especially nice with
venison.
HOLLANDAISE SAUCE.
Half a teacupful of butter, the juice of half a lemon, the yolk
of two eggs, a speck of cayenne pepper, half a cupful of boiling
water, half a teaspoonful of salt; beat the butter to a cream, add
the yolks of eggs one by one; then the lemon juice, pepper and
salt, beating all thoroughly; place the bowl in which is the
mixture in a saucepan of boiling water; beat with an egg-beater
until it begins to thicken which will be in about a minute; then
add the boiling water, beating all the time; stir until it begins
to thicken like soft custard; stir a few minutes after taking from
the fire; be careful not to cook it too long. This is very nice
with baked fish.
CURRANT JELLY SAUCE.
Three tablespoonfuls of butter, one onion, one bay leaf, one
sprig of celery, two tablespoonfuls of vinegar, half a cupful of
currant jelly, one tablespoonful of flour, one pint of stock, salt,
pepper. Cook the butter and onion until the latter begins to color.
Add the flour and herbs. Stir until brown; add the stock, and
simmer twenty minutes. Strain and skim off all the fat. Add the
jelly and stir over the fire until it is melted. Serve with
game.
BROWN SAUCE.
