# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2010
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Louis Zangwill, The Beautiful Miss Brooke
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34404/34404-h/34404-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

The opening bars of a waltz sounded
through the house above the irregular murmur
of conversation, bearing their promise and
summons along festal corridors and into garlanded
nooks and alcoves. Paul Middleton
drew a breath of relief as the girl to whom he
had been talking was carried off to dance, for
she had bored him intolerably. The refreshment
room, crowded a moment ago, was
thinning down, and, glad of the respite, he
took another sandwich and slowly sipped the
remainder of his coffee. His humour was of
the worst. If his hostess had not been his
mother's oldest friend, he would never have[2]
allowed himself to be persuaded to accept her
invitation after he had once decided to decline
it. Why had his mother so persisted, when
she knew very well he was looking forward
to playing in an important chess match?
Certainly the evening so far had not compensated
him for the pleasure he had thus missed.
He had been chafing the whole time, and
intermittently he had played with the idea of
slipping out and taking a hansom down to
the chess club. But he had ticked off five
dances on Celia's programme—Celia was of
course Celia—and he was to take her to supper.
Moreover, on his arrival at the small-and-early,
Mrs. Saxon had led him round—he
feeling that his amiable expression made him
a hypocrite—and, mechanically repeating his
request for the pleasure of a dance, he had
scrawled his name on several programmes
with scarcely a glance at their owners. It
was, however, more particularly his engagements[3]
with Celia, and one or two other girls
he knew well, that had made him stay on.
Once more he glanced at his watch. It was
getting well on towards midnight now, and
the issue of the chess match must already
have been decided. After some speculation
as to the winning side, he resigned himself to
finishing the evening where he was.
At the best of times Paul Middleton's interest
in the ballroom was only lukewarm. He
frankly professed not to care about it at all,
and, though he was in the habit of dancing
every dance, he looked upon himself more as
a spectator than a participator on such rare
occasions as he accepted cards for. He had
no favourite partners. Into the inner and intimate
life of that circle of light made for human
pleasure he could never enter; he had
always shrunk from exploring its labyrinth of
flirtation, coquetry, and petty manœuvring,
the very thought of the intricacies of which[4]
affrighted his plain-sailing temperament. To
him one girl in a ballroom was much the
same as another—a green, white, or pink
gown with sometimes an eye-glass attached.
He knew very well, though—if only from his
mother having instilled it into him—that no
such indifference attached to him, a young
man of twenty-three, who was absolute master
of at least eleven thousand pounds a year,
and not without claim to other merits.
Becoming aware that the music was in full
swing upstairs, he began to think it was high
time to look for his partner. But the name
"Brooke" on his programme, which he
made out with some difficulty, called up no
picture, no living personality. He could not
even recollect the moment when he had written
it, and it did not appear he had made any
note to help him identify the girl. His last
partner had had to be pointed out to him by
Mrs. Saxon, and he did not care to trouble her[5]
again. "Besides," he reflected, "this Miss
Brooke, whoever she is, will most likely be
hidden away in some nook or other and will
be only too glad not to be hunted up."
He had almost made up his mind to skip
the dance when there came into the room an
old schoolfellow, more or less a friend of his.
The two interchanged a word. Thorn, it
appeared, wanted a whisky and soda before
going home. He had to turn in early to be in
good form for the morrow's cricket. It was
the first match of the season, and he was anxious
to do brilliantly. Paul took the opportunity
of asking him if, by any chance, he knew
or had danced with a Miss Brooke.
"The beautiful Miss Brooke you mean,
don't you?" asked Thorn.
Paul explained he didn't know which Miss
Brooke he meant, but that he ought to be
dancing with a Miss Brooke. Any girl who
answered to that name would satisfy him.[6]
"Well, if the one you mean, or don't
mean, is the one I mean, she's just outside the
door talking to a big Yankee chap. I never
heard of her before to-night, but she's a stunning
girl. She's the daughter of some American
millionaire, a railway king, or something
of that sort—at least everybody says so. I
tried to get a dance with her, but I wasn't
in luck. I envy you. Good-night, old
boy!"
"I suppose, then, I must consider myself
in luck," thought Paul, staying yet a moment
as he caught sight of his full reflection in a
glass. It was a medium, slightly built figure
that met his gaze, easy and graceful of carriage.
The face was fair with a tiny light
beard—the silken hair cut short, the features
intelligent, the eyes grey, the teeth beautiful.
A suspicion of a freckle here and there did not
seem unsuited to the type of complexion.
The survey seemed to please him, and he[7]
stepped forward with the intention of taking
possession of "the beautiful Miss Brooke."
Thorn's indication proved correct. To his
surprise Miss Brooke seemed to recognise him
as he approached, for she welcomed him with
a smile, from which he deduced, moreover,
that she must have been waiting for him. He
had a general sense of enchantment and diaphanousness,
of a delicate harmony of colour-tones;
an impression as of an idealised figure
that had stepped out of a decorative painting.
He wondered how he had escaped the impression
at the time of his introduction to her,
and, despite her smile, he was chilled by a
doubt that it might, after all, be some other
Miss Brooke on whose programme he had
written. Of the man she had been talking to
he scarcely took any note at all, beyond verifying
he was a "big Yankee." He took her
up to the dancing-room, and they began
waltzing. Paul considered himself a pretty[8]
good dancer, and there were even moments
when he could conscientiously say he was
enjoying himself. But somehow he found
himself going badly with Miss Brooke.
Things seemed to be wrong at the very start.
There was an uncomfortable drag. Paul was
compelled to take enormous steps to counteract
it, and after a dozen turns both agreed to
give it up.
"You dance the English step, of course,
Mr. Middleton," she observed as they sauntered
round. Her American accent was of the
slightest, and few as were the words she
had so far spoken, they seemed to Paul subtly
to vibrate with a pleasant friendliness. Her
voice was sweet and clear, with an under-quality
of softness and caress. The suggestion
that there were waltz steps other than
the one he was wont to dance was new to
him.
"I suppose mine is the English step," he[9]
replied, "though I never heard of any other.
Is yours very different?"
"Oh, yes. We Americans really waltz,
whilst you English just go round and round
and round, with your stiff legs for all the
world like a pair of compasses."
Paul could not agree with her, and patriotically
proceeded to defend the English waltz,
surprised to find himself expending oratory on
so trivial a subject. He asserted it was not
the mere monotonous turning to which Miss
Brooke would reduce it, but that a spirit went
with it; whereupon Miss Brooke shook her
head, declaring she had shown the American
step to a good many English people, and, no
matter how sceptical before, they had vowed,
one and all, never to dance the English step
again.
They had wandered away from the mass
of rotating figures and taken possession of a
couple of seats in a corner outside the dancing-room.[10]
Paul had now an opportunity of observing
Miss Brooke more narrowly. Other
partners he had already forgotten. He could
hardly have identified them again. So far as
he was concerned, they had got completely
lost in the crowd from which they had temporarily
emerged. But of Miss Brooke he felt
sure a perfectly definite picture would remain
in his mind. What struck him most at once
was a certain spirit of frank good humour that
seemed to exhale from her, that made him
feel, even with her first few words, as if she
were merely resuming an interrupted conversation
with him. Her manner suggested the
natural falling-into-step by the side of an established
friend, overtaken en route, and it
was hard for him to realise this was really
their first talk together.
Paul had never danced with an American
girl before, else he would have been aware
of the incompatibility of their steps. His notions[11]
of the American girl—or at least the American
girl that comes to Europe—were of the
vaguest. He had in the course of his existence
met perhaps two or three of the class, but
he had never really talked to them. He had
heard the American girl spoken of—praised,
damned, or tolerated; he had read about her
push and businesslike qualities; and a short
time since he had seen the type portrayed on
the stage—a dashing, masterful creature, a
piece of egotism incarnate, with a twang as
pronounced as her self-assertiveness, a terrible
determination, and an equally terrible
assurance of carrying it through. But he had
never thought about her coherently; never
consciously crystallized these more or less
contradictory notions of her that had come to
him in so scattered and chaotic a fashion. It
was quite certain, however, that Miss Brooke
had nothing in common with the monstrosity
that had given so much delight to that English[12]
audience, and raised in it a due consciousness
of its own virtue of modest moderation. Nor
could he associate her with the dreadfully improper
and unabashable person he had heard
more than one British matron declare the
American girl to be.
Miss Brooke did not address her words to
the floor, but sitting with her chair at an
angle to his, looking straight at him as she
spoke. Paul found the ordeal a fascinating
but sufficiently trying one. He had no chance
against this wonderful girlish face, with its
sparkling blue eyes and its subtle quality of
sincerity and spirituality; tantalising by the
charm of its smile, which suggested moments
of wickedness and kissing, and provoking by
its air of unawareness of its calm-destroying
powers. He was conscious, too, of a long,
white neck rising above a pair of well-knit
shoulders, out of a mass of white fluffy trimmings,
in which were set with careless art a[13]
few deep-red velvet flowers. On her forehead
lay two roguish curls that moved freely,
and each temple was covered by a bewitching
lock, whose end curled inwards toward the
ear. At the back her hair was drawn right
up into curls, leaving the whole neck free, and
showing the contour of the gracefully-poised
head. Her white gown seemed woven of
some fairy substance, embroidered with myriad
gold spots, and encircled round the waist
with three golden bands. The pink, round
flesh of the upper arm showed firm and cool
through the web of the sleeve that met the
long white glove at the elbow. The bodice
followed closely the modelling of the bust,
and the skirt swept downwards, ending in
a mass of foam-like fluff amid which nestled
the tips of two neat shoes. Altogether a
superb girl, dainty and supple, without any
suggestion of fragility.
The comparative merits of the English and[14]
American waltzes were still occupying their
attention.
"Now, tell me, Mr. Middleton," she asked,
after enthusiastically descanting on the pleasure
and grace of the "long glide," "haven't I
really converted you?"
"I want very much to be converted, but
your waltz seems formidable. I am afraid
of it."
"I'm sure it would not take you long to
learn. Cannot I really coax you into a promise
to try it? I enjoy making converts—I
have missionary tendencies in the blood."
"That's interesting. Because there are
tendencies in my blood, too. Anti-missionary
ones, however. To be true to the family
tradition, I'm not sure whether I ought not
resist your coaxings."
"Which I'm sure you're not going to do."
Her face took on an expression of mock
imploration. "But, tell me, how far back[15]
does your tradition go, and how did it
arise?"
"It began with my grandfather, whose pet
idea was that the energy and money spent on
missions should be employed at home for the
raising of the lower classes. My father went
a step further by deciding the particular form
in which the lower classes should reap the
benefit, and he died with the hope that the
dream of two generations should be realised
by me."
"There is quite a touch of poetry in what
you tell me," said Miss Brooke. "My family
history is more prosaic, but it has a dash of
adventure in it. The missionary hobby began
with my great-grandfather, who was devoted,
body and soul, to it—certainly body, for he
was eaten by cannibals. Poor savages!"
"Poor savages!" echoed Paul, for the
moment supposing Miss Brooke meant to
throw doubts on her ancestor's digestibility.[16]
"Yes, for grandfather went out to preach
to them! A very mean revenge, I call that."
"How do you reconcile that statement
with your own missionary leanings?" asked
Paul, thinking it strange a railway king should
be the son of an earnest missionary, and
vaguely speculating whether the millionaire
was in the habit of giving large sums to "revenge"
his grandfather.
"Oh, as a woman I have the right to make
contradictory statements. 'Tis a valuable
right, and I find it very convenient not to
yield it up, though I did learn logic at
college."
"But surely it must be ever so much nicer
to triumph by logic."
"If one were only sure of triumphing!
But I am really in no difficulty, so you will
not get an exhibition of logic to-night. My
missionary tendencies are purely a matter of
instinct, my anti-missionary ones a matter of[17]
sentiment. Do not instinct and sentiment
pull different ways in human beings? Confess,
Mr. Middleton, don't you often want to
do things you feel you ought not?"
"More often I don't want to do things I
feel I ought to."
"That is a piece of new humour."
"I meant the inversion seriously. But I'm
glad to find that we are agreed at least in
sentiment."
"And I do try and turn the instinct into
useful channels. Americans, you know, never
let force run to waste. Now, you will learn
that waltz, won't you, Mr. Middleton?
Promise me quickly, as some one is coming
to take me to dance. There comes the top
of his head."
"Dear me, has the next dance come round
already!" ejaculated Paul. "You may consider
me a sincere convert," he added quickly,
"if—if you will spare me another dance."[18]
"If you can find one," she replied; and,
slipping her programme into his hand, she
rose in response to the smile of the newcomer.
To Paul's surprise, the man was the
same from whom he had carried off Miss
Brooke only a minute or two ago, as it appeared
to him. Which fact caused him now
to take keen notice of him. "The fellow"
was quite six feet high, and of slim, supple
build. His face was dark, and, to Paul, distinctively
American. He wore a short pointed
beard and a carefully-trimmed moustache.
His black hair somewhat eccentrically hung
down in lines cut to the same length. His
eyes gleamed with an almost unnatural brightness,
and his teeth showed themselves polished
and white.
"Write thick over somebody else's name."
Paul was conscious of Miss Brooke speaking
to him in almost a whisper; then in a moment
she had bowed and moved off. He[19]
could not help feeling angry with the man
for taking her away, and his displeasure
showed itself in his face. There seemed,
too, something proprietorial in the way
"the confounded fellow" walked off with
her, and a thousand foolish conjectures hustled
in his brain. However, he remembered he
had Miss Brooke's programme, which, together
with her last injunction, formed a
comforting assurance she had taken him into
special favour. It had been decidedly nice to
talk to this girl, who seemed just the sort of
person—simple and straightforward despite
her wonderful charm—he felt he could get on
with, and it gave him pleasure to picture her
again sitting by his side, fresh, cool, sweet,
and surpassingly beautiful.
After lingering a little he went into the
ballroom again. Miss Brooke's figure alone
drew his eye—the rest of the world was a
mere dancing medley. She was obviously[20]
enjoying her dance, and Paul found himself
envying her partner his easy mastery of the
American waltz step. He could not help observing
now what a superb note she struck in
that crowd. He could see, too, she was being
noticed, and divined talk about her by
many moving lips.
He found an opportunity of returning her
programme, which she received with a
marked look of surprise that changed into
a smile of thanks. Paul was much puzzled.
Her manner seemed to make it appear that
she had dropped the programme and he had
picked it up. He rather resented this, till it
occurred to him she had slipped it into his
hand so as not to be seen by her present
cavalier, and probably she had played this
little comedy because she did not want to
rouse his suspicion. Paul's fears that the
man might be something to her were reawakened,
but they were palliated by a[21]
sense of triumph over him. Had not Miss
Brooke played a part—for his sake?
Mrs. Saxon passed near him and stopped
to talk to him a moment. He made absent-minded
replies—indeed, five minutes later he
recalled that he had said something particularly
foolish and hated himself. In this
mood he sought cousin Celia and took her
to supper. He examined her more critically
now, finding her handsome, solid, and only
passably interesting. He noted, too, that
her manner lacked sprightliness and enthusiasm,
and that the things she talked about
didn't interest him in the least. He found
himself apologising again and again for not
having heard what she said. That was
whenever there were questions for him to
answer. He had, however, enough wit left
to feel it was fortunate she did not ask
questions more frequently. Meanwhile his
eye wandered constantly towards a little[22]
table some distance off, which Miss Brooke
and her American friend had all to themselves,
the other two covers being as yet
unappropriated. Once or twice he became
aware that Celia's eye was following his.
He saw a gleam of understanding flash
across her face, followed by a flush whose
meaning was obvious. But somehow he
felt reckless.
An hour later he was with Miss Brooke
again. At her laughing suggestion they had
found a hiding-place, more "towards the
upper regions," in order to keep out of the
way of the man whose name had been written
over, and who, indeed, never appeared.
Miss Brooke was admiring an exquisite little
painting of a picturesque boy looking over a
rude wooden bridge on to a small stream.
The work, which hung just opposite them,
bore a well-known French signature, and had
attracted her attention at once. The enthusiasm[23]
with which she spoke of the artist led
Paul to inquire if she herself painted.
"I try to," she answered self-deprecatingly.
"I am appallingly interested in my
work. I always lose myself when talking
about it."
She was evidently serious, and Paul was
glad to have struck such a mood, which
promised possibilities of intimate conversation.
"You have taken up art seriously?" he
asked.
"One must do something to fill one's
life," she replied, with unmistakable earnestness;
and set Paul musing about the inability
of fortune to compensate for a want of purpose
in life, as he had, indeed, felt long ago.
That a woman, however, should give expression
to the sentiment surprised him. Her
next words astonished him still more.
"I have always been ambitious, and I[24]
might have achieved something in art if I
hadn't wasted so many years trying other
things."
"But, surely you must find the knowledge
you have acquired worth having."
"I would willingly exchange it all for two
years' progress in my work. The mistakes
began by poppa discovering I was a musical
genius, and as I was just mad to do something
big in the world, I believed him. The
next discovery was mine—that I was a great
writer, and when, two years after that, an artist
friend declared some sketches of mine
were full of inspiration, my enthusiasm for
writing fizzed out immediately, and I rushed
into painting, and over to Paris to study. Of
course, I'm only in the student stage, but my
professor has given me distinct encouragement.
In my heart I really believe I should
succeed if only——" She broke off with a
curious laugh, but went on almost immediately:[25]
"If only I don't transfer my enthusiasm
to sculpture before long. You see I
know my little ways. Besides, the temptation
to change is as strong as it possibly can
be. It would be such a distinction to have
completed the round of the arts."
"Poetry would still be left untouched."
"Oh, I've written poetry as well. That
was part and parcel of my literary mania."
"And naturally expired with it."
"No. Let me confess. Poetry is the one
thing I keep up in order to be able to feel I am
made of fine stuff. It's the one unsaleable
thing I devote my time to, and without it I
should feel utterly ignoble. With all my ambition
to achieve greatness, I am quite unable
to say how much of my enthusiasm is due to
the hope of accompanying dollars."
Paul was startled for a moment, then
laughed in high amusement at the idea of a[26]
railway king's daughter eking out her income
by Art.
"I mean it. I'm not as noble as I look,
but thank you for the compliment all the
same. If I have allowed myself any illusions
on the point, they were all dissipated when I
heard of the price a Salon picture sold for
last year. My feeling of envy was too naked
to be mistaken—naked and unashamed. I
don't know if you've ever experienced the sort
of thing—whether you've ever written poetry
to keep your self-respect."
"I fear writing poetry would be no test for
me. I don't mean to imply that the result
would not be unsaleable," he added, smiling,
"but that I am not so avaricious as you profess
to be. I am quite satisfied that my work
in life shall bring me no return."
"I wish I were as fine as that," said Miss
Brooke.
"I am afraid I am far from being fine,"[27]
said Paul, modestly. "I am simply content
with my fortune. As you said before, one
must do something to fill one's life. I am
only too grateful for the prospect of being able
to employ my energies. So you see I am
really selfish at bottom."
"We each appear to have a due sense of
the clay in us, so let us agree we are neither
of us precisely the saints we appear. But
you've not yet told me in what particular way
you purpose satisfying that selfishness of
yours."
"Thereby hangs a long tale," said Paul,
laughing again. "It is connected with the
family tradition I mentioned to you before."
"I remember. Your father laid some injunction
on you about converting missionary
energies and subscriptions for home use."
"That is a quaint way of putting it. It is
true his injunction first set me thinking, and it
led to my developing certain Utopian ideas of[28]
my own. As the result, I am now studying
architecture. No doubt you will think it a
strange choice. There begins another dance,
and we've both partners."
"How vexatious!" said Miss Brooke.
"Just when I am so interested. I am really
longing to hear all about your Utopia."
"I should so much have liked to tell you,"
murmured Paul, thinking he might even have
sat out another dance if it were not for his
foolish exclamation.
"Oh, but you're going to call, Mr. Middleton."
"I shall be very happy," said Paul, repressing
a start.
She wrote her address for him on the back
of his programme, adding, "I shall be in on
Wednesday afternoon."
He thanked her and took her down to the
dancing-room where she was pounced upon
immediately, and he then discovered, to his[29]
surprise, that he and Miss Brooke had sat out
two dances! Moreover, the frown which
Celia gave him over her partner's shoulder as
she waltzed by made him refer to his programme,
when he found he had overlooked
the little tick at the side of dance number fourteen.
[30]
"A day and a half to wait before seeing
Miss Brooke again," was Paul's first reflection
the next morning. "All I should have
laughed at as absurd a month ago, proves to
be true. I am fast in the toils." And all
through the day Miss Brooke filled his
thoughts. He was, somehow, a different
person from before, as if he had awakened
from some sluggish torpor.
All his life Paul had suffered from an excess
of parental love, which had considerably
curtailed his freedom; and even when the
death of his father a year before had left him
his own master, he had no thought of living
away from his mother, much to her secret[31]
gratification. Her fondness for him had been
such that she had had him educated at home
for several years, and was only persuaded to
let him go to school under great pressure from
her husband. She had established her influence
over her boy from the beginning, and his
pliable and obedient disposition had enabled
her to maintain it now that he was grown up.
His father, who had divided his time between
collecting beautiful beetles, representing a
rural constituency, enacting the good Samaritan,
and, as Paul had told Miss Brooke, thundering
and writing letters to the press against
foreign missions, had cherished an ambitious
career for his son. He himself, he felt, was a
mere pawn on the parliamentary chessboard,
and he dreamt of a really great political future
for Paul, who, moreover, he hoped, would
leave his mark on the social life of the generation
by promoting the increase of public fine-art
collections. Beautiful centres of art—beautiful[32]
buildings with beautiful contents—could
be established, he argued, if the money subscribed
for foreign missions could be used for
the purpose; and he had the necessary statistics
ready to hurl at the head of the sceptic.
Acting on the advice of a friend who considered
the Bar afforded the best training in
oratory, he began by placing the boy in a solicitor's
office immediately after he had left
college. Some eighteen months later the
father was carried off in an epidemic of influenza.
Paul, who had long since discovered
that oratory viâ the law was not adapted to
one of his temperament, had decision enough
to desist from it. His attitude towards his
sire's dream had never been a very reverent
one, for he knew well he was not of the stuff
of which Parliamentary leaders are made.
But, as the affection between the two had been
really strong, the son wished to respect the
father's ideas so far as possible, if only for sentimental[33]
reasons; and, finding in himself a
natural taste for making beautiful designs as
well as an innocent love for illuminated
books, old carvings and mouldings, and such
curious antiques as had a real art value, it occurred
to him he might make a thorough
study of architecture from the art as well as
the practical side. Later on he would design
art galleries for the people, and set a movement
on foot to promote their construction.
Without taking himself too solemnly, he liked
to think that what he purposed would have
given his father pleasure; and he was always
able to take good-humouredly such jesting remarks
as had reference to his schemes.
Meanwhile mother and son had settled
down in a small house in Elm Park Road.
The country house was let on a long lease,
as Mrs. Middleton did not wish to have the
trouble of keeping it up, preferring to travel
for three months in the year. The household[34]
consumed but a small part of their revenues,
and consequently the amount of money in
the family threatened to increase from year
to year, despite that Mr. Middleton's good
works were continued, and that Paul, going
a-slumming, started additional good works on
his own account.
Mrs. Middleton was only too pleased at
Paul's leaving "that nasty dark, close office,"
asserting it must have injured his health. Besides,
her faith in his talents was so absolute
that she was certain he would one day be a
very great man indeed, whatever the profession
he espoused. So she ceded to him for
his study perhaps the pleasantest room in the
house. It was at the back and opened on to
a narrow garden, so that he could saunter out
occasionally and pace up and down. As he
was here quite isolated, he never felt the need
of having rooms elsewhere.
Despite the vigilance under which Paul[35]
had grown up, he had yet managed to have
one or two boyish love-affairs without his
parents suspecting anything; and he had at
times dreamt of an ideal love and an ideal
happiness. But of late he had developed different
notions, and had come to pride himself
on his freedom from all mawkish sentiment.
Notwithstanding this, he was chivalrous
enough to believe that women were angels;
which belief, curiously enough, was unimpaired
by the fact that, in practice, he was
a little bit afraid and suspicious of them.
Nor did he always find them interesting;
he would sooner play a game of chess any
day than talk to one of them.
Cousin Celia was often at the house to join
him and his mother at their quiet tea, and one
day the idea entered his head that Mrs. Middleton
had a certain pet scheme. But modesty
prevented it from taking root in him, and
he preferred to believe that the notion of a[36]
marriage between him and Celia had occurred
only to himself, and would greatly
surprise everybody else if he broached it.
Celia was an orphan, and he had heard
her pitied all his life. She was considered
to possess an extraordinary share of good
looks and an uncommon degree of affability.
Good judges assured one another she would
make an excellent wife, and Mrs. Middleton
had taken good care that the said judges
should discuss the girl in the presence of
her boy, who could scarcely contend against
so subtle an undermining. Despite his vague
knowledge of the wiles of match-making, he
began to persuade himself that he really liked
Celia, and he played more and more with the
idea of marrying her. The leading-strings
were handled so lightly and skilfully, he
would have been much astonished to hear
that his inclinations were not absolutely
uninfluenced. In Celia was all that straightforwardness[37]
by which he set such store;
from her was absent all that caprice and
flirtatiousness he was so afraid of. It was
easy to know her wishes, easy to please
her; and she had never made him the
victim of moods.
And the more he thought of marrying her,
the more he began to decry romantic love to
himself. Whether it really existed or not he
would not pretend to say, though, in the light
of his own experience, he could just imagine
its existence. Those old boyish ideas of his
were all a mistake. And thereupon he fell
back eagerly on the theory of sensible companionship
as the only sound basis for
marriage—which theory had now abruptly
to be rejected.
Already Paul, promenading his garden
whilst beautiful coloured plates of Egyptian
decoration lay neglected on his table, was
bothering himself as to whether he could[38]
leave Celia out of the account with a clear
conscience. The question he kept asking
himself was whether such attention as he
had paid her could reasonably be interpreted
as bearing any real significance. He
was certain he had never actively made
love to her, as he had always hesitated to
begin, but he had seen a great deal of her
of late and their intimacy had made great
strides. Moreover, she had allowed him his
five dances the evening before without a
word of demur. He knew, too, he had
often felt himself flushing on hearing her
praised, feeling a sort of proprietary pride
in the subject of discussion; and he wondered
now if his demeanour on such occasions
had been observed.
All these considerations caused him considerable
uneasiness in view of the fact
that he was perfectly sure now he did not
want to marry her. Miss Brooke had come[39]
into his horizon, and lo! the whole world
was changed. Oh, to be free to woo and
win such a girl!
Suddenly he had a flash of shrewder insight,
and he was able to find comfort in
that first suspicion, which now returned to
him, that his mother was really responsible
for this Celia affair. Why—and his awakened
mind now ran over a score of memories—he
had scarcely ever met Celia out without his
mother having supplied the impulse for his
going to the particular place! He had been
a fool not to see how she had worked
matters from the beginning. And now
there arose in him a shade of resentment
against her, and his man's independence
revolted for the first time against this subtle
subordination of his will to hers. He had
a definite perception—attended with a distinct
sense of shame—of the fact that he
had never really ceased to be, so far as[40]
she was concerned, the good little boy who
had learnt his letters at her knee. He had
an individuality of his own, he told himself,
and it behoved him to play the part of a
man. He should begin his emancipation
at once by putting a prompt stop to "this
Celia business."
[41]
As Paul rang at the address Miss Brooke
had scribbled down on his programme, his
dominating thought was that American
millionaire's daughters chose rather shabby
houses to stay in. Though the name of
the street had surprised him when he had
first read it, he had yet conceived it possible
she might be staying at some kind of private
hotel; but he had not anticipated a dusty
card with the word "apartments." He took
it for granted her mother was with her, and,
though he had not formed any clear conception
of Mrs. Brooke, she looming mistily in
his mind as a handsome, stately personage
that had decidedly to be taken into the[42]
reckoning, he had wondered how she would
receive him.
A maid-servant ushered him up two flights
of stairs into a front room and announced his
name. As he entered he was conscious of
three persons sitting at the far end where a
bright fire burned, and was somewhat startled
to recognise the long lithe figure, the dark
face and hair, and the piercing black eyes
of the American Miss Brooke had danced
with. A peculiar shade of expression flitted
across the man's face, telling Paul the recognition
was mutual. At the same time Paul
was assuming that the bonneted and cloaked
mature-looking lady was no other than Mrs.
Brooke herself, and he wondered why she
should receive callers when so obviously
dressed for going out. Miss Brooke rose to
greet him with a pleasant smile of welcome.
In a simple dress with wide sleeves
that fitted tight round the wrists, her short[43]
front hair, evenly divided, falling over her
temples in rippling masses, she seemed less
phantasmal and fairylike, less remote from
this world—a being more humanly sweet
and that one might dare to woo.
But unfortunately in that moment he became
aware of the huge bulk of a high
bed against the wall on his right, and a
tall screen that cut off a corner of the
room struck him as having the air of concealing
something. Though he kept control
over himself physically, his mind grew
perfectly vacant. He did not dare to think—it
seemed vain to make any surmise—but
bowed to the bonneted lady as he
heard Miss Brooke say: "Katharine, let
me introduce my friend, Mr. Middleton—Mrs.
Potter."
Paul had seldom felt so many emotions
at one time. Added to his surprise at the
expected Mrs. Brooke changing at the last[44]
moment into a Mrs. Potter, and to his
bewilderment at being received in a bedroom,
was a thrill of pleasure at Miss
Brooke's reference to him as "my friend."
He had, too, a sense of gratified curiosity
at learning the next moment that the man's
name was Pemberton; it was convenient,
moreover, to have a definite symbol by
which to refer to him in thought.
"I think the water's boiling, dear," said
Mrs. Potter. "Doesn't it mean 'boiling'
when steam comes out of the spout like
that?"
"Not yet, Katharine. Half a minute more.
You are just in nice time, Mr. Middleton, to
get your cup of tea at its best." And Miss
Brooke busied herself cutting up a big lemon
into thin slices at a little table that was laid
with a pretty Japanese tea-set.
"Lisa's tea is quite wonderful," chimed in
Mrs. Potter. "I always spoil mine—I can[45]
never quite tell when the water boils. That's
my pet stupidity."
For a moment Paul watched the artistic
copper kettle as it sang its pleasant song.
Mrs. Potter already struck him as an obviously
cheerful personality, and he felt absurdly grateful
to her for mentioning Miss Brooke's first
name. He had not yet given up Mrs. Brooke,
expecting her to enter the room very soon
now; and he found it hard not to fix his gaze
noticeably on the bed, half-surprised that
everybody else ignored it, seeming totally unconscious
that any such piece of furniture was
there at all.
Mr. Pemberton took little part in the somewhat
banal but good-humoured conversation
that now sprang up, but drummed idly with
his fingers on the settee on which he was
lounging. Now and again a monosyllabic
drawl fell languidly from him, and Paul read
into this demeanour annoyance at his presence.[46]
Mrs. Potter, he soon learnt—for the lady
was loquacious—was a widow and a journalist
on a three months' stay in Europe, of
which she was passing a month in London,
endeavouring to make as much copy out of it
as possible. She related with glee, and without
any apparent qualms of conscience, how
she had "fixed up" accounts of various great
society functions, writing her copy in the first
person.
"Lisa is so good and helpful to me. I impose
on her dreadfully. I should never have
been able to get them fixed up without her.
And then her spelling is so perfect—she runs
over my copy and puts it right in a jiffy."
"Lemon or cream, Mr. Middleton,
please?" asked Miss Brooke. "Two lumps
of sugar or one? What, none at all! Oh,
yes, everybody thinks these cups sweetly
pretty. I'm taking them home with me as a
souvenir."[47]
"What shall I do without you in Paris?"
broke in Mrs. Potter again. "I shall be lost
there. Can't I coax you to come back with
me, Lisa dear?"
"Can't disappoint poppa," said Miss
Brooke laconically.
"You'll have me to come to," drawled
Mr. Pemberton.
"You'll be handy for some things, but
your spelling's worse than mine," said Mrs.
Potter; and somewhat irrelevantly went on to
suppose that Paul must know Paris well.
Paul, alas! had only two visits to boast of,
one of a week's, the other of two weeks' duration,
both in the company of his mother.
Whereupon a sound, as of a suppressed snigger,
came from the direction of Pemberton.
Something like the truth had begun to
dawn on Paul's mind, and he knew better
now than to continue to expect Mrs. Brooke
to appear. He had sufficiently gathered from[48]
the conversation that Miss Brooke was on her
way home from Paris to America, and that
she was going to travel alone, and had taken
London en route, probably armed with letters
of introduction. Most likely, he argued, she
must have considered the one room sufficient
for her needs, and had not anticipated callers.
Or perhaps Americans, for all he knew, did
not mind receiving callers in a bedroom.
This, he concluded, was probably the case, as
no one seemed in the least gêné, despite that
the bed was such a palpable fact, and stood
there in massive unblushingness. Otherwise
an atmosphere of feminine daintiness seemed
to surround Miss Brooke, transforming even
this lodging-house bedroom.
However, he did not grasp the facts without
an almost overwhelming sense of pain.
His romance had been rudely shattered at
one blast, and he felt his breath draw heavily
when he first comprehended Miss Brooke was[49]
on the point of leaving London. A sense of
helplessness came upon him as he realised he
could do nothing but just get through with
his call. There seemed not the slightest
chance now of his telling her about the career
he purposed for himself. He had dreamed,
too, of her showing him her verses, perhaps
some of her sketches. But the presence of the
others stood in the way. He would have
liked to hate them both, but being forced to
like Mrs. Potter, he had to bestow a double
amount of dislike on Mr. Pemberton, which
he was very glad to do. And then he wanted
to know the exact relation between Mr. Pemberton
and Miss Brooke. From a hint the
"fellow" had dropped, it was clear he lived
in Paris—where Miss Brooke had been living.
Was he a relative? Who was he? Why
was he in London? How came he to be at
Mrs. Saxon's dance? For a moment Paul
thought of asking Mrs. Saxon about him, and[50]
also about Miss Brooke, but he put the idea
from him as underhand and unworthy.
Meanwhile the conversation went on,
pleasant and banal. Mrs. Potter deluged Paul
with questions about the London season and
English painters and the Academy. She narrated
the comicalities of her shopping expeditions,
various little misadventures that had
arisen from the different usage of everyday
words by the two nations. By imperceptible
stages along a tortuous and varied route they
drifted on to the subject of love, and Mrs.
Potter, still keeping the talk almost all to herself,
related several touching romances of her
friends' lives. Once or twice Paul's gloom
was lightened by the smile of Miss Brooke
that met his look each time he turned his face
towards her. A lien, invisible to the others,
seemed to be established between them.
At length Mrs. Potter, drawing Mr. Pemberton's
attention to the hour, rose to go, and[51]
the two left together. Despite some mad
idea of declaring himself to Miss Brooke there
and then, which had occurred to him, Paul
had also risen, but to his astonishment Miss
Brooke drew her chair closer to the fire, and
motioned him to take a seat in the opposite
chimney corner. He obeyed as if hypnotised.
"What would my mother think of this?"
he asked himself, and awaited developments.
As for Miss Brooke, at no moment did she
seem aware of the slightest unconventionality
in the situation.
"Katharine is so sweet," she began
thoughtfully. "You can't imagine how
pleased I was when she wrote she was
coming. Charlie is piloting her about a little.
He is so good-natured."
"Charlie is, I presume, Mr. Pemberton."
"Why, of course. And he'll be of so
much use to her in Paris. He has a studio
there. But I hope she won't fall in love[52]
with him," she added laughingly. "Katharine
is so romantic; she is always in love
with some man or other."
Though he knew as a general biological
fact that women fall in love with men, Paul,
despite all the love-stories he had read, had
never yet been able to grasp it and admit it
to himself as a fact of actual life. Somehow,
he had always felt that the onus of falling in
love and of courtship rested on men, and that
it was very good and condescending of women
to allow themselves to be loved at all. But
Miss Brooke's way of talking seemed to take
it for granted that it was a perfectly natural
and proper thing for a woman to be in love,
that romance was a thing a woman might
own to without any shame; making him
realise more distinctly than ever before that
women were not so entirely passive and
passionless. But all this he rather felt than
thought, and it did not interfere with the[53]
sentence that was on the tip of his tongue;
the outcome of his sense of disappointment
and desolation at her threatened departure
out of his life, which was only mitigated by
the reflection that Pemberton was being left
behind.
"And now you are going home!"
The words were obviously equivalent to
a sigh of regret.
"But not for good, I hope," said Miss
Brooke; and Paul's universe changed at once
into a wonderful enchanted garden. "Of
course, it will be very nice to be at home
with poppa and mamma again, but I should
not be leaving Paris from choice. I was making
such progress at school that my professor
was quite angry I couldn't stay. But perhaps
I shall be back in a year's time. I certainly
shall if everything goes well."
"I do hope it's nothing serious that calls
you away, and that keeps you from your[54]
studies so long a time," exclaimed Paul fervently.
"From my point of view it's certainly
serious," smiled Miss Brooke, good-humouredly.
"As I've already tried to make you
believe, I am a very greedy person, with a
fondness for dollars, and the whole trouble
is that they keep out of reach. Poor hardworked
poppa can't send me any more
money just now, but he'll be getting a bigger
salary next year, and I shall be able to go
back and paint a masterpiece for the Salon.
In the meanwhile I shall have to amuse myself
as best I can sketching about the place,
and watching poppa getting through big
batches of couples. He's a minister—you
know the cloth's hereditary in our family—and
marries off people wholesale."
Till that moment Miss Brooke had been
the railway king's daughter. For Paul to
find now that she was a comparatively poor[55]
girl, whose anxiety to earn money by making
her mark in art was no mere jesting
pretence, involved a complete readjustment
of his mental focus. But its instantaneity
made the operation a violent one, especially
as he strove hard not to exhibit any external
signs of discomposure. At the same time a
good deal that had bewildered him was explained,
though there were points yet on
which he needed enlightenment. And with
all his astonishment went an unbounded admiration
for the cheerful way in which she
accepted her position, the lover's keen lookout
for every scrap of virtue in the beloved
seizing on this greedily for commendation.
What a splendid, plucky girl she was! The
glamour of his romance was heightened.
Mere millionaires and all that appertained to
them seemed suddenly prosaic.
Into what a bizarre misconception had he
fallen! She herself was not to blame. If his[56]
mind had not been clogged up by what
Thorn had told him beforehand he would not
so persistently have misunderstood her references
to money; but how should he have
thought of challenging what he knew only
now to have been a mere speculative rumour?
There had been nothing in her appearance and
personality to belie that rumour, and, as obviously
she was not called upon to contradict
statements about herself she had never heard,
such manifestations of the truth as had since
become visible to him had only served to
mystify him.
The way, too, she had taken certain things
for granted as perfectly natural and proper,
somewhat astonished him, to wit, her inviting
him to call here, her reception of him in a bedroom,
and his presence alone with her now.
These facts contravened the ideas in which he
had been brought up, and he could only suppose
that American ideas probably differed[57]
from English. This surmise seemed, on the
whole, corroborated by the glimpse he had
had that day into the spirit of the American
independent woman—a type entirely new to
him—as exemplified both by Mrs. Potter and
Miss Brooke.
He asked how soon she was leaving, and
learnt she was sailing on the Saturday, so that
barely two days of London remained to her.
He did not like the idea at all, as he had
formed the hope he might somehow see her
again before her departure.
"My berth is taken," explained Miss
Brooke, perhaps amused by his evident discontent.
"Some boxes have gone on. Besides,
I could not stay here any longer.
Dollars are getting scarce. I'm going to
have some more tea—won't you join
me?"
"Willingly." He wanted to stay longer,
and tea, by filling the time plausibly, would[58]
help to lessen his constraint at the original
position in which he found himself.
"I am so pleased you were able to call!"
went on Miss Brooke, as she poured out the
beverage. "You haven't forgotten your
promise to tell me all about your work—and
your Utopia as well," she added, smiling, and
handing him his cup.
Her sweetness as she spoke enchanted
him. When he himself had been hesitating
on the brink of the chasm, with what ease
had she taken him across it at one leap! Soon
he found himself telling her how he had come
to abandon his father's ideas and plan out his
life his own way, with as much emotion as if
he were relating his inmost secrets to an affianced
wife. And certainly no affianced wife
could have listened with a graver attention, or
more sympathetic demeanour.
"Has it ever occurred to you to study
architecture at Paris?" she asked. "The[59]
Beaux Art School is, I think, one of the finest
in the world, and you could scarcely get a
more artistic atmosphere."
The effect of her remark was as that of an
electric spark that fuses many elements into
one new whole. He was conscious of a
struggling chaotic mass of thought, followed
by a clear perception of the conditions of his
existence in all its bearings. And in a flash he
had made up his mind to plunge into the delicious
indefiniteness of what offered itself. A
soft purple haze floated before him as in a
dream, and an odour of incense and a harmony
of sweet sounds seemed to steal upon
him. And the haze, parting a moment,
allowed him a glimpse of a magic city in its
depths. And in that city, he knew, were
"Lisa" and himself.
That was to be the future! The awakening
of the man in him was complete. By an
abrupt mastercoup he would wrench himself[60]
away from the influences that had well-nigh
reduced him to a puppet. His reply to Miss
Brooke now would be the beginning of the
necessary forward impulse.
"The idea has not come to me, though, of
course, I should have had to consider the
question of a formal course before very long.
But I like the suggestion very much."
"Lots of the boys take the course there,"
added Miss Brooke. "There are, of course,
many more American than English boys, but
you'll find them all a sociable set."
He asked for details about the student life,
and Miss Brooke tried to give him some notion
of it. In this way quite half an hour slipped
by, during which Paul became worked up to
a high pitch of enthusiasm and took care to
leave no doubt in Miss Brooke's mind that his
decision was finally taken.
"Charlie, too, might be useful to you,"
said Miss Brooke, as Paul rose to take his[61]
leave. "I'm sure he'd be delighted to be of
service to you. And how nice, too, if we
were to meet there again! Perhaps we
shall."
Her face gleamed as with the pleasure of
anticipation.
"I shall always bear the hope with me,"
said Paul gravely; and, wishing her a pleasant
crossing, he bade her "good-bye."
"Let us say 'Au revoir' rather," and
once again she pressed his hand, which was
more than he had dared hope for.
But what had "Charlie" to do with Miss
Brooke? he asked himself a thousand times
that evening.
[62]
A month later—about the beginning of
June—Paul had entered the École des Beaux
Arts as a student of architecture. Not to
have succeeded in tearing himself away
would have been to lose all self-respect.
He had determined to justify himself to
himself, to prove he had a will he need
not be ashamed of. Thus it was that his
astonished mother and a favourite uncle—Celia's
guardian—who both had a good deal
to say about Paris and its temptations, expended
their speech to no purpose.
Paul entered into his student life with zest,
working hard and conscientiously in a very
methodical fashion. He allowed himself,[63]
however, plenty of time for enjoying the
city; going to the theatres, and peeping
into all the show places, and hunting up
curios at old shops, and lounging and playing
billiards at the cafés, and drinking beer
al fresco on the boulevards. Occasionally
he rode in the Bois, or made excursions
up and down the Seine, and into the neighbouring
country—mostly, of course, in company,
for he soon struck acquaintance with
some of the men, many of whom he found
had to manage on very little money. So
he said nothing about his own easy circumstances,
rather enjoying the two-franc
seat at the theatre and the fifteen-centime
ride on the tops of tramcars. When he
wanted expensive amusement he went
alone.
No one he knew had so far mentioned
Miss Brooke's name, and though he was
often on the point of asking one or other[64]
of his new friends about her, some instinct
invariably restrained him. He had nurtured
his love for her, all his solitary thought
turning to her, and it seemed a sort of
sacrilege to make even the most innocent
inquiry about her in her absence. This
waiting for her in silence was part of the
romance.
He understood the American girl a little
better now, fellow-students having introduced
him to girl friends—that is to say, he was
better acquainted with her and her ways.
And he was satisfied that whatever appeared
right to Miss Brooke, no matter
how much it violated his own notions,
must be right absolutely. With her the
fact of riches or poverty was reduced to a
mere indifferent background, against which
her personality stood out in all its charm
and dignity. A girl like her could make
her home in one room, and yet make you[65]
welcome in it with as much ease and grace
as any lady in a fine drawing-room.
Time passed, and still nobody, by any
chance, referred to Miss Brooke. This was
not surprising, for Paris was large, and
American girl students were plentiful and
scattered all over it. Moreover, a girl who
had gone home months before was likely
to be soon forgotten. Pemberton he had
never met, but he had seen him just once
from the top of a tramcar. The hot
weather came on and Paul passed a delicious
month at Montmorency in company
with one of the men. After his return he
settled to work again, and the months
went by almost without his keeping count
of them—for, Miss Brooke having mentioned
a year as the time she was likely to remain
in America, he would not look for her till
the spring came on again. In the meanwhile
he inflicted much misery on himself[66]
by speculating as to whether home and
home ties might not have absorbed for
good so ideal and affectionate a girl as he
conceived her to be, especially after so long
a residence abroad. But deep down was
implanted in him an unswerving faith in her
coming, and, though the manner of their
meeting had been left so undefined, he
was certain there would be no difficulty
when the time came, and that his life after
that would be one long fairy tale.
The spring came at last, and with it vernissage
at the Salon. Paul knew one or
two men who were exhibiting, so he decided
to pass his afternoon at the Palais de
l'Industrie. The tens of thousands that
thronged the galleries made picture-inspection
difficult and tedious; but the crowd
itself presented many compensating features
of interest. Paul was hoping, too, he
might see Miss Brooke there, as it was[67]
not impossible she might by now be back
in Paris. Occasionally he fancied a girl
resembled Miss Brooke, but when, after
infinite striving, he had got close to his
quarry, he found the points of likeness
were but few. Once or twice the fair
one eluded his pursuit, and got irretrievably
swallowed up.
On his going to déjeuner the next day,
at a little restaurant close by the school,
where he was in the habit of dropping in
at mid-day—he dined in the evening in
state at a more pretentious establishment—there
sat Miss Brooke herself at a table at
the end of the room, her face towards the
door. None of the usual clients had yet
arrived, as it was a trifle early, and mademoiselle
was distributing the newly-written
menus among the various tables. In any
case he must have caught sight of her at
once, as the cluster of sharp red and black[68]
wings that shot up from one side of the
little toque, which just seemed to rest on
her hair, drew the eye at once. Her face
showed glowing and bright, set above the
dark mass of her stuff dress. As the door
swung to she looked up from the menu she
had been studying.
"How do you do, Mr. Middleton? You
seem real scared to see me."
Her greeting seemed as calm and laughing
as if they had but parted the day before,
and Paul felt some vague dissatisfaction
with it—he did not quite know why. It
seemed, somehow, as if there were no romance
between them at all, as if they
were the merest acquaintances. Perhaps it
was that the pent-up emotion of months
of waiting needed more dramatic expression
than this commonplace situation afforded.
He asked permission, and sat down opposite[69]
her, scarcely knowing what to say
to her first.
"Can you tell me whether cervelle de
veau is anything good to eat? It's the
only unfamiliar thing on the menu, and my
only hope."
He took the sheet of paper as she held
it to him, but found the dish was equally
unknown to him. They appealed to mademoiselle,
who informed them, "C'est dans
la tête."
"I wonder if she means 'brains.' I was
hoping not to have to translate cervelle
literally."
"I am not afraid of experimenting," suggested
Paul.
"For my benefit. That is real kind of
you. Whenever I've been curious about
things with strange names, I've always had
to order them, which is rather an expensive
way of increasing one's French vocabulary."[70]
When the dish came, neither Paul nor
Miss Brooke liked the curly look of it, so
they fell back on bifteck, salad, cheese, and
fruit.
"And so you are here after all," said
Miss Brooke, musingly.
"Why? Did you think I was not serious
about coming?"
"I didn't mean that. My expression was
a sort of acknowledgment to myself that I
had found you—or rather, to be proper,
that you had found me."
His heart fairly leaped with pleasure.
She had certainly then thought of him during
the past months!
"I must thank the happy chance that led
you in here," he murmured, feeling his emotion
at length control him.
"Happy chance!" She charmed his ear
with a ripple of laughter. "Why, I've exhausted
almost every restaurant near the[71]
Beaux Arts, that being the most feminine way
of pursuing you. The mathematical theory of
probability—college learning does prove useful
at times—told me the happening of the event,
that is, of the event I wanted to happen, was
a certainty. For some particular restaurant or
other is a habit which everybody contracts; it
is, indeed, the first vice one picks up in Paris.
And it's a habit that can't be broken. Day after
day you revolt—if you're a man, you swear—against
the cuisine. Things are becoming intolerable.
Time was when everything was
perfect, when the menu was varied, and
always included your favourite dishes; when
one could eat the salad without too close an
inspection of the under-side of the leaves, and
when the wine at eighty centimes a litre
didn't turn blue or taste like ink. To-day is,
most certainly, the last time you will ever set
foot in the place. But the morrow comes, and
at déjeuner time your feet bear you there[72]
again, and you are so meek about it that you
scarcely protest."
"That is just my experience," he confessed.
"I was sure it would be. That is what
enabled me to calculate so infallibly. You see
I speak my thoughts quite unashamed. Paris
makes one so frightfully immodest."
"I'm glad, then, I didn't take it into my
head to apply the same method in my search
for you. Not only would it have upset your
mathematics, but, having no particular landmark,
I might have wandered on forever.
All the same, I have kept my eyes open. In
fact, I was hoping to see you yesterday at vernissage."
"Were you there?" she exclaimed.
"What a silly question!" she added immediately,
laughing. "What I meant to say was
I was there. But, of course, it was quite impossible
to find any one in such a crowd."[73]
Paul noticed with pleasure that the conversation
on both sides assumed the fact of a positive
rendezvous between them. Miss Brooke
went on to chatter about the vernissage.
"I see this morning's Herald puts us
down as a low lot. Its reporter must be very
exigeant. In spite of our presence he insists
the models gave the ton to the assembly."
"Were there many models present?"
asked Paul. "I don't remember seeing any."
"There were quite enough of them to be
noticeable. Perhaps you thought they were
all countesses."
"I did have some such idea," he admitted.
"I didn't know models dressed like countesses."
"They do when their artists take them to
vernissage. Which affords food for reflection."
Paul felt slightly embarrassed and did not
answer.[74]
"And now," resumed Miss Brooke, contemplating
her cœur à la crême, "if I may
venture to intrude on your reflections, will you
please pass me the sugar?"
"Is it long since you returned?" he inquired
soon. "I was going to ask you before,
only the cervelle puzzle arose and somehow
I forgot."
"Just three weeks," she replied. "Poppa
had his bigger salary, and as it was getting
tedious seeing couples married I made haste to
come over again. You can't imagine how
impatient I was to get back in time for vernissage.
It gives such a fillip to your ambitions
to see crowds round your friends' pictures,
and to read about them in the papers; it
makes you realise your own powers, and sets
you wondering why you hadn't dared to
send something in. When you are tired of
lamenting your folly you begin to admire
your modesty, and of course you remember[75]
that modesty is the mark of true
genius."
"And you had all those thoughts?"
"Oh, no! They are the thoughts I should
have had if I hadn't been busy admiring the
dresses. The pictures must wait—I shall be
going again to see those, perhaps two or
three times. Most students do. One is supposed
to learn from them, but in practice one
only criticises. The boys say everything is
rotten. We girls pretend to agree with them,
only, of course, it wouldn't be proper to express
our opinion as violently as that. Do
you dine here as well?"
"I dine as the whim takes me. You see I
haven't yet acquired a habit for evening wear.
Not every Bohemian can make that boast."
Miss Brooke laughed. "Bohemians
mostly acquire bad habits for evening wear.
But I'm going to cut Bohemianism altogether
so far as my meals are concerned, and settle[76]
down in a pension. Two or three of the girls
live there, and they report well of it. I also
made friends while crossing with a girl who
was being consigned there."
He asked whether she had had a good
crossing, and whether she were a good sailor.
Miss Brooke replied that the weather had been
perfect the whole way and she had enjoyed
herself, and she proceeded to entertain him by
relating incidents of the passage. Meanwhile
the little restaurant had filled, and was nearly
empty again. They rose at last and settled
their additions. Paul then noticed that Miss
Brooke had her painting materials with her,
and insisted on carrying them so far as her
school. They stepped out into the sunshine,
and became aware how fine a day it was.
"The afternoon almost tempts me to cut
the Beaux Arts," said Paul.
"By the way, how are you getting on
there?" asked Miss Brooke.[77]
He was only too eager to tell her of his
progress, and to discuss his chances of a
medal. He also gave her an account of the
new friends he had made—he liked the American
"boys" very much, was indebted to
them for endless kindnesses.
"Why didn't you look up Charlie?" she
asked suddenly.
"How could I?" he asked, annoyed at the
mention of the man's name, reminding him,
as it did, of the apparent and inexplicable
intimacy between the two, and also telling
him they must already have seen each
other.
"You could easily have found him if you
had inquired among the boys. He lives in his
studio and he has scarcely left it the whole
time I've been away. By the way, you remember
Katharine, don't you? She's married
again. To her editor this time. This is my
school."[78]
They came to a standstill and faced each
other to say "good-bye."
"I scarcely feel like working this afternoon,"
observed Miss Brooke. "My laziness
really overpowers my ambition. Did you not
say something before, Mr. Middleton, about
your being tempted to cut the Beaux Arts?
Do be nice and yield to that temptation. I
want to give way to mine so badly, but being
a woman I daren't do anything unless
somebody else is doing it at the same
time."
Paul's fibres of resistance did not relax
gradually; they collapsed all at once.
"Well," he laughed. "I've been so good
all along, I think I've earned the right to play
truant for once."
"Mr. Middleton! That's bringing morality
into it again, and I wanted to indulge in undiluted
wickedness. You have to carry my
box as I'm sufficiently occupied in holding up[79]
my skirts. I'll give you some tea afterwards
as a reward."
They strolled slowly in the sunshine, making
for the river and crossing by the Pont des
Arts; and passed through the Jardins des
Tuileries, where the freshness of the greens,
and the playing fountains, and the leafy trees,
and the pretty children, and the odour of lilac
proclaimed the spring. They sauntered across
the Place de la Concorde and into the shady
avenues of the Champs Elysées, where huge
spots of sunlight freckled the ground; talking
the while of the life of the city, of the foreign
elements, of the Old and New Salons. Miss
Brooke explained how her own day was
spent. Seven o'clock in the morning found
her punctually at school, and she worked two
hours before taking her café au lait, afterwards
continuing till midday. In the afternoon
she usually copied and studied at the
Louvre or Luxembourg. Such had been the[80]
routine of her work before, and she had had
no difficulty in falling into it again. She
could not hope to exhibit even next year, as
she could neither afford a studio nor the expense
of models. At the present she was living
with some friends at their appartement in
the Avenue de Wagram. After their departure
at the end of May she would enter into
the pension, which was within a stone's
throw of her school.
Paul, eagerly listening to all these details,
was only conscious in a far-off way of the
eternal roll of smart carriages in the roadway,
or of the multitude of children playing under
the trees in charge of bonnes, whilst the mammas
sat about on chairs, chatting, or with
books or needlework. Onward the pair
strolled past the Arc de Triomphe and down
the great Avenue into the Bois de Boulogne,
only stopping to rest by the laughing lake.
Here the appeal of the water and the moored[81]
boats soon became irresistible. They fleeted
the remainder of the afternoon ideally, till
Miss Brooke announced it was time to repair
to the Avenue de Wagram. Paul was
afraid of her friends—he was scarcely presentable.
"Be calm, my friend," she reassured
him. "We shall have a nice little tea all
to ourselves. The others have gone to
Versailles and are only coming back in
time to dine. We dine chez nous, as we
have a bonne who cooks. Of course I
can't be in to déjeuner, as the distance is
too great from my school. You must come
one evening and I'll present you."
He thanked her for the suggestion, glad
to welcome every arrangement that promised
in any way to throw their lives together,
for he had been not a little afraid he might
not after all have the opportunity of seeing
very much of her.[82]
As Miss Brooke made the tea in
the pretty drawing room of the cosy flat,
Paul began to realise with surprise how
much progress their friendship had made
in that one day. His dream had turned
out true! He was so happy that the consciousness
of all but the moment faded
from him. London, his mother, Celia,
and even chess were for the time absolutely
non-existent. "Charlie," too, was
forgotten, as the obnoxious name had
not again dropped from Miss Brooke's
lips.
He took his leave at last, filled with joy
by Miss Brooke's promise to run in on the
morrow to déjeuner at the same little restaurant.
But as he turned from the broad
stairway into the hall, he almost collided
in his pre-occupation with a tall well-dressed
man. Both murmured "Pardon!"
and pursued their ways. Paul had seen[83]
the other's face, but he had taken several
steps forward before the features sank
into his brain, and he realised with a
great shock they were those of "Charlie."
[84]
However, Miss Brooke said nothing to
him about Charlie in the days that followed,
though he saw her often. Without it being
specially mentioned again, it was somehow
understood they were, for the present, to
meet at mid-day at the little restaurant, and,
moreover, she allowed him to take her several
times to the two Salons. He might
easily have dragged in references to Pemberton,
but he felt it would not be right
to do so for the mere purpose of discovering
what it would have been an impertinence
to demand outright.
And the more his camaraderie with Miss
Brooke became an established fact, the more[85]
did this question of Charlie disturb him.
He had discovered by this time that a
harmless friendship between a man and a
girl was by no means unusual among the
students and was not necessarily assumed
to imply matrimonial intentions. He knew,
moreover, that such friendships grew rapidly
on this soil where the English-speaking students
gravitated together during the years
of their voluntary exile. But, if this thought
pacified him as to Miss Brooke and Charlie,
the very pacification carried with it a sting.
For it led to the further tormenting suspicion
that Miss Brooke did not take the
relationship between her and himself as
seriously as he would have liked her to.
Her conduct and bearing towards him were
all he could wish, yet he seemed to feel
behind them a stern limit to the intimacy,
a barrier, as it were, that might bear on
its face: "I am put here by way of giving[86]
you a reminder you are not to make
any mistakes as to the extent of your
rights over this property."
Sometimes, indeed, in envisaging the
position, he came to the conclusion that
this was entirely due to his own imagination
and that he might safely ask her to
share his life. But at that point uncertainty
would rise again, warning him that to
make any such impulsive proposition just
then might be to jeopardise the future of
his romance. The remembrance of the distress
caused him by his effort to determine
the precise degree of Celia's claim on
him by reason of his having engaged her
for five dances in the same evening intruded
in grotesque contrast now that he
was endeavouring to determine the precise
degree of his claim on Miss Brooke.
Despite these prickings, and despite
Charlie, sweetness predominated in his life.[87]
He felt untrammelled and unwatched over,
recalling with a shudder the old strands that
had tethered him. Though he wrote regularly
to his mother, whom he had seen twice
last autumn, on her way southward and on
her return, all reference to Miss Brooke was
excluded from his letters. He would not
discuss his relation to her with anybody
else, foreseeing that would only lead to a
deal of useless and perhaps endless talk.
After Miss Brooke had moved to the pension,
where she had arranged to take all
her meals, he no longer saw her every
day. But it was understood he could take
his chance of finding her at home whenever
he chose to call in the evenings.
She generally received him in her little
oblong sitting-room on the second floor,
that opened out on a pleasant balcony,
overlooking the street. He soon grew to
love this room, to the decorations of which[88]
she had added a huge Japanese umbrella,
which hung from the ceiling, and two Japanese
lights, and a piece of Oriental tapestry,
besides her personal nicknacks. Paul's usual
lounging-place, whilst Miss Brooke gave him
his after-dinner coffee, was an old cretonne-covered
ottoman, on which a broken spring
made a curious hump, and over his head
were suspended some book-shelves. Now
and again he would find other callers, of
both sexes, for Miss Brooke was "at
home" once a week to all her friends.
Of course, Paul did not abuse his privilege,
but firmly restricted the number of his visits.
Occasionally, too, he had the happiness of
taking her to dine at some one or other
of the great cafés on the Grands Boulevards,
and they would stroll back together
along the river bank, enchanted by the
wonderful nocturnes. On Sunday sometimes,
they would make an excursion beyond[89]
the fortifications to some rural spot,
she taking her paint-box and sketching
lazily whilst they talked; and if, on rare
afternoons, he left his work, and looked in
at the Luxembourg to find her deftly plying
her brush in her big blue coarse linen
apron, with its capacious pockets, she
seemed by no means displeased.
Every legitimate topic was talked over
between them. He had long since exhausted
the theme of his own life, that
is, he had told it so far as he cared to
tell it. Celia, for one thing, did not appear
in it, and there were one or two little matters
he was especially careful to suppress.
He felt vaguely saint-like, when, in the
course of this judicious selection from his
biography, he arrived at his slumming experiences,
and hinted at his charities, which
were being continued during his absence.
Miss Brooke repaid the confidence in kind,[90]
enabling him, by her various reminiscences,
to reconstruct a fairly continuous account of
her existence, which, it never struck him,
might also be selected.
They drifted, too, into the realm of ideas,
exchanging their notions on—among other
things—love and platonic friendship. They
discussed the last-mentioned phenomenon in
great detail, Paul, aflame with self-consciousness,
but quite unable to pierce beneath the
sphinx-like demeanour with which Miss
Brooke made her impartial and freezingly
impersonal statements. From ideas they
passed on to the consideration of conduct
and how it should be determined under
divers subtle conditions.
"Yes, but don't you really think that
one ought to listen to such an appeal
if. . . . ," she would gravely interpose
with her sweet voice as her brush made
sensuous strokes on the canvas. And Paul[91]
became more and more impressed with the
nobility of her soul, and strove likewise—as
was but natural in the circumstances—to
impress her with the nobility of his. He
usually felt ethically perfect after such conversations,
and, had the occasion immediately
arisen, it would have found him equal
to acting along the lines of the "ought"
laid down by Miss Brooke. He imagined
that he certainly was receiving endless
benefit from this threshing out of things
with a quick and sympathetic personality.
So ran by a couple of months, "Charlie"
continuing to be the chief cause of disturbance
in Paul's existence. The two men had
by now met several times at Miss Brooke's,
had saluted civilly, but had little to say to
each other. Paul felt sure his hatred was
returned, and neither showed the least disposition
to become better acquainted. Neither
asked the other to dine or drink, or play[92]
billiards, or even to walk with him, and if
rarely they passed in the street a nod was
all they exchanged. The lines of their lives
occasionally met in a point, but never ran
together.
The enmity between them only became
irksome when no others were present, but
never did Miss Brooke herself manifest the
least suspicion of it. Whatever the relation
between Miss Brooke and Pemberton, it
never seemed to interfere in practice with
the relation between Miss Brooke and himself.
She alluded to "Charlie" in her talk
much more freely than heretofore, but always
apropos, always impersonally, just as
she might casually mention Katharine, who
was so happy now. Charlie had such and
such a habit, such and such a way of looking
at things, such and such ideas of art.
But Paul's jealousy grew till he became
well-nigh intolerable to himself. It made him[93]
resort to underhand watchings, from the mere
thought of which, in saner moments, he
shrank with shame and remorse. But he had
thus ascertained that Charlie was, if anything,
a more frequent visitor than himself, and had
less scruples in the matter of standing on ceremony.
[94]
One night Paul was at the Opera when he
caught sight of Miss Brooke and Pemberton
with her. His evening was spoilt and he left
at once. He felt both angry and hurt, for he
had seen her for a few minutes in the afternoon,
and she had said nothing about her
plans for the evening beyond warning him it
was highly probable she might not be at
home.
The climax had come. He was determined
that things should not continue as they
were. If Miss Brooke simply regarded their
connection as a mere students' companionship,
agreeable to both parties but strictly temporary,
then he must end it immediately. Miss[95]
Brooke must at once be made aware of what
this friendship meant to him. What he had
so far deemed inexpedient seemed to him
the only expediency—to stake all on one
coup.
In the stress of the crisis the prejudices
that were his by inheritance and teaching,
and that his new life had caused to slumber,
asserted themselves again, crying aloud
against these friendships. Miss Brooke ought
never to have expected him to be proof
against that sort of thing, of which he had
never had experience. Pemberton might be
able and content to flutter round without hurt,
but he himself had been a lost man from the
beginning.
It soothed him to map out the future as he
wished it to be, and all seemed so natural and
reasonable that, if she cared for him in the
least, she could not but admit his views on
every point. He felt himself filled with an[96]
infinite longing, an infinite tenderness. He
would surround her with his love so that
escape from it should be impossible. It should
permeate every fibre of her being, and she
should in the end come to him and give up
everything to fulfil the duties of a wife, presiding
over his household, absorbing herself in
his career, and giving all her thought to the
unity their two lives would constitute. Of
course, she could paint in such time as was
left to her, and any glory she might achieve
would redound to the credit of his name.
Still when a woman had once become a wife,
he argued, her ambition generally faded.
Wifehood was absorbing. Greater glory than
that of being a perfect wife there could
not be.
A few days later, when his emotion had
somewhat calmed down, and he could trust
himself sufficiently to see her, he called at the
pension, but, as had happened occasionally[97]
from the beginning, he did not find her at
home. So the next morning he sent her a
great heterogeneous mass of flowers with the
half-jesting, half-reproachful hope they might
meet with better fortune than he. Whereupon
he immediately received a letter explaining
she had passed the previous evening with
some very nice people in the Avenue Kléber,
and announcing her intention of taking him
there on the morrow. Would he dine early
and call for her? She thanked him for the
flowers in a postscript, saying they had transformed
her room into a veritable bower.
At the time appointed he climbed the well-known
two flights of stairs and the bonne
showed him into the little room, saying mademoiselle
would join him "in a little minute."
Several big minutes passed, and then the
door-hanging was pushed aside and Miss
Brooke stood smiling at him. She had always
appealed to his æsthetic side, giving him the[98]
sense of contemplating an exquisite piece of
art-work; but the particular impression he
had to-night differed from all previous ones.
Her figure seemed slenderer in its black net
evening dress, covered with bead-work that
glistened with a wonderful shading of green
into blue and blue into green. Above the turquoise-blue
velvet trimming of the bodice, her
long neck made a dazzling whiteness, and her
face looked pink and babyish, whilst her curls
lay about with just a shade more severity than
usual. She wore a necklace of turquoises set
in antique gold, and in her hair was a big gold
comb inset with the same stones, irregularly
cut. The note of colour thus given made her
blue eyes appear like two large jewels amid
the constellation. Paul told himself he had
never realised before how beautiful those eyes
were. The lightly-parted lips intensified the
babyishness, so that she ceased to be the independent,
self-willed girl, fitting in rather[99]
with that other conception he had lingered on
as the ideal she might develop into as his wife—a
woman clinging to her husband and glad
of his strength.
He was sure he saw her now as she really
was. The conditions of her life were alone to
blame for forcing on her the necessity of a
career. Woman's true sphere was the home.
An outside existence subjected to hardening
influences a delicate soul whose very nature
was to thirst for tender nurture and love.
Such had always been his mother's conviction;
such was his fervent belief. The association
of Miss Brooke with money-earning
seemed an ugly blot on the universe.
There seemed, too, a tenderer, more intimate
quality in her voice, and a sort of clinging
in her touch as she went down the
stairway with her hand on his arm. That forbidding
barrier of which he had always been
conscious had vanished![100]
"It's the McCook's last 'At-Home,'" she
explained, as the voiture began to move.
"They are such nice people—I'm sure you'll
like them. Dora's an old college chum of
mine, and she's asked me to stay with her to-night.
Dora and I chat such a deal when we
get together, and we always enjoy sitting up
nice and quiet by ourselves after everybody
else has gone. I told her you would
escort me home, but she seemed quite
shocked at the idea. As if you haven't escorted
me back from the theatre! Dora has
become quite conventional since her marriage.
She used to argue with her mother and do
pretty well as she liked not so very long ago.
Now I believe her mother shocks her sometimes.
She's leaving with her husband in a
few days for Perros-Guirec, and they're going
to take me with them."
Her words rang with a childlike joy. He
asked where Perros-Guirec was in a voice that[101]
was somewhat desolate at the prospect of losing
her.
"It's in Brittany—a whole day's journey
from Paris. I was there two years ago, and
sketched most of the time. Everybody is
thinking of leaving now, the heat will soon be
getting unbearable. The Grand Prix has been
run, the Battle of Flowers has been fought,
and the Allée de Longchamps is deserted. All
the smart people are in villégiature. How
nice is the evening after the sultry day!"
They were passing through the Boulevard
St. Germain. Miss Brooke was sitting just
close enough to Paul for them to touch with
the swaying of the carriage. He felt singularly
happy. The hushed sounds of the city
over which the dusk hung mystic came to
him like a soft sustained tone of music; its
lights gleamed in upon them with magic rays.
He was conscious of the great dark masses of
palaces, of shadowy pedestrians moving noiselessly[102]
on the side-paths. No fever in the air
now, only a far-reaching calm.
"The night makes one almost sorry to
leave Paris," resumed Miss Brooke. Her voice
made the harmonies sweeter, blending them
all into one perfect harmony.
"But the breezes, and the woods, and the
rye-fields, and the farm-houses with their delicious
old oak presses, and the kind-hearted
people, and the quaint children who love to
watch you sketch and see you squeeze the
paint out of the tubes—the memory of all
these things draws you back to them. I long
for Brittany almost as much as I once longed
to leave everything and everybody and be just
myself—and by myself. It seems so long ago
now."
She had almost unconsciously moved
closer to him now.
"Won't you tell me when that was—Lisa?"[103]
It was the first time he had dared to call
her by this name. In his longing to utter it in
articulate speech it had rushed to the tip of his
tongue.
"It was three years ago—before I came
here. Every place had associations that hurt
me. I wanted to get away—to work, work,
work. I seemed to hate everybody. So I
came here, and for months I thought I was as
hard as a stone. Then one day I found myself
angry with a girl—a fellow-student—and I
was quite surprised to find I could feel at all.
And then I was suddenly glad I was a human
being again."
Her voice melted away into the vast
murmur of the soft-twinkling city. Beyond
the fact that he was selfishly glad she had
had trouble—it afforded him the exquisite
pleasure of sympathy—there was no active
thought in him now, no estimation of the
position. His soul alone dominated; it had[104]
been moved to responsiveness and it now
wrought out its mood, subtly surrounding
her, he felt, with its comfort.
They crossed the mysterious, glistening
river, and came upon the myriad flame-points
of the Place de la Concorde. They
turned into the Champs Elysées betwixt
woods enchanted by the sorcerer Night;
catching glimpses of palaces of light amid
the trees whence melody came floating,
mingled with the incense of the summer.
"Won't you tell me, Lisa—that is, if
you think you can trust me."
It was sweet to exercise the privilege of
calling her "Lisa." He felt it was his for
always now.
"I know I can trust you, Paul. Would
you really care to hear? Of course you
would," she continued quickly, giving him
no time to reply. "What a silly question
for me to ask! Still there is little to tell![105]
I loved a man. We were to be married.
His mind was poisoned against me by an
enemy. He was harsh and unjust. A few
words sum all up. He is married to another.
A commonplace chapter, is it not?
But to have lived through it—to have lived
through it!"
He grew dazed and white. "To have
lived through it!" Those simple words
seemed to his comprehending mood athrob
with the sobbing of great grief.
"But you do not love him now?" he
breathed.
"No, no! All is over now. But I
brooded and brooded and thought—the experience
made me a woman. Life is a serious
thing to me now. I feel better and
stronger for what I have suffered. But the
memory remains."
"You have nothing to reproach yourself
with, Lisa. Surely there are happier memories[106]
in store for you. It is for you but to
shape the future."
He longed for her impulsive "How?"
and had his answer ready. It seemed a
strange thing, but this confession of a past
love, this telling of a great sorrow in her
life, had wrought a spell upon him. His
eyes were full of tears. In that moment
his love for her seemed to have increased
a thousandfold. The surprise with which
the revelation had overwhelmed him was
lost in the rush of pity. She had suffered,
and by his love he would make everything
up to her.
But now there came a sudden change,
slight in its outward manifestation, but felt
by him like a chill blast, for his soul vibrated
to hers, registering every subtle
shade of her mood. She did not speak
immediately, and he knew that moment of
silence was fatal.[107]
They had passed the round point of the
Champs Elysées, and the woods and gardens
had ended. Only the giant hôtels
rose on either hand. There seemed more
carriages darting about now, a greater
movement of life, a general sense of disenchantment
in the air, of an awakening
from a dream to the clattering reality of
things. Paul realised that the spell was
broken.
Miss Brooke had turned her head for a
moment to look through the window.
"We shall be there in two or three
minutes now," she said, as a sort of natural
outcome of her ascertaining their exact
whereabouts. "I am afraid I must
rather have depressed you. It is scarcely
courteous to our hostess for us to arrive
in so gloomy a mood."
She gave a little laugh which set his
every nerve a-tingle, so certainly did its[108]
ring lack the appealing quality that had
brought him so close to her. It seemed
to thrust him back abruptly and brutally.
"Tell me, Paul, haven't you ever had
any love affairs?" she went on to ask, and
there was a suspicion of banter in her tone.
"I've told you all about my tragedy, now
tell me about yours or all yours. I know
we've told each other all our lives before,
but of course we both bowdlerized. The
most interesting parts have yet to be
told."
As she had asked him a direct question
he felt constrained to answer it. He found
himself considering whether his relation to
Celia need count as a love affair, but he
was so convinced he had never been in
love with her at all that he decided he
could leave her out without doing violence
to his conscience. Altogether there had been
in his life two very minor and foolish amourettes[109]
that might have became entanglements;
one with a barmaid when he was
in the lawyer's office, some of the clerks
having persuaded him the girl "was gone
on him," the other with a simple maiden of
sixteen, the daughter of a market gardener,
which idyll had proceeded at his father's
country seat. Paul told the latter—it was
a boyish passion that had come to nothing
and stood for nothing in his life; the former
he was ashamed of. "I proposed to her
and gave her a mortal fright. She was so
scared she ran away. We were both shamefaced
when we met again, and my spurt of
pluck was at an end. I dared not say another
word to her, and somehow we drifted
out of being sweethearts. I was barely nineteen
at the time."
Miss Brooke laughed again heartily, but
Paul only felt the gloomier.
"Tell me some more, please. You put[110]
me into quite a cheerful humour. What
was your next love affair?"
She had resumed her old militant badinage.
"There is nothing more in my biography
that is likely to entertain you," he answered
evasively.
"Is it so bad as that, Paul? I think you
might tell me all the same. I'm not easily
shocked."
"You mistake me. I have told you all,"
he replied, driven to the lie direct.
"Come, come, Mr. Paul. In a woman
one might expect such a want of candour.
But suppose I tell you my other affairs—will
that encourage you to tell me yours? Is it
a bargain?"
"Your other affairs?" he repeated.
"Did you imagine I've had only one in
my life? That's paying me a very poor
compliment. This is our destination."
"Why do you tease me, Lisa?" he[111]
asked, as they descended. He was relieved
that the drive had come to an end. It
had been a trying time for him. He wondered
what it was all coming to? Just
when the critical moment had come she
had practically inhibited him from speaking.
She was a strange, baffling girl, and he was
helpless in her hands.
"I'm not teasing you, I simply want to
finish my confessions. You must dance
three dances with me, and talk to me a
lot after. Perhaps I shall succeed in softening
you and then you'll be more tractable.
We dance till midnight. After that we sup
and converse till dawn. It seems there are
special complications and permissions for
dancing and music in the small hours, as one's
neighbours above and below are apt to want
to sleep just then. Dora shirked the bother,
especially as her French is so weak and
her husband's worse."[112]
They went up the stairway and were
warmly welcomed by Mrs. McCook. It
was a pleasant gathering of nice-looking
men and pretty girls, but Paul was only
half alive to it. To him it was scarcely
more than a mere background for the further
development of his drama. So far he
took these further love-affairs of Miss Brooke
as the purest make-believe, but all the same
he was curiously uneasy and anxious to
hear what she had in mind to tell him.
When he could talk to her again, he
could discover no trace in her manner of
her having lived through with him a supreme
emotional moment. The softness
that had given him a glimpse of infinite
love, and which he had perhaps hoped
might reveal itself again, was absent; in its
place the old niceness and the frank friendliness
of comradeship, and with them the
old warning to him to stand back. She[113]
proceeded to give him the promised account
of her various lovers in a light, mocking
mood.
"I began very early, much earlier than
your simple country maiden. My memories
of childhood are rather hazy, but I should
say I must have had a lover before I was
out of my cradle. But I was thirteen before
my heart was really moved. Since
then I have been in love with so many
men that I really can't remember half of
them. However, I'll try and pick out those
that affected me most seriously at the time.
The first one was really a very nice schoolboy.
His idea of love-making was to feed me
incessantly with candy, which he did for a
whole year till I fell a victim to the charms
of another boy. The two fought. Both
emerged from the combat with black eyes,
which rather spoilt their beauty, and therefore
killed my interest in them. It required[114]
quite an heroic effort, though, to refuse
their offerings."
"And was this method of love-making
as satisfying to them as it was to you?"
asked Paul, beginning to be confirmed in
his supposition that Miss Brooke was joking.
"Oh, we used to have clandestine meetings
and we used to kiss, of course. That
made me rather tired of them. They wanted
to be kissing the whole time."
Paul had a momentary vertigo, though he
professed by his manner to be listening in the
same spirit as Miss Brooke narrated.
"The first one was always a nice boy even
when he grew up and was always ready to
fall in love with me again. But one fine day
he got engaged, wrote to tell me about it, and
asked me to congratulate him. He married.
That finishes with him.
"The next interesting one was a college[115]
man. I was about sixteen then and at the
height of my musical ambition. He was
musical, too, in fact quite an enthusiast. He
used to pilot me about to concerts and send
me tickets for the opera. Besides I was struggling
then with Latin, Greek, and Conic Sections,
and he used to help me polish off things—for
selfish reasons, of course."
"And used you to kiss this time as well?"
he asked, no longer questioning that he was
hearing her personal history.
"Only at very sentimental moments," she
replied, apparently overlooking the mockery
in his voice. "I was older and a greater expert
in emotions. One's first experiments are
necessarily crude. But, to proceed, my cavalier
lost his head one day and wanted me to
marry him at once, which was rather absurd.
So I had to give him his congé and accept the
attentions of a less violent lover. I had always
a reserve to draw upon, but so long as a man[116]
behaved nicely and didn't get altogether unreasonable,
I let it accumulate. My musical
friend, however, gave me some trouble. We
had several stormy interviews, and at last I had
positively to refuse to see him. One fine day
he, too, got engaged and wrote to me asking
me to congratulate him. I know he was divorced
some time since, but I've completely
lost sight of him."
At this moment Miss Brooke was led away
to dance, but was able to join him again before
very long.
"The next——" were her first words, in
a mock-solemn, long-drawn-out tone, as she
took his arm and then she broke into laughter.
"The next was a tall Southerner with nice
manners, a soft voice, and a pretty way of
calling me 'ma'am.' He, too, was musical—naturally,
I preferred musical lovers then. The
Colonel, as everybody called him, literally
worshipped me, but he was as poor as a[117]
church mouse, and I used to think myself very
noble to be satisfied to get stuck with him in
back seats at concert-halls. He went back
South after graduating, swearing he'd never
forget me; but, as soon as he'd made his fortune,
he was coming back to marry me. I
thought that if the illusion would help him to
make his fortune, he might as well keep it.
In any case I should have given him cause to
be grateful to me. He wrote to me half-a-dozen
times, then there was a break of some
months; and, when I had almost forgotten
him, one fine day I got a letter from him."
"Announcing his engagement and asking
you to congratulate him," said Paul, with bitterness.
"Yes. I think you may take that for
granted. It is what they all do. Is it any use
my telling you more? I'm beginning to think
the recital is getting monotonous. And then
there are some coming along and I can't remember[118]
the exact order, which came before
which."
She seemed to hurry over her last words as
though impatient to be done, and wearied and
bored by the memory of all these dallyings
with sentiment. The mocking merriment appeared
also to have died out of her face and
voice. She gazed idly at the dancers who, in
the restricted space, almost constantly brushed
up against them as they stood pressed close to
the wall. Paul wondered if he were looking
haggard. The air of careless merriment he
had at first forced himself to assume had given
way, as he listened, to a sort of nervous
apathy. The one great passion of hers she
had confided to him had drawn him closer to
her by its intrinsic dignity. It had appealed
to his finer nature, stirring it to its very
depths. But these later revelations of hers revolted
him by their very pettiness. What had
her parents been at that such a girl had been[119]
allowed to run wild in that fashion? It was
monstrous she had not been supervised and
prevented from stooping to these foolish and
frivolous relations with foolish and frivolous
men—men she had allowed to kiss her lips!
The pang that tore him at the image revealed
to him how powerless he was. He
glanced at her again as she stood at his side.
There was a half-sad expression now on her
face, which had resumed all its babyishness
again. The lock of hair near her ear lay about
in a dainty twist. Her lips showed innocent
and red. To kiss them he would lay down
his life!
He was shaken; he wanted to sob aloud.
But he was at a festive gathering. Round,
round, up and down the room went the
dancers, shuffling forward with their rapid
glide, the men bending their long, supple
bodies, the flowing curves of the women's
dresses imparting a greater grace to the movement.[120]
The whole scene was dreamy to him.
His inner thought was the only reality.
Why had she told him, why had she told
him? he moaned within himself. Then as he
saw a new softness appear in her face, a
gleam of comfort came to him. Perhaps it
had been from motives of conscience and she
really repented all; perhaps, too, she had
thought it right to tell him everything before
allowing him to ask her to be his.
He would overlook all those episodes if
only she would be his. If even they had been
more serious, if even she had been a dishonoured
woman, he knew now he would have
had no strength not to condone. If any one
had told him a year ago that he—Paul—would
one day be both willing and eager to make
such concessions as regards the past of a
woman he contemplated making his wife, he
would have denied the statement indignantly
as a libel on himself.[121]
She turned suddenly, and their looks met.
Her face lighted up with a smile. "Come,
Paul, it's your turn now?"
"My turn!" he echoed, her words for
the moment startlingly sounding like an invitation
to take his place in the procession of
her lovers.
"Yes," she said. "Who was your
sweetheart after the gardener's daughter?"
He denied any further love, though hating
to tell the lie. But Miss Brooke persisted,
entreating, provoking, urging, coaxing, pouting;
subtly transforming herself into the
child with its lovable moods and movements;
enslaving him, rendering him powerless
at her will, with this one strange
exception—he could be strong enough to
withhold from her the episode he was
ashamed of.
"Paul, Paul," she said sternly. "Tell
the truth. Are you not in love now?"[122]
He scarcely dared look at her. He was
conscious of that lock again and of another
on her forehead.
"Silence betrays. Did you come to Paris
for the sake of your architecture or to be
near me?"
"To be near you, Lisa," he breathed.
[123]
Although the thought of Lisa's old flirtations
obtruded and pricked occasionally, Paul
went about the next morning in a state of
subdued happiness. A wonderful calm had
come over him, disturbed only at the moments
when he had to thrust from him those
images of other men kissing Lisa's lips.
Those meaningless loves had been long dead,
he argued, and, since she had made the confession
voluntarily at the risk of estranging
his love, it would be unfair to her for him
to dwell upon them now.
At the same time he could never have
conceived the possibility of such a line of
argument on his part in the days before he[124]
had met Miss Brooke. Love had, indeed,
set at naught all the principles he had thought
to abide by—had made him yield his demand
for that absolute soul-virginity he had deemed
the very basis of his choice.
But away with all that now! Her love
for him was, of a surety, the first that had
come into her life since her great sorrow.
As for Pemberton, there had never been the
slightest sentiment between her and him.
No doubt the fellow would now take a suitable
place in the background of their life, and
they would welcome him as an acquaintance.
Why should he bear the man animosity?
He could not do any work that morning,
but strolled hither and thither, getting joyous
impressions from the sun-lit city. Lisa had
not only promised to dine in the evening at
the Café Pousset and afterwards to go with
him to see a melodrama at the Ambigu,
most of the other theatres having closed their[125]
doors, but she had given him permission to
take his holiday at Perros-Guirec during the
whole two months of her stay there, so that he
would be virtually one of the party. The
immediate outlook was, therefore, very agreeable.
He returned to the maison meublée where
his quarters were, immediately after his mid-day
meal, and passed the afternoon packing
away his luggage, which occupation gave
him the pleasurable feeling that his preparations
for the happy time to come were in
full swing. He sang and whistled as he
worked, his overflowing vigour manifesting
itself in the bold ornamental letters with
which he made out the labels for his trunks:
"Middleton, Paris à Perros-Guirec." At
half-past five he began to think of taking
a stroll before dinner, and was on the
point of doing so when the concierge
brought him up a letter with the characteristic[126]
explanation that it had come in the
morning, shortly after monsieur had gone out,
and that he had forgotten about it as monsieur
passed by before.
Paul recognised his mother's writing, and
stayed to read it. At first it did not seem
to contain anything of special importance,
covering much the same ground as many of
its predecessors, and dealing with one or
two business matters. On the third page
came a reproach that he had allowed three
weeks go by without writing.
"I can understand," continued his mother,
"that all those hours of engrossing work
every day must leave you quite fatigued, my
poor child. But surely I am very reasonable
in my demands, and one letter a week is
not such a very heavy tax on you. Are you
sure you are not overworking yourself, dear
Paul? You were always a delicate child,
and you are certainly not strong enough to[127]
go on living in a French hotel, with only
strangers to look after you. Don't you think
you ought to take a long holiday now? I
am going to take Celia to Dieppe—it has
all been decided and arranged to-day. The
poor child has been worried and fretting
and poorly for a long time past, and sadly
needs this entire change of scene. Now
suppose, dear Paul, you come and join us at
Dieppe. You will be near to me, and I
can look after you again, if only for a
couple of months. We shall be starting
the day after to-morrow, and we shall be
staying at the Hôtel de Paris. Write to
me, dear Paul, direct there, or, better still,
come down and surprise us. Celia, I am
sure, will be delighted to see you. I never
understood what happened between you
two exactly. You said 'good-bye' so stiffly
that I made sure you had quarrelled, though
Celia assures me that was not so. She is a[128]
dear, good girl, and I love her as if she
were my own daughter."
Of course he couldn't go. What a bother
to have to refuse! Why had they just fixed
on Dieppe when they might have gone to
Norway or taken a jaunt up to Scotland!
And then, too, confound it! they might even
make a descent upon him at Perros-Guirec,
for he would have to tell his mother that
was the place where he had already arranged
to spend his holiday with friends.
He must discuss the matter with Lisa before
replying to her or telling her of his
intended marriage.
But he had scarcely time to digest the
letter before the man brought him up another
which the postman had just left. This
time the writing was Lisa's. What could
she have to write to him about if it were
not to postpone the evening's engagement?
His nervous fingers tore at the envelope.[129]
"Dear Paul.—Please don't come for me
this evening, and, indeed, you must never
come for me again. In writing this I am
acting the part of a very good friend to
you, and it is as a very good friend I
should like you to remember me, as I shall
always remember you.—Yours sincerely,
So all was over! Behind the simplicity
of the words he perceived a terrible inexorableness.
If only she had signed "Lisa,"
it would not have crushed him so much;
but the "Elizabeth Brooke" was paralyzing.
When his hand was steady enough, he
wrote:—
"Dear Lisa:—Need I say your note has
quite stunned me? Won't you give me a
word of explanation?     Paul."
[130]
The concierge's boy delivered this at Miss
Brooke's pension.
He scarcely knew how he got through
the night. Every now and again he woke
up and tossed about; and when he did
lose consciousness, he had a sense of a
grey infinity in which there was a great
chasm. He wanted to rush to it to close it up,
but was held back by some strange power.
The morning's post brought him Miss
Brooke's reply.
"Dear Paul.—I am glad your letter is
so sensible and to the point. Of course I
owe you an explanation, but I want you
not to insist on it, because I fear it will
hurt you too much. The pain it would
give me I deserve.—Yours,    Lisa."

He found this note infinitely softer than
the first and was encouraged to write again.[131]
"Dear Lisa.—I am not strong enough to
face the punishment unless I know my sin.
The pain of listening to you can be nothing
to the pain of this horrible gap in my
mind. Won't you let me see you—for the
last time? Remember it is only a day
since you told me you loved me. Don't
refuse.    Paul."
To which came the reply by his own
messenger.
"Dear Paul.—Come this evening at eight
and you will find me alone.—Yours,
All day long he nerved himself for the
interview. He would rehearse nothing, anticipate
nothing. When the time came, he
would speak straight from his heart. Perhaps
he might yet move her.
[132]
Miss Brooke received him with the same
cheery frankness as of yore, gave him a
quick hand-shake, and installed him in his
old place on the knobby-springed ottoman
beneath the hanging book-shelves. The
little table was laid, as usual, for after-dinner
coffee, and the small copper kettle
was boiling over a spirit-lamp. She was
the first to speak.
"You were right, Paul. I have been
thinking a good deal, and I have come to
agree with you that we ought to have a
last talk together. I am sensible that I am
a thoroughly unscrupulous person—please
don't contradict me, I mean it in sober[133]
earnest—but I am not without my redeeming
moments, and so it happens I feel I
ought to make my apology to you before
we part. Apology! That is a very weak
word to use after my immoral behaviour
towards you. I mean to talk to you very
openly, in fact, I am going to confess the
whole extent of my misconduct. Only I
want you to believe that to do so will
hurt me if possible even more than you.
I really do want your sympathy very
badly, Paul, although I know I don't deserve
it."
Her beautiful face was grave, and her
voice a shade anxious. In her eyes was
an expression of sincerity that compelled
acceptance.
"I know you will make me understand
everything, Lisa," he said.
"You must withhold your judgment till
I have finished. I am going to be absolutely[134]
candid, though I am not sure whether I
have ever succeeded in telling the truth
about things, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, even to myself. One shrinks
from laying bare the causes and motives
of one's thoughts and conduct, even when
no other eye is looking. But I should feel
myself quite vile now if I concealed the least
thing from you."
"One can over-accentuate the baseness
of one's motives as well as cover it up,"
he suggested.
"It is very kind of you, Paul, to try and
spare me. But please save up your mercy;
I warn you I shall be sadly in need of it
later on. To come to facts now, Paul, I
have tried to victimise you from the beginning.
I have dissembled and told you
lies throughout. I have systematically acted
a part. I have never loved you."
He tried to make some articulation, but[135]
not a muscle moved. He sat as if turned
to stone.
"That first evening we met I knew I
had turned your head, and I could see at
once you were inexperienced with women
as surely as if the fact had been branded
upon you. I had heard somebody point
you out and say you were worth fifteen
thousand pounds a year, and, as afterwards
you yourself told me you were rich, any
doubt I might have had on the point was
removed. My own poverty had just been
painfully brought home to me, for I had
been forced to leave Paris for want of
money at the very moment my ambition
began to look reasonable. I was feeling
particularly bitter about it as there was no
certainty at all of my being able to come
back here. Poppa's savings had all gone
in starting me with a good stock of dresses
and keeping me here two years. He had[136]
hoped to be able to do more for me, but
he could only send me my passage-money.
Fifteen or even ten thousand pounds a year
is a great temptation to a poor girl. Chance
had never yet thrown in my way a really
rich suitor, and there was I, at the moment
of meeting him, almost on the eve of departure,
with very little money in my pocket
and indebted to the kindness of a lady for
her invitation to stay the month in London.
She had taken my room for me as she could
not accommodate me at her own house.
You see how poor I was! I set myself
puzzling in the coolest possible way as to
how I could get you. Instinct as well as
the ease with which I had bewitched you
told me there were romantic possibilities in
you, of which you had scarcely any suspicion
and which might easily be played
upon. And a plan formed at once in my
mind in the ultimate success of which I[137]
had the fullest confidence. To put the idea
into your head that we meet again here in
a year's time was to appeal to your romantic
side. That is why I mentioned the Beaux
Arts to you—your love for architecture made
my game easy. I was now determined that
nothing should stand in the way of my returning
to Paris, that poppa somehow must
raise the necessary money—even if he ran
into debt. Happily he was able to send me
back and to see his way clear to keep me
going as long as I chose to stay."
Miss Brooke paused a moment and poured
out Paul's coffee, which, however, he let stand
untouched.
"Everything turned out just as I had calculated,"
she continued, after taking a sip at
her own. "You had carried me in your mind
the whole time, and you had been waiting for
me and counting on my coming. So far I
was delighted. For a time all went smoothly.[138]
You were mine completely. But then an unforeseen
force began suddenly to act on the position.
My old enthusiasm for my work came
back, and with it my old mad ambitions. Do
you know what first gave me those mad ambitions?
You shall hear in a moment. Anyway,
my old intolerance against anything like
dependence rose up in me. I wanted to make
a great name and a great deal of money, all by
myself. A picture by a great master—we admired
it together at the salon—had just sold
for thirty thousand dollars, and that inflamed
me. No woman painter has yet existed of
absolutely the first rank; one and all have
been influenced, more or less, by a man. I
wanted to be the first woman whose work
should be absolutely great, absolutely original.
I wanted the honour for America, for I am
proud of being an American woman. But you
were on the spot, and I had only to move my
little finger to get you. You were an eternal[139]
temptation. Don't you think I knew you
were jealous of Charlie? He has been in love
with me ever since I first came here; but,
poor devil, he only just manages to get along,
and is only too glad if he's not behindhand
with his studio rent. The reason I allowed
him to hang round so much was partly because
he had become a habit of mine, and
partly to help me not to be tempted to give
you too much of my company.
"I really wanted to fight against the
temptation of your money, but more for my
own sake than yours. In the first place I did
not love you. And in the second, I could
read your nature like a book. Your ideas and
mine would never go together. I wanted a
husband who would be content with such
moments of love as I could spare him out of
my career; to whom I could go for love when
I wanted love; who would be content to live
out his own life and leave me to work out[140]
mine. I do not want to be kept by my husband—rather
than that I should prefer to keep
him. All my rooted independence had sprung
up as by magic the moment I took up my
brush and palette again and looked at the
model. Your notions were far too primitive
for me. You would have allowed me to go
on with my art as a concession—to do credit
to your name, perhaps. You would have
looked upon my pictures as sacred, to be
hung in your house and worshipped by you
before your guests; I should have wanted to
sell them, to convert them into dollars.
"Do you wonder now I was strong
enough to hesitate? I was only too glad
when Dora said she was going to carry me off
to Perros-Guirec. It would take me away
from you and—temptation. Then you sent
me those flowers. I was touched. Not by
the flowers, but by the train of thought they
set going. The ghost of my conscience came[141]
up, suggesting I should be treating you badly,
seeing 'you had 'em so bad.' And then you
had, say, ten thousand pounds a year! That,
I suppose, had something to do with the rising
of the phantom. So I determined to take you
to Dora's—of course, she replied at once she
would be pleased to welcome you—and I
made up my mind, half to amuse myself, that
I would make you propose in the cab on the
way to her. I could read you through and
through, and knew your every thought. So
far I had kept you at a perceptible distance,
now it pleased me to draw you close to me,
and to see you obey without my uttering a
single word of command. I told you about
my old engagement just then because it gave
me a sensation of daring. I calculated on stirring
the romance and chivalry in you still
more deeply. The experiment was risky—but
it succeeded. You responded like a good
ship to its helm. Then for the first time[142]
since I had known you, Paul, I suffered remorse—real
remorse. Why it came just
then I have never been able to make out,
but all of a sudden I was dreadfully sorry
for you.
"I saw clearly that even if I had loved
you, our lives could never harmonise; that
after the first honeymoon cooings, the conflict
of wills and ideas would inevitably set in, and
we should both be utterly and hopelessly miserable.
But I did not love you, and I felt myself
in a terrible dilemma. You were on the
point of speaking, and the only thing I could
think of to stop you, and to stop you for
always, was to tell you my early flirtations.
I was hoping to play on your prejudices and
set you against me. I was true to myself then;
I was throwing away—how many thousands
a year?
"But I caused you suffering to no purpose,
and, as I realised nothing would make you[143]
desist, the temptation of all those thousands
came upon me again. I argued I was
the stronger personality of the two, and I
should be able to manage you—easily. Curious
how I accentuated the 'easily,' and
twisted my arguments to suit it. There was
little to do—I just pulled the wire and the
puppet worked. You'll forgive me for calling
you a puppet, Paul, but you were one, you
know.
"Perhaps now you will begin to understand
how I felt the next morning. I really
liked you, Paul, and I had done you so great a
wrong from the very moment of our first
meeting. I had not cried for more than three
years, Paul, but I cried then. The situation
was desperate, and there was nothing for it
but to apply a desperate remedy.
"I have not told you all. I have purposely
kept back something to the end. If I had
mingled it with the rest it would have been[144]
lost, and as it is my only claim on your sympathy,
I have kept it for use by itself. It is
unfortunate that even here I have to begin
with the confession of another lie, but I have
already confessed to so many, I am hoping
that one more won't make me sink any lower
in your estimation. Besides, my motive in
telling it was good. I refer to my old engagement
The fact was true, but the details I
gave you were false. I had intended telling
you the truth, but somehow it stuck on my
lips. I felt I ought never to have used so
sacred an experience for such a purpose. I
had to invent a lie as I went on. But I cut it
as short as I could.
"I did love the man as, it seemed to me,
no woman could have loved a man before.
He was almost penniless, but I did not mind
that. I would have married him, and he
would not have interfered with my ambitions.
He would have been content to have me live[145]
away from him whilst I worked according to
my own spirit, and developed the gifts he was
the first to discover in me. For he was a
painter, too; had starved to get a training in
Europe, had starved while getting it. To help
us get a start I was content at first to absorb
myself in his work. That was a fatal mistake.
I can scarcely trace out how it came about—and
to linger on it makes me suffer terribly—but
with the lapse of time I ceased to exist for
him as a creature of flesh and blood. I suddenly
realised that I had become a mere inspiration
to him—it was only the artist in me
he worshipped. All his heart and soul went
into his work—he was no longer a man, but a
mere mind wielding a brush. I can see him
how absorbed before his canvas, tall and thin
with his scholar's stoop—for Nesbit was a
scholar! But it had to end at last. I cried
bitterly for many a night after. I had a letter
from him one fine day——"[146]
"Announcing his engagement and asking
you to congratulate him?" broke from Paul's
lips. His eyes were too dry for tears.
"It is the only letter of his I haven't burnt.
He is famous now, but the first picture he
ever sold went to buy my turquoise necklace
to match the comb I had from my mother.
His example was a noble one—the first picture
I am offered money for shall go to poppa
instead. But he would never take the gift
back, and now I value it as his. It has always
given me great joy to wear it—in fact,
that is my one great joy apart from my
work."
"You still love him! You have loved
him all through!" cried Paul.
Her face softened. "You see I have quite
an extraordinary vein of sentiment in me.
I am not sure whether I am not ashamed
of it."
"Tell me, Lisa—if I may still call you[147]
Lisa—all those flirtations you told me about
were true?"
"What a quaint question! You haven't
drunk your coffee." He gulped down the
cold contents of the tiny cup at one draught,
for his mouth was parched.
"They all happened just as I told you,
and I haven't told you a quarter."
"And do you mind my asking you another
quaint question? Have you and Charlie
ever kissed?"
"I have always liked to have nice men
kiss me. It is a mania with me, and I
shall go on doing so till the end of the
chapter."
"All the same, Lisa, I love you still. Is
there no hope for me? I have no prejudices.
I want you, Lisa, just as you are.
Your life shall be perfectly free—your career
your own."
"You are good, Paul, and I have played[148]
with you precisely as a cat plays with a
mouse. You will have observed I have a
good deal of the cat in me. Believe me,
I am in earnest when I say I am quite
unworthy of your love——"
"No, Lisa," he began.
"Listen, Paul. I want you to understand
how much I love my lost darling. If he
were to leave his wife and child, now and
come to me and say he loved me, I would
go with him to the end of the earth. No,
no, Paul. My hope is only in my work.
I know I shall realise my ambition. Some
day you will marry a better woman than
I am. And if," she continued, with a
smile, "you care to write and let me
know, be sure I shall congratulate you
right heartily. Now tell me I have your
sympathy, and then let us say good-bye."
"I love you, Lisa. Is that not sufficient[149]
proof of my sympathy? I shall leave Paris
to-night."
"Come, Paul, kiss me! For the first
time and last!"
He brushed her lips so lightly that he
scarce had the consciousness of doing so;
then he staggered from the room.
[150]
He wandered he knew not whither, penetrating
into strange, silent regions his foot
had never trod. At the end of an hour
he found he had taken a long circuit
round, and that he had arrived again at
the hôtel where Lisa lived. He crossed the
narrow street, and, standing in the shadow,
looked up at the window he knew so well.
It stood wide open, and he could see the
white ceiling of the lighted room, with the
huge Japanese umbrella making a glare of
colour against it. In the balcony sat two
figures full in the light that flooded out.
One was Miss Brooke, the other a stalwart
young man in a Norfolk suit he could not[151]
recollect having seen before. A vague sound
of their cheerful talking came down to him.
He turned away with a sigh, and strode
rapidly to his lodging. He lighted his lamp,
and, sinking into a chair, sat looking at his
trunks. The labels with their bold ornamental
lettering—"Middleton, Paris à Perros-Guirec"—stared
him mockingly in the
face. He averted his eyes, instinctively
seeking in his pocket for his mother's letter,
which he had till now forgotten, and
was surprised to find it rolled into a ball.
Smoothing it out, he read it through
again.
"Write to me, dear Paul, direct there,
or, better still, come down and surprise us.
Celia, I am sure, will be delighted to see
you. I never understood what happened
between you two exactly. You said 'good-bye'
so stiffly that I made sure you had
quarrelled, though Celia assures me that it[152]
was not so. She is a dear, good girl,
and I love her as if she were my own
daughter."
And with these words he seemed to read
the inevitableness of his fate. His rebellion
against it was over. He had broken loose
from the maternal leading-strings, but had
made a miserable failure without them.
Now he would help to fix them on him
again.
The millionaire's daughter, the keynote of
whose character had struck him as a charming,
simple frankness, and in pursuit of
whom he had set out, had proved to be
a more complex specimen of womanhood
than he could have imagined to exist, the
very essence of that femininity of which
he had always had an instinctive distrust.
Celia was not brilliant, but she was safe—he
knew her well enough to be sure of
that.[153]
He seized a small brush and inked over
the flamboyant "Perros-Guirec," writing
over the black strip the word "Dieppe"
in the plainest of lettering. Then, finishing
what little packing there remained to be
done, he went out to consult a time-table
at a neighbouring café, where he wrote
and posted a note to his professor, and
another to the massier of his class. He
next hailed a cab at the rank, and the
concierge carried down his trunks. "À la
gare St. Lazare!"
The cocher cracked his whip, and Paul,
lost in thought, was only vaguely conscious
of the streets and boulevards that had become
so dear to him.
"The spirit and method of Kipling's fresh and virile song have taken
the English reading world. . . . When we turn to the larger portion of
'The Seven Seas,' how imaginative it is, how impassioned, how superbly
rhythmic and sonorous! . . . The ring and diction of this verse add new
elements to our song. . . . The true laureate of Greater Britain."—E. C.
Stedman, in the Book Buyer.
"The most original poet who has appeared in his generation. . . . His
is the lustiest voice now lifted in the world, the clearest, the bravest, with
the fewest false notes in it. . . . I do not see why, in reading his book,
we should not put ourselves in the presence of a great poet again, and consent
to put off our mourning for the high ones lately dead."—W. D.
Howells.
"The new poems of Mr. Rudyard Kipling have all the spirit and
swing of their predecessors. Throughout they are instinct with the
qualities which are essentially his, and which have made, and seem likely
to keep, for him his position and wide popularity."—London Times.
"He has the very heart of movement, for the lack of which no metrical
science could atone. He goes far because he can."—London Academy.
"'The Seven Seas' is the most remarkable book of verse that Mr.
Kipling has given us. Here the human sympathy is broader and deeper,
the patriotism heartier and fuller, the intellectual and spiritual insight
keener, the command of the literary vehicle more complete and sure, than
in any previous verse-work by the author. The volume pulses with power—power
often rough and reckless in expression, but invariably conveying
the effect intended. There is scarcely a line which does not testify to the
strong individuality of the writer."—London Globe.
"If a man holding this volume in his hands, with all its extravagance
and its savage realism, is not aware that it is animated through and through
with indubitable genius—then he must be too much the slave of the conventional
and the ordinary to understand that Poetry metamorphoses herself
in many diverse forms, and that its one sovereign and indefeasible
justification is—truth."—London Daily Telegraph.
"'The Seven Seas' is packed with inspiration, with humor, with
pathos, and with the old unequaled insight into the mind of the rank and
file."—London Daily Chronicle.
"Mr. Kipling's 'The Seven Seas' is a distinct advance upon his
characteristic lines. The surpassing strength, the almost violent originality,
the glorious swish and swing of his lines—all are there in increased measure. . . .
The book is a marvel of originality and genius—a brand-new
landmark in the history of English letters."—Chicago Tribune.
"In 'The Seven Seas' are displayed all of Kipling's prodigious gifts. . . .
Whoever reads 'The Seven Seas' will be vexed by the desire to
read it again. The average charm of the gifts alone is irresistible."—Boston
Journal.
In "March Hares" Mr. Frederic has written an original, witty, and
delightful story, which will increase the number of his readers and prove
one of the most successful novels of the season.
"One of the most cheerful novels we have chanced upon for many a
day. It has much of the rapidity and vigor of a smartly written farce, with
a pervading freshness a smartly written farce rarely possesses. . . . A
book decidedly worth reading."—London Saturday Review.
"A striking and original story, . . . effective, pleasing, and very capable."—London
Literary World.
"Crisp and delightful. . . . Fascinating, not so much for what it suggests
as for its manner, and the cleverly outlined people who walk through
its pages."—Chicago Times-Herald.
"An original strain, bright and vivacious, and strong enough in its
foolishness and its unexpected tragedy to prove its sterling worth."—Boston
Herald.
"The author's style is bright and chatty, the dialogue very entertaining,
and the pictures of country-house life pleasing. 'Green Gates' is a
book to enjoy."—Boston Times.
"A study in character. . . . Just as entertaining as though it were the
conventional story of love and marriage. The clever hand of the author of
'The Green Carnation' is easily detected in the caustic wit and pointed
epigram."—Jeannette L. Gilder, in the New York World.
"A drama of biting intensity. A tragedy of inflexible purpose and relentless
result."—Pall Mall Gazette.
"A good story, bright, keen, and dramatic. . . . It is out of the ordinary,
and will give you a new sensation."—New York Herald.