# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2007
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Rudolf Schmid, The Theories of Darwin and Their Relation to Philosophy, Religion, and Morality
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/22150/22150-h/22150-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

THE DARWINIAN THEORIES AND THE THEISTIC VIEW
OF THE WORLD.
A. The Position of Purely Scientific Darwinism in Reference to Theism.
§ 1. Scientific Investigation and Theism. The Idea of Creation.
At the very beginning of our investigation, we have to state that the
  absolute freedom of scientific investigation lies not only in the
  interest of natural science, but just as clearly in the direct interest
  of religion; and that every attempt at limiting the freedom of scientific
  investigation in a pretended religious interest, can only have its cause
  in the fullest misapprehension of that which the religious interest
  requires. For the religious view of the world consists in this: that it
  sees in the universe, with all its inhabitants and processes, the work of
  an almighty Creator and Ruler of the world; and therefore it cannot be
  unimportant to it, whether we also have a knowledge of this work, to a
  certain extent, whether we make use of the means which lead to the
  knowledge of the world, [253]and whether we make progress in the
  knowledge, or not. The religious view of the world sees in every
  correction and enrichment of our scientific knowledge only a correction
  and enrichment of our knowledge of the way and manner of the divine
  creation and action; and every such correction and enrichment acts
  directly as an incitement to religiousness—although, fortunately
  for the universal destination of religion, the degree of our
  religiousness is not dependent upon the degree of our knowledge of
  nature. Therefore, the religious view of the world does not throw any
  barriers in the way of scientific investigation; it does not prescribe
  the route by which the latter is to reach its aim, and it does not forbid
  it any scientific auxiliary means, nor, indeed, any scientific auxiliary
  hypothesis, nor does it, so far as the communication of scientific
  knowledge is concerned, inquire after the religious or the irreligious
  standpoint of those who offer it such knowledge. In all these directions,
  it knows of but one requirement: that of exact and correct presentation;
  in a word, of but one requirement of truth. Real, well-founded,
  and certain results of natural science can never come into antagonism
  with religion; for precisely the same thing which in the language of
  natural science is called natural causal connection, is in that of
  religion called the way and manner of divine action and government. Where
  man has adopted any view, the proving of which, according to its nature,
  belongs to natural science, and natural science should show an error in
  such a view, he must simply give it up and surrender the erroneous
  opinion, that such a view is to form a constituent part of our religious
  perception. Just as decidedly, on the other hand, religion can ask of
  [254]natural science that it should not use
  speculative views of religious character, the proving of which belongs to
  the science of religion, for the purpose of scientific generalizations,
  in case the science of religion should prove that such views are
  antagonistic to the nature and the principles of religion.
Those who, on religious grounds, look with suspicion upon scientific
  investigation, are frequently influenced by two erroneous notions,
  closely related to one another, without regard to the well-grounded
  aversion to the atheistic beauty with which so many scientific works are
  adorned. One of these errors is the notion that any object is remote from
  divine causality in the degree in which it has the cause of its origin in
  the natural connection, and that it would be easier for us to trace the
  origin of an object to the authorship of God, if we could not find any
  natural cause of its origin, than if we had knowledge of such a natural
  cause. The other error is the notion that the idea of "creation" excludes
  the idea of the action of secondary causes.
If the first mentioned opinion were correct, those certainly would be
  right who identify the progress of sciences with the progress of atheism;
  and ignorance would then be the most effective protection of piety. But
  this opinion is in direct conflict with all sound religious and
  scientific reasoning. It is in conflict with sound religious reasoning:
  for the religious view of the world sees in nature itself, with its whole
  association of causes and effects, a work of God; and as certainly as,
  according to the religious view of nature, a thousand years in the sight
  of God are but as yesterday when it is past, just so certainly is an
  object a work of [255]God, whether its origin is due to
  milliards of well-known secondary causes, which all together are
  works of God—as well with reference to the laws which they obey as
  to the materials and forces in which these laws are active—or
  whether, when treating the question as to the immediate cause of its
  existence, we see ourselves led to an agency unknown to us. And
  that opinion is also in conflict with all sound scientific reasoning: for
  the fact that we do not have any knowledge of the immediate cause of a
  phenomenon, is by no means a proof that this immediate cause is the
  direct action of God who does not use any secondary causes; the phenomena
  may just as well have still more material or immaterial secondary causes,
  unknown to us. We will illustrate the error, referred to, by an example
  which will also reveal its relationship to the other error of which we
  shall have to speak immediately. It is certainly no evidence of an
  especially intensive piety, if we build the conviction that God is the
  Creator of man, among other things, on the obscurity in which for us the
  origin of mankind is wrapped. For from this obscurity no other conclusion
  can be drawn than increased proofs of the limitation of our knowledge;
  that piety which traces those phenomena whose natural causes we know,
  just as decidedly to the causality of God, is much more—we shall
  not say, intensive, but correctly guided—than that piety which
  traces back those whose natural causes are hidden to us. And, on the
  other hand, it is also no evidence of especial religious coolness or
  indifference, when we pursue with interest and the desire of success the
  attempts at bringing light into the history of the origin of mankind. He
  who does the latter can, according to his religious or [256]irreligious
  standpoint, just as easily connect his interest with the hope of an
  enrichment of his knowledge of the ways and works of God, as with the
  hope of a confirmation in his atheistic view of the world. The reverence
  with which we stand before the action of God in those works whose
  existence is in a higher degree a mystery to us than the existence of
  others (for in reality everything is a mystery to us), is perhaps a
  little differently modified from the reverence with which we stand before
  the action of God in those of his works in the mode of whose origin we
  are permitted to get a deeper glance; but each is reverence, and we can
  get from both nutriment for our religious nature.
Those who favor the second error—namely, that the idea of
  creation excludes the idea of secondary causes—overlook the facts
  that the idea of the creation of the universe is essentially different
  from the idea of the creation of the single elements of the universe, as,
  for instance, of the earth, of the organisms, of man; that the idea of a
  creation without secondary causes can only be applied to the origin of
  the universe in its elements, forces, and laws, and that the first origin
  of the single elements in the world—as of the single planets,
  organisms, man—not only admits the action of secondary causes, but
  even requires and presupposes the action of conditions. For all single
  species of beings which have originated within the already existing
  world, have also certain elements, even the whole basis and condition of
  their existence, in common with that which was already before in
  existence; the planet has its elements in common with the elements of
  other planets, the organic has the same material substances as the
  inorganic, man has [257]the elements and the organization of his
  body as well as a great part of his psychical activity in common with
  animals. Nothing urges us to suppose—and the analogy of all that we
  know even forbids us to suppose—that with the appearance of a new
  species of beings, the same matter and the same quality of matter which
  the last appearance has in common with the already existing, has each
  time been called anew into existence out of nothing. Only that which in
  the new species is really new, comes into existence anew with its first
  appearance. But we do not even know whether the proximate cause of this
  new does really come into existence for the first time, or whether it was
  not before in existence in a real, perhaps latent, condition, and is now
  set free for the first time. In the one case as in the other, we shall
  call the new, which comes into existence, a new creation. And if man
  thinks that the new only deserves the name of creation, when it occurs
  suddenly and at once, where before only other things were present, like a
  deus ex machina, certainly such an opinion is only a childlike
  conception, which becomes childish as soon as we scientifically reason
  about the process. It cannot be doubtful that religious minds which are
  not accustomed to scientific reasoning, have such a conception; whether
  theologians also favor it, we do not know, although it is possible.
  Certainly those scientists who intend to attack the faith in a living
  Creator and Lord of the world, take it as the wholly natural, even as the
  only possible, conception of a Creator and his creation; and of course it
  is to them a great and cheap pleasure to become victorious knights in
  such a puppet-show view of the conception of creation. But the source
  whence Christians derive their [258]religious knowledge tells them precisely
  the contrary. The Holy Scripture, it is true, sees in the entire universe
  a work of God. But where it describes the creation of the single elements
  of the world, it describes at the same time their creation as the product
  of natural causes, brought about by natural conditions. The reader may
  see, for instance, the words: "And God said, Let the earth bring forth
  grass, the herb yielding seed, etc. And the earth brought forth
  grass and herb," etc. "And God said, Let the earth bring forth the
  living creature." Even the creation of man is thus related: "And the
  Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground." Certainly the
  forming presupposes a matter out of which man is formed. And, on the
  other hand, where the Bible speaks of single beings in the kingdoms long
  before created and perfected, of the individual man who is originated by
  generation and birth, of single plants and animals—in general, of
  single processes and phenomena in the world long before perfected, of
  wind and waves, of rain and flames, which altogether have their natural
  causes of origin—it speaks of them all precisely in the same way as
  when describing their first creation as works of God. The expressions
  "create, make, form, cause to appear," are applied to the single
  individuals of the kingdoms long before created, precisely in the same
  way as they are to the first origin of the first individuals of those
  kingdoms.
Thus, by the full freedom which religious interest gives to scientific
  investigation, we are well prepared to treat with entire impartiality the
  question as to the position of each of the Darwinian theories in
  reference to theism. [259]
§ 2. The Descent Theory and Theism.
In the first part of our investigation, we found that the idea of the
  origin of the species, especially of the higher organized species,
  through descent from the next related lower ones, has a high degree of
  probability, although it is still not proven in a strictly scientific
  sense, and although especially the supposition of an often-separated
  primitive generation of single types is not excluded by that idea, and we
  can hardly suppose that the main types of the animal kingdom are
  developed out of one another. Now we are far from asking of
  religion to decide for itself in favor of the one or the other
  mode of conception, or to place its influence in the one or the other
  balance-scale of scientific investigations. It leaves the answering of
  these questions exclusively to natural science, knowing beforehand that
  it will be able to come to an understanding with the one as well as with
  the other result of its investigations. But we confess frankly that it is
  incomparably easier for us to bring the origin of the higher
  groups of organisms in accord with a theistic and teleological view of
  the world through descent than the origin of each single species of
  organisms through a primitive generation; and we reach this result
  especially by the attempt at teleologically perceiving the
  palćontological remains of organic life on earth. Theism and teleology
  see in the origin of things a striving towards a goal, a rising from the
  lower to the higher, a development—it is true a development really
  taken only in the ideal sense of an ideal connection, of a plan; or, as
  K. E. v. Baer, in 1834, in his lecture on the most common law of nature
  in all development, expresses [260]himself, of a progressive victory of mind
  over matter. Such a plan and its realization we can much more easily
  conceive when, in the past genera which geological formations show us, a
  genealogical connection takes place between the preceding species and the
  now living species, than when each species perished and beside or after
  it the newly appearing species always originated out of the inorganic
  through primitive generation. In the first case, we see in the preceding
  a real preparation for the following, and also easily perceive,
  the apparent waste of enormous periods of time for the successive
  processes of creation. In the second case, the coming and going of genera
  in innumerable thousands of years, without any exterior connection,
  becomes an incomprehensible problem, and the striving towards an end
  according to a regular plan, which we observe in the development, of the
  organic kingdoms on earth, disappears completely in metaphysical
  darkness.
Precisely because so many advocates of a theistic view of the world
  have thought that for the sake of the theistic idea of creation they were
  obliged to suppose a primitive origin of all the organic species, and
  because, nevertheless, the fact is patent that in the course of the
  pre-historic thousands of years myriads of species came and perished, not
  to return again, they became liable to the reproach on the part of the
  adversaries of theism, that the Creator, as they supposed him, makes
  unsuccessful attempts, which he has to throw away, as the potter a
  defective vessel, until he finally succeeds in making something durable
  and useful; and this objection was and is still made, not only to these
  superficial theists and their unhappily-selected and indefensible
  position, but to [261]the whole view of the world of theism
  itself and to the faith in God and the Creator in general.
For all these reasons, we can from the religious point of view but
  welcome the idea of a descent of species. Philologists have, if we are
  correctly informed, the canon that as a rule the more difficult text is
  the more correct one; but we doubt whether those should adopt this canon
  who try to read in the book of nature, whether with the eye of science or
  with that of religion—unless the faculty of reasoning is given to
  us in order to conceal the truth.
But, we have also to look for a manner of reconciling theism with all
  the different possibilities under which a descent is at all reasonable
  and conceivable. One of these possibilities is that of an entirely
  successive development of species out of one another by imperceptibly
  small transitions; and of this we shall soon speak. Another is the
  possibility of a descent by leaps, through a metamorphosis of germs or a
  heterogenetic generation. The real causes of such a heterogenetic
  generation, if it took place at all, have not yet been found; therefore
  we have to treat only of the abstract possibilities of its
  conceivableness. There are two such possibilities.
The birth of a new species took place in one of two ways: Either to
  those materials and forces which formed the germ of the new species, were
  added entirely new metaphysical agencies which did not exist before, and
  only the basis and the frame within which the new appeared, or that which
  the new species has in common with the old mother-species had the cause
  of its existence in the preceding. Likewise even the original productions
  [262]of man are always composed of two
  factors—of the given pre-suppositions and conditions, and of the
  new which on their basis and within their frame comes into existence.
  Otherwise the causes of the new which was to originate already lay in all
  former stages, but were still latent and still hindered in their
  activity, and only at the time of the birth the new impulse came which
  set them free for their activity. This new impulse may very well belong
  to the causal connection of the universe, and be caused by something
  analogous to natural selection.
In the first case, which in its application to the origin of man is
  adopted by A. R. Wallace and Karl Snell, the reconciliation between
  descent and theism has not the least difficulty; for if the agency which
  in the new-appearing species produces that which is specifically new in
  it, came only into existence with the first formation of the germs of the
  new species in the mother-species, this new certainly cannot have its
  origin anywhere else than in the supermundane prima causa in the
  Creator and Lord of the world.
In the second case also, theism is in no way threatened. For if we
  have to refer the cause of a new phenomenon in the world so far back as
  even to the beginning and the first elements of all things, we
  nevertheless have to arrive at last at the cause of all causes; and this
  is the living God, the Creator and Lord of the world. Thus the new form
  of existence would anyhow have the cause of its existence in God; and the
  value, the importance, and the substance of its existence, would only
  commence from where it really made its appearance, and not from where its
  still latent causes existed. As little as we attribute to the just
  fecundated [263]egg of man the value of man, although we
  know that under the right conditions the full man is to be developed out
  of it, just so little in accordance with that view would the differences
  of value within the created world be dissolved in a mass of atoms or
  potencies of a similar value. Neither should we have to fear that from
  such a theory cold deism would be substituted for our theism, full of
  life. For as certainly as theism does not exclude, but includes, all that
  is relative truth in deism, so certainly the supposition that the Creator
  had laid the latent causes of all following creatures in the first germs
  of the created, would also not exclude the idea of a constant and
  omnipotent presence of the Creator in the world. Undoubtedly it belongs
  to our most elementary conceptions of God, that we have to conceive his
  lofty position above time, not as an abstract distance from finite
  development, but, as an absolute domination over it; so that for God
  himself, who creates time and developments in time, there is no
  dependence on the temporal succession of created things, and it is quite
  the same to him whether he instantly calls a creature into existence, or
  whether he prepares it in a short space of time, or years, or in millions
  of years. In this idea we also find the only possible and simple solution
  of the before-mentioned problem of a timeless time which Fr. Vischer
  wishes to propose to philosophy.
§ 3. The Evolution Theory and Theism.
In speaking of an evolution theory, in distinction from the descent
  theory, we mean, as is evident from the first part of our work, that way
  and mode of [264]constructing the doctrine of the descent
  of species which permit this descent to take place, not by the leaps of a
  metamorphosis of germs, but by transitions so imperceptably small that
  the difference of two generations which lie in the same line of descent,
  is never greater than those differences which always take place between
  parents and children of the same species—transitions so gradual
  that only the continuation of these individual changes in a single
  direction produces an increase and, finally and gradually, the new
  species. The treatment of the question as to what position this
  evolution theory takes regarding theism, is even more simple than
  answering the question as to the position of the descent idea in
  reference to theism.
For now we have no longer to discuss the different possibilities of a
  development, as heretofore we have discussed those of a descent, but only
  the idea of a gradual development or of an evolution in general. Of such
  possibilities, it is true, we find several. In the first place, we can
  look for the inciting principle of the development of species either in
  the interior of organisms, or we can see it approaching the latter from
  without. The only scientific system which has made any attempt at
  mentioning and elaborating the inciting principle of development is that
  of Darwin; a system that chooses the second of the alternatives just
  stated and sees the essential principle that makes the transmission of
  individuals a progress beyond one species, approaching the individuals
  from without. But while we shall have to treat of this specific Darwinian
  theory—the selection theory—still more in detail in the
  following section, we shall also there have to point, out [265]everything
  that theism has to say in reference to a principle of development which
  approaches the organisms from without. Another possible explanation of
  the origin of species through development is to be found in the fact that we look for the
  inciting principle of development in the interior of organisms. This is
  done, so far as we know, by all those scientists who, although inclined
  to an evolution theory, are adversaries of the selection theory; but none
  of them claim to have found the inciting agencies of development. Thus,
  as in the preceding section, we are again referred only to the wholly
  abstract possibility of conceiving these inciting agencies either as
  coming into existence anew in the organism with each smallest individual
  modification which leads to a development of the species, or as being
  before present in the organisms, but still latent, and only coming into
  activity when they are set free. But the question whether theism could
  accept the one or the other possibility had to be treated of in the
  preceding section, and was there answered in the affirmative.
Thus it only remains to treat in general of the question as to the
  reconcilableness of the idea of the origin of species through evolution,
  through gradual development, in general with a theistic view of
  the world.
In the first place, we wish to render evident the fact which is so
  often overlooked by the friends of monism and still more by theistic
  adversaries of the idea of evolution, that the idea of a development of
  species, and also of man, does not offer to theistic reasoning any new or
  any other difficulties than those which have been long present, and which
  had found their solution in the religious consciousness long before any
  idea of evolution disturbed the [266]mind. It is true, the question as to the
  origin of mankind is, to speak in the language of natural history,
  a still unsolved problem; and the supposition of its gradual
  development out of the animal kingdom is still an
  hypothesis—one of all those attempts at solving this problem
  which still wait for confirmation or refutation. But there is another
  quite analogous question whose position has long ceased to be a mere
  problem, and whose solution is no longer a mere hypothesis; namely, the
  question as to the origin of the perfect human or any other organic
  individual. To speak again in the language of natural history,
  this origin is no longer a problem—that is, without regard to the
  obscurity in which the existence and origin of every creature, as to its
  last causes, is always and will always be veiled for us. We know that the
  human, and, in general, every organic individual, becomes that which it
  is through development. It begins the course of its being with the
  existence of a single cell, the egg, and goes through all stages of this
  development by wholly gradual and imperceptible transitions, so that the
  precise moment cannot exactly be fixed when any organ, any physical or
  psychical function, comes into existence, until perfect man is
  developed. Man has this mode of coming into existence in common
  with all organized beings, down to the lowest organisms which stand above
  the value and rank of a single cell. At this place, and with the design
  of our present discussion in view, we ought not to render the importance
  of this fact obscure by a teleological comparison of the different eggs
  and germs with one another. If we look upon that which is to come
  out of the germs, and which certainly if prepared and present in the
  first vital functions of the [267]germ, although we are not able to observe,
  prove, and estimate it by means of the microscope and the retort, then of
  course the difference in the value of the germs must be immense; and from
  this point of view we certainly look upon the germ of man differently
  than upon the germ of an oyster. But here the question is not as to the
  differences of value of organisms: no scientist who remains within the
  limits of his realm, will ever deny them; but we treat of the question
  whether such valuable objects come into existence suddenly or
  gradually—whether it is possible, or even a fact which repeats
  itself before our eyes, that a form of being of higher value comes forth
  from a form of being of a lower value in gradual development. And here it
  is an undisputed fact that all qualities of man, the physical as well as
  the spiritual, come into existence in such a gradual development that not
  in a single one of them can be fixed any moment of which it may be said:
  on the other side of this moment it did not exist, but on this side it
  did exist. All differentiations of his body, from the first
  differentiation of the egg-cell into a complexity of cells up to the last
  formation of his organs, take place in the same gliding development. All
  his psychical and spiritual functions and forces come into existence in
  this form of gradual development. Where, in the development of the human
  individual, is the moment in which consciousness, language,
  self-consciousness, memory, will, the perception of God, moral
  responsibility, the perception of the idea and the ideal, or whatever
  else we may mention, came into existence? Nowhere; all this, and all the
  rest, is developed in a gradual process. The only marked time in this
  development is the time of birth: [268]it brings a great
  change into physical life, and is perhaps the beginning epoch of the
  spiritual development of man. But even the birth is not absolutely bound
  to a certain time; the child may be born too early, by weeks or even
  months, and its development nevertheless takes place; and even after
  birth, how slowly and gradually spiritual development begins and
  continues!
With this gradual process of individual development which we have long
  known, we have never found any difficulty in bringing two things into
  harmony. First, we always judged the value of the single qualities of man
  only in the proportion in which they were really present and came into
  existence, and in such a way that we entirely followed the flowing
  development of the individual. Therefore we looked upon the suckling, for
  instance, not at all as a morally responsible individual; upon the child
  of two years as more responsible, but to a far less degree than the child
  of school-age, and the latter again to a less degree than the man; and
  thus we have been long accustomed to reason, when looking upon all single
  qualities of man. Second, we did not find any difficulty in bringing into
  perfect harmony the idea of a gradual process of individual development
  and of the dependence of the latter on a complex totality of natural
  causes: with the idea of the absolute dependence on God, the Creator, of
  that which arose through development. Every religiously reasoning man has
  always looked upon himself as the child of his parents, gradually
  developed under the activity of complex natural causes, as well as the
  creature of God, that owes the existence of all its forces and parts of
  body and soul to God. Should it then, be so difficult, or is it only [269]something new, to bring into harmony, when
  looking upon the entire species and genus, that which we were long ago
  able to bring into harmony when looking upon the individual—it
  being presupposed that the investigation leads us to a development of the
  entire species and genus similar to that of the individual development?
  Or have we here again to ask, as in § 1: is it
  more religious to make no attempt at removing the veil which covers the
  natural process of the origin of mankind, than to make it? It is true,
  the not knowing anything can, under certain circumstances, create and
  increase the sensation of reverence for the depth of divine power and
  wisdom; but a perception of the ways of God is also certainly able to
  create the same. On that account, we need not at all fear that by such an
  attempt and its eventual success we might get into the shallows of
  superficiality, to which nothing seems any longer to be hidden, only
  because it has no presentiment of the depths which are to be sounded.
  There will always remain enough of the mysterious and the uninvestigated,
  and each new step forward will only lead to new views, to new secrets, to
  new wonders.
But does not a development, like that which we here for the moment
  assume hypothetically, efface and destroy the specific value of man and
  mankind from still another side? Would not a beginning of mankind
  be really lost, in case that theory of evolution should gain authority?
  and would not there still lie between that which is decidedly called
  animal world and that which is decidedly called mankind an innumerable
  series of generations of beings which were neither animal nor man? We do
  not believe it. What makes man man, [270]we can exactly point
  out: it is self-consciousness and moral self-determination. Now, in case
  development took place in the above sense, it may have passed ever so
  gradually; the epochs of preparation between that which we know as
  highest animal development and that which constitutes the substance of
  man, may have stretched over ever so many generations, and, if the
  friends of evolution desire it, we say over ever so many thousands of
  generations; yet that which makes man man—self-consciousness
  and moral self-determination—must have always come into actual
  reality in individuals. Those individuals in which
  self-consciousness came into existence and activity, for the first time,
  and with it the entire possibility of the world of ideas—the
  consciousness of moral responsibility, and with it also the entire
  dignity of moral self-determination—were the first men. The
  individuals which preceded the latter may have been ever so interesting
  and promising as objects of observation, if we imagine ourselves
  spectators of these once supposed processes; yet, they were not men.
§ 4. The Selection Theory and Theism.
The last scientific theory whose position in reference to theism we
  have to discuss, is the selection theory.
We have found but little reason for sympathizing with this theory. But
  since we believed that we were obliged to suspect it, not for religious
  but for scientific reasons, so the completeness of our investigation
  requires us to assume hypothetically that the selection principle really
  manifests itself as the only and exclusive principle of the origin of
  species, and to ask now what position it would in such a case take in
  reference to theism. [271]
The only answer we are able to give is decidedly favorable to
  theism.
It is true, development would in such a case approach the organisms
  merely from without. For the principle lying within the organisms, which
  would then be the indispensable condition of all development, would be
  first the principle in itself, wholly without plan or end, of individual
  variability; second, the principle of inheritance which for itself and
  without that first principle is indeed no principle of development, but
  the contrary. The causes from which the single individuals vary in such
  or such a way, would then be the outer conditions of life and adaptation
  to them: i.e., something coming from without. And the causes from
  which one individual, varying in such or such a way, is preserved in the
  struggle for existence, and another, varying differently, perishes, would
  be approaching the individuals also from without; hence they are a larger
  or smaller useful variation for the existence of the individual.
Now if, through these influencing causes of development, approaching
  the most simple organisms from without, a rising line of higher and
  higher organized beings comes finally into existence (a line in which
  sensation and consciousness, finally self-consciousness and free-will,
  appear) we again reach the teleological dilemma: all this has either
  happened by chance, or it has not. No man who claims to treat this
  question earnestly and in a manner worthy of respect, will assert that it
  happened by chance, but by necessity. But with this word the materialist
  only hides or avoids the necessity of supposing a plan and end in place
  of chance, as we have convinced ourselves in Part I, Book II, Chap. II, § 1. [272]The only exception in
  this case is, that the bearer and agent of this plan would not be the
  single organism (as is easily possible when we accept a descent theory
  which is more independent from the selection theory), but the collection
  of all forces and conditions, acting upon the organism from without. And
  for the question, whence this plan and its realization comes, we had
  again but the one answer: from a highest intelligence and omnipotence,
  from the personal God of theism. The locus of creation and the
  locus of providence would now, as ever, retain their value in the
  theological system, with the sole exception that most of that which so
  far belonged to the locus of creation would now belong, in a
  higher degree than in the hitherto naturo-historical view, to the
  locus of providence and of the government of the world. When
  looked upon from the theocentric point of view, the new forms which we
  had to suppose as called into existence only by selection, would remain
  products of divine creation: the "God said, and it was so," would retain
  its undiminished importance; but looked upon from the cosmic point of
  view, they would present themselves as products of the divine providence
  and government of the world, still more exclusively than in every
  principal of explanation which finds the causes of development in the
  organisms themselves or in an immaterial cause acting upon the organisms
  from within. The first as well as the second point of view is in full
  harmony with the religious view of things.
We do not conceal that on the ground of all other analogies we
  sympathize more with those who look for the determining influences of the
  origin of new species rather within than without nature, and who, while
  [273]looking at that which the higher species
  have in common with the lower, do not forget or neglect the new, the
  original, which they possess. But we are indeed neither obliged nor
  entitled, in the name of religion, to take beforehand in the realm of
  scientific investigation the side of the one or the other direction of
  investigation, or even of the one or the other result of investigation,
  before it is arrived at. Let us unreservedly allow scientists free
  investigation in their realm, so long as they do not meddle with ethical
  or religious principles, and quietly await their results. These results,
  when once reached, may correspond ever so closely with our present view
  and our speculative expectations, or in both relations be ever so
  surprising and new; the one case as well as the other has already
  happened: at any rate they will not affect our religious principles, but
  only enrich our perception of the way and manner of divine activity in
  the world, and thereby give new food and refreshment, to our religious
  life.
§ 5. The Naturo-Philosophic Supplements of Darwinism and Theism.
We still have to discuss the position of theism in reference to the
  philosophic problems to which a Darwinistic view of nature sees
  itself led, and in the first place its position in reference to the
  naturo-philosophic theories with which the descent idea tries to complete
  itself.
In the first part of our book, we have found that not [274]a single one
  of the naturo-philosophic problems before which the descent idea places
  us, is really solved: neither the origin of self-consciousness and of
  moral self-determination, nor the origin of consciousness and of
  sensation, nor the origin of life; and even the theory of atoms, although
  it is quite important and indispensable for the natural philosopher and
  chemist according to the present state of his knowledge and
  investigation, has not yet been able to divest itself of its hypothetical
  character. Religion might, therefore, refuse to define its position in
  reference to theories which are still of a quite problematic and
  hypothetical nature. But by giving such a refusal, religion would not act
  in its own interest. The reproach is often made that it has an open or
  hidden aversion to the freedom of scientific investigation—a
  reproach which, it is true, is often enough provoked by its own
  advocates; often the assertion is made by advocates of free
  investigation, that free science has led, or can lead at any moment, to
  results which shake or even destroy theism and with it the objective and
  scientifically established truth of a religious view of the world. The
  consequence of this assertion is exactly, as before-mentioned, that minds
  whose religious possession is to them an inviolable sanctuary, and who
  lack time and occasion, inclination and ability, to examine
  scientifically these asserted results of science, really suspect free
  science and contest the right of its existence. Another consequence of
  this state of war between religion and science is the fact that so many
  minds in both camps fall into a servile dependence upon battle-cries:
  they confound freedom of investigation with license; science with apathy
  or [275]hostility to faith; faith with lack of
  scientific perception, blind unreasoning belief, etc. Such a state of
  affairs does not, indeed, serve the interests of peace and truth; only a
  correct treatment of philosophy as well as of religion can lead to
  them.
Such a way of peace and truth from the side of religion and its
  scientific treatment is entered upon, when religion sets itself right,
  not only with all real, but also with all conceivable,
  possible results of the other sciences, not only of the exact, but
  also of the philosophic sciences. If it finds, in such an investigation,
  that such conceivable results are reconcilable with the theistic view of
  the world which is the basis of religion, it has already shown its
  relationship to the freedom of investigation. But if it finds anywhere a
  possible result which is in conflict with its theistic view of the world,
  it is obliged to examine the mutual grounds of dissent, as to the degree
  of their truth and their power of demonstration; and in case its own
  position is the stronger, better founded, and more convincing, to prove
  this fact. If it does this, it again acts according to the principle of
  free investigation—with the single difference that in such a case
  it not only makes this allowance to the opponent, but also uses this
  principle for itself in its own realm and especially in the border land
  between itself and its opponent; but at the same time it shows in this
  case (what, indeed, so many are inclined to deny), that religion also has
  its science, and that theology itself is this science, and has the same
  rights as the sciences which are built up in the realm of material things
  or of abstract reasoning.
We therefore assume hypothetically, that the origin [276]of
  self-consciousness and of moral self-determination is fully explained by
  consciousness; the origin of consciousness and sensation by that which
  has no sensation; the origin of the living and organic by the lifeless
  and inorganic; and that atomism also is scientifically established and
  proven: how, then, would such a theory of the world and theism stand in
  respect to each other? By this assumption, we think we should simply
  stand again at the point, the basis of which we had to discuss in Part I,
  Book II, Chap. II, § 1, when treating of
  teleology. We should always see something new, something harmoniously
  arranged: a process of objects of value, continually rising higher and
  higher, coming forth out of one another in direct causal connection; and
  should have a choice of one of two ways of explaining this process. We
  should either have to be satisfied with this final causal connection, and
  perceive in this process itself its highest and last cause, in doing
  which we should be obliged again to deny order and plan in this process,
  to reject the category of lower and higher and the acknowledgment of a
  striving towards an end in these developments, and after having climbed
  to that Faust-height of investigation and knowledge, to throw ourselves
  in spiritual suicide back into the night and barbarism of chaos, or of a
  rigid mechanism to which all development, all life, all spiritual and
  ethical tasks, are but appearance; or we should have to treat the idea of
  development seriously and recognize a plan and a striving towards an end
  in this world-process, and should then find ourselves referred to a
  higher intelligence and a creative will as the highest and last cause
  which appoints the end and conditions of this process. This would be the
  case still more, as we actually [277]see that at present the single beings
  which stand on a lower stage of existence no longer produce beings of a
  higher stage, although, according to that theory whose correctness we now
  assume hypothetically, the elements and factors for the production of
  those higher forms of existence are fully present in the lower ones.
  Inorganic matter no longer produces organisms; the lower species of
  plants or animals no longer develop higher ones; the animal no longer
  becomes man; and yet there were periods, lying widely apart, in which,
  according to that theory, such things took place. What else set free
  those active causes, at the right time and in the right place? What else
  closed again at the precise place and moment the valves of the proceeding
  development, and brought to rest again the inciting force of the rising
  development?—what else but the highest end-appointing intelligence
  and omnipotence?
Even the inherent qualities of the elements, and the products of all
  the higher forms of existence which in the future shall arise out of
  them, the whole striving toward an end of the processes in the world,
  would present itself to us much more vividly than now, where we are still
  in the dark as to all these questions. We should see in atoms the
  real inherent qualities of all things and processes which are to
  be developed out of them; in the inorganic the real inherent
  qualities for the organic and living; in that which has no consciousness
  and sensation the real inherent qualities for self-consciousness.
  Instead of being now obliged to recur to the ideal and metaphysical, we
  should see the threads of the world's plan uncovered before us in
  empirical reality; and far from bearing with it an impoverishment of our
  [278]consciousness of God, all this would bring
  us only an immense enrichment of its contents; for with such an
  enlargement of our knowledge, we should only be permitted to take glances
  into the way and manner of divine creation and action—glances of a
  depth which at present we are far from being permitted to take.
Even very concrete parts of a theistic view of the world, as they
  present themselves to us—e.g., in the Holy Scripture, from
  its most developed points of view—would now find only richer
  illustrations than heretofore. St. Paul, for instance, in Rom. viii,
  speaks of the earnest expectation of the creature that waiteth for the
  manifestation of the sons of God. As to the present state of our
  knowledge of nature, those who adopt this view are only entitled to see
  in the sensation of pain of the animal world a sensation of this
  longing, unconscious of the end; but as to all soulless and lifeless
  beings and elements in the world, they can see in these words of a
  sighing and longing creation only a strong figurative expression used
  because of its suitableness to denote suffering of the animal world, as
  well as of men,—for the destination of the world to another and
  higher existence in which the law of perishableness and suffering no
  longer governs. On the other hand, if, as we assume hypothetically, all
  higher forms of existence in the world could be explained out of the
  preceding lower ones, and if the before-mentioned theorem of a sensation
  of atoms should form a needed and correct link in that chain of
  explanation, those words of sighing and longing would have to be
  literally taken in a still more comprehensive sense than now and in their
  directly literal meaning [279]would refer not only to the animal world
  but indeed to everything in the world.
Therefore, so long as attempts at explaining the different forms of
  existence in the world wholly from one another keep within their own
  limits, and do not of themselves undermine theism; and so long as there
  are men who on the one hand favor such a mode of explanation and on the
  other hand still adhere firmly to a faith in God, whether it be the
  deeper theism or the more shallow and superficial deism—so long
  religion has no reason for opposing those attempts at explanation. And
  there are such men; we need only to mention Huxley, whose position in
  reference to religion we have already discussed; or Oskar Peschel, who,
  in his "Völkerkunde" ("Ethnology"), says: "It is not quite clear how
  pious minds can be disturbed by this theory; for creation obtains more
  dignity and importance if it has in itself the power of renewal and
  development of the perfect." Even Herbert Spencer, with his idea of the
  imperceptibility of the super-personal, of the final cause of all things,
  is still a living proof of the fact that man can trace the mechanism of
  causality back to its last consequences and, as Spencer does, even derive
  consciousness and sensation from that which is without sensation, and yet
  not necessarily proceed so far as negation of a living God, even
  if he persists in his refusal to perceive in general the ultimate cause
  of things.
To meet those attempts, religion would have to take only two
  precautionary measures on two closely related points; and in doing this
  it would indeed make use of that before-mentioned right to defend freedom
  of [280]investigation both in its own realm and in
  the border-territory.
One precaution would consist in the requirement of the acknowledgment
  that even in that purely immanent mode of explanation the idea of
  value is fixed, but that the value of the new appears only when the
  new itself really comes into existence; that we therefore do not call,
  e.g., the inorganic living, because according to that mode
  of explanation life develops itself out of it; and that we do not ascribe
  to the animal the value of man, because according to that mode of
  explanation it also includes the causes of the development of man. Such a
  discrimination of ideas is indeed a scientific postulate, as we
  have had occasion to show at many points of our investigation; and we
  also complied with this requirement long ago in that realm of knowledge
  which is related to these questions as to the origin of things, but is
  more accessible and open to us, namely, in the realm of the development
  of the individual. We have spoken of this at length in § 3. But in the interest of religion also we
  have to request that the differences of value of things be
  retained, even when man thinks he is able to explain their origin merely
  out of one another. For without this, all things would finally merge
  simply into existences of like value; man would stand in no other
  relation to God than would any other creature, irrational or lifeless;
  and the quintessence of religious life—the relation of mutual
  personal love between God and man, the certainty of being a child of
  God—would be illusory when there should no longer be a difference
  of value between man and animal, animal and plant, plant and stone. [281]
Many a reader thinks, perhaps, that with this precaution we make a
  restriction which is wholly a matter of course, and that nobody would
  think of denying these differences of value. Häckel, in his
  "Anthropogeny," repeatedly reproaches man with the "arrogant
  anthropocentric imagination" which leads him to look upon himself as the
  aim of earthly life and the centre of earthly nature; this, he says, is
  nothing but vanity and haughtiness. Several writers in the "Ausland"
  faithfully second him in this debasement of the value of man. Its editor
  ("Ausland," 1874, No. 48, p. 957), for instance, reproaches Ludwig Noiré,
  although he otherwise sympathizes with him, that in his book "Die Welt
  als Entwicklung des Geistes" ("The World as Development of Mind"),
  Leipzig, Veit & Co., 1874, he still takes this anthropocentric
  standpoint and can say: "The anthropocentric view recognizes in man's
  mind the highest bloom of matter, which has attained to the possession of
  a soul." This, Häckel says, is nothing else but the former conception,
  not yet overcome, that man is the crown of creation. This pleasure in
  debasing the value of man is also a characteristic sign of the times. K.
  E. von Baer is right, when, in his "Studies" (page 463), he says: "In our
  days, men like to ridicule as arrogant the looking upon man as the end of
  the history of earth. But it is certainly not man's merit that he has the
  most highly developed organic form. He also must not overlook the fact
  that with this his task of developing more and more his spiritual gifts
  has only begun.... Is it not more worthy of man to think highly of
  himself and his destination, than, fixing his attention only upon the
  low, to [282]acknowledge only the animalic basis in
  himself? I am sorry to say that the new doctrine is very much tainted in
  this direction of striving after the low. I should rather prefer to be
  haughty than base, and I well recollect the expression of Kant, 'Man
  cannot think highly enough of man.' By this expression the profound
  thinker especially meant that mankind has to set itself great tasks. But
  the modern views are more a palliation of all animal emotions in
  man."
The other precautionary measure referred to would be, that the
  realm of mind, and especially the ethical realm, is not
  dissolved into a natural mechanism. This precaution is also
  connected with the first one, the latter being its condition; for only
  where it is acknowledged that causes, so long as they are still latent,
  do not fall under the same category of value as their effects, when these
  are once realized, it can also be acknowledged that the realm of mind and
  morality, although it has grown out of the ground of the mechanism of
  nature, can still have brought something new and higher into the world.
  Besides, this precaution is also a postulate of anthropologic science.
  For spiritual and ethical facts have at least the same truth and reality
  as the material, and a still higher value, and can therefore not permit
  any injury to their full recognition. But religion also must require this
  acknowledgment. For if the specific activity of mind in man is
  endangered, we also lose his specific value, and thus get into the
  before-mentioned dilemma; and if the moral responsibility of man is
  endangered, the relation of man to God loses its ethical character. Of
  the consequences in reference to morality, we shall have to speak
  hereafter. [283]
Moreover, religion does not require this acknowledgment without a rich
  compensation. For if that naturo-philosophic mode of explanation, whose
  correctness we hypothetically assume in this present section, prove to be
  right, and if the higher which comes anew into existence in the world, is
  to have the full cause of its origin in the preceding lower, such an
  admission, in accordance with the laws of logic, by which causa ćquat
  effectum, is only possible when we either similarly, as above,
  invalidate all difference between higher and lower, all difference of
  value of creatures, and contest the possibility that that which appears
  anew can also follow new laws of existence and activity; or when, in the
  highest cause of all final causes in the world, we see the full abundance
  of all those possibilities present as real cause, which afterwards appear
  in succession in the world. This highest cause, then, lodges in material
  things the final causes of all which is to come, as still latent causes,
  waiting to be set free; and such a highest cause as the fullness of all
  that which is successively to be developed in the world, is offered to
  science by religion itself in the idea of a living God. We say expressly,
  that religion offers this idea to science, and not that science creates
  this idea; for the acknowledgment of God, as we have before had occasion
  to point out, is in the last instance not a result of science, but an
  ethical action of mind,—although from this acknowledgment the
  brightest light falls upon science and the whole series of its
  conclusions, and although science owes to precisely this idea of God the
  highest points of view to which it sees itself led and from which alone
  it is able to survey its entire realm. [284]
§ 6. Elimination of the Idea of Design or its Acknowledgment and Theism.
In the whole preceding course of our investigation as to the position
  of religion and theism regarding the different scientific and
  naturo-philosophic theories, theism could quietly keep the position of a
  friendly and peaceful spectator. The degrees of our sympathy with the
  theories which have successively passed before our eyes, were on
  scientific grounds very unequal; but on religious grounds, and in the
  interest of a theistic view of the world, we found ourselves nowhere
  induced to take sides for or against a theory. But the position of
  religion and theism becomes quite different in reference to the assertion
  that the existence of ends and designs in nature is refuted by the
  evolution theory or by any other hypothetical or real results of science.
  With this assertion, the existence of a living and personal God, of a
  Creator and Lord of the world, is denied; and every religion which claims
  objective truth for its basis is eliminated. It is true, man can under
  this supposition still speak of a religion in the sense of subjective
  religiousness; but the life-nerve is also cut off from this subjective
  religiousness. We have repeatedly had occasion to prove this in our
  historical review, and also in the section in which we pointed out the
  plan of our own analysis.
But still, where we have had to represent this anti-teleological view
  of the world, we have happily convinced ourselves of the fact that an
  existence of ends and designs in nature is not only reconcilable
  with the conformity to law and the causal mechanism of its processes, but
  is [285]also postulated by scientific
  contemplation of nature, as soon as the latter observes that in these
  processes, acting with lawful necessity, something in general is
  attained, and, moreover, when out of them comes forth something so
  infinitely rich and beautifully arranged, such a rising series of higher
  and higher developments, as the world. On the other hand, combatting the
  striving towards an end in nature leads to such scientific monstrosities,
  destroys so thoroughly the idea of God and also all ideas of value in the
  world, even all spiritual and ethical acquisitions of mankind, that we
  can explain the origin of such a doctrine only by the determined purpose
  of getting rid, at any cost, of the dependence on a living God: again a
  proof of the fact that faith, or want of faith, in its final causes, is
  not the product of reflecting intelligence, but an ethical action of that
  centre of human personality from which the spiritual process of life in
  the individual comes forth—an ethical action of mind.
Herewith the position of theism in reference to the elimination of the
  idea of design is also soon characterized: it is the position of
  irreconcilable antagonism. In rejecting the position of its opponent,
  theism perceives that it is in harmony not only with every correctly
  understood religious need, but equally so with every scientific
  interest—with the interest of a correct knowledge of nature, as
  well as with the interest of those sciences which have to take care of
  and try to understand the spiritual and ethical endowments of
  mankind.
If we now turn our attention to the position of theism in reference
  to the idea of design in general, theism on its part also gives an
  equally firm support to that intimate connection, proven by natural
  science, between causality [286]and striving toward an end—between
  actiology and teleology, as they are called in the language of the
  philosophical school. While a contemplation of nature perceives in nature
  a mechanism governed by laws and necessities, it finds results reached
  through this chain of causality in which it must acknowledge ends toward
  which the preceding has striven. Now, theism, on its part, proceeds from
  the highest end-appointing cause of things and processes, and finds that
  the reaching of these ends postulates a mechanism of natural conformity
  to law. In order to prove this, we certainly must take a course which is
  prohibited by many as anthropomorphism, i.e., we must try to study
  the connection of ends and designs, and the possibility of such a
  connection where we are able to observe in general not only the
  accomplishment of purposes, but also the forming of
  purposes; and the only realm of this kind which we know of, is the realm
  of human action. He who, merely through fear of anthropomorphism, shrinks
  from this only possible comparison, may consider that for those who
  assume a highest end-appointing cause (and we, too, proceed from this
  standpoint) man also, who forms his designs and strives toward his ends,
  is a product of that highest end-appointing cause; and that, therefore,
  in the human striving toward an end, a certain analogue of the divine
  striving toward an end must occur. We are, indeed, not obliged on this
  account to identify the two, and to close our eyes against the immense
  differences which exist between them, and which, wholly of themselves,
  intrude upon our observation. What we mean by that analogy may thus be
  stated.
Man forms for himself designs and ends, and pursues [287]and reaches
  them by using the objects and forces of nature as means. He can do this
  only because the forces in nature act from necessity, strictly
  conformable to law. Because, and so far as man knows the action of
  forces, conformable to law, and the inviolable necessity of the
  connection between certain causes and their effects, he can select and
  make use of such causes as means, by virtue of which he reaches those
  effects as designs intended by him. If he could not depend on this
  conformity to law, on this causal connection taking place according to
  simple necessities, he could not select, make, and use, with certainty,
  any tool, from the club with which he defends himself against his enemies
  or cracks the shells of fruit, up to the finest instruments of optics and
  chemistry, and even to the telegraph and steam engine. The conformity to
  law, with which the forces of nature act, far from being an impediment to
  his appointing and reaching his ends is much more the indispensable means
  by which he is enabled in general to reach them. Now, if we thus find, in
  the only action striving towards an end which we are able to observe to
  the extent of the appointing of ends and the selection of
  means—namely, man's end appointing action—such a strong
  dependence of finality on causality that the reaching of ends is not
  possible at all unless the means act of necessity conformably to law,
  then we are certainly obliged to draw the conclusion that the highest
  author of things has prepared the world so, that the reaching of ends
  requires the action of means, and that the category of finality and the
  category of causality are mutually prepared for each other. For,
  according to the theistic and teleological view of the world, the [288]laws
  of nature, acting with causality and necessity, are certainly not laws
  which the Creator found in some way, and with which he had to calculate
  as with factors given to him from somewhere else, in order to make use of
  them, so far as he was permitted, for the accomplishment of his
  designs—this would be the way and manner of human
  teleological action, and transferring it to divine action would be
  an anthropomorphism which we should have to reject. On the contrary,
  these laws themselves are the work of the teleologically acting
  Creator—he, indeed, will have given to them such a quality that
  with them he is able to reach his ends as a whole and in detail. The
  inviolability of the laws of nature also results from this idea. For
  means which would have to be supplemented, sometimes set aside,
  occasionally replaced by others, would be less perfect than such means as
  by virtue of their quality are able with certainty to serve the designs
  which are to be reached by them. How theism can reconcile with this view
  the indispensable idea of divine freedom, we shall have occasion to show
  in Chap. II, § 4.
Among the writers who defend teleology, we can mention two who,
  starting from the analogy of human teleological action, have pointed out
  the idea that teleology itself requires a necessity, conformable to law,
  in the activity of the forces of nature. One of the two is K. E. von
  Baer, in his oft-quoted essays on striving towards end; and the other is
  the Duke of Argyll. At a time when the assault against teleology had just
  begun, this noble author perceived the whole importance and weight of
  these attacks, and most energetically defended teleology. The expression
  of the just-mentioned ideas, [289]among others, forms one of the
  fundamentals of his work, "The Reign of Law" (London, Strahan & Co.,
  first edition published in 1866, and since then in frequently repeated
  editions); a work which is well fitted to instruct us, in the most
  interesting manner, regarding the present state of the related questions
  as they are treated of in Great Britain.
[290]
THE DARWINIAN THEORIES AND POSITIVE
CHRISTIANITY.
§ 1. The Creation of the World.
Now that we have come to a clear understanding of the position of the
  Darwinian theories in reference to the basis of all religion and of all
  living religiousness, to theism in general, it remains to be seen what
  position those of the theories which are reconcilable with theism take in
  reference to the positive Christian view of the world.
We naturally omit all those objects and parts of Christian dogmatics
  which have no points of contact, or are very indirectly connected with
  the Darwinian ideas, or which—as, e.g., their position in
  reference to the idea of God in general—have found their principal
  illustration in our investigation just finished. We shall nevertheless
  have now to take into consideration once more, although from another
  side, some objects which we have discussed in treating of the relation of
  the Darwinian ideas to theism, on account of the specific part which
  theism has in Christianity. This is especially the case with those
  Christian facts which belong to the first article of the Apostolic Creed,
  and immediately also with the doctrine of the creation of the world. [291]
At first sight it seems that the evolution theory and Christianity are
  in no other place more sharply opposed to each other than in that of the
  history of creation. Darwinism claims for its theory immense periods of
  time; and geology seems to furnish them according to its demand. The Holy
  Scripture, on the other hand, teaches a creation of the world in six
  days.
With the attempt to find the right way to end this conflict, we enter
  upon that part of the border-land between theology and natural science,
  which, among all others, is most contested, and which has offered to the
  most luxuriant fancy the widest field of action and the one most
  profitably taken advantage of.
We confess at the outset that we sympathize with those who try to keep
  the peculiar realms of religion and natural science apart in such a way
  that a collision between the two is impossible. We quietly leave the
  investigation of the temporal succession in creation—especially the
  investigation of all that belongs in the finite causal connection of
  natural processes—to natural science; we also do not look to the
  source of our Christian religion, to the Holy Scripture, for a scientific
  manual, least of all for the communication of a knowledge of nature,
  supernaturally manifested and claiming divine authority, the acquisition
  of which is especially the task of scientific labor. But we bestow just
  as decidedly upon religion the specific task of showing man the way to
  communion with God, especially the way of salvation; a task in which it
  can as little permit itself to be hindered by natural science, as the
  latter in the pursuit of its peculiar tasks can allow an objection from
  any source. On the side of religion, the bond of unity which brings [292]into
  harmony the two activities of the human mind—the religious and the
  investigating—in the realm of nature, and, in general, in the whole
  realm of exact science, consists in the fact that in all which exact
  science offers to religion as the result of its investigation, the latter
  perceives and shows the works and ways of God; and on the side of the
  exact sciences, the bond consists in the fact that they bring within the
  reach of their scientific, historical, literary, culturo-historical, and
  exegetical investigations all that which in the religious realm appears,
  or in the written word is fixed, as historical fact. Religion, therefore,
  concedes to exact sciences the full right of examining the biblical
  records as to all the relations of their historical and literary
  connections; it even makes these investigations a quite essential and, at
  present, very much favored branch of its own science of theology. On the
  other hand, religion reserves just as decidedly to itself the full right
  of drawing from them, of maintaining, and of realizing, the whole full
  religious basis and significance of those records.
We know very well that such a proposition is very simple in principle,
  but much more difficult in practice. For the quintessence of that which
  constitutes the basis of the Christian religion—namely, the leading
  back of mankind to communion with God by means of salvation—is not
  only a philosopheme, a theoretical or mystic doctrine, but a fact:
  it comes into the world as a series of divine facts; it is
  interwoven by innumerable threads into creation and the course of nature
  and history; and, as to this whole aspect of its appearance in the world
  of phenomena, it falls under the cognition of the exact sciences. But as
  soon as any given fact excites the [293]interest of religion as
  well as that of exact science, collisions are possible from both sides.
  Some advocates of religion, through mistaken zeal for religious
  interests, may think it necessary to assert and to represent as
  indispensable to religion facts whose cognition as to reality belongs
  only to exact science and which are contested by exact science; as,
  e.g., the creation of the world in six literal days, or the
  creation of the single elements of the world without the action of
  secondary causes. And some advocates of exact science, from reasons of a
  superficial analogy, may erroneously think it necessary to dispute the
  reality of facts, otherwise well attested, but wanting analogy, in which
  religion has a central interest; as, e.g., the reality of the
  resurrection of Jesus Christ, or the reality of his miracles. Or they may
  unjustifiably try, from our experiences in this world, to forbid glances
  which religion permits us to throw beyond the present course of the
  world; e.g., the eschatological hope of Christians is often enough
  contested, or as the laws of nature are called eternal in the absolute
  sense of the word, although natural science is only led to a recognition
  of the duration of the same, which is congruent with the circumstances
  and duration of this present course of the world.
We are perfectly aware of all these possibilities of a collision, and
  of all the difficulties of their prevention and reconciliation; but we
  nevertheless know of no other way for their avoidance than that simple
  principle of agreement which, on account of its simplicity and clearness,
  seems to us to be perfectly able to maintain the peace between the two
  parties interested, or where it is disturbed, to restore it. [294]
Thus, we wholly agree that in the question of creation the
  investigation of the succession and of all modalities in the appearance
  of the single elements of the world, is entirely left to natural science,
  and that the biblical records should on the one hand be investigated
  wholly, and even to their remotest consequences, from a literary,
  historical, and exegetical point of view, and on the other hand be tested
  with equal fullness and completeness as to their religious contents. The
  literary and exegetical examination of the Mosaic account of creation
  will reveal that its conceptions of that which in the creation of the
  world belongs entirely to the natural process, do not go beyond that
  which otherwise belongs to the sphere of knowledge and views of
  antiquity, as well as of immediate perception of nature in general; and
  that we cannot expect any scientific explanation from it, because man
  really came last on the stage of earth, and is therefore not able to say
  anything, founded upon autopsy, about the origin of all the other
  creatures which preceded his appearance. Just as little could the first
  men possess and deliver to their offspring a remembrance of the first
  beginnings of their own existence. Moreover, the literary and exegetical
  interpretation of the Bible will also refer to other passages of the Holy
  Scripture which entirely differ from the succession of creations, as they
  are related in Genesis I; so, e.g.,
  besides Job XXXVIII, 4-11, the second account
  of creation in Genesis II, 4-25: again a proof
  that what we read in the Biblical record of creation about the succession
  in the appearance of creatures is not binding upon us. Religion can have
  nothing to say against these results; it will not reject the information
  of man as to the [295]succession and the modalities in the
  appearance of the single elements of the world, which it receives from
  natural science, and will not expect it by means of a special
  supernatural manifestation; it will willingly accept it from natural
  science, and simply make use of it in such a way that in nature and its
  processes it also perceives a manifestation of God. Now, when it examines
  the different Biblical accounts of creation as to their religious
  substance, it will find in them such a pure and correct idea of
  divine nature and divine action—such a pure conception, equally
  satisfying to mind and to science, of the nature of man, of his position
  in nature, of the nature and destination of the two sexes, of the ethical
  nature and the ethical primitive history of man,—it will especially
  have to acknowledge in the Biblical account of creation, in spite of all
  points of collision with the cosmogonies of paganism, such an elevation
  above them, such an exemption from all theogony, with which
  heathen cosmogonies are always mixed up, that we are perfectly right in
  perceiving in these records the full and unmistakable elements of a pure
  and genuine stream of manifestation, which pours into mankind.
So far we find ourselves in full harmony with a theology which, in the
  manner indicated, reconciles the religious interest with the historical
  and critical interest. We find the points of view to which this
  perception leads, represented with special clearness and attractiveness
  in Dillmann's Revision of Knobel's "Commentar zur Genesis" ("Commentary
  on Genesis"), Leipzig, Hirzel, 1875.
But it seems to us that a readiness to be just to historical criticism
  and impartial exegesis has hindered [296]theologians occupying
  this standpoint from being just also to the religious element, in
  its full meaning, in reference to a very important part of the Mosaic
  account of creation, in which the author of it shows quite a decided
  religious interest. We mean the six days of creation, together
  with the seventh day, the divine Sabbath. Theologians became too
  quickly satisfied with the exegetical perception of these seven days, as
  creative, earthly days, of twenty-four hours; and this hindered them from
  assigning to the religious meaning the full importance which these days
  have in that record. That the idea and the number of the days in that
  account have a high religious meaning to the author, is clear from the
  following: The account in Genesis I, 1-24,
  belongs to that series of parts of the Pentateuch which we call the
  original, and which has the Sinaitical Law as the centre of its belief.
  The division of the days into weeks, each having six working days and one
  day of rest, which possibly existed before, but which received obligatory
  importance to Israel first by the Sinaitical legislation, so far controls
  that account of the creation of the world that, next to the sublime
  perception of the dignity and position of man, it forms its very
  quintessence. The account makes that divine week of creation, with its
  six working days and its divine day of rest, the divine prototype and
  model for the human division of time; and the Decalogue also, in the
  conception which it has in Exodus XX, directly
  bases the commandment of the Sabbath on the divine week of creation. Now,
  if we suppose that the author took these days as earthly days of
  twenty-four hours, we are first of all obliged to reject as a child-like
  error the idea on which from religious [297]reasons—not from
  reasons of a mystical idea of God, but from direct practical religious
  reasons—he puts great importance; an idea with which he establishes
  an institution of human life which has been preserved through many
  thousands of years and is still preserved as the exceedingly blissful
  basis of all social life. For that the creation of the world, from the
  beginning of things up to the appearance of man, demanded more than six
  times twenty-four hours, is beyond any doubt. Moreover, we should be
  obliged to reject the arguments of such a central religious custom as
  Sabbath-rest in a record in which we have to assign an absolute and
  lasting religious value to all other religious elements of it, as to the
  ideas of the unity, omnipotence, and wisdom of God, of his creation
  through the creative word, of the perfection of his works, of man bearing
  the image of God. We should even see that idea of God which presents
  itself to us out of all other characteristics of that record in such
  spotless purity and sublime magnitude, sink down to a decided
  insignificance through the identification of the divine days of creation
  with our earthly days of twenty-four hours. All this certainly brings
  near to us the question: do we make a correct exegesis, do we correctly
  read that record, when we think that the author, because he speaks
  of days, must necessarily have understood earthly days, such as we know
  now?
We readily perceive how interpreters have arrived at this view. The
  divine sections of creation in the Mosaic account show themselves too
  decidedly as days to make possible any other interpretation than to take them as
  days. Now from experience we do not know of any other days than of
  earthly days of twenty-four hours; [298]and therefore the
  conclusion naturally follows, that the author also took the divine days
  of creation as such earthly days of twenty-four hours. A simple reference
  of the same to periods, so that we should again think of fixed periods of
  the earth or of the world, would especially pervert the literal
  sense—would entirely remove from the account the idea of "day"
  which is so essential to the author of the record, and thereby render
  obscure the archetype of the divine week of creation for the human
  divisions of time; and the looked-for harmony between the Biblical days
  and the geological periods of the earth would by no means be established
  by such an identification of the days of creation with the periods of the
  world: for the geological or even the cosmic and astronomical periods are
  nowhere in congruity with the Biblical days of creation.
But the question, however, is: are there not evidences in the Biblical
  account itself which show that the author did not take these days
  as creative earthly days of twenty-four hours? We have to answer this
  question decidedly in the affirmative.
In the first place, it is an established fact that these days of the
  week of creation were also, according to the meaning of the author,
  days of God. Now that such days of God, even with the most
  childish and simple worldly knowledge of that early period of mankind, so
  soon as such a pure idea of God, as appears from the whole
  account, is at the bottom of the conception, can no longer be
  identical with the days of the creature, is to be inferred
  beforehand with the greatest probability from the purity of that idea of
  God, and is even expressly [299]confirmed by special evidences in the
  record itself. We have to mention no less than four of them.
The days of creation present themselves as days of God, which
  as such differ from the creative days of earth by the fact that
  with them the day and the work of the day are absolutely
  identical. In the creative days, the day and the work of the day are
  always different from one another; the days come and go as temporal
  frames which include everything that happens during these days, whether
  we know it or not. Now we may turn our attention to and mention ever so
  many works of an earthly day: there always happen innumerable other
  things which also belong within the frame of that day and which are only
  not observed by us. It is quite another thing with those Biblical days of
  creation: here the day begins with the beginning of the day's
  work; it exists and passes on single and alone in the
  course of the work of the day, and it comes to an end when the day's work
  is completed, and the work of the following day begins: it comes to an
  end with "evening and morning."
We also lay some stress, though not very much, upon the fact that, in
  the account, that which makes and regulates the earthly day is
  created not before the fourth day of creation, Genesis I, 14: "And God said, Let there be lights in the
  firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let
  them be for signs and for seasons, and for days and years." We
  admit that if we were obliged for other reasons to suppose that the
  author of the account took the days of creation as common earthly days of
  twenty-four hours, we must and should find it possible that the author
  had been able to [300]suppose the existence and the course of
  such earthly days even before the creation of sun, moon, and
  stars; for he certainly could not yet have the scientific perception that
  the sun with its light and the rotation of the earth were the only cause
  of an earthly day. But it is easier and more natural for us to bring that
  passage, Genesis I, 14, into accord with the
  conception that the days of creation are divine days which, as such, are
  different from creative days, and on one of which God also created that
  which originates creative days.
Another evidence in the account is of still greater importance for our
  conception of days. These days of creation in the Biblical record have
  no night. The account closes the work of each day with the words:
  "And the evening and the morning were the first day," "the
  second day," etc. Now, if we have to suppose that the author took
  these days as common earthly days, it would be quite impossible to
  understand why, after having mentioned at the close of the day's work
  that it now became evening, he omits the long night of twelve hours, and,
  although not having said anything of the night, makes the morning which
  follows the latter, the end of the preceding day; and why he does not
  say, "and it became evening" and "it became night, the first day,"
  etc. We then could not avoid the question: what, according to the
  conception of the author, did God do in these six nights of his week of
  creation? But if we suppose that the author took the days as days of God,
  and therefore, in his conception of the days of creation, elevated the
  same above the common earthly days of the creature, and so represented
  them to himself as he alone, through his idea of God, thought he might
  [301]venture to do, then that mode of
  expression, so exceedingly strange under all other suppositions, appears
  very simple and natural to us. For the author did not mention a night,
  because these days simply had no night; and they had none, because as
  days of God they could have none—because with God there is
  no night; because the rest of God, as the seventh day shows, is only a
  day of rest and not a night of rest. And the author saw the morning
  immediately following the evening of his divine day of creation, and
  recognized in this morning together with the evening immediately
  preceding it, the close of the day, because the accomplishment of the
  day's work (evening) already contained in itself the preparation of the
  following day's work, or at least pointed to the coming of the
  latter.
Finally, the fact that, according to the Biblical account, the
  seventh day still has no end, is just as decisive for us. The end of
  each of the six days is mentioned by the solemn repetition of the words:
  "And the evening and the morning were the first day," etc.; but it is not
  mentioned in regard to the seventh day. Now if, according to the meaning
  of the author, the seventh day had also had its end like any of the six
  preceding days, he would at the seventh and last day have had
  double reason for mentioning its end; and the omission of that
  concluding word would indeed be inconceivable. When Dillman says: "The
  formula 'and (it became) the evening' is wanting, because the account is
  here at an end, and is no longer to be carried over to another day, and
  because for that reason its designation as seventh day is presupposed in
  v. 2," we have to reply that, under the supposition of the days of
  creation having [302]been common earthly days, a carrying over
  of the account to further days was certainly to be expected, even if from
  nothing else than the formula: "And the evening and the morning were the
  first day," etc. For then the human weeks could have followed the week of
  God, in which man, following the divine example, would have had to work
  six days and to rest one. The same commentator says (p. 24): "The author
  could not even have dared make a statement about the life-duration of the
  first men, if to him the day in which he was created had been an
  indefinitely long period of time." But, according to the conception of
  the Biblical author supposed by us, only the "day of God," in which he
  was created, would have been an indefinitely long period of time
  (although we are not willing to identify the days of God with certain
  earthly periods of time); the earthly days and the earthly years, on the
  other hand, would have their existence after the fourth day of creation,
  and thus, according to that view, we could estimate and name the earthly
  years and days of all that which happened before the fourth day of
  creation, under the condition that we have, or believe we have, the means
  of estimating them. When Dillmann continues: "On the contrary, the author
  took these days as nothing else than days," we wholly agree with him; but
  add to it: "not days of the creature, but days of God."
By this long duration of the seventh day, we are obliged to draw still
  another conclusion; namely, that according to the conception of the
  author the six preceding days also must have far exceeded the duration of
  earthly days. This leads us to another Biblical analogy, whose direct
  power of demonstration for a long [303]duration of the
  Biblical days of creation is, it is true, justly contested, but which, as
  soon as we have to assume for other reasons that according to the author
  the days of creation far exceed the earthly days as to duration, becomes
  a strong support of this view. For it is certainly not unimportant that
  in the 90th Psalm, the psalm of Moses, the mediator of the Sinaitical
  legislation, to the circle of ideas of which that account of the creation
  so entirely belongs, the thought is expressed which is also taken up in
  the second letter of St. Peter, with its developed cosmological
  conceptions: namely, the thought "that one day is with the Lord as
  a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day."
With that exegesis of the seventh day as one still remaining up to the
  present, we are in clear accord with the more developed theology of the
  New Testament, and with the interpretation which it itself gives of that
  divine day of rest. Jesus himself, in St. John, V. 17, puts aside a reproach of the Pharisees in
  reference to a healing on the Sabbath, with the words: "My father worketh
  hitherto, and I work." This answer only has a meaning in the sense: my
  father worketh hitherto, although, since the accomplishment of the days
  of creation, he enjoys the Sabbath-rest; and thus I also work on the
  Sabbath as on a work-day. And the Letter to the Hebrews, in its fourth
  chapter, looks through the medium of the ninety-fifth Psalm back to this
  Sabbath of creation which, as a day of rest of God, exists to-day, and
  the entering into which is given and promised to the people of God.
By this whole conception of the Biblical week of creation, which
  appears to us exegetically much more [304]natural and
  unconstrained than any other, we alone reach that conception which the
  author of that record intends to reach; namely, a conception
  really worthy of God, of his temporal relation to the world, and of the
  relation of human days to the divine days of creation; we get a
  foundation for the commandment to keep the Sabbath, the idea of which can
  be completed without disturbing the idea of God. The relation of God to
  the whole temporal course of this present world, from its beginning to
  its end, for the religious mode of contemplation of man who, as the image
  of God, looks to the creative activity of God for a prototype and an
  example for his own activity, can be comprised in one single, great,
  divine week, whose first six days last to the completion of the creation
  of man, and whose seventh day still lasts and will last to the completion
  of the course of the world—till the latter itself, and mankind with
  it, can enter into the divine rest.
From this religious interpretation, which we have to ascribe to that
  Biblical idea of the divine week of creation, it by no means follows that
  religion has to demand of natural science that it shall reach in its
  cosmogonic investigations the same succession in the appearance of things
  as we find in the Biblical account. This would be nothing else but an
  actual carrying of a pretended religious interest over beyond the limits
  of a realm in which the deciding vote belongs to natural science. However
  incomplete the cosmogonic knowledge of the latter may be, it nevertheless
  is at present established clearly enough to reject forever such a demand.
  Astronomy convinces us that it is entirely inconceivable that all which
  belongs to the work of the fourth Biblical day of creation, even [305]the
  whole formation of stars and of our system of planets, succeeded
  the work of the third day, the formation of earthly continents and
  plants. And geology in its strata, which exhibit petrifactions, shows us
  that the relative Biblical days' works in reality did not succeed one
  another alternately in such a way that the one began where the other
  ceased, but that from the beginning of organic life the works of the
  third and the fifth days from the carboniferous period, also the works of
  the third, fifth, and sixth days, developed themselves perfectly by the
  side of each other. It would be an excess of refinement to identify any
  Biblical day of creation with any period or any complex of periods in the
  development of the earth or of the world.
On the other hand, for a Christianity founded upon the Holy Scripture,
  it is still not entirely without interest to compare the results of
  natural science and the extent and succession of the Biblical days' works
  with one another. For a declaration which undertakes to trace
  something which has so deep a hold on human life as the Sabbath-rest,
  back to the prototype of directly divine action, is certainly worthy of
  attention. Now if we wish to make such a comparison, we can only do it in
  exact analogy with the way and manner in which we compare the predictions
  of the prophetical word with their fulfilment. For in so far as the
  declarations of that Biblical record about the circumstances of creation
  have religious value of which we are to take notice, they as declarations
  concerning events of which man certainly cannot have historical knowledge
  of his own, come entirely under the point of view of the prophetical
  word; with the exception that they do not contain a forward-looking
  but a [306]backward-looking prophecy. This is
  one of the most correct and fruitful thoughts which Johann Heinrich Kurz,
  in his "Bibel und Astronomie" ("Bible and Astronomy"), Berlin,
  Wohlgemuth, 1st edition, 1842, has expressed, but has fantastically
  misused, in that work, in general so prolific of indefensible positions;
  a fate which, as is well known, the forward-looking prophecy has had also
  often enough to undergo.
In the same manner as we have to explain the forward-looking prophecy
  from two factors—on the one hand, from the circumstances of time,
  the knowledge, the dispositions, and the characters of prophets; on the
  other, from the receptivity of their mind for the mind of God and the
  last purposes of his actions—we also have explained that record of
  creation from two factors: on the one hand, from the view and the
  knowledge of its time, and on the other from the receptivity of its
  author for a pure and living idea of God and of the religious relations
  of human life. And we shall also have to do likewise when interpreting
  it. For the interpretation of the forward-looking prophecy, we have
  behind us the experience of thousands of years, from which the following
  principles, of treatment and interpretation have resulted. As long as
  such a prophetic word is not yet fulfilled, so long, indeed, its meaning
  is and remains the object of Christian faith and Christian hope; but it
  is difficult and almost impossible to distinguish in it, what is lasting
  substance, and what is transient form. Perhaps many a thing is looked
  upon as substance, which in the fulfilment appears to be only an image
  and form; and perhaps many a thing as form, which in the fulfilment shows
  itself as a more concrete reality than we had supposed. [307]And it would
  even be psychologically a violent assumption, if we should presuppose in
  the mind of the prophet a still greater knowledge of the future course of
  things, than that which he expresses; or if we should separate him in his
  worldly knowledge, and even in the form of his prophetic utterances, from
  the views and limits of his time. But by far the most fruitless effort of
  all would be to construct beforehand out of his words the particulars of
  the historical course of the future. Attempts of this kind have been
  defeated whenever they have been made. But if the fulfilment of such a
  prophetic word has once taken place, it is a joy and a strengthening of
  faith to all following generations, and even after the final fulfilment
  of all prophecy, it will still be a joy to the children of God in their
  perfection, to compare prophecy and fulfilment and to allow the prophecy
  to be illumined by the light of fulfilment, the fulfilment by that of
  prophecy.
All this finds its full application to the Biblical narrative of
  creation. That which in the forward-looking prophecy is the historical
  fulfilment, is in the backward-looking the scientific investigation. So
  long as the latter was not directed at all to the prehistoric history of
  the earth, it was an audacious undertaking to separate in the Biblical
  six days' work substance and form from one another; it was and is still
  an unpsychological violence to suppose in the human author of the
  narrative all possible knowledge of psychical and scientific secrets, and
  to lift him above the child-like views of his time concerning the things
  of this world. But it was by far the most fruitless undertaking to
  construct in detail from his words a picture of the real [308]circumstances
  of the creation and development of the world. Attempts of this kind have
  been often made; but they have produced nothing but dreams. And certainly
  the attempt to control and correct natural investigation by means of such
  dreams would be like trying to correct well-established facts of history
  by the prophecies of a still earlier period, or even to prove them false.
  But from the time when natural science, as it is at present, began to pay
  attention to the prehistoric history of the earth and even of the
  universe, such a comparison has been possible.
It tells us, it is true, that the Biblical days' works did not follow
  each other in the course of earthly and cosmic developments in such a
  way, that the one began where the other ceased, but that they passed on
  in the long lines of their course, beside one another, and above one
  another. But looking upon their meridian altitudes, they
  nevertheless, where we are able to undertake certain geological
  comparisons, follow one another exactly in the same order in which the
  days follow one another in that Biblical record. The meridian altitude of
  the third day (for here the certainty of geological knowledge
  first begins for us) has to be looked for where the continents are formed
  and the vegetable life preponderates on earth: and that is the
  carboniferous period. The meridian altitude of the fourth
  day must have been reached where for the first time the covering of
  vapor and clouds of the earthly atmosphere permanently parted, and sun,
  moon, and stars became visible: and geology finds this time in the period
  which lies between the carboniferous period and the trias—in the
  Permian period, as it is called in England, in the dyas of
  the [309]fossiliferous and of cupriferous slate and
  Zechstein, as we call it in Germany. The meridian altitude of the
  fifth day has to be looked for where ocean-life, with its sauria
  and innumerable animals, gave its impress to organic life on earth, and
  the air was filled with inhabitants: geology calls such a time the
  secondary period of trias, Iura, and chalk. That ocean-life
  preponderated in this period, is beyond any doubt; while in general
  geology gives us more meagre information about the inhabitants of the air
  than of the animals of the ocean and land. The flying sauria of Iura are
  still characteristic enough to leave at least the possibility that the
  winged world, which in value still stands below the mammalia, assisted in
  giving to that secondary period its proper type. Finally, the meridian
  altitude of the sixth day cannot be anywhere else than where the
  animals of the land became the most characteristic inhabitants of the
  globe, and where man appeared: and that is the tertiary period of
  geology, in which mammalia appeared in great numbers and variety, and at
  the end of which we find the first traces of the appearance of man.
We nevertheless do not assign special weight to the establishment of
  such a correspondence. The religious value of the idea of a divine week
  of creation is rendered perfectly certain to us, if we only find that it
  is reconcilable with a pure idea of God. That would not be the case, if
  we had to look upon the week of creation as an earthly week; but it is
  perfectly so, if the divine week stretches over the whole temporality of
  the course of the world. Therewith we can be satisfied. For we have
  neither theological nor philosophical nor [310]scientific evidences
  enough to draw from these Biblical utterances any metaphysical
  conclusions in reference to the relations of God to the temporal
  development of the world. We should not dare to contest directly such
  metaphysical relations: for the human week, with its day of rest, is such
  an eminently fortunate and blissful invitation, the observance of this
  command is accompanied by such a striking prosperity in all
  life-relations of a people, its non-observance by such an evident curse,
  and, moreover, the idea of man bearing the image of God is such a
  fruitful idea, satisfying equally spirit and mind, that we have to
  remember the possibility that the institution of the human week, with its
  day of rest, is certainly founded on the real relations of the
  life-process of that creature which bears the image of God to the
  activity of its divine prototype upon the earth. But nevertheless, we
  just as little dare to attempt or to challenge the establishment of such
  metaphysical relations: for a theosophistic treatment of numbers seems to
  us no fruitful field for the promotion of religion—neither for the
  promotion of religious knowledge nor for that of religious life.
Still, however, the result of our comparison between Biblical and
  scientific interpretation seems to us worth mentioning for a special
  reason. It is true, we have found a succession of the meridian
  altitudes of the Biblical days in the same order in which, according
  to the Biblical relation, the days' works followed one another; but we
  have found in the total course of the Biblical days that their
  works in reality passed on in long lines contemporaneously with one
  another. Now, since that first part of our result—the succession of
  meridian [311]altitudes—is the least we have
  to expect, if the counting of the days shall at all have an objectively
  real ground in the world's process, on the other hand, the second part of
  our result—the far-reaching contemporary existence of the different
  Biblical days—has an exact analogy with those prophecies whose
  partial or entire fulfilment permits us a more certain judgment of the
  character of prophecy and a more certain comparison between prophecy and
  fulfilment. Even the prophetic world knows of a divine day, which in the
  prophecies occupies an eminent and central position: it is the day of the
  Lord as the day of judgment and salvation. This day of the Lord also
  stands before the eye of the prophet, certainly not as a common earthly
  day of twenty-four hours, but as a day of God rising above earthly days
  and embracing an infinite number of them, although it also has its very
  distinct meaning which comes into the earthly temporality. But in the
  historic fulfilment, there happen along with it a thousand things which
  do not belong to it; for two-thirds of mankind that day did not dawn at
  all; and as to its temporal course, it had its dawn in the beginnings of
  mankind,—its sunrise took place eighteen hundred years ago, and its
  meridian altitude is still impending.
Finally, that even the piety of those who composed the Biblical
  records, and of all those who see in them the manifested evidences of
  their faith, assigns no religious weight to the succession of the days'
  works, becomes clear from the before-mentioned fact, that the second
  account of creation, which makes man and his ethical primitive history
  its centre, relates the creation of the inhabitants of the earth in quite
  a different order from [312]the first one. We shall treat of this
  point again, and more in detail, for another reason, in the following
  section.
We still have to treat of the question as to what position the Holy
  Scripture and Biblical Christianity take regarding a development in
  general: and here also we have only to say that they are very
  favorable to such an idea. The works of the six days themselves are in
  their succession nothing else but a development, a permanent
  differentiation of that which was not separated before, a continuous
  unfolding of the more simple into the more complex, an always progressing
  preparation of the globe for newer and higher forms of existence, until
  finally man appeared. In the Biblical account of creation, the idea which
  forms the basis of every evolution theory, (namely, that the new which
  appears has its conditions and suppositions, its creative secondary
  reasons, in the preceding), is pronounced with special clearness. When it
  says: "Let the Earth bring forth grass and herb,... and the earth brought
  forth," etc.; "And God said: Let the waters bring forth abundantly the
  moving creature that hath life," etc.; "Let the earth bring forth the
  living creature; and it was so;" and "God made the beast of the
  earth,"—the creative causality also is mentioned in the clearest
  words by the side of and under the causality of the Creator, by means of
  which the latter had made creatures. The friendly relation between the
  Biblical account and the evolution theory even goes so far that the Holy
  Scripture, like that theory, does not permit animals to come forth from
  plants, although the latter represent the lower, the former the higher,
  and that, plants are a [313]necessary condition for animals, but that
  even according to the Bible both kingdoms come forth from the inorganic
  of the earth. When treating of the creation of plants, it says, "Let the
  earth bring forth grass," etc.; and when treating of that of animals, it
  says, "Let the earth bring forth the living creature." At last, if
  science should once succeed in perceiving more clearly than now the
  origin of the organic from the inorganic, it would have in those words
  the means for a harmony with the Biblical conception.
Now, just as evidently as the Holy Scripture is favorable, in general
  and as a whole, to the idea of evolution, so certainly it seems to reject
  it precisely at that point where the whole interest of our question lies;
  namely, in reference to the origin of the single species. For here, when
  treating of the creation of plants as well us of animals, it is said in
  most distinct words: "after his kind." But the contradiction is
  only apparent. As to the way and manner in which God created every
  species, whether he used secondary causes or not, nothing else is said
  than that God created every species, that the creatures exist in
  distinctly marked species, and that these species are not chance, but lie
  in the plan of God—that they are his work. This fact, that it was
  God who wished to create each species as species, and in reality created
  it, is just as firmly established, if the species came forth from one
  another and were developed in gradual transitions, as if they received
  their existence in some other way. As, in the fifth day's work, we find
  simply the words: "And God said, Let the earth bring forth the
  living creature: and it was so;" and "God made the beast of the
  earth,"—in precisely the same way [314]God could indeed
  create single plants and animals after their kind, in such
  a way that one should come forth from another, that they should be
  developed from one another.
§ 2. The Creation of Man.
The most important facts which we have to mention, as bearing upon the
  position of the Christian doctrine of the creation of man in reference to
  the evolution theory, have been treated of in Chapter
  I, A. We have especially convinced ourselves of the fact, that
  the new, even if it has its secondary causes, and comes into existence in
  gradual development, is no less a creation of God, and has no less the
  full value of the new, than if it were created instantaneously. Likewise
  man also stands before us untouched in the full newness and dignity of
  his being, in the full qualitative and not simply quantitative
  superiority of the highest gifts of his mind, and especially of his
  personality, his ego, his liberty,—in one word, in his full image
  of God,—whether we have to look upon him as created in gradual
  development or as created suddenly.
There are two circumstances in the Biblical account from which we see
  that, although it is naturally silent as to the descent problem, it not
  only knows and acknowledges the connection of man with the lower
  creatures of the earth, but also expressly directs attention to it.
One of these circumstances is connecting man's creation with that of
  land-animals, in a single day's work. We do not lay more stress on this
  union than that of the Holy Scripture, although it emphasizes so strongly
  the dignity of man in his likeness to God and in his having entire [315]supremacy over the whole earth, and
  although it could have found therein reasons enough for assigning a
  proper day to the creation of man, to which the whole preceding creation
  pointed, and whom the whole creation on earth should serve, yet in its
  account of the creation it evidently desires man to be looked upon in his
  connection as a creature with the animal world. Moreover, we should not
  overlook, in the Biblical account, that the benediction which God gives
  to the animals of the water and the air, at the end of the fifth day, is
  in the sixth day not pronounced over the land-animals—although they
  certainly are as much entitled to it as fish and birds—but over
  man. Of course, it is presupposed that the land-animals naturally partake
  of the benediction of man, so far as it can be due to them; the
  benediction, namely, of fertility and of increase. According to these
  indications and to the Biblical conception, man stands in still another
  and closer connection with the animal world than in that of mere
  supremacy over it.
The second circumstance to which we have to call attention, is the
  declaration (Genesis II, 7), that God created
  man out of earth; or rather, as the literal translation says: "And the
  Lord God formed man (of) dust of the ground." It is of no importance
  whether the accusative "dust of the ground" is, as some say, a mere
  appositive, or, as others explain it, the accusative of matter. When the
  account calls man dust of the ground, or a being formed of dust, the
  difference is infinitely insignificant, whether the earthly matter out of
  which God formed man who is dust of the earth, was an animal organism or
  not; whether man was formed [316]directly or indirectly out of the earth,
  and whether the forming demanded a longer or a shorter time. For that it
  did demand time, and that it was not an instantaneous creation, is
  implied in the expression "to form."
We call attention to this passage for still another reason. The second
  account of creation, as it begins Genesis II,
  4, and goes on to the end of the third chapter, is strikingly different
  from the first account, Genesis I-Genesis II, 4. It has its origin in that author whose book is
  called that of the Jehovist, or, more lately, the judaico-prophetic book;
  and who, among all those that have contributed stones to the building of
  the Pentateuch, gives the deepest insight into the nature of sin and
  grace, and into the divine plan of salvation. Now in this book, from the
  religious point of view so extremely worthy of attention, the account of
  the creation is given quite differently. Man is the centre of the
  account; that which does not directly refer to him is entirely omitted.
  The order in which the inhabitants of the earth were created, is not only
  not divided into the six day's works of the first account, and in verse 4
  is not only directly taken as the work of a single day, in the expression
  בַּיּוֹם
  (in the day, in which = when), without especial stress being put upon the
  expression "one day," for בַּיּוֹם
  has become a particle; but this order is entirely different from the
  other. In the second account, the succession is the following: "first,
  man; then, the paradise into which man is placed; next, the trees (the
  question at what time the rest of the vegetable world was created is left
  entirely without answer); then, the determination to create also an
  assistant to man; next, the creation of animals; finally, the creation of
  the woman out [317]of a rib of man." Now, although it is
  wholly beyond doubt that the two accounts had different authors, the
  question will nevertheless arise, how it was possible that those who
  inserted these two accounts in the Holy Scripture, one after the other,
  could so harmlessly put side by side and read one after the other these
  two accounts, so entirely contradictory, without being obliged to think
  that the truth of the one would refute the other. They certainly must
  have had in some way the conviction that the one account was consistent
  with the other. But such an agreement between the two accounts is only
  possible when we either see in them only ideal truths, or when one of the
  two shall represent the actual reality of the circumstances of creation,
  and the other rather their ideal character. In case we should have to
  make such a distinction, it cannot be doubtful which of the two accounts
  has more of the real, and which more of the ideal character. In the first
  account nothing is related which does not give direct points of
  connection in the real process, as we can imagine it. In the second
  account, we find many points which hardly permit a direct literal
  conception, even on the part of the first readers of the account and of
  the editors of the canon of the Old Testament: for instance, besides the
  different order in which the first account is given, the creation of the
  woman out of the rib of man: this account, when ideally taken, is so
  inexpressibly comprehensive, pregnant, and deep—when taken really,
  so perfectly improbable. It will be likewise difficult to believe that
  even the old readers of the account—at least those of them who
  looked deeper and were more enlightened—took with extreme [318]literalness the expression, that God
  breathed into the nostrils of man who is dust of the ground, the breath
  of life. The third chapter has still other features from which we have at
  least to assume that the author did not at all intend to give importance
  to an extremely literal conception of it. Now, if the second account is
  the more ideal one, the meaning of it is: that man, his being, his aim,
  his primitive history, is made the centre of the entire description, and
  around him all the rest is grouped; while in the first account he appears
  to be more the end of the whole creation—as he presents himself to
  natural investigation in the real process of creation, as the last member
  in the chain, not as the centre in a circle or a star. Now if that is the
  case, if the second account of creation, having man as its centre, is the
  more ideal, then we certainly must not overlook the fact that in the
  ideal account man is called dust of the ground. Then the nature of dust
  also belongs, from the ideal point of view, so necessarily to the nature
  of man that the question, whether the connection of this man who is dust
  of the ground, with this ground, is brought about through the form of a
  preceding animal organism, or not, is no longer of importance. Therefore,
  if we oppose the animal ancestry of man for the general reasons that we
  do not wish to descend from something lower, that lower nevertheless is
  present as dust of the ground. And if we oppose such a pedigree on
  account of the ugliness and wickedness which exist in the animal world,
  we have to point to the fact that, on the one hand, mankind also has
  stains which are uglier than those which disfigure the wildest beast of
  prey, and that, on the other hand, the animal world shows features which
  [319]are so noble that no man need be ashamed
  of them. It is certainly a right feeling to which Darwin, in his "Descent
  of Man," gives expression, when he says: "For my own part, I would as
  soon be descended from that heroic little monkey who braved his dreaded
  enemy in order to save the life of his keeper, or from that old baboon
  who, descending from the mountains, carried away in triumph his young
  comrade from a crowd of astonished dogs, as from a savage who delights to
  torture his enemies, offers up bloody sacrifices, practices infanticide
  without remorse, treats his wives like slaves, knows no decency, and is
  haunted by the grossest superstitions." We have but to add:—if only
  the coming forth from the creative hand of God, the creation in his own
  image, the communion with Him and being a child of His, are preserved.
  And that all this can be preserved, even when adopting descent and
  evolution, we have seen from repeated considerations.
But we have to draw still another conclusion from the difference
  between the two accounts of creation. If the succession, in which the
  inhabitants of the earth appear in the first account, is so entirely
  different from that in the second, as it evidently is, we have
  necessarily either to give up the historical reality of the one or of the
  other account, or of both, or to suppose that the creation of the
  inhabitants of the earth took place in a way and manner which makes it
  possible to perceive a real connection of the succession in the
  first account, as well as in that of the second, with the real
  processes of creation. Now we do not at all intend to argue with those
  who choose the first part of the dilemma; we ourselves join with them,
  and believe that salvation does [320]not depend upon the objective reality of
  that succession, nor the possession of salvation on the faith of such
  reality. But we leave to the consideration of those who, in their
  religious convictions, think themselves bound to the objective reality of
  both accounts, the following thoughts: If not only ideal depth, but also
  a connection with the empirical and historical reality of the process of
  creation, is to be assigned to the succession of the first account as
  well as to that of the second, it is only possible by assuming a
  descent—namely, that man, e.g., may be called in one sense
  the first of creatures, inasmuch as with the first organism that was
  already given which was afterwards developed into man, and inasmuch as
  all which was otherwise created and developed as aspecial species, was
  only present on account of that aim; and that man in another, in the
  merely empirico-historical sense, is still also the last of creatures.
  Thus, then, the advocates of descent would find themselves in the
  unaccustomed position, equally surprising to friend and foe, of being in
  a much more friendly relation to the Biblical belief in revealed religion
  than their opponents. We should see the apparent discords not only
  between Scripture and nature, but also between account and account,
  dissolved into harmony, and above the double relation of the two accounts
  we should see the morphological ideas of Oken and Göthe, the ideas of
  types of Cuvier, Agassiz, and Owen, the laws of development of K. E. von
  Baer, and finally the ideas of descent of Lamarck and Darwin, reach a
  friendly hand to one another. And even the old joys of a teleological
  view of nature, adorned indeed with queue and wig, but at present
  rejected with too much disdain, even if they [321]are called
  ichthyo-teleological and insecto-teleological, would attain in this
  reconciliation their modest, subordinate place. Moreover, we should then
  have the satisfaction of seeing again that a religiousness which in its
  own realm gives absolutely free play to natural investigation, and does
  not find it beneath its dignity to learn from natural science, can on
  that account retain its own autonomy in its own realm much more
  uncontestedly; and that, as it seems to us in the present case, it can go
  much farther in the use which it makes of its autonomy and in the
  extension of the revealed character of its religious records to physical
  processes and circumstances, than is either necessary or safe, and that
  it nevertheless is rewarded for keeping peace with natural science by
  more rich, more living, and more correct glimpses into the harmony
  between the word of God and the work of God, than would be the case with
  a religiousness which, without regard to natural science, weaves its
  cosmogonies from the Holy Scripture alone.
§ 3. The Primitive Condition of Man: Paradise, the Fall of Man, and Primitive History.
After the Holy Scripture has narrated the creation of man in two
  accounts, the second of them gives us a continuation in the well-known
  account of Paradise and of the fall of man, with its consequences; and
  the further development, of the Biblical doctrine, as well as of
  Christian theology, has also taken the substance and quintessence of
  these narratives into its representation of the Christian truths of
  salvation.
We shall not throw any obstacles in the way of bringing about an
  understanding between the Darwinian views [322]and the Biblical
  primitive history, by acknowledging the justice of the view that
  Christian piety might in some way contain in itself the demand that also
  the form in which the facts of truth in Genesis III are given to us, has historical reality. He who
  makes this demand has only his own short-sightedness and imprudence to
  blame, if he also loses the substance with the form, the figurative
  nature of which can be shown to him only too certainly. We acknowledge it
  as a real providence of God, which intends faithfully to guard believing
  man against a senseless and slavish adherence to the letter, and against
  grounding his means of salvation upon insecure foundations, that at the
  grand and venerable portal of Holy Scripture two accounts stand
  peacefully beside one another, which, if we penetrate through the form
  into their substance, complete one another in magnificent and profound
  harmony, but which, if we look upon the form as their substance, so
  diametrically contradict each other that we cannot do anything else but
  reject the one or the other, or, still more logically, both. We think
  that this hint is strong enough to be understood, and bears, like all
  bowing before truth and its power of conviction, rich fruit not only for
  our knowledge, but also for the purity, certainty, and richness of our
  religiousness. We shall not lose by this acknowledgment the character of
  revelation and the impression of the truth of these Biblical records, but
  shall be able through them, and through them alone, to gain and perceive
  it. It is true, the first account, and still more the second—the
  account of the creation and of the primitive history of man—has in
  its external form an exceedingly close relationship to the poetical myths
  of the ancient nations of the Orient; but [323]its difference does not
  consist essentially in the form—although this too, being the form
  of a true and correct substance, shows differences enough from these
  heathen myths—but consists in the substance itself. These heathen
  myths certainly contain many beautiful, deep, and true factors, but
  always, besides, fundamental ideas which we have to reject as half-true
  or wholly erroneous: sometimes a dualistic conception of God and the
  world, sometimes a materialization of the divine, the spiritual, and the
  ethical, sometimes fatalistic and sometimes magic elements in great
  number. These Biblical representations, on the other hand, certainly
  appear to us still in a picturesque form which is analogous to that
  formation of myth; for it really seems to be the only form in which the
  mind of man, in his first epoch of life, was able to perceive and
  represent supernatural and ethical truth, as we are to-day able to
  represent the highest relations of our mind to the supernatural and the
  ethical only in pictures and parables; but the Biblical representations
  offer us, under this plastic covering, a substance which, in view of the
  most extensive criticism, of the deepest speculation, and of the most
  enlightened and practically most successful piety, is still established
  as the purest, the most correct, and the most fruitful representation of
  the nature of God, and of the ethical nature and the ethical history of
  man.
Moreover, we shall not make it difficult to bring about an
  understanding between the Darwinian theories and the Biblical doctrine,
  by supporting the other view taught by the Holy Scripture—that
  death came into the animal world first through the fall of man, and that
  the fall of man first brought the character of perishableness [324]into the
  condition of the earth or even of the universe. There are essentially
  three Biblical passages to which those refer who think that they find
  such a view in the Holy Scripture; namely, Romans V, 12; Romans VIII, 19-23,
  and Genesis III; but they are wrong. That the
  Apostle Paul, in Romans V, 12, by the world,
  into which death came through sin, did not mean the universe or the
  globe, but mankind, is plain enough from the connection, and is only
  demanded by the difference of meaning which in the Greek, as well as in
  the German language, the word "world" has according to its connection.
  And in Romans VIII, 19-23, where he speaks of
  the subjection of the creature to vanity, he does not mention a certain
  time in which it happened, nor an historical occasion, as the fall of
  man, which should have given the impulse to this subjection; but he only
  says, in general, that it was God who "hath subjected the creature to
  vanity," and that he hath "subjected the same in hope." He who
  reads this passage without prepossession, can be led to no other idea
  than to this: that God has subjected the creature to the law of vanity
  from the very beginning of creation—not forever, but from the very
  beginning—with the intention that he shall also celebrate his
  transfiguration and deliverance from the yoke of perishableness, together
  with the perfection of mankind, and with the manifestation and
  transfiguration of the children of God. And even the curse of the ground
  (Genesis III, 17) is no cursing of the
  universe, or of the globe and its creatures, but only a cursing of the
  ground; and of this not on its own account, but only in its relation,
  as a means of subsistence, to man, and in opposition to the [325]exemption from
  labor which his life hitherto had, and to the agreeableness of his means
  of support in paradise.
After having thus rejected these two perversions of the Biblical
  doctrine, there remains to us as an established substance of the latter,
  and as an essential part of Christian dogmatics, so far as it may come
  into contact with the Darwinian views, at least the following: Man
  was originally created by God, good and happy. To his goodness there also
  belonged the possibility of having a sinless development, as he ought to
  have had; and to his happiness there also belonged a life amid
  surroundings wholly corresponding to him, and the possibility of
  obtaining exemption from death and all evils by way of a self-controlling
  submission to God, which resists temptation. We purposely express
  ourselves thus. For the Biblical primitive history does not say that man
  was created with exemption from the law of death, but that the
  latter must have been granted to him as a reward for his
  submission: the tree of life stood by the side of the tree of the
  knowledge of good and evil, and only the eating of the fruit of the tree
  of life, by avoiding the eating of the forbidden fruit, should have given
  to man that immortality which he forfeited by disobedience. Man became
  disobedient, and, in consequence of it, subject to death; the harmony
  between man and his surroundings disappeared; the earth became to him a
  place of labor and of death; and now began for man his historical
  development as a web of guilt, of punishment, and of education and
  redeeming mercy.
Now, in the presence of this Biblical view, the question comes up
  first of all: is a view according to which man should have been able and
  obliged to take a sinless [326]development, and, in case he had taken it,
  should have been exempt from the fate of death and of the ills preceding
  it, and endowed with immortality as to body and soul—is such a view
  in any way reconcilable with the Darwinian ideas of development,
  according to which man came forth from the series of lower organisms,
  subject to death?
We could avoid answering this question by a deduction similar to that
  which we drew in Chap. I, § 3, when treating of
  the question of the reconcilableness of the idea of evolution with
  theism, but of which we likewise made no use. We could show that in this
  question no other difficulties present themselves to the religious
  consciousness, than such as existed long before the appearance of the
  Darwinian theories and were overcome by pious consciousness and religious
  reasoning. For a difficulty entirely similar to that which here appears
  to us, when looking upon the whole human species and its origin,
  stood before us heretofore, when looking upon the human individual
  and his origin. From the standpoint of Biblical Christianity, we ascribe
  to the human individual an immortality of the soul and a coming
  resurrection of the body; but we do not to the human embryo at the
  beginning of its development in the womb. Now we know that the
  development of man from that embryo to perfect man is wholly gradual;
  that we cannot observe and predicate of any organ, of any quality, of any
  activity of body, soul, or mind, exactly the moment when it comes into
  existence; and that therefore we cannot give the moment when we could
  assume that something so decidedly great and new as the immortality of
  the soul and the prospect of a [327]resurrection of the body, begins for the
  human individual. Although we know all this, nevertheless in all
  discussions of the question whether we have to hope for an immortality of
  the soul and a resurrection of the body, the gradual development has
  hardly ever been, so far as we know, a weight—in any case, never
  the decisive weight—in the balance against the supposition
  of an immortality. If we can look upon the idea of an immortality of the
  soul and of a resurrection of the body as reconcilable with the fact,
  that the human individual was only developed gradually out of something
  which was still soulless and perishable, we also have to look upon the
  other fact as reconcilable with the gradual development of the whole
  species; namely, that man, if he should have developed himself
  without sin, would have reached an immortality of body and soul. But we
  shall not enter this path which would lead us around the whole question.
  For the objection might be made, that the scientific and philosophic
  impossibility of assuming an eternal duration of an individual that
  originated in time, has, indeed, always been pointed out, and only the
  assertion, not the proof, of the contrary has been opposed
  to it; but that Darwinism puts this impossibility into new and full
  light. Therefore, if we wish to reach a certain basis for our conviction,
  nothing else remains to us but to enter upon that question wholly and
  exclusively from Darwinian premises.
Now these premises, indeed, indicate to us a development of
  things, but a development of such a kind that there appears to us
  something new, and always new in a rising line. The rising of this line
  of development consists in the fact that the spiritual comes forth from
  the [328]natural in permanent progress and in
  always higher development: that mind vanquishes matter. The first new
  thing which meets us in the development of the globe, is the organic and
  life; the second, sensation and consciousness; the third,
  self-consciousness and free-will. Now let us once suppose imaginary human
  spectators of every first appearance of these phenomena. Would he who
  thus far had only known inorganic phenomena and processes, have dared,
  before the appearance of life, to utter the proposition: matter can also
  become living and live? And who would have dared to suggest the further
  doctrine: matter can also feel and get a consciousness of things?
  Finally, who would have dared even to say: matter can also become a
  self-conscious and free personality? To every person who would have
  pronounced such dreams of the future, there would have been opposed,
  apparently with full right, the inviolable mechanism of the inorganic
  world. But all this nevertheless took place. If something material can be
  led so far that a personality lives in it, that, with the assistance of
  this material basis, is able to perceive the ideas and the eternal, that
  can act in accordance with aims and designs and can set itself the
  highest aims, and that may even enter upon a loving and child-like
  relation to the highest primitive cause of all things, then we are no
  longer permitted to say that the material, of which the body of such a
  personality consists, could not have been subjected to the service of
  such a personality so far, that the latter could have vanquished the
  elements of the destruction of life in an eternal process of spontaneous
  renewal.
It is true, with such a concession alone we have not [329]gained
  anything directly. For in abstracto everything is finally
  conceivable which does not contradict the logical laws of
  reasoning—even the basilisk and the mountain of diamonds in stories
  and fairy tales. But such an abstract conceivableness has not the
  least value for the knowledge of the real, nor even for the
  knowledge of the really possible. For in the world of being and
  becoming, everything in its last elements, forces, qualities, and laws,
  as well as in the last causes of its development, is something so
  absolutely given, that only afterward are we able to analyze that
  which is present, from our observations, or to follow from the given
  factors that which can be, or which under other conditions would have
  become different, and that we are not able to synthetically construct the
  one or the other in advance, independently from the factors of reality.
  If, therefore, that concession shall attain a scientific value, and if
  the conditional sentence: Man would not have been subject to death if he
  had not sinned, is to become an admitted and unassailable part of
  Christian theology, we have to look in the realm of phenomena, and in the
  course of that which took place, for facts which prove that
  man, if he had not committed sin, would not have died, and which thus
  change that merely abstract, possibility into a real one.
Now we have such a fact in the resurrection of the Lord. If it
  really took place, then it is the last earthly stage in the course of the
  Lord's work of Redemption, and then it permits us to draw conclusions
  backwards as to what would have become of man, if he had not been in need
  of this redemption, if he had had a sinless development instead of one
  with sin. [330]
We know very well that in mentioning this fact we meet not only the
  opposition of those who contest a teleological, theistic, and especially
  a Christian view of the world, but also the natural doubts of those who
  defend with warm interest teleology and the ethical fundamentals and
  productive forces of Christianity, but who think it more advisable to
  pass over the whole question of the resurrection in cautious silence. The
  main consideration which hinders them from believing in the reality of
  the resurrection of Jesus Christ, is not the want of historical
  attestation, but rather the absolute want of any attested analogy in the
  other events which have taken place on the earth. What we commonly see
  and witness in the dead, is without exception precisely the opposite of
  that which is related about the further fate of Jesus crucified. Now we
  have repeatedly had occasion to point out that the want of analogy cannot
  at all be a proof of a fact's not having taken place, supposing it
  otherwise well established. Especially if a development of events
  follows aims, it lies in the nature of this development that in its
  course in all the places where we really and actually can speak of a
  development, of a process, things appear and must appear which were not
  present before, and which, even if they once appeared, nevertheless need
  not necessarily be repeated, except at certain times which correspond to
  the plan of development; namely, when "their time has come." All these
  are events which are wanting in analogy, but which cannot be doubted at
  all on that account. That was the case with the first appearance of
  organic life, also with the first appearance of beings having sensation
  and consciousness; moreover, it was the case with the first appearance of
  each of the thousands [331]of species of organic beings: all these
  things, at the time when they first appeared, lacked every analogy in the
  past, and were perhaps repeated for some time, in primitive generations,
  perhaps not; at any rate, they have all ceased to have analogies within
  the memory of man. In an eminent degree does the first appearance of man
  want every analogy with what we observe elsewhere. We never see men
  appear on the stage of the earth, who were not originated by men; yet
  this event, so contrary to all analogy, did once take place, and stands
  without parallel and analogy in the midst of the series of events, so far
  as our knowledge can reach.
Thus the resurrection of the Lord must also necessarily want analogy,
  in case it is an event which really marks a station of progress in the
  development of earthly creatures and their history, and in case also its
  nature and its importance tend not to bring mankind, or at least those
  who believe in him who has been raised, at once under the influence of
  its physical consequences, but only so far to prepare the way for these
  consequences in intellectual and moral life-forces. And precisely such an
  event is the resurrection of Jesus, according to the announcement of the
  Lord as to himself and his work, and according to the development of this
  personal testimony in the minds of his first disciples, and also
  according to what Jesus actually became for mankind, and especially for
  Christianity. According to this testimony of Jesus and his apostles, and
  to this actual experience, Jesus is the Redeemer, whose work is to make
  amends for the destruction caused by sin, and thus to originate and
  establish a new creation in mankind which, from inner, mental, and
  spiritual beginnings, [332]renews mankind, and becomes the leaven
  which, in long periods of labor, leads it to the goal of perfection; a
  perfection in which the whole creation shall participate—with
  which, indeed, mankind is inseparably connected on the whole natural side
  of its existence. But then it also lies in the nature of the resurrection
  of Jesus to be single in its kind, and without analogy, until that time
  shall have come in the development of mankind when the last enemy, death,
  shall be forever removed and overcome.
We quite fail to conceive how those who acknowledge design in the
  world, can avoid the acknowledgment of the resurrection of
  Jesus—supposing the fact to be historically established: whereof we
  shall have to speak hereafter. It is, indeed, quite impossible to speak
  of a goal of mankind, if annihilation—annihilation of single
  personalities as well as of mankind as a whole—is its certain
  destiny. Where and what is this end of mankind, if the last generation of
  the globe is to perish with the destruction of this globe, or languish
  and die even before that destruction, and if nothing will be left of
  mankind beyond the soulless material for new formations in their
  putrifying corpses and desolate homes and works of art? Where and what is
  this goal, if all which once set human minds and hearts in motion, and
  which stimulated the intellectual and moral work of the human races,
  simply ceases to exist, no longer finds anywhere even a place of
  remembrance, and nowhere has a fruit to exhibit, except perhaps in the
  mind of a God who once set the cruel play in motion, and now permits it
  to cease, in order to procure for himself a change in the entertainment?
  A mere immortality of human [333]souls, without resurrection and without
  the perfection and transfiguration of the universe, is not afforded us by
  this goal, which we certainly need, if we are to think at all of a goal
  for mankind. For if all departing souls should be carried into another
  world whose only relation to the further course of the earthly history of
  mankind was in the fact, that the dead are always gathered in it; into
  another world whose only relation to the past of the earthly history of
  mankind should be in the fact, that it is divided into a heaven and a
  hell for those who reach it; if in this world everything should move on,
  without end, in eternal coming and going; and if nothing could be said of
  that other world than that everything there is different from
  ours—even that we should there have no possible points of contact
  with this world: then we should have nothing else but a gloomy dualism of
  the world for which neither our intellectual, nor our psychical, and
  least of all our physical, organization is in any way prepared, we should
  have in it no satisfaction of our noblest instincts, no goal to which we
  would be led by any of the guides who show us the paths which we have to
  follow on earth. Only a resurrection and transfiguration of the earth and
  the universe, as well as of a glorified mankind, show us such a goal. For
  this aim, for such a real continuation of life of the single
  personality, and of all mankind, after the long work of moral and
  intellectual development, all noble and worthy instincts of mankind are
  prepared—from the instinct of self-preservation up to the instinct
  of self-sacrifice for ideal purposes and the instinct of moral perfection
  and community with God. We find that in all the rest of creation,
  instincts and inherent powers [334]are present to be satisfied. The
  naturalistic tendencies which at present control so many minds, are very
  much inclined to found their whole view of the world upon this
  correlation of instinct, function, and satisfaction. Should, then, the
  highest instincts of the highest creature on earth alone make an
  exception? Have they originated from illusions, and do they lead to
  illusions? We cannot refrain from quoting a word which Alb. Réville, of
  Rotterdam, has written in the first part of the October issue of the
  "Revue des Deux Mondes," 1874, on the occasion of a criticism of E. v.
  Hartmann's "Philosophy of the Unconscious"; though it was written only in
  defence of theism in general. We quote from a report of E. P., in the
  Augsburger Allgem. Zeitung, Oct. 27, 1874, which is all at present
  at our command: "When the young bird, fluttering its wings on the edge of
  its mother's nest, launches forth for the first time, it finds the air
  which carries it, while a passage is opened for it. Instinct deceived the
  bird just as little as it deceives the multitude of large and small
  beings which only live in following its incitations. And should man
  alone, whom spiritual perfection attracts—man whose characteristic
  instinct it is to raise himself mentally toward the real-ideal, the
  superiority of which he cannot sufficiently describe, should man, who
  obeys his nature, dash his head against the wall built of unhewn stones
  of unconscious, blind, and deaf force? Nature, indeed, has too much
  spirit—according to Hartmann himself—to indulge in such an
  absurdity; and the philosophy of the 'unconscious Unconscious' will never
  permit it." It is true, there is actually present in mankind, and in it
  alone, such a discord between [335]instinct and satisfaction: man has in
  himself instincts which are opposed to sin and death, and nevertheless
  sin and death exist. But the redemption through Christ, and especially
  the knowledge of his resurrection, announces to us that this discord is
  removed.
Therefore, he who in general acknowledges that mankind in its
  development has had given to it goals which correspond to its gifts and
  instincts, has every reason to look about and see whether, in the course
  of human history, certain things have happened which point at such
  aims—indications which prophetically assure mankind, that it
  advances toward a spiritual and moral perfection, and toward an
  undiminished participation of all members of mankind in this perfection.
  Such an assurance is offered us in the resurrection of Jesus; and
  therefore, all who have not abandoned a teleological view of the world,
  have reason for examining it with reference to the degree of its
  historical truth. This degree is the highest which we can in general
  claim of any historical event.
In order to show this with such brevity as is necessary in the present
  book, and at the same time to guard ourselves against every danger of
  prejudice in the investigation, we shall for this occasion assume
  hypothetically that all, even the most extreme, assertions of Biblical
  criticism as to the authenticity and inauthenticity of the books of the
  New Testament, and as to the difference of their component parts and the
  time of their composition, are correct and proven; and see what then
  remains established. In the first place, it is an acknowledged fact, that
  Peter first, then the eleven apostles at different times, and between
  these more than five hundred "brethren" (i.e., nearly or fully all
  who had preserved their [336]attachment to the Lord till his death),
  saw the appearances of the risen one, a few days after his death; and,
  indeed, under the most different circumstances, and under mental
  conditions in which they did not at all expect any such second
  appearance. We have, in regard to this, the most authentic written
  evidence of the apostle Paul, in the fifteenth chapter of his first
  letter to the Corinthians: a letter whose authenticity no criticism has
  dared to doubt. This letter was written in the spring of 58: and Paul
  himself had already been changed from a persecutor into a believer in
  Christ in the year 36—i.e., one year after the death of
  Jesus, which took place in 35; he went to Jerusalem in 39, and here
  everything was related to him by Peter, as we know from his letter
  (likewise not contested) to the Galatians. Thus the authentic information
  of the man, who in 58 collected the historical proofs of the reality of
  the resurrection of Jesus for his Corinthian Christians, goes back to
  four years after the death of Jesus, and to the personal witnesses of the
  appearances; as in that letter he also refers to the fact that "many of
  these five hundred brethren are still living." Moreover, it is an
  established fact, that the first written evidences of the evangelical
  history from which our canonical gospels subsequently originated,
  likewise contained accounts of the appearance of the risen one. Finally,
  it is an established fact that, from the very beginning, the whole
  meaning of evangelical preaching turned on the two facts of the death and
  of the resurrection of Jesus, as on the two cardinal points of all
  preaching of salvation; also that all the faith of those who embraced the
  Gospel was founded upon these two facts, as upon the historical
  fundamentals of the [337]salvation which comes from Jesus; and that
  thus Christianity, with all its effects, which have unhinged the old
  world and diffused streams of blessing over mankind, has its historical
  basis in faith in the death of Jesus and his resurrection. This is our
  historical chain of proof. And that evidence which gives certainty to its
  most important link, on which everything depends—the
  appearance of the risen one—is the entire failure of all the
  attempts at explaining that appearance from a seeming death, from an
  intended deception, from a self-delusion, from a vision and an ecstasy,
  from a poetic myth; in short, from any other cause than, that the Lord
  really appeared to his disciples as the man who was dead, but who is
  risen and lives. We cannot follow Keim in all his methods of
  reconstructing the life of Jesus, and we believe that he is much too
  timid regarding the consequences which follow from an objective, real
  appearance of Jesus after his death; but we acknowledge it as a high
  merit of his christological works, that although he is willing to use
  criticism to the utmost, he has so thoroughly and strikingly shown the
  impossibility of explaining the appearance of Jesus after his death
  differently from the real manifestations of his still living person. It
  is well that Strauss, in his "The Old Faith and the New," declares the
  history of the resurrection of Jesus a historical humbug; for it
  may open the eyes of many, if the tendency, of which Strauss is leader,
  is no longer able to explain Christianity—the noblest, purest, and
  most successful religion which has come into existence in the whole
  history of mankind—otherwise than by calling it a humbug. With him
  who is pleased with this manner of explaining the most perfect blossom
  and fruit of [338]the tree of mankind, we certainly can find
  no common ground of mutual understanding.
We have been led to all these discussions, by looking for something
  actual which should be able to throw its light back upon the earliest
  primitive history of mankind—a history which can no longer be
  historically investigated. We have found this reality in the resurrection
  of Jesus; and the light which it throws upon the primitive history of
  man, we have perceived in the conclusion to which it leads us: that man,
  if he had taken a sinless development, would also have been exempt from
  death.
The resurrection of Jesus throws its light upon still another side of
  the Biblical doctrine of the primitive condition of man: namely, upon
  that which is the religious quintessence of the Biblical doctrine of
  Paradise. As now the resurrection of the Lord is the beginning and
  the prophecy of a new creation on the basis of the old, and as we now
  hope, with St. Paul, that this beginning shall manifest its comprehensive
  cosmic effects, when the Lord shall manifest them in the resurrection of
  the "children of God:" so, in case of a sinless development of man, the
  beginning of this new and glorified stage of creation would certainly
  have been perceptible at the beginning of the history of mankind and in
  the relation of man to his earthly surroundings. But we are of course not
  permitted to make or to pursue such a suggestion at present, since a
  sinful development of mankind, with its consequences, actually took
  place.
We have no reason to enter into the discussion of another often and
  much debated question, which is connected with the primitive history of
  man; namely, [339]whether mankind is descended from one
  or more pairs of men. We pass it by; because it has no connection
  whatever with the acceptance or rejection of the Darwinian ideas, and
  since it is not yet archćologically and scientifically solvable. There
  are Darwinians who think monogenetically, and others who think
  polygenetically; and there is still a third class—and they speak
  most correctly—who acknowledge that they know nothing about it.
  Besides, we can also pass by this question, for the reason that in spite
  of the important place which it occupies in the theological system of St.
  Paul, we have no right to assign to it, in the form in which we put it,
  the decisive dogmatic importance which it still occupies in many
  conceptions of Christian theology. For we cannot question the right of
  the natural sciences to enter into the discussion of this question, and
  to look for a solution of it. As soon as we make this concession, it
  necessarily and naturally follows from it, that we must no longer make
  the substance and truth of our religious possession, even in a
  subordinate manner, dependent on the results of exact investigations: for
  our religious possessions have too deep a basis of truth, to permit us to
  ground them on the results of investigations in a realm so dark for
  science and so far removed from religious interest. As to this question,
  we may hope for a future solution in the monogenetic sense: we may
  rejoice over the fact that, according to the present state of knowledge,
  the needle of the scale rather inclines in favor of a oneness of origin
  of mankind; but we must also be prepared to accept the possibility of a
  contrary result, without being afraid that in such a case we should have
  to abandon at once that religious factor [340]for whose sake the
  advocates of a monogenetic descent might defend their view. This
  religious (and, we may add, quite as strong ethic) factor consists in the
  idea of the intimate unity and brotherhood of mankind. We must absolutely
  adhere to this idea; for it is in opposition to the particularism which,
  quite without exception, governed the entire old world, even its most
  highly developed nations, and which was only penetrated by some beams of
  hope and prediction in the prophecy of Israel—one of the most
  beautiful and blissful gifts of Christianity to mankind. This idea still
  contains, as ethical motive, one of the strongest, most indispensable,
  and most promising forces in the world. If this idea shall be a real and
  lastingly effective one, it certainly must also have its real basis in
  the history of the origin of mankind. But, we must ask, is the only
  conceivable reality of this basis a monogenetic pedigree, and do we lose
  this reality if science should once find that mankind came into existence
  not only in one single pair, but in several pairs, even in different
  places, and at different times? Even in such a case, the idea of the
  unity of mankind would only lose its real basis, if at the same time we
  were permitted to think also anti-teleologically—if we were
  permitted to suppose that that which came into existence, repeatedly, and
  in different places, had each time entirely different causes without a
  common aim and a common plan. If we think teleologically, we see the
  unity of mankind, also in case of a polygenetic origin, in the unity of
  the metaphysical and teleological cause which called mankind into
  existence; and to rational beings, endowed with mind, as men are, the
  metaphysical bond is certainly stronger than the physical. [341]Precisely the
  Darwinian ideas of the origin of species through descent would show us in
  such a case the real bond which unites mankind. For then we should only
  have to go back from the different points on the stem-lines of the
  prehistoric generators of these primitive men, at which men originated
  otherwise than by generation, in order to arrive finally at a common root
  of all these stem-lines: the members of mankind would even then remain
  consanguineous among one another, not only in an ideal, but in a real
  sense.
Now that the idea of the unity of mankind was holy and important to
  St. Paul, is to be inferred in advance from such a universal mind. And
  when in Acts XVII, 26, he expresses this idea
  before the Athenians, so proud of their autochthony, with the words that
  "of one blood all nations of men dwell on all the face of the earth"; or
  when, in Romans V, and 1 Corinthians XV, he makes use of the idea in order to explain and
  to glorify the universal power of redemption of Christ by putting Adam
  and Christ in opposition to one another, as the first and the second
  Adam, so that he sees sin and death coming forth from Adam, grace and
  justice and life from Christ and extending over mankind; then we find
  this idea quite convincing and natural, and adhere firmly to the
  quintessence of these truths, even if we acknowledge neither in these
  passages, nor in Genesis I and II, the intention of God to give us a supernatural
  manifestation of the exterior process of the creation of man. Paul
  himself gives us a hint not to follow slavishly a literal interpretation,
  when he says, in Romans V, "as by one man sin
  entered into the world and death by sin," and calls this man Adam,
  although he knows that according to the [342]Biblical relation, Eve
  was the one who was first seduced, and although he expressly points out
  and makes use of this priority of the sin of Eve in another connection,
  and for another reason.
Finally, we may here also take into consideration the contradictions
  which have come up by reason of more recent investigations, in reference
  to the prehistoric conditions of man, and which, especially in
  England, have been designated as the contradiction between the
  elevation theory and the depravation theory.
In general, this contradiction is looked upon as if a conception of
  the primitive history of man, remaining conformable to the Bible, could
  only be brought into harmony with a depravation theory, and not with an
  elevation theory; but certainly without reason.
The Biblical and Christian conception of the primitive history of man
  does not at all demand the conception of a gradual sinking down of
  mankind from a supernatural height—of a gradual depravation of our
  species—which many representations seem to assume. For, according
  to it, the fall of man had already taken place with the first pair of
  mankind; they were driven from Paradise, to long hard labor and
  development; and Paradise was taken from earth. Even the paradisaical
  condition, with its short duration, was deficient in all the various
  gifts of life which are a product of human inventive faculty and skill,
  and which can leave behind vestiges and remains. But what the Holy
  Scripture relates or indicates of the after-paradisaical primitive
  history of man, wholly corresponds to the idea of a gradual development
  out of the more simple and rough, which is demanded by the evolution
  theory in its [343]application to history. That, even
  according to the Biblical conception, goodness and progress in outer
  culture, sin and intellectual stagnation, are not identical, we see from
  the fact, that by the Holy Scripture the most successful inventions of
  man are not assigned to the more pious Sethites, but to the Titan-like,
  rebellious Kainites. Likewise, the evolution theory does not at all
  require a constant, general, and exclusive progress of mankind in all its
  members. As in the realm of irrational organisms, so in the history of
  mankind; it has to assume the most various ramifications with progress,
  stand-still, and retrogradation. It is true, it sees in the nations of
  culture progress in an upward rising line; but besides, stand-still and
  retrogradations in great variety. It also sees in mankind in general a
  labor of upward rising development; but it also sees many hindrances of
  development, and many shavings which the work throws to one side. But
  exactly the same thing was also seen in every religious or profane
  contemplation of history, long before the evolution theory was born.
Therefore, the different views of the earliest primitive history of
  man, the theory of depravation and that of elevation, do not stand so
  opposed to one another—the former representing the Biblical and
  religious, the latter the anti-religious, view of the history—but
  the question as to the primitive history is not yet solved in that
  respect; the depravation theory, as well as the elevation theory,
  indicates rather the directions in which investigation has to put
  its questions to the archćological sources. Investigation, on the other
  hand, has free scope in both directions; and the primitive history of man
  shows itself to be a realm in which religious and scientific interest,
  [344]opponents and advocates of the descent
  theory, can peacefully join hands for common labor. Up to the present,
  the investigations reach results which seem to fall now more into one,
  now more into the other, scale of the balance. On the one hand, the older
  the products of human skill are, the more simple they are; on the other
  hand, even the oldest remains show man in full possession of that which
  distinguishes him from the animal, and attests a spiritual life. The
  reader may think of the before mentioned sketches of the reindeer and
  mammoth (page 90). If we finally come down to
  historic times, and to the present, in order to try to draw conclusions
  from the comparisons of the remotest times of which we have historic
  knowledge, with the present, as to prehistoric times, we likewise find on
  the one side vestiges of the lowest barbarism in the past and present;
  but on the other side we find that the oldest written monuments afford a
  glance into a perfection of intellectual reflection and into a nobility
  of moral and religious views which permits us to draw the highest
  conclusions as to the intellectual worth of earliest mankind. The very
  oldest records of the Holy Scripture give evidence of this intellectual
  height; and even the royal programmes of Assyrian monarchs, which the
  wonderful diligence and ingenuity of recent investigators have deciphered
  from the cuneiform inscriptions, not only relatively correspond to the
  height of culture which we find in the ruins of Assyrian palaces, but
  even, when looked upon absolutely and aside from the morality of conquest
  which they indulge, are inspired by a nobility of mind, and permeated by
  a religiousness, which no potentate of recent times would need to be
  ashamed of. They have [345]been made accessible to the public by the
  work of Eberhard Schrader: "Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament"
  ("Cuneiform Inscriptions and the Old Testament"), Giessen, 1872.
§ 4. Providence, Hearing of Prayer, and Miracles. 
Before we enter into the special christological realm, we have yet to
  glance at the realm of the more common relations between God and the
  creature, as they have found, in faith in a divine providence, in hearing
  of prayer, and in divine miracles, their reflection in Christian
  consciousness.
It is true, we had to discuss the chief basis of an understanding in
  this matter when treating of the position of the Darwinian theories in
  reference to theism in general; but we have a double reason for entering
  again into the consideration of the concrete form which this faith has
  obtained in Christianity.
One reason is the fact, that faith in a special providence of God, in
  a hearing of prayer, and in a connection of the human history of
  salvation with miracles, forms a very essential part of the Christian
  view of the world and of Christian religiousness. All Holy Scripture is
  interwoven with assurances of a providence of God, going even into
  details; with the most distinct and solemn promises of the hearing of our
  prayers; and with the most emphatic reference to the miracles which it
  relates. The Lord himself not only found all these doctrines, and left
  them untouched, but he developed them in the most pregnant way, and
  brought them into the most intimate connection with the quintessence and
  centre of his doctrine. According to his teaching, [346]"a sparrow shall not
  fall to the ground without the will of your heavenly Father; but the very
  hairs of your head are all numbered." He encourages us to pray, with the
  words: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the
  Father in my name, he will give it you;" and he proves himself to be the
  Redeemer, through signs and wonders, and refers to the greatest sign
  which was to be manifested in him—the sign of the resurrection.
The other reason for entering upon the discussion of these questions,
  lies in the incredible thoughtlessness with which a great part of modern
  educated people, even of such men as do not at all wish to abandon faith
  in a living God, permit themselves to be governed by the leaders of
  religious infidelity, and to be defiled and robbed of everything, which
  belongs to the nature of a living God. By many, it is considered as good
  taste, and as an indispensable sign of deep scientific learning and high
  education, and it forms a seldom contested part of correspondence in
  newspapers, which have for their public a wide circle of educated people,
  that in referring to the inviolableness of the laws of nature they
  declare faith in a special providence of God to be a view long ago
  rejected, and which is only consistent with half-civilized individuals;
  that they look down with a compassionate and self-conscious smile upon
  the egoistic implicit faith of congregations who still pray for good
  harvest-weather, and see in the damage done by a hailstorm a divine
  affliction; that they criticise it as a sad token of ecclesiastical
  darkness, when even church-authorities order such prayers in case of
  wide-spread calamities; that they fall into a passion over the [347]narrowness
  and the dulling influence of pedagogues who see in the histories which
  they relate to their pupils or put into their hands for reading, the
  government of an ethical order of the world which goes a little farther
  than the rule that he who deceives injures his good name, and he who gets
  intoxicated injures his health; that they give a man who still believes
  in the resurrection of Jesus, to understand that he has not yet learned
  the first elements of the theory of putrefaction and perishableness. That
  the adversaries of faith in a God thus express themselves, and try to
  conquer as much ground as possible for their frosty doctrine, is
  certainly quite natural; but that even advocates of theism should permit
  such stuff to be presented to them, and can keep silent in regard to
  it—nay, that even preachers offer it to their congregations as
  ordinary Sabbath edification, and that their hearers can gratefully
  accept it—is certainly a suggestive and alarming evidence of the
  rapidity with which, in many men who still do not wish consciously and
  certainly to be thought godless (i.e., to be separated from God),
  their connection with the source of light and life is decreasing, and of
  how strongly the fear that they may be looked upon as unscientific and
  imperfectly educated, overbalances the fear of losing the living God and
  Father, and therewith the support of both mind and life.
Now, that this faith in a special providence, in a hearing
  of prayer, and in divine miracles, forms an essential part of
  Christian religiousness, we do not need to show more in detail; it is an
  established historical fact, and an object of direct Christian knowledge.
  On the other hand, we have still to say a word concerning [348]that which, on
  the part of those just described, is so strongly contested; namely, about
  the scientific worth of such a faith, and also about its reconcilableness
  with the Darwinism theories.
In the first place, as to the faith in a special providence of
  God, and, in connection with it, as to the possibility of a
  hearing of human prayer, such a faith is by itself the inevitable
  consequence of all theism; nay, it is precisely identical with theism; it
  is that which makes theism theism, and distinguishes it from mere
  deism—i.e., from an idea of God, which merely makes God the
  author of the world, and lets the world, after it was once created, go
  its own way. Now, the theistic idea of God, which sees the Creator in an
  uninterrupted connection with his creation, is in itself the more
  scientific one: for a God who, although the author of the world, would
  not know how to find, nor intend to find, a way of communication with his
  creation, would certainly be an idea theologically inconceivable. We
  should, therefore, still have to adhere to the idea of a special
  providence of God, even if in our discursive reasoning and exact
  investigation of the processes in the world we should not find a single
  guide referring us to the scientific possibility of such a direct and
  uninterrupted dependence of the world on its author. We should then have
  simply to declare a conviction of the providence of God to be a postulate
  of our reasoning, which is given with the idea of God itself; and would
  just as little call this conviction unscientific on account of the fact,
  that we are not able to show the modalities of divine providence, as in
  reference to the exact sciences we should contest the character of their
  [349]scientific value on account of the fact
  that they are no longer able to give us an answer exactly where our
  questions become most important and interesting.
But the ways in which we are able to realize scientifically the idea
  of a divine providence are, indeed, not entirely closed for us. We have
  several of them; one starts from the idea of God, others from the empiric
  created world.
It belongs to the idea of God, that we have to think of the
  sublimity of God over time and space, of his eternity and omnipresence,
  in such a way that God, in his being, life, and activity, does not stand
  in time nor within any limits or differences of space, but
  absolutely above time and above all limits and differences of space; that
  he is present in his world everywhere and at any time. He who
  objects to this, can only do it with weapons to which we have to oppose
  the objection which the adversaries of the Christian idea of God so often
  raise against it—namely, the objection of a rejectable
  anthropomorphism. In contesting the possibility of the idea of an
  uninterrupted presence of a personal and living God in the entire realm
  of the universe, the adversaries seem to permit themselves to be daunted
  by the difficulty which is offered to man in controlling the realms of
  his own activity. The greater such a realm, the more difficult becomes a
  comprehensive survey, the more the human influence has to restrict itself
  to the greater and more common and to neglect the little and single. The
  more removed is the past which helps to constitute the circumstances of
  the present, the greater is the human ignorance and oblivion; the more
  removed is the future, the greater is the human incapability of [350]influencing it decisively. Such measures
  ought to disappear, even in their last traces, when we reflect on God and
  divine activity. If once the idea is established for us of a living God,
  who is always present in the world created by him, and in whose "sight a
  thousand years are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in
  the night," the final causal chain of causes and effects may be ever so
  long, and stretching over this course of the world from its beginning to
  its end; the single phenomena may be woven together of ever so many
  thousands and thousands of millions of different causal chains: we
  nevertheless see above them all the regulating hand of God from whom they
  all come, and who not only surveys and controls their texture in all its
  threads, but who himself arranged, wove, and made it. Such a view is not
  only more satisfactory to the religious need of man, but it also seems to
  us more scientific, than a view which traces everything back to a blind
  and dead cause, or even to no ultimate cause at all, and thinks it has
  entirely removed the last veil, if it pronounces the great word "causal
  law."
Now, while our idea of God thus tells us that God has in his
  hand all causal chains in the world, and its million-threaded web in
  constant omni-surveying presence and in all-controlling omnipotence, our
  reflection on the world and its substance and course also leads us
  from the a posteriori starting-point of analytical investigation
  precisely to the same result; it even leads us to a still more concrete
  conception of this idea—namely, to the result, that not only the
  causal chains, in their totality and in their web, but also all
  single links of these chains, [351]have their force and
  existence only by virtue of a transcendental, or what is the same, of a
  metaphysical, cause.
For if we analyze the single phenomena in the world, we certainly
  observe in the activity of their qualities and forces such a conformity
  to law, that, in our reflection on these phenomena, we can go from one
  phenomenon to the necessity of another as its cause or its effect, and
  thus form those particular causal chains and causal nets in whose
  arranged representation natural science consists. But that those
  qualities and forces exist and act precisely thus, and not otherwise, and
  why, we are no longer able to explain. We can only say: the material and
  the apparent is no longer their cause, but their effect; therefore, the
  cause of that which comes into existence lies beyond the
  phenomenon—i.e., in the transcendental, in the
  metaphysical.
This becomes evident in the inorganic world and in those
  qualities which are common to all matter. Such common qualities of the
  latter are, for instance, cohesion and gravitation. That all matter has
  the quality of cohesion, we can only say because we observe it; but that
  it must be so, and why, we are not able to say. This becomes still more
  evident in gravitation. Gravitation is so decidedly an action in space,
  that it appears to us, together with cohesion, as precisely the bond
  which binds the entire material world together. Each single material atom
  is subject to its force; but how and why, and especially how and why
  matter acts upon the matter in space, physics can no longer tell
  us, but refers us to a metaphysical cause.
This dependence of each single being, and of all its qualities and
  forces, on a transcendental and [352]metaphysical cause of its existence,
  becomes most clear to us in the world of the organic, and
  especially in the transmission and development of organisms. That
  individuals originate new individuals of their species; that the
  fecundated germs, if the necessary conditions are present, develop
  themselves out of the first germ and egg-cell in continually progressive
  and distinct differentiations, each after its kind, into the full-grown
  condition, so that individuals endowed with a soul and intellectual life
  are also developed out of such beginnings;—these are facts which
  are continually repeated before our eyes, and men of science have not yet
  reached the end in pursuing the actual in these processes into its finest
  ramifications. But how it is that individuals must transmit
  themselves—that the seeds and eggs must have this force of
  germination and development—they have not yet been able to explain,
  and will never be able to do so. The word "inheritance," which is to
  solve the problem, is only a name for the fact which we
  observe, and for the regularity of its repetition; but for this fact of
  inheritance itself, we seek in vain a physical explanation: we are
  referred to a metaphysical cause. Thus, not only the first
  origin of life on earth is an enigma to us (as we have seen in Part I,
  Book II, Chapter I, § 3), but organic life itself,
  in its whole existence and course, is a process which, at every step, and
  in every place of its course, remains to us in its last causes physically
  unexplained, and refers us to metaphysical causes.
If we finally see in all these inorganic and organic processes a
  striving towards ends—and we must see it, as soon as we in general
  observe order, the category of higher and lower, and the appearance of
  the higher on [353]the basis of the lower—we are, with
  all our teleological observations, again referred to the metaphysical,
  and still more decidedly to the goal-setting metaphysical; and a
  metaphysical which sets and reaches goals is nothing else than that in
  philosophic language which in the language of religion we call a living
  Creator and Ruler of the world and the activity of his
  providence.
From still another side, the knowledge of the world, even in a
  scientific way, leads us to the acknowledgment of a divine providence
  which controls with absolute freedom every process in every place and in
  every moment of the world's course. We see continually, in the midst of
  nature, and in its causal course conformable to law, something
  supernatural, transcendental, and metaphysical, acting decisively upon
  the course of nature; and that is the free activity of man. Every
  man carries in the freedom of the determinations of his will something
  transcendental and metaphysical in himself, which we can call natural
  only when we mean by nature the summary of all that which exists, but
  which we have to call supernatural when we mean by nature the summary of
  that which belongs to the world of phenomena in its traceable causes as
  well as in its traceable effects. The scale of life-activities, from the
  lowest arbitrary motions, from the impulses and instincts of the animal
  up to the highest moral action of the will of man, shows us in indistinct
  transitions all stages which lead from the natural to the supernatural,
  until, in the ethical and religious motives of man, we arrive at
  superphysical (i.e., supernatural) motives which daily and hourly
  invade the natural, and in this invasion consciously and unconsciously
  use the forces of nature [354]and their activity, conformable to law,
  and in spite of their metaphysical and transcendental origin, from the
  moment of their activity, join the natural causal connection of the
  world's course. This observation of an invasion of the physical by the
  supernatural, as it continually takes place in the free action of man,
  leads us in a triple way to the acknowledgment of an action of divine
  providence upon the course of the world.
In the first place, this observation shows us, in a very direct way,
  points where the free disposition of God acts determinatingly upon the
  course of things, and where this action becomes accessible to our
  observation. These points are the human personalities, in so far and
  inasmuch as they permit themselves to be influenced and determined by the
  will of God in the ethical and religious motives of their action, and,
  when these motives become actions, determinately act upon the course of
  things.
In the second place, this observation further leads, by way of two
  conclusions, to the acknowledgment of a divine providence.
One conclusion is the following: If there exist in the world free and
  intelligent beings which, through their free determinations, guided by
  reflection, decisively act upon the course of nature, and if these
  beings, on account of these very qualities of freedom and intelligence,
  occupy the highest stage among the creatures which we know, the last
  metaphysical cause of their existence must also have qualities which are
  able to produce such free and intelligent beings—at least the
  qualities of freedom and intelligence in the highest degree. And this
  highest metaphysical cause which produces free and intelligent
  personalities in the world, can at least be no [355]more dependent upon the
  entire world, whose author it is, than those personalities are dependent
  upon that realm in the world in which they have their existence. We call
  such a metaphysical cause, to which we have to ascribe freedom and
  intelligence in the highest degree, God; and we call its free position in
  reference to the world, the government of the world, or providence.
The other conclusion leads us to the acknowledgment of a connection of
  providence with conformability to law in the actions of all forces and
  qualities in the world. It is the same conclusion to which we had to
  refer in Chap. I, § 6, but which now, as we draw
  from theism the conclusion of the acknowledgment of a special divine
  providence, falls with increased weight into the scale. It is the
  following: On the one hand, we observe in the processes of the world a
  striving towards ends; on the other, we know in the world itself only one
  single creature which acts according to aims, which sets itself its ends
  and reaches them with freely chosen means. This one creature is man. Now
  man can, as we pointed out in Chap. I, § 6, choose
  and use the means with which he wishes to reach his ends, only because he
  can rely on the conformity to the end in view and the regularity in the
  effect of all the qualities and forces of things. If he could not rely on
  them, he certainly could set himself ends; but the reaching of them he
  would have to leave to the play of chance. Now if we see, on the one
  side, that the only creature known to us which sets itself ends is able
  to reach these ends by virtue of inviolable conformity to law in the
  forces and effects of its means, and if we see, on the other, that in the
  course of the world ends are also reached, and that at the same time [356]all
  secondary causes which lead to these ends act with a necessity
  conformable to law, we certainly are right in drawing the conclusion that
  the highest metaphysical cause of all things—we now say, the living
  God—has so prepared the whole universe that his free but regular
  and systematic goal-setting and end-reaching action upon the course of
  all things rests, as a whole as well as in detail, directly upon the
  conformity to law of all forces and their effects.
The observation of a free action of the human personality upon the
  course of things, once more leads us back to a reflection on the idea
  of God. For if we have reason to acknowledge a freedom of the
  determinations of human will—and the consciousness of ethical
  responsibility will be a proof of this freedom which cannot be
  invalidated by any contrary reflection—the question comes up:
  how is this freedom of a creature reconcilable with the idea of
  God? Far be it from us to claim to have found a solution of these
  last and most important problems of the human mind. For all meditations
  on them but lead to antinomies in the presence of which we dare not churn
  to remove all difficulties of reflection still less to solve the
  difficulties by pursuing only one chain of reasoning and ignoring the
  other. The way of science leads rather to mere compromises, and
  these compromises consist in the fact, that on every side of our
  observations or arguments we look for and adhere to that which results
  for us in incontestable fact or indispensable postulate, and that we
  adhere to all results or postulates thus found even when we are no longer
  able to trace their unity and harmony back to their last sources. Now if,
  on the one hand, our idea of [357]God is established as a self-testimony of
  God to our ethical consciousness and as a result of our teleological
  reasoning, and if, on the other, is established the fact of the world and
  of its processes going on conformably to law, and likewise the fact of
  human freedom and its actions upon the course of things, and finally the
  fact of the admission of the human will and action into a higher
  teleology which is superior to human will, and which, in the history of
  mankind, of individuals, and nations, reaches its higher ends, now by
  affirming, now by denying, human will; then we have simply to account for
  all these facts as mere facts, and the scientific attempt at
  pursuing them into their inner connection is nothing else but a more or
  less successful compromise. We have to be satisfied with these
  indications, for the further discussion of them would lead us far beyond
  the task of the present publication. We shall only point out the fact,
  that precisely the knowledge of the image of God in man shows us the way
  to the knowledge of how it is conceivable that God can create
  personalities through whose freedom of will he relatively limits the
  absoluteness of his own will.
In all our discussions hitherto, the scientific basis of a faith in
  the possibility of an answer to prayer has been evident. All
  reasons for a divine providence, also speak with the same force of
  persuasion for the hearing of our prayers, as soon as the idea of
  being a child of God has become an integral part of our idea of God.
  And this idea—the idea of God as the father, and of a relationship
  of love between the divine and the human personalities—is so much a
  part of the Christian idea of God, that it belongs to its very essence.
  Only one [358]consideration might offer scientific
  difficulties to our faith in the hearing of prayer: namely, if God hears
  the prayers of his children, in the course of time new motives for his
  action present themselves to him; now, is it reconcilable with the idea
  of God, that God makes himself in any such way dependent on that which
  first appeared in time, and on the changing moods of the creature? But
  this difficulty is precisely the same which we met, when acknowledging
  human freedom and its reconcilableness with a divine providence; and we
  have tried to indicate above the path which leads to its solution.
It is the principal idea which penetrates all our reasoning about the
  relation of God and the world—namely, the idea of a teleology in
  the world—which is to lead us to a correct conception of the
  miracles and their reconcilableness with a mechanism of nature and
  with the Darwinistic ideas of development. In the much discussed contest
  about the problem of miracles, clearer results would certainly have been
  attained, if one had questioned more closely what the record of the
  Christian religion means by miracles, and what position, according to it,
  these miracles have to take in the order of the world and in the divine
  plan of salvation; and after having satisfied himself as to this
  position, had further asked what position they take in reference to our
  exact science and our theistic view of the world. Instead of doing this,
  we have often enough seen friend and foe of the idea of miracles, as soon
  as the question was even touched upon, at once set to work with the
  insufficient conceptions of old rationalism and supernaturalism, and thus
  raising objections and attempting solutions which could satisfy nobody.
  Especially every inadequate idea [359]which was put forth by
  the advocates of faith in miracles, was gladly accepted by its
  adversaries; for thereby they were furnished with a caricature of the
  idea of miracles, the tearing to pieces of which was an easy and
  agreeable sport to them.
The very ideas of the natural and the supernatural are a
  category which is to be treated with caution. When discussing the
  question of divine providence, we have seen that, with every free act of
  the will of man springing from an ethical motive, something supernatural
  invades the natural, so that in every normal human life we always see
  supernatural and natural by the side of and in one another.
The distinction between the direct and the indirect action
  or invasion of God is also to be used with great caution and
  restriction. For where we are no longer able to find secondary causes,
  who can assert that God no longer uses any? Where the realm of visible
  causes ceases and that of the invisible begins, who can exclude secondary
  causes? And on the other hand, where God acts directly, who can deny the
  concurrence of his direct presence and his direct action, or reduce the
  value of that which was indirectly produced?
Moreover, the often-returning conceptions of a breaking of the laws
  of nature, or the compromises which were made between a breaking and
  a non-breaking of the laws of nature by assuming a "supernatural
  acceleration of the process of nature," were still more misleading. In
  the whole world, infinitely many higher and lower forces act according to
  laws and order. In every process, a part of the forces which in the
  single case surround it, become active, and thereby hinder [360]another part
  from its activity. But the laws of this other part of forces are not
  thereby invalidated or broken. When a man acts with moral freedom, from
  mere moral motives, the highest of the conceivable forces over which we
  have control comes into direct action upon the natural. But therewith
  those forces, with their laws, which would have been active if another
  motive had determined him, are not yet overcome, but only hindered from
  their activity in exactly the same way as one part of forces can be
  active and another not, where mere mechanical actions take place. Thus,
  in miracles, no law of nature is overcome, but only a force which
  otherwise would have been active according to the law of its activity, is
  for the time hindered from action by another force becoming active.
  Moreover, through the conscious and unconscious connection of the idea of
  irregularity and lack of plan with the idea of miracles, not only the
  idea of a God who works miracles, but also that of a personal Creator and
  Ruler of the world, in general, has come into discredit. For that reason,
  Häckel, for instance, when he attacks the Christian idea of creation,
  never fails to speak of the "capricious arbitrariness" of the Creator;
  and Oskar Schmidt also speaks of the "caprice" of the God of
  Christians.
With these criticisms, which we have made in reference to the
  treatment of the question of miracles, we certainly have undertaken only
  to characterize the superficial skirmishing which took place between the
  two opposing views of the world, but not the labors of more recent
  theological science. But that skirmish has made, like all superficiality,
  the most noise in the world; and since the adversaries of the faith in
  [361]miracles endeavored almost exclusively to
  reflect in this manner, and almost ignored the deeper deductions of
  theological science, they succeeded in making the idea of miracles almost
  the most dreaded object of antipathy to modern education, and many of
  those who feel that the conceptions of traditional dogmatics are in need
  of revision, and religion and science of a reconciliation, endeavor to
  find that revision and reconciliation especially in the fact, that
  religion gives up miracles. On the other hand, theology as
  science, in its main advocates, long ago gave up these insufficient
  and misleading categories and conceptions, and established a conception
  of miracles which can easily be received into the science of the
  processes of nature, as well as into our reasoning about God and the
  divine. The first who adopted this mode of treatment, is one of the
  pioneers of more recent positive theology, and of a theology still
  uninfluenced by science—Karl Immanuel Nitzsch. It is certainly
  interesting to read what this man, as early as 1829, said, in the first
  edition of his "System der Christlichen Lehre" ("System of Christian
  Doctrine"), and also in the succeeding edition printed without
  alteration. He says, on page 64: "The miracles of revelation are, in
  spite of all objective supernaturalness, derived from their central
  origin, something really conformable to law: partly in relation to
  the higher order of things to which they belong and which is also a
  world, a nature in its kind, and acts upon the lower in its way; partly
  in reference to the similarity to common nature which they retain in any
  way; partly on account of their teleological perfection; and they must
  not only be expected as the homogeneous phenomenon from the inner miracle
  of [362]redemption, from the standpoint of perfect
  Christian faith, but also by virtue of the union between spirit and
  nature, be looked upon as the natural in its kind." In these words
  we find the fruitful germs of a sound dogmatic development which the idea
  of miracles has found on the part of more recent theology.
Let us, in the first place, try to keep free from all preconceived,
  correct or incorrect, opinions, and ask how the miracles appear to us,
  when they present themselves with a claim to acknowledgment as integral
  parts of a divine revelation of salvation, namely, in the religion of
  redemption and its record. In regard to their name, they appear to us in
  the Holy Scriptures as amazing bright processes, as great deeds and
  signs; and in regard to their nature, as signs which are destined to call
  the attention of man to the government in grace and in judgment of a
  living God, to the salvation of redemption which God gives to man, and to
  the human instruments which he uses for that purpose. Now, in a view of
  the world which, like the Biblical, so decidedly sees a revelation of God
  in all that which takes place, in a view of the world to which everything
  natural has also, as a work of God, its supernatural cause, and
  everything supernatural, at present, or in the future, is transposed
  again into nature and history, not only all those above rejected
  conceptions of miracles lose their significance, but all remaining
  conceptions with which one otherwise tries to distinguish the miracles
  from all that is not miraculous, or to classify the different species of
  miracles, also diminish in importance, as do also all those distinctions
  of direct and indirect actions of God—the distinctions of relative
  and absolute, of subjective and objective miracles: and there [363]remains
  hut a single inviolable kernel and central point of the Biblical
  conception of miracles, and that is the above mentioned teleological
  character of miracles. Indeed, we are not willing to reject all these
  logical distinctions and investigations as worthless: they have helped to
  render clear our conceptions and ideas, and they still help. But a deeper
  investigation of the idea of miracles and its relation to a scientific
  knowledge of the world may perhaps finally lead our more developed
  reflection back to the fact that we find the quintessence and the nature
  of miracles only where the pious people of the Bible found it. And this
  quintessence of miracles consists precisely in their teleological
  nature, and not at all in the fact that they cannot be explained
  physically: it consists in the fact that miracles are signs
  through which God manifests himself and his government over man, and
  actually shows the latter that he wishes to bring him to the
  pursuit of perfection by the way of redemption. Ritschl, in an essay
  which appeared in the "Jahrbücher für Deutsche Theologie," as early as
  1861, pointed out this decidedly teleological character of Biblical
  miracles and the indifference shown by pious men in the Bible as to the
  question whether these deeds and signs can be explained naturally or
  not.
The profit which we derive from this reverting to the Biblical
  conception of the idea of miracles is by no means small.
In the first place, we help to establish the full recognition of that
  direct religious consciousness and sensation which is not only
  characteristic of the pious men of Scripture, but which yet characterizes
  all genuine religiousness; and this consists in the fact that the
  religious man sees [364]miracles of God in all that turns his
  attention to God's government,—in the sea of stars, in rock and
  bush, in sunshine and storm, in flower and worm, just as certainly as in
  the guidance of his own life and in the facts and processes of the
  history of salvation and of the kingdom of the Lord. In this idea of
  miracles, the essential thing is not that the phenomena and processes are
  inconceivable to him—although certainly in all that comes into
  appearance there is still an incomprehensible and uncomprehended
  remainder. For a form of nature, e.g., which turns his attention
  to a creator, is of course a miracle, even if he is able to look upon it
  with none other eye than that of the unlearned: but it even then remains
  a miracle,—nay, it is increased to a still greater miracle, if he
  has learned to contemplate and investigate it with all the auxiliary
  means of science. A hearing of his prayers remains a miracle, whether or
  not he is able to perceive the natural connection of the process in which
  he sees his prayers answered, or even to trace it back to the remotest
  times which preceded his prayers. The events and facts of the history of
  salvation remain miracles to him, whether the history of nature and the
  world offers to him auxiliary means of explaining them or not. The pious
  man, therefore, does not find the essential characteristic of miracles in
  their relative inconceivableness, but in the fact that they refer him to
  a living God who stands above this process, whether perceived or
  unperceived in its relative causal connection, and unites it with the
  course of things in order to reach his ends and to manifest himself to
  man. Now, in our attempt at a scientific reproduction of the idea of
  miracles, if we return to that Biblical conception, we see no longer in
  this just [365]mentioned religious conception of miracles
  a pious sophistry which avoids the difficulty of the idea, or a
  child-like naďveté worthy of being partly envied and partly
  pitied, which does not at all see the difficulties and remains on the
  child-stage of Biblical conceptions; but we only perceive in it a
  confirmation and fulfilment of that profound and beneficent word of our
  Lord: "Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of
  God as a little child, he shall not enter therein." Of course, piety as
  well as science makes distinctions among miracles. The former
  separates the mere products and processes of nature which, through
  what is explicable as well as what is inexplicable in their qualities and
  processes, point to an almighty and all-wise Creator, and thereby become
  miracles to the religious view of the world, from the historical
  events which, by their newness and uniqueness, and by their pointing
  toward divine ends, manifest God and his teleological government to man,
  and calls them miracles in a still more specific sense than science does.
  And among historical events, piety as well as science assigns the name
  miracle, in the most pregnant sense, to those events which belong to the
  history of salvation, and, by their newness and uniqueness,
  introduce new stages into it, render legitimate its new instruments, or
  bring new features of redemption to our knowledge. Our religiousness has
  the greatest and deepest interest in this history: for it is the history
  of the leading back of man into communion with God by the way of
  redemption; and therefore the events of this history are precisely those
  miracles upon which our deepest religious interest is concentrated. But
  in spite of all these distinctions in degree, that natural relationship
  and that [366]common character of the miraculous between
  the miracles of nature, the miracles of the history of man, and the
  miracles of the history of salvation, remain established; and we render a
  service to religious consciousness, as well as to the scientific
  conception of the idea of miracles, if by returning to the Biblical idea
  of miracles, as we propose, we make a more comprehensive definition of
  miracles possible.
Another advantage which we derive from returning to the Biblical idea
  of miracles consists in the fact that it preserves us from the
  magical and necromantic in our conceptions of miracles; that it
  allows us a grouping of miracles according to value, which
  corresponds with the idea of God and of the divine government as well as
  with the idea of miracles itself; and that in the presence of all single
  relations of miracles it summons us to criticise and
  investigate the real state of the case. For the nature of miracles
  does not consist in the inconceivable—at least not in the planless
  and arbitrary,—but in the fact that they call the attention of man
  to God and his government; and this leads to the reverse of all that is
  magical and necromantic, because the magical is unworthy of the idea of
  God and contradicts all the other self-testimony of God. Now if the
  nature of miracles consists in the fact that they call my attention to
  God and his government, an event will become a miracle to me, and
  increase its value, in the degree in which it refers me to God and his
  government, and especially in the degree in which it refers me to that
  government of God which is the most important to me—namely, to the
  action of God in me and mankind, with which he is bringing about his ends
  in salvation; [367]but in the degree in which an event loses
  this character, it becomes to me an event without miraculous or religious
  significance. This gives a quite definite grouping of miracles according
  to value, from those which belong to the central manifestations of the
  divine plan of salvation and way of redemption, to those which lie in the
  extreme periphery of religious interest. It is a grouping which
  corresponds with the idea of God just as much as with the idea of
  miracles; while all other divisions or groupings of miracles according to
  value, which might take their principle of division and their weight from
  the greater or smaller conceivableness of the causal connection, from the
  greater or smaller difference of a miraculous event from all other
  events, are indifferent in reference to the idea of God, and change the
  centre of gravity in the idea of miracles. Besides, if these miracles are
  to be real signs to me which refer me to God, his government, and his
  ways of salvation, they must, in the first place, in order to secure my
  conviction, be real events and facts and not mere falsifications and
  fictions; and this point leads us to the duty and right of criticising
  and investigating actual circumstances. In presence of all Biblical and
  non-Biblical miracles, we have the full right and the full duty of using
  criticism in reference to the confirmation of actual circumstances, and
  where the latter cannot be established with certainty, the question is in
  order whether the related event is really of such a character as to
  legitimate itself as a sign of God and his government. In the preceding
  section, we have had occasion to use this principle in reference to the
  investigation of that event which, next to the coming of the Redeemer,
  offers itself to us as the [368]central miracle of the history of
  salvation and redemption: namely, in reference to the history of the
  resurrection of the Lord.
We have by no means the wish to avoid difficulties which meet
  us, when trying to bring miracles, and especially the specific and
  pregnant miracles of the history of salvation, into harmony with our
  scientific knowledge of the world: only we can no longer admit that these
  difficulties consist in the inconceivableness or in the supernaturalism
  of miracles. For to the religious view of the world—which traces
  equally the explicable as well as the inexplicable back to God, which
  even derives the natural from the supernatural causality of
  God—neither the occasional inexplicability nor the supposed
  supernaturalness of an event can be that which makes the event a miracle.
  But an event in the history of salvation becomes a miracle from the fact
  that something extraordinary, something new, happens in it,
  which by its newness and its extraordinary character presents itself to
  man as the manifestation of certain divine ends in salvation, and
  can be explained at first sight, but only at first sight, from
  nothing else than from the service which it renders to the plan of
  redemption. Whether afterwards these extraordinary and new features can
  or cannot be perceived in their natural connection, or explained out of
  it, does not at all change anything in the miraculous character of the
  event, as soon as it has once had the before-mentioned effect. The
  only task and the only difficulty which meets us in the question of
  miracles, is to show that such extraordinary and new things really
  happen, and to bring the reality and possibility of such new things into
  our perception of the [369]causal connection of the course of the
  world, conformable to law. But it ceases to be a difficulty, so soon as
  we acknowledge a teleology in the course of the world and a teleology in
  the history of mankind, and especially as soon as we acknowledge that
  teleology in the history of mankind which, by the way of the divine means
  of redemption, leads man back to God. Where there are no ends, nothing
  can happen which calls the attention of men to these ends; nor, indeed,
  can anything new happen; for nothing prevails in more absolute
  sovereignty to all eternity than the maxims causa ćquat effectum
  and effectus ćquat causam. But where ends are appointed and
  reached, something new also happens; and every new thing refers to its
  end. For each step leading nearer such an end is something new, and
  refers, as soon as we compare it with preceding steps, to the end towards
  which it strives. All ends to which the course of things refers us, are
  to the religious view of the world ends which are appointed by God; all
  means which serve to reach the ends, are means which God created and
  chose; and every phenomenon and every event which manifests this
  teleological government of God to our mind, is a miracle to us. Now this
  whole course of the world is interwoven with such new things, in events
  which manifest to us, now more clearly, now more dimly, the striving of
  the course of the world towards an end, because the latter is really
  striving towards an end. Even prehistoric times show us new things which,
  from a scientific and historical point of view, we have to place in the
  line of the course of the world; and from a religious point of view, in
  the line of miracles. The first appearance of organic life on earth was
  new, and indicated new ends; the first [370]appearance of each
  single species of animals and plants was new; new, also, and indicating
  the highest end of creative life, was the first appearance of man. All
  these things we call miracles of creation; and we especially place
  the creative miracle of the appearance of man on a level with the
  greatest miracles of which we have knowledge, and use the name miracle
  for all before mentioned newly appearing formations, whether or not we
  are able to explain those originations from the preceding connection of
  the course of nature and its forces. Now, in the history of mankind,
  where the intellectual and ethical motives of that which happens become
  active, where also the greatest ends which come up for consideration are
  spiritual and ethical ends, where man himself acts freely according to
  ends, and where, therefore, human and divine teleology come alternately
  into play, the manifestation of a striving toward an end, in which
  religious consciousness immediately sees also ends and means of God, is
  repeated in an eminent degree. Every event which brings about a progress
  in the history of mankind as well as of individuals, is as to this side
  something new, extraordinary, teleological: i.e., a miracle to the
  religious mode of contemplation; and this miracle is the greater as is
  more important the end under consideration, and the greater and the more
  decisive the step towards this end which the event accomplishes. Now, if
  we recognize the return of mankind into a communion with God as the
  highest goal of the general and individual history of mankind, and if we
  find in the latter facts which lead to this goal, then these facts are
  the great central miracles of history. As such, the facts of redemption
  present [371]themselves with all that for which it once
  prepared the way; and, now that it has come, leads to full and complete
  perfection—and among them all, the coming, the person, and the
  history of Jesus Christ, stands as central fact and central miracle in
  the midst of all events in the history of salvation, and forms the
  central point of all religious interest. We see how unjust it is when one
  urges, as an objection to a belief in miracles, that it assigns to God
  arbitrary and capricious actions. We call the manifestations of divine
  teleology miracles. But striving towards an end and conformity to a
  regular plan is not arbitrariness or caprice, but the contrary; and the
  greater our estimate of the highest cause of all things, the greater will
  appear to us the conformity to a plan and to law of all which presents
  itself as miracles in the course of events. There is perhaps one
  objection which is about as equally unjust as the objection of caprice;
  and that is the objection that faith in miracles, in teaching a belief in
  supernatural things, lends to introduce into the course of events
  something which is against nature. But since miracles, as a sign of
  divine teleology, manifest ends for which nature also is prepared, and
  through which the fallen nature of man, fallen by sin, is again restored;
  and since to the religious view of the world all natural phenomena and
  processes expressly rank among miracles, the faith in miracles teaches
  the contrary of an opposition to nature. It is incontestible—and
  will become still clearer and more certain to us through all farther
  investigation of the subject—that the acknowledgment of the idea of
  miracles as a necessary and a justified part of religiousness [372]stands and
  falls with the acknowledgment of a teleological view of the world.
We certainly do not indulge in the foolish hope that with the
  deductions of this section we should be able suddenly to win over any of
  the decided adversaries of faith in providence and miracles. For, as we
  have had occasion to remind the reader, the acknowledgment or the
  non-acknowledgment of God and his living government in the world is not
  the result of this or that reflection and chain of conclusions, but
  rather an ethical action of the centre of human personality in which God
  discovers himself in his self-manifestation. Now, if this centre, in the
  freedom of its decision, has once denied the acknowledgment of God and
  his government, then the intellectual actions of the soul offer
  themselves to this atheistic and anti-theistic standpoint, and build up
  atheistic systems in which the ideas of providence and miracles naturally
  find no place. Thus system is opposed to system, although the one is not
  able to overcome the other. For the last and deepest power of conviction
  lies, neither for one nor the other system, in its chains of conclusions,
  in its superstructure, but in its foundation, its standpoint, and its
  principles; and the choosing of one or the other standpoint, the theistic
  or atheistic, is an ethical action which precedes methodical
  reasoning—or if it takes place at the same time or precedes it, has
  still deeper motives than those of more or less clear forms of mere
  reasoning. But we believe, and we wish and hope in our modest way to have
  shown by our present investigation, that the standpoint of faith also has
  its logical and justified science, and that it is able to appreciate the
  [373]world of the real more universally and
  candidly, and offers to logical reasoning fewer and less important
  difficulties, than the systems of atheism.
We have now discussed all the essential and direct points of contacts
  between Christianity and the theory of evolution. But a remaining part,
  still more closely related to the centre of the Christian view of the
  world, yet offers some indirect points of contact which demand
  treatment.
§ 5. The Redeemer and the Redemption. The Kingdom of God and the Acceptance of Salvation.
As soon as it is once an established fact that an evolution theory of
  the origin of man as a merely scientific theory permits all the valuable
  qualities of man, when they have once come into existence, to show
  themselves undiminished in their entire greatness and importance, and
  must so permit them, then the whole Christian view of the world, of the
  Redeemer, his person, his course of redemption, and his work, remains
  entirely untouched by all these scientific theories of evolution. Yet the
  Biblical representation, the orthodox perception, and the actual history
  of the Redeemer and his work, present us with some evidences which are
  rather in sympathy than in antipathy with these scientific theories.
  First, the long preparation for his birth, which began immediately after
  the fall of man and stretched over at least four thousand years, perhaps
  over a much longer period, the special preparation of his human
  genealogy, the selection, separation, and guidance of the ancestor and of
  the people of Israel, of the tribe, the family, and finally of the mother
  of Jesus—all these are manifestly [374]just as favorable to
  the idea of evolution as they would have been to the idea of a sudden
  creation of man out of nothing, if Christ, the second Adam, had come into
  existence by a sudden creation. Moreover, the Redeemer himself was wholly
  subject to the ordinary laws of development of the human individual, and
  was, from his annunciation and conception, developed entirely like man in
  the long process of evolution from the egg and its still absolutely
  indifferent spiritual worth through all the imperceptible stages of
  development before and after the birth up to the full age of man.
  Likewise the result of his course of salvation, redemption, and entrance
  into the kingdom of God, underwent the same process of gradual
  development. It began with a few disciples, and was slowly propagated; it
  has to-day reached but a small part of mankind, and even where it took
  root, it sees infinitely many things by its side which it has not yet
  been able to penetrate with its leaven:—facts which have much more
  elective affinity with the scientific ideas of development than with
  those of sudden creations.
Finally, precisely the same analogy forces itself upon us in the
  Christian doctrine of the way of salvation. The work of the Holy Spirit
  in the human individual is nothing less than a new birth; its aim is the
  revival of the entire man, in mind, soul, and body. In most men, this
  work takes place by a slow process, advancing step by step. This gradual
  course is even the rule in Christianized nations; although a decisive
  change of mind often enough, though by no means always, takes place in
  marked epochs of the inner history of life. And in all
  Christians—even in those whose conversion takes place by a sudden
  awakening, like that of Paul—the [375]transformation of the
  entire man into the similarity of Christ, and the full restoration of the
  image of God, is certainly a process of development, and must await its
  completion in the resurrection. This view is also confirmed by the Lord's
  parable of the seed, growing up imperceptibly.
Every believing Christian knows these facts, and judges and acts
  according to them: therefore, when in the realm of nature, which God
  certainly submitted to the free investigation of the human mind, he meets
  similar views, what right has he to protest against them as being hostile
  to religion?
§ 6. Eschatology.
In our discussion of the preceding questions, we have seen that an
  entirely neutral, not to say friendly, relationship is taking place
  between religion and the theories of development, which will continue so
  long as the latter keep within the limits of their proper realm, the
  perception of nature; and that a hostile relation takes place, and
  anti-religious attacks are to be guarded against, only when a
  disbelieving system of metaphysics, which has grown on other ground, in
  an uncalled-for way, tries to connect itself closely with the theory of
  descent. This is in an eminent degree the case with the great
  eschatological hopes of Christianity. The evolution theory so exclusively
  contents itself with the attempts at perceiving the causal circumstances
  of organisms in the present world, that it does not at all wish
  to, and cannot, express itself concerning the end and goal
  of the world and the laws and circumstances which may reign in a
  future ćon, and that it gives free scope to every perception of
  the ultimate which might come from another source. [376]
On the other hand, Christian eschatology is alone able to do most
  essential service to the evolution theory, in case it should be verified,
  by giving an answer to questions to which the evolution theory tends more
  decidedly than any other scientific theory—namely, to the questions
  as to the end of the world and mankind, with such distinctions as
  no philosophy which treats of the doctrines of nature, is able to give,
  although natural science itself demands the answer to these questions the
  more peremptorily, the higher the points of view are to which it leads
  us.
The world shows to every investigating eye a development, whether we
  have to take this development as descent or as successive new creation;
  and therefore we shall take, in the following discussion, the idea of
  development in this broad sense which comprises all conceivable attempts
  at explanation. All nature—its most comprehensive cosmic realms as
  well as the realms of its smallest organisms—together with the
  corporeal, psychical, and spiritual nature of man, shows a
  harmony, a conformity to the end in view, and a striving
  toward an end of its development, the denial of which will certainly
  not add to the laurels which transmit the scientific fame of our present
  generation to posterity. Now, what is this end? The answer which we
  receive from those who reject Christian eschatology, may be given by two
  scientific antipodes: by Strauss and Eduard von Hartmann. Strauss takes
  sides with those who reject all striving toward an end in nature; and his
  answer to the question (which still asserts itself in his system of the
  world), is: eternal circular motion of the universe, death of all
  individuals and of all complexes of individuals, even of [377]mankind.
  Eduard von Hartmann, on the other hand, is filled by the knowledge of the
  teleological, but he rejects the hope of Christians and the end which
  offers itself to him in the place of the rejected end of Christian hope,
  is destruction—destruction of all individuals and destruction of
  the world. In view of such ends, is not the Christian's hope the
  answer which not only satisfies the deepest ethical and religious need,
  but also all heights and depths of the most faithful, most devoted, and
  most enlightened investigation of nature?
Finally, we have still another eschatological conclusion to mention
  and reject; a conclusion which is drawn from this theory by the advocates
  of the evolution theory. It opens the perspective into a future
  development of still higher beings out of man. In abstracto, we
  can naturally make no objection to the possibility of such a development,
  as soon as we once accept the evolution theory; but we have to object to
  the supposition of such a process in infinitum. For such a process
  would certainly be interrupted by the final destruction of the globe; and
  in case the mechanico-naturalistic view of the world should be right,
  this destruction would be only the more cruel as would be more highly
  organized the beings which should find their destruction in this
  inevitable catastrophe. Moreover, as we have repeatedly seen, a
  development in infinitum suffers from a self-contradiction: for
  development involves an end, and this end must certainly have been once
  reached. Now, if we have reason to assume that this end has been reached
  in the development of the inhabitants of the globe, by the creature being
  in the image of God and his child, and that it is also reached in fallen
  man through redemption [378]and its perfection, then the idea of
  development, it is true, allows and postulates a relative development of
  mankind, so long as this takes place within the limits of the now valid
  laws of the universe,—a development towards the perfection of this
  likeness to God and filial relationship; but that idea of development has
  no longer an influence that would lead to the production of new beings
  which should be more than man.
With the foregoing, we believe that we have discussed all essential
  points of the relation between religion and Darwinism; and we now proceed
  to the last part of our investigation.
[379]
DARWINISM AND MORAL PRINCIPLES.
§ 1. Darwinistic Naturalism and Moral Principles.
If we consider the ethical consequences of a view of the world which,
  proceeding from Darwinism, permits the universe, man included, to be
  taken up into a mechanism of atoms—a mechanism in which everything,
  even the ethical action of man, finds its sufficient explanation—we
  certainly cannot perceive how such a view of the world is able to arrive
  at firm moral principles. If man, even in his spiritual life and moral
  action, is a mere product of nature, originated through descent, and if
  his whole spiritual life is fully consumed by these merely mechanical
  factors, then all moral principles are also nothing else than inherited
  customs founded upon those instincts which in the struggle for existence
  have proven to be the most beneficial to man. Then their influence is
  subject to continual change, always corresponding to the existing state
  of human development. As these moral instincts have displaced the former
  instincts of the animal predecessors of man—say, e.g., of
  sharks, of marsupialia, of lemurides—so they must [380]also expect it
  any time to be displaced in turn by new and still more useful instincts.
  And even in the same period of the development of mankind, the moral or
  immoral principles which have actual authority in each nation or tribe,
  have their full right of existence as long as they are not displaced by
  still more advantageous instincts. Moral principles in which infanticide,
  prostitution, and cannibalism have a place, are inferior to the highest
  form of Christian morality only so far as they do not hold their own in
  the struggle for existence, when nations having those low views come into
  collision with nations of higher moral culture; but in themselves they
  have full value and full right, so long as they attain the end of all
  instincts, and so far as we can speak of ends at all; in such naturalism,
  apart from human activity, the end consists only in the preservation of
  the individual and the species in the struggle for existence.
Under these suppositions, moral principles not only lose their
  objective and solid consistency in the mass of mankind, but they also
  become irrevocably subject to the arbitrariness of the single individual.
  An individual who either has not, or asserts that he has not, a
  determined moral instinct, or who allows it to be smothered by some other
  instinct which in a normal individual is subordinate, but in him
  stronger, is fully justified in his immoral action so long as he is
  successful with it. Every individual is entirely his own master and his
  own judge. If man is morally good, it may be the consequence of an
  especially happy individual disposition, or of an especially clear
  perception, or of happy circumstances and influences; but it is not the
  consequence of a free subordination under the authority [381]of a moral
  law; for there is neither freedom nor an objective moral authority. The
  single man is but the product of a certain sum and mixture of powers of
  nature, acting of necessity, which may with him turn out fortunately or
  unfortunately. If, on the other hand, man is morally perverted, society
  may defend itself against his perversity; wisdom may try to convince him
  of the bad consequences of his perversity for himself and society; the
  effect of his perversity may make him sensible of the bad consequences of
  his actions: but there is no other objectively valid corrective of his
  perversity. If he is successful in his immoral action, and if he silences
  his conscience, this voice of the unobserved higher instinct in favor of
  the preferred lower—which unfortunately, as is well known, succeeds
  oftenest and most easily in the case of those whose perversity has become
  the most habitual, and in whom another grouping of instincts would be
  most desirable—then the whole affair is settled, and he is
  absolved. Let us be understood correctly. We do not say that all
  advocates of mechanical or monistic ethics draw these conclusions in
  reality; we know very well that many a man is better than his system; but
  it seems to us inevitable that the logical pursuit of that naturalistic
  principle leads to this dissolution of all solid fundamentals of moral
  principles, and that it is but an inconsequence, certainly worthy of
  honor and of notice, if all the advocates of naturalism do not profess
  this dissolution of all moral principles with the same cynic frankness
  that is shown by many of their partisans.
We do not say too much, when we charge ethical naturalism with
  dissolution of all moral principles. Let [382]us examine them, for a
  moment, according to the old but still fundamental division into duty,
  virtue, and highest good.
According to the principles of that ethical naturalism, there can be
  no duty at all, no objective moral law, binding absolutely and in
  general. The motives of action are either the strongest and most durable
  instincts, or, in case of high culture, conventional agreement of that
  which benefits society. In the one as well as in the other case, when the
  duty is neglected, the appeal is not made to something absolutely
  objective and binding, but either to the highest instinct (and to this
  every individual has the right to answer with a Quod nego), or to
  agreement and custom; and as to this, every individual has the right to
  make his reformatory or revolutionary attempt at change—of course
  only upon the condition that his attempt is successful, and that it
  stands proof.
Relatively it is easiest for ethical naturalism to establish a
  principle of virtue, inasmuch as we have to look upon virtue as
  the principle of individual perfection, and inasmuch as even naturalism,
  by means of the indestructible impulse of man to attain moral ideas, can
  postulate an ideal of human action. But on closer examination even the
  naturalistic idea of virtue vanishes under our hands. Virtue, as
  individual morality, is constituted of the factors of duty and of the
  highest good, which form the motives of virtuous action. Now a system of
  morality which, as we have seen, is entirely wanting in an objective
  solid principle of duty as the motive of action, and which likewise, as
  we shall see immediately, is wanting in an objectively established
  highest good as the end of action, cannot possibly [383]produce any other idea
  of virtue than an abstract formal one. In ethical naturalism, even this
  form is subject to change. For, according to this system, not only the
  motive and end but also the form of moral action depend on that which in
  every circle of society and at every time proves to be the most
  successful form. It is the proof of success or failure which gives this
  form a certain traditional authority and a relative solidity—but
  only a relative one, and only until it is displaced by a still more
  successful form.
That, finally, ethical naturalism is also wanting in an objective end
  of moral action, in the idea and meaning of the highest good, is
  indeed not denied by naturalism itself. It is true it speaks with
  predilection of the idea of species, which man is to represent and to
  realize, and in that respect we can say that the highest good of
  naturalistic ethologists is the species or the idea of species.[11] But the idea of species
  is only the empty vessel which first becomes valuable by reason of its
  contents. Now, if we ask ethical naturalism the properties with which
  that idea of species is to be endowed, it certainly mentions properties,
  but those which are too rich; namely, it mentions the idea of all that is
  good in human life and the forms of human life, in concreto, the
  whole sum of all the conditions and acquisitions of the culture of
  mankind, art, nature, and science: the comprehensive idea of these
  acquisitions, the enjoyment of them, the work at them, is the highest
  good. Now, since no human individual can enjoy them all and work at them
  all at the same time, every individual, as [384]to disposition,
  inclination, and circumstances, has to enjoy a part of them, to work at a
  part of them, and to renounce a part of them. And since each single one
  of these good things, however valuable to the individual, may be refused
  to or taken away from him, he has again to learn to be satisfied with
  that idea of species, however little it is able to offer him, when
  separated from the empiric possessions of this earthly life. Thus with
  naturalism the highest good is either mentioned in an abstraction which
  does not offer us anything, or which, if we ask the meaning of that
  abstraction, is instantly drawn down into the low sphere and the varied
  multiformity of empirical and individual life, left to the chance of
  individual taste, and confounded with that which is connected with the
  highest good only in the second line and in a derived
  manner—namely, with the formations and actions of life which strive
  at and serve the realization of the highest good. Ethical naturalism is
  not able to produce out of itself an objective highest good which is for
  each individual alike attractive, rich, and comprehensive.
Moreover, since ethical naturalism proves itself insufficient for the
  principles of any and all morality, it is but a natural conclusion that
  it is still less able to produce those principles which are
  characteristic of the highest representation of human morality known to
  mankind, namely: Christian morality. Ethical monism has no room
  for three ethical fundamental views, whose full possession morality owes
  to Christianity, and which gives to Christian morality its highest motive
  power. One of these is a deeper conception of evil as a sin, as a
  positive rebellion against the good; another is faith in a future [385]absolute realization of the highest good
  in an end sometime to be reached by mankind and the individual and by
  means of a moral order of the world; and the third is the acknowledgment
  of the full worth of personality. Evil—to which of course no
  objective valid moral law, but only one conventionally established,
  stands opposed—is to ethical naturalism nothing but the action of
  an instinct which in this given case is not beneficial to man in his
  struggle for existence; the category of good and evil is entirely
  replaced by the category of the useful and detrimental. With the
  disappearance of the idea of sin as a transgression of the divine law,
  the correlated idea of holiness also disappears from the system of
  ethical naturalism. Besides, blessedness, complete harmony of the outer
  and inner man with the ideal in the state of mankind as well as of every
  individual, complete realization of the highest good for the whole as
  well as for the single through the means of moral work and perfection on
  the part of man and of holy and loving guidance and endowment on the part
  of God, is an aim which naturalism is not able to acknowledge, since,
  according to it, mankind and individuals continue in the ever-flowing
  stream of earthly incompletion until both reach their destiny in
  annihilation. A moral order of the world is an impossibility to it, since
  no holy and loving Ruler and Governor of the world, but only a blind
  mechanism, causes the course of things. Finally, the personality of man
  can be only perceived in its worth and in its full importance, when, in
  the first place, it is in the possession of freedom, of full moral
  responsibility; and when, in the second place, it lives beyond the span
  of its short earthly existence and may hope for a full realization of
  [386]all its ideals of virtue and the highest
  good for itself as well as for mankind. Both these points must be
  contested by monism and naturalism. The place of freedom is taken by
  absolute determinism; even man is only a natural product, the highest
  which naturalism knows, but still no more than a product of nature; his
  personality and his life, bound to the material body, cease with the
  death of this body, and therefore never reach the ideal of either
  morality or blessedness. All ideals are and must forever remain objective
  illusions which came forth out of the power of the corresponding noble
  impulse, imaginative objective conceptions of the moral impulses.
§ 2. Scientific Darwinism and Moral Principles.
Whilst Darwinistic naturalism surely injures the moral principles, the
  Darwinistic theories are friendly to them, if they, as mere scientific
  theories, restrain themselves within the limits of natural science. But
  in no other point of the entire realm of contact between the natural and
  intellectual sciences is it more difficult to observe the boundary-line
  than in reflecting upon the moral self-determination of man; here natural
  science is always in danger of going beyond its limits.
In the question as to the relation of the evolution theories to
  religion, the boundary-line can everywhere be easily drawn in theory and
  easily observed in practice. For it is entirely natural for man to look
  upon the phenomena of the visible world on the one hand, with a religious
  mind, as works and actions of an almighty Creator and Ruler of the world,
  on the other, with his observing and reflecting mind, as products of
  natural causes. With this double view, man by no means feels [387]himself
  dragged hither and thither between two conflicting views; he is able in
  his logical contemplation of the world scientifically to establish and
  arrange each for itself and both in their harmony, and has the full
  consciousness that the one, like the other, has subjective as well as
  objective truth. Or, if a single individual does not have this
  consciousness, he must at least admit that it is not Darwinism primarily
  which created the difficulty of this combined view of the world, but that
  the latter existed for man in the past as well as in the present.
But the relation of the Darwinian theories to ethical problems
  is quite a different thing. Here, in the first place, it is not the same
  process which is to be explained as well in regard to its natural
  conditions as to its moral cause. It is true that this double view
  deserves attention in so far as we can look upon every action which
  results from a moral determination also in reference to its natural side.
  If I have to raise my arm in consequence of a moral determination, then
  physiology and mechanism can demonstrate with it the whole theory of the
  motion of members. But this is not the question, when we treat of the
  relation between the natural and the ethical. In this example, the
  moralist examines the motives of my action, the scientist describes and
  explains the activity of the nerves and muscles of my arm, and as long as
  the scientist is not guilty of going beyond the boundary to which he is
  tempted, and which even now we are endeavoring to make clear, as long as
  he does not include the ethical motives in his physiological attempts at
  explanation, the one keeps himself neutral with reference to the other;
  each of them knows that he is [388]operating in a field which at first has
  nothing in common with that of the other. In a moral action, as
  such, the question is no longer as to a process which is to be
  explained as well in regard to its natural conditions as to its ethical
  cause, but of a process which either has its ethical cause, and
  then in its ethical value no natural cause, or which even
  in its ethical motives belongs to the causal connection of empirical
  nature with its indestructible chain of natural causes and natural
  effects. Now at this point the scientist, as such, is always exposed to
  the danger of denying the first part of our dilemma and affirming the
  second. For, in moral action, something which is elevated above nature
  and its causal connection always makes its way into this causal
  connection of nature, and with its action and the effects of this action
  wholly enters into this connection: and natural science which has to deal
  particularly with this causal connection of nature and with it alone, is
  on that account nevertheless always tempted to explain everything that it
  sees coming into this connection, in all its causes (even in those
  which no longer belong to this natural causal connection), out of it. It
  is therefore always tempted to trace even ethical action which, with its
  deeds, makes its way and enters into this causal connection, but which
  with its motives stands above it, as to its motives, back to a natural
  causal connection; and thus to contest the independence of ethical
  motives and their principles—which independence is not dependent on
  nature, but, on the contrary, frequently contradicts it. Ethics must
  adhere to the fact that the ethical determination of the will has its
  origin not in a natural condition, but in the ethical centre of
  personality; although all the conditions under which the ethical motive
  [389]originates and acts, belong completely to
  the causal connection of natural life, in which man himself stands as to
  the whole natural part of his being. The ethical realm stands above the
  natural realm, and shows its superiority partly by the category of moral
  demands whose imperativeness cannot have grown out of the mechanical
  necessity of the natural law, because it often enough contradicts the
  latter and carries out its demands in opposition to it, partly by the
  consciousness of individual responsibility which cannot be got rid of
  even by him who mentally establishes a system of determinism that denies
  responsibility, partly by the voice of the injured conscience which
  cannot merely be the dislike of a dissatisfied higher natural impulse,
  when it can speak of the same action for years, even for an entire human
  life, and even, where man has counterbalanced that once felt
  dissatisfaction of the higher impulse, by an oft-repeated satisfaction of
  it. In Book I, Chapter V, § 1, we tried to show
  that even Darwin seems not to have entirely avoided this danger of
  explaining the moral from physical causes; while at the same time we
  acknowledge that he otherwise esteems the realm of the moral, and that he
  even finds the lofty position of man above the animal world still more
  decidedly expressed in his moral than in his intellectual qualities.
But such an intrusion of the physical into the ethical is by no means
  a necessary consequence of scientific Darwinism—only an
  ever-present temptation of it. He who once admits that even by means of
  development something new can originate, that even under the full
  influence of the evolution theory there appeared in the series of
  creation entirely new phenomena with the [390]appearance of life and
  the organic, and of sensation and consciousness, and still more with the
  appearance of self-consciousness and freedom, which phenomena no
  evolution theory is able to explain; and he who takes into consideration
  the weight of that other obvious fact that, in the origin and the growth
  of each single man, a time in which he acts with moral responsibility
  follows in gradual development a time in which he had but the value and
  the life of a cell,—such an one can explain the whole origin of
  mankind according to the evolution theory, and yet see something
  absolutely new coming forth with the appearance of moral determination.
  All conditions of the moral determinations of the will may be and are
  naturally conditioned, as, indeed, in this world the entire spiritual
  life of man is certainly bound to the conditions of his corporeal life;
  all preliminary stages of moral types which preceded the temporal
  appearance of moral beings, and which surround us still, those stages
  which appear in the animal world, may have preceded and prepared the way
  for the introduction of morally responsible beings into the world: the
  moral determination of the will itself nevertheless remains something new
  and independent—something which transcends nature.
If this fact is once admitted, then ethics also has free play to
  establish independently and render valid its principles. And then we have
  no longer any reason to treat of the relation of the different ethical
  principles to naturo-historical Darwinism; for this relation is that of
  absolute mutual peace.
[391]
DARWINISM AND MORAL LIFE.
§ 1. Darwinistic Naturalism and Moral Life.
Precisely the same relationship between Darwinism and morality, which
  we found in treating of moral principles, presents itself when we ask
  about the relationship of Darwinistic ideas and moral life in its
  concrete reality. He who builds a system of monistic naturalism upon his
  Darwinism, if he is logical, and not better than his system, comes into
  inevitable collision with concrete moral life; while he who limits his
  Darwinism to the realm of natural science, remains in concrete life in
  peace with morality.
That Darwinistic ethical naturalism also comes into conflict with
  concrete moral life, becomes evident from the joy with which the
  advocates of subversion and negation greet the new principle of the
  "struggle for existence," and make it the principle of their own actions
  and social theories. This is not chance sympathy, but is founded upon the
  nature of ethical naturalism. Of him who learns to look upon himself only
  as a product of nature, though highly ennobled, we cannot expect any
  other principle than that of following his nature: not, indeed, the ideal
  nature of man—for this is an abstraction which man reaches only by
  means of a long [392]process of reflection—but his own
  empirical nature, as he finds it present in himself; for this is indeed
  that natural product as which man has to consider himself according to
  that theory. Where this leads to, everybody knows who knows human nature.
  If these consequences are not to be found in all ethical naturalists, and
  if they are perhaps the least evident in the system and life of the very
  ones who otherwise teach naturalism the most logically (Strauss, for
  example), we again most cheerfully admit that many men are better than
  their systems, and that in making objection to a system, even an ethical
  system, we in the first place do not say anything at all about the
  advocates of this system and their moral value. Often enough some noble
  and fruitful truth has been advocated by men who are personally
  contemptible, and often enough some dangerous error is propagated by men
  who are personally very amiable and moral, although the damage which such
  an error carries with it, must become evident in their lives, on closer
  observation. Besides, we must not overlook the fact, that what in a
  perverse system is still relatively true, and the thing which gives it a
  relative vitality, is borrowed from truth and from the correct system;
  and that all those who oppose the present fundamentals of morality, and
  especially of Christian morality, in a thousand ways live upon and
  consume the possessions which they owe to the same influences against
  which they contend.
But to whatever relative height the moral nobility of single advocates
  of ethical naturalism may rise, it is not able, at least not from its own
  principles, to produce thoroughly moral and truly cultivated characters;
  such are only produced where that which forms the character, [393]flows out
  of a spring of life whose origin is above nature and its series of
  causes.
From this we see that for the most part a very low idea of
  personality, a very low derivation of the motives of human action, is
  found in the works of Darwinistic moralists—as, e.g., we
  have seen in the works of Häckel that to him the idea of a personality of
  God is inseparably connected with the idea of capricious arbitrariness,
  and that he derives all actions of all men from the motives of
  egoism.
But we also see, from still more common evidences, the fact that some
  of the very highest blossoms and noblest fruits of human virtue, as they
  ripen on the ground of Christian morality, are not even acknowledged,
  much less required, by ethical naturalism. We think particularly of the
  virtues of love, of self-denial, and of humility.
  Certainly, we do not deny that men who are inclined toward naturalism can
  and do possess love to a certain degree, but the highest exemplification
  of love, the love of enemies in the fullest sense of the word—not
  only compassion on the battle-field, but the full, forgiving, blessing
  love which renders good for evil, and even intercedes for a personal
  enemy, although he may be the intentional and successful destroyer of our
  whole earthly happiness—such a love may perhaps be demanded and
  admired by a naturalistic moralist under the imposing influence of the
  presence of such a love and in unconscious dependence on the motives of
  Christianity which surround him; but he will never be able to show from
  what point of his system it is to be deduced. On the other hand, it is
  easy to show him more than one point of his system which, far from
  requiring such love, [394]stigmatizes it as simple foolishness. Such
  a fruit only ripens under the care of him who gave his life for us while
  we still were enemies, and under the influence of the remission of our
  sin by our Heavenly Father.
Moreover, an ethical naturalist can also accomplish much in
  self-denial: he can make many great sacrifices, if he can thereby
  reach a desirable end that cannot be reached without acts of self-denial;
  he can show great strength and patience in a resigned endurance of the
  inevitable; and if we take into consideration the possibility of its
  being logically at variance with his system, he may perform all that
  which the highest morality requires. But a renunciation which is more
  than silent resignation, and which under certain circumstances can also
  become a joyful renunciation of all that was beloved and dear to man on
  earth, does not grow out of the soil of naturalism, and is possible only
  there where man carries in himself a possession which would render him
  still more fortunate and happy than the idea of species, and where he
  knows the cross of Jesus, and understands the word of the Lord: "He that
  loveth his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his life for my sake,
  shall find it." Strauss is a striking proof that naturalism is not able
  to estimate the tasks of self-denial at their full importance. In his
  "The Old Faith and the New," although he speaks with great earnestness of
  moral demands, yet he deeply degrades that which is connected with a
  Christian renunciation of self and the world, when he reproaches
  Christianity with "a thorough cult of poverty and mendicity" (!)
  and, regarding its demand for self-denial, he denies that it has any
  comprehension of the tasks of [395]industry, of the virtues of home and
  family life, of patriotism and civil virtue.
Finally, we may make a similar statement in regard to humility.
  There certainly are ethical naturalists also who are modest. But when the
  prophets of ethical naturalism again and again announce that the great
  aim of all the discoveries of the evolution theory is to show us how far
  mankind has fortunately progressed; when their spirit of devotion is
  nourished by Göthe's Promethean word: "Hast thou not thyself accomplished
  all, thou holy glowing heart?"—and even when Häckel prints as the
  leading motto of his "Anthropogeny" Göthe's poem "Prometheus"; when the
  struggle of selection is also elevated to a moral principle, and the
  life-task of an individual is limited to creating elbow-room for himself:
  then humility, indeed, is a virtue which a naturalist may acquire, not
  through his naturalism, but in spite of it; and the great naďveté
  with which, in books of that tendency, haughtiness and passion for glory
  are treated as something necessarily understood, and their own ego is
  glorified, is a much more logical result. "We are proud of having so
  immensely out-stripped our lower animal ancestors, and derive from it the
  consoling assurance that in future also, mankind, as a whole, will follow
  the glorious career of progressive development, and attain a still
  higher degree of mental perfection." (Häckel, "Hist. of Creat.") This is
  the theme which is repeated in many variations in all books of similar
  tendency. In the same book already referred to, we read: "Each free and
  highly developed individual, each original person, has his own
  religion, his own God; so it is certainly not arrogance when we
  also claim the [396]right of forming our own idea of God." Or,
  "The recognition of the theory of development and the monistic philosophy
  based upon it forms the best criterion for the degree of man's mental
  development." L. Büchner, in his collection of essays, "Aus Natur und
  Welt" ("From Nature and the World"), dedicates a long chapter to
  self-glorification, and finds confirmed in himself the word of the poet,
  "Great destinies are always preceded by spirit messengers"; and he, still
  living, prefaces his own biography in the latest edition of "Kraft und
  Stoff" ("Force and Matter"), and on the first page of the same publishes
  the testimonial which he received, when leaving the gymnasium: "The
  bearer of this testimonial excelled in the thorough study of literature,
  philosophy, and poetry, and as regards style in his productions showed an
  excellent talent." In view of these things, we certainly do no injustice
  to this tendency when we deny to it the conception of the idea and the
  practice of humility.
§ 2. Scientific Darwinism and Moral Life.
It is evident from the peace-relation between mere scientific
  Darwinism and moral principles, that naturo-historical Darwinism also
  remains in peace with moral life. We therefore have no longer to treat of
  any question of competency in the realm of concrete moral life, but only
  to mention the points of contact in which both realms, fully
  acknowledging their mutual independence, yet in an inferior way exercise
  some beneficial influence upon each other. [397]
Moral life influences Darwinism in so far as, by its mere existence,
  it cautions the advocate of the scientific evolution theory against
  effacing the differences between the moral and the natural, and against
  degrading man to the level of animals on account of his connection with
  the animal world. The naturo-historical idea of evolution, in case it
  should turn out to be correct, would exercise an influence upon moral
  life in a three-fold direction: First, it would add to all the motives of
  the humane treatment of the animal world—which certainly without it
  already has moral demands—a new one, and establish them all more
  firmly. Man would then recognize in the animal world which surrounds him
  branches of his own natural pedigree, and exercise his right of mastery
  only in the sense which Alex. Braun expresses, when he says: "Man
  consents to the idea of being appointed master of animals; but then he
  must also acknowledge that he is not placed over his subjects as a
  stranger, but proceeded from the people itself, whose master he wishes to
  be." A second service which the idea of evolution would have to render to
  the forming of moral life, would consist in the fact that it would favor
  all those ethical modes of contemplation and those maxims which regard
  the gradual process of development and the growth of character as the
  relative power of influences and conditions, and that it would give them
  hints for the perception of moral growth, in like manner as, in the
  before-mentioned parable, the Lord illustrates the imperceptible and
  continual growth of the kingdom of God with the growth of a plant. A
  third service which the evolution theory might be able [398]to render to
  moral life, would consist in the fact that it would give to the motive of
  perfection and progress, which is always and everywhere a moral lever, a
  new illustration and a new weight by pointing at the progress which
  development has to show in the life of nature.
[399]
If now, having reached our goal, we look back upon the way which we
  have traversed, we find a justification of the regret expressed at the
  beginning, that a scientific treatment of religion and morality is
  compelled to take a position in regard to theories which are not yet
  established. We found the most different problems—scientific,
  naturo-philosophical, metaphysical, religious and
  ethical—inextricably mixed, and were obliged, as one of our first
  tasks, to make an attempt at finding the clew and at examining and
  testing each single problem, together with attempts at its solution,
  separately, although keeping constantly in mind its connection with all
  other problems and their attempts at solution. We found ourselves led
  into the presence of a series of the most interesting problems, but not a
  single solution finished. That very attempt at solution which brought up
  this whole question, and which was repeatedly announced as the infallible
  key to the solution of all scientific problems—the selection
  theory—we found a decided failure, at least in the direction of the
  extension and importance which was given to this theory. And yet in spite
  of the hypothetical nature of all attempts at solution, we see
  investigators in all the realms of natural science strongly attracted by
  the very promising character of these problems and busily engaged in
  making attempts at solution; [400]and we see even philosophy strongly
  attracted by its interest in these works. Such a diligent work can
  certainly not be without gain; but wherein will this gain consist? Will
  it, as its antagonists prophecy, be like that which in former times
  alchemy brought to science, which, indeed, enriched chemistry by an
  entire series of new discoveries, but did not find what it sought, the
  one fundamental element from which all the rest are derived, which only
  confirmed, with a power acknowledged even to-day, the old doctrine of the
  elementary difference of the elements? Will the Darwinian investigations
  thus also make all possible discoveries by the way, but in place
  of that which they look for, in place of a common pedigree or of a few
  pedigrees for all organisms, finally only give additional strength to the
  permanence of species and the unapproachableness of the secret of their
  origin? Or can we derive from the reasons which the investigators urge in
  favor of the idea of an origin of species through descent and evolution,
  the hope that that mysterious darkness of prehistoric times upon which
  the works of our century have shed so much light, will still be
  illuminated even to the sources from which organic species came, and from
  which mankind also originated? We must leave the decision of these
  questions to the future and to scientists.
But we have to note one gain, which is so great that on its
  account, we willingly cease our regret in regard to the unfinished
  condition of these theories; for we owe the full enjoyment of this gain
  to that very unfinished condition. It is the gain which religion and
  morality get from these investigations, and which consists in the new
  and comprehensive confirmation of the conviction, [401]which, indeed, was
  established before, that religion and morality—Christian religion
  and Christian morality—rest on foundations which can no longer be
  shaken by any result of exact investigation.
The triumph with which the Darwinian theories were greeted by many as
  the new sun before whose rising all that mankind had thus far called
  light and sun turns pale, and the antipathy with which, on that very
  account, many to whom their religious and ethical acquisitions are a
  sacred sanctuary, turn away from these theories, urged us to investigate
  their position in reference to religion and morality. Now, if these
  theories had produced a certain undoubted result, we should
  unquestionably have been satisfied with the examination of the position
  of religion and morality in reference to this certain result. But since
  not a single result of those investigations is really established, we
  have found ourselves obliged to give our investigation a much greater
  extension and to discuss even all imaginable possibilities. The
  beneficial result of this comparison was, that religion and morality not
  only remain at peace with all imaginable possibilities of
  scientific theories, but can also, in the realm of the
  philosophy of the doctrines of nature, be passive spectators of
  all investigations and attempts, even of all possible excursions into the
  realm of fancy, without being obliged to interfere. It is in the realm of
  mere metaphysics that we first perceive an antagonist whose
  victory would indeed be fatal to the religious and ethical acquisitions
  of mankind: this antagonist is called elimination from nature of the idea
  of design. Fortunately, this metaphysical idea is in such striking
  opposition not only to the whole world of facts but also to all logical
  [402]reasoning, it has everywhere, where man
  perceives organization and a difference between lower and higher,
  especially in the contemplation of the world, of this cosmos of
  wonderful order and beauty, so decidedly all philosophical as well as all
  exact sciences as its adversaries, it lays its hands so rudely and so
  destructively not only upon the religious and ethical acquisitions but
  also upon all ideal remaining acquisitions of mankind, that religion and
  morality know, when fighting this adversary, they are in firm accord with
  all the spiritual interests of mankind.
This, in its most essential features, is the pleasing result of our
  critical examination; and such a demonstration of the immovably solid
  foundation, secure from all the change of opinions and all the progress
  of discoveries on which morality and religion rest, has still an entire
  series of further pleasing consequences in its train.
In the first place, it is a living and actual proof of the fact that
  religion and morality give to all sciences the full freedom of
  investigation. The religious and ethical interest itself not only
  gives, but even requires, this freedom of investigation. It
  requires it in consequence of that impulse of truth which religion
  has in common with every impulse of knowledge, and which in itself is an
  ethical impulse. In consequence of this impulse, religion must found its
  possession on nothing else than subjective and objective truth, and can
  look upon all the paths which lead through even the remotest realm of
  knowledge to the establishment of truth, only with sympathetic interest.
  Precisely those who see in religion more than a mere expression of
  emotion, and all those who require that their religious life and the
  object of [403]their religious faith shall possess truth,
  subjective and objective, cannot commit any greater folly than treating
  search for truth in any other realm with suspicion, or even ignoring it.
  They only injure that which they meant to defend, by rendering the purity
  of their own religious interest suspected, and by establishing more
  firmly the breach between religious life and faith and the other
  acquisitions of culture and interests of their time, of which neither
  religion nor science, but only a misguided tendency of their minds and
  hearts, is guilty. How much unfriendly and unjust judgment has already
  found utterance by means of the pen and voice, in reference to honest and
  meritorious workers, on the part of religious zealots who fail to
  recognize that close relationship of the religious with the scientific
  impulse of truth! How often and how much does such a judgment gain great
  consideration from a public of which but a few are able to form an
  independent opinion of the men and works which are thus abused before
  their eyes and ears, and how much of the aversion to the form in which
  the religious life of the present offers itself, on the part of those men
  who are thus suspected, is in the last instance to be attributed neither
  to be irreligiousness of these men nor to the deficiency of the present
  form of our religious life, but to the repelling effect of that unjust
  treatment!
Another gain of our discussion, correlated to that just mentioned,
  consists in the proof that religion and morality have their autonomous
  principle and realm which is not at all obliged to borrow the proof
  of its truth from the present condition and degree of our knowledge, but
  carries it in itself, although it stands in [404]fruitful reciprocal
  action with all the other realms of knowledge and life. Just as decidedly
  as we had to caution the advocates of religion against keeping themselves
  indifferent, suspicious, or even hostile, regarding the advances into the
  realm of secular knowledge, so decidedly do we like to see the workers in
  the realm of the knowledge of nature cautioned against confusing points
  of view, in thinking that they can through their scientific knowledge
  purify and reform the religious and ethical realms. They may purify and
  reform as much as they please, but only in their own realm. The only
  thing they are able to reform is our knowledge of nature, and in our
  religious and ethical life and perception only that which belongs to this
  natural part; but this is only the outer part of religious and ethical
  life: the source of our religion and morality springs from quite another
  ground than that which they cultivate.
A third gain from our discussion is the actual proof of the harmony
  between faith and knowledge, between the religious and the scientific
  views of the world. In our investigation we had no occasion for
  psychological or theoretical investigations as to faith and knowledge and
  their mutual relation; but if our discussion is not an entire failure,
  perhaps the actual exposition of a standpoint on which faith and
  knowledge may live at peace with one another, which is not bought by a
  sacrifice on either side, and which does not consist in a compromise of
  the two, but which has its reason in the deepest and most active interest
  of the one, in the full and unconstrained freedom of the other, a
  stronger proof for the intimate relationship of these brothers, between
  whom the present generation wishes too often to sow discord, than if we
  [405]had undertaken long religio-philosophical
  and theoretical investigations.
Finally, the results of our analysis have given us still another gain:
  they have led us beyond Lessing's "Nathan" and his parable of the "Three
  Rings." We call this a gain, without the least intention of discrediting
  by it the motives of tolerance and the points of view for the judgment of
  the character and religiousness of human individuals, which lay in that
  parable, or suspecting the motives of so many of our contemporaries whose
  religio-philosophical judgment is entirely expressed in that parable. We
  saw ourselves compelled to make a choice either of accepting or of
  rejecting ends in the world, and found that the world resolves itself
  into a senseless game at dice, and that the phenomena become more
  unintelligible the more important they are, if we ignore or even reject
  teleology. The acknowledgment of the latter prevented us from seeing in
  the world and its events merely the eternal stream of planless coming and
  going; it prevented us from accepting such an endless stream of
  appearance and disappearance, and therefore also an endless stream of the
  appearance and disappearance of new forms of religion in that creature
  for whose appearance we see all other creatures are only a preparation,
  and are even obliged to look upon them as a preparation in accordance
  with no other theory more than that of evolution. It also urged us to
  inquire as to the ends and designs of mankind, and we found this end in
  the disposition of man for a communion with God, for the state of bearing
  his image and of being his child. Now we have fully to acknowledge that
  Christianity, like all religions which claim truth and universal
  acceptance, [406]is to be analyzed with the very same means
  of science as all phenomena in the world of facts, and that therefore it
  is especially subject to all investigations of religio-philosophical,
  religio-historical, and historical criticism, to its fullest extent. But
  precisely such an analysis of Christianity leads us to a result which
  elevates Christian religion high above all other forms. It also confirms
  by means of science what, indeed, is established to a Christian mind as
  certainty from his own direct experience, that the quintessence of that
  which Christianity offers us, is truth and gives full satisfaction to
  soul and mind. For that analysis establishes, in the first place, that
  Christianity shows us the idea of God and the nature and destiny of man
  in a purity such as no other religion does, and in such a life-creating
  power that it is able to satisfy most completely all the nobler desires
  and impulses of soul and mind, and to overcome most successfully all
  ignoble ones. Furthermore, it shows us that these gifts of Christianity
  offered themselves, and still offer themselves, not only in philosophemes
  and doctrines, in parables and myths, in postulates and prophecies, but
  what, indeed, is not the case in any other religion, in an arranged
  course of deeds and facts which, in everything that is necessary and
  essential for the acquisition of that idea of God and for the realization
  of that ideal of mankind, legitimate themselves to criticism as
  historical facts, and which legitimate themselves as actions of divine
  manifestation by the fact, that they and their consequences also are
  really able to fulfill what they promise, and to bring mankind nearer to
  the accomplishment of that goal which they set up for it. Finally, it
  shows us, when it reviews and compares the development of [407]culture among
  all mankind, that the Christian nations have really borne the richest
  blossom and fruit which has appeared hitherto on the tree of mankind, and
  that Christianity, for the life of nations, has not only, like other
  religions, powers of preservation, but also powers of renovation and
  renewal which other religions are wanting. Even all the errors of
  superstition and immorality, of intolerance and lust of power, of so many
  of its advocates and confessors, at which the adversaries of the
  Christian view of the world so willingly point, are but a confirmation of
  its value. For they show us how divine and heavenly the gift must be, if
  even such errors were not able to smother its fruits. If we do not wish
  to suppose that mankind has foundations and ends which up to the present
  it is not yet allowed to know, we certainly must look for these
  foundations and ends where we find the best which has so far been given
  to mankind and which has been accomplished by it.
This acknowledgment of Christianity as the only true and only really
  universal religion leads us beyond another sentiment of Lessing, which
  has found an equally strong or perhaps still stronger echo in the mind.
  We mean the expression that, if he had to choose, he would prefer the
  continual search for truth to the possession of truth itself. We
  emphatically acknowledge the holy right and the high nobility of this
  impulse of investigation and activity, but we need not buy its
  acknowledgment and satisfaction at the price of being obliged to renounce
  a consciousness or the hope of a consciousness which is equally
  indispensable to our inner happiness as that impulse of investigation,
  and which first gives to this impulse its overwhelming
  power—namely, the [408]consciousness and the hope of really
  possessing the truth. For, in fact, we are not required to make this
  choice. There is a possession of truth which does not exclude, but
  requires, the search for truth: that is the possession of truth in the
  answer to the questions as to the starting point and the goal of our
  life, the possession of truth in the fundamentals of our religious view
  of the world. It is the certainty about the starting-point and goal of
  our life, which lastingly and effectively invites us also to look for and
  perceive all the ways which, in theory as well as in practice, lead from
  a firm starting-point to a certain end, and only the possession of truth
  in the fundamentals of our religious view of the world gives value and
  satisfaction to investigation in a world which, without this possession,
  contains for us only transitory and fleeting, and therefore only
  unsatisfactory, things, but which stands before us as the work and the
  theatre of revelation of a God and Father, and therefore gives to
  investigation inexhaustible joy and satisfaction when we look upon it
  from those stand-points.
In like manner as, at the outset of our investigation, we perceived in
  organic species creations of God, and in spite of this, or rather on
  account of it, looked upon the attempts at exploring their origin with so
  much deeper interest, we also see ourselves, in the still more direct
  religious realm, not at all condemned to stagnation when we acknowledge
  Christianity as absolute religion. This very acknowledgment alone makes a
  real progress possible for us. For every progress, in order to be a real
  progress, needs a firm starting-point and a certain goal; hence that
  which is shown and offered to mankind in Christianity. From this [409]starting-point and toward this end there
  are tasks enough for religious progress. The ever more definite
  investigation of the facts and doctrines of Christianity, the improvement
  and ever more complete reproduction of the scientific image in which
  these facts and doctrines are reflected in the mind of man the
  progressing adaptation of ecclesiastical life in divine service, and
  organization to the substance and the need of Christian religiousness,
  the harmonizing of our possession of faith with all other elements of
  culture of each period, the working up of that which is given to us in
  Christianity into the spiritual and ethical acquisition of a single
  personality and its ever more complete representation and realization in
  the individual and the common life, the progressing penetration of
  generations by the transfiguring light of religion and morality, and the
  progressive overcoming of the likewise progressingly developing kingdom
  of evil—in short, all that which the language of religion calls the
  growth of the kingdom of God, is work and progress enough, but certainly
  work and progress on the ground of a certain basis as the starting-point
  given to us by God, and work and progress toward a certain goal set for
  us by God.
It is only from this basis of a possession of truth as it is offered
  to us by Christian theism, and by the facts of redemption and of a
  reconciliation of man with God, that the breach between faith and
  knowledge, between religion and the life of culture, which at present
  takes place in so many a heart and mind, can be healed; and, far from
  seeking to cripple or hinder those who stand on this basis, it alone
  gives to their theoretical and practical activity its joyous strength and
  certain end, to [410]their sphere of knowledge its universal
  breadth. The Apostle Paul, at the end of 1 Corinthians, XV, when he takes a comprehensive view from the
  highest points of Christian hope to which he found himself led from those
  fundamentals, knows of no fitter words to conclude with and to give it a
  practical application than these: "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, be ye
  steadfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
  forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not vain in the Lord."
[1] "The International Scientific
  Series." No. XIII.
[2] "Evolution of Man."
[3] It was only when the manuscript
  of this work was nearly finished and the first part of it had gone to the
  press, that the author received the second part of K. E. von Baer's
  "Studien aus dem Gebiete der Naturwissenschaften" (Studies in the
  Realm of Natural Sciences). It contains another essay on teleology,
  "Ueber Zielstrebigkeit in den organischen Körpern insbesondere,"
  and a treatise on Darwin's doctrine, "Ueber Darwin's Lehre," which
  Baer had promised long ago and which the public had anxiously awaited. It
  is no little satisfaction to find that I, from my modest premises,
  reached results regarding the naturo-philosophical problems and their
  weight in the religious realm which so fully harmonize with the views of
  this first authority in the realm of the history of development. I shall
  still have occasion here and there to avail myself of a study of this
  latest and most important publication upon the question of Darwinism, and
  shall confine myself here to the remark that von Baer, although he
  rejects the selection theory and the superficial treatment of the
  principle of evolution on the part of materialists, is by no means
  disinclined to the idea of the origin of species through descent, whether
  in gradual development or in leaps; and that in this respect he could no
  longer be counted among the advocates of the group above referred to, but
  among those which we mention farther on, had he not repeatedly and
  forcibly confessed, with a modesty worthy of acknowledgment, his total
  ignorance concerning the manner in which certain forms of life,
  especially the higher ones, originated. The origin of higher species
  without the supposition of a descent is to him unexplainable, because the
  individuals of these species are, in their first development of life, so
  dependent on the mother. Furthermore, he points out the fact that in
  early periods of the earth the organic forming power which ruled, must
  have been a higher one than it is at the present time; in like manner as
  the first period in the embryonic development of individuals is to-day
  the most productive. This higher power of organization, he says, could
  consist in a higher power of changing organisms into new species, as well
  as in a higher power of producing new species through primitive
  generation; or it could consist in both. In general, there is no reason
  to suppose that primitive generations which took place at the first
  origination of life on earth, could not have been repeated later and
  oftener. The nearer a generation was to these individuals originated through
  primitive generation, the greater was undoubtedly its flexibility and
  changeableness; the farther, the greater the fixity of type.
[4] After the completion this
  manuscript, the author found that K. E. von Baer, in his treatise upon
  Darwin's doctrine, pays especial attention to the change of generation
  and also to the metamorphosis of plants and animals in exactly the same
  sense and reaches the same conclusion.
[5] Compare Max Müller, "Lectures on
  the Science of Language," 6th ed., London, 1871, vol. I, p. 403.
[6] Compare v. Baer, "Studies, etc.,"
  p. 294 ff.
[7] Darwin says, on page 146, Eng.
  Ed., of his "Descent of Man": "In the earlier editions of my 'Origin of
  Species', I perhaps attributed too much to the action of natural
  selection or the survival of the fittest.... I did not formerly
  sufficiently consider the existence of structures which, as far as we can
  at present judge, are neither beneficial nor injurious; and this I
  believe to be one of the greatest oversights as yet detected in my
  work.... An unexplained residuum of change, perhaps a large one, must be
  left to the assumed uniform action of those unknown agencies, which
  occasionally induce strongly-marked and abrupt deviations of structure in
  our domestic productions."
[8] This word, which is of recent
  coinage in Germany, has been found so incapable of being rendered by an
  exact English equivalent, that it has been thought best to retain it and
  to give the author's own explanation of the meaning which he desired it
  to express. He says, in a note to the translator: "I was led to this idea
  [of Auslosung] in a small essay of Robert von Mayer ("Ueber
  Auslösung," 1876). Afterwards Mayer personally stated to me that he
  heartily approved the emphasis I had given to this idea, and said that he
  had only thought of the fact that psychical processes, like the action of
  the will, losen aus (release) physiological processes, like the
  action of the muscles, and that I had carried the idea farther, in saying
  that psychical processes are ausgelost (released) by physiological
  processes, and that this is a very important step farther on the way of
  investigation. Mayer himself thought it would be necessary to call the
  attention to this, when he further developed the ideas he had given in
  the before-mentioned essay; his intention to do so was prevented by his
  death.
"Auslosung is a word originated by modern mechanical science,
  and means: (1.) Slight mechanical operations of detaching and the like,
  by which another and more important action, whose forces were heretofore
  restrained, can be set into activity: e.g., the pressure which
  sets in motion a machine, previously at rest, is Auslosung; the
  pressure on the trigger of a gun is Auslosung; the friction of a
  match which is the beginning of a great fire is Auslosung. (2.)
  This idea may now be applied to chemical processes: e.g., a glass
  of sugar-water will remain sweet unless some foreign element is
  introduced into it, but the moment it receives a fermenting substance
  either by chance, from the air, or with intention, then the sugar water
  is brought into a process of chemical decomposition, and from this there
  results Auslosung; but the introduction of the fermenting agent
  into the sugar-water is Auslosung. (3.) Von Mayer applies this
  idea to psycho-physical relations of life, and says: when the will acting
  through the agency of the motor nerves sets in motion the muscles, this
  is Auslosung."—[Trans.]
[9] For the use of readers who do not
  understand Greek, we may state that the word teleology is derived
  from the Greek word telos, Gen. teleos: end, purpose, aim;
  and means the "doctrine of design or a conformity to the end in view,"
  or, as K. E. von Baer prefers and wishes to have introduced into
  scientific language, "the doctrine of the striving toward an end"
  (Zielstrebigkeit). It seems to be quite a superficial treatment of
  an idea on whose reception or rejection no less a thing than an entire
  view of the world with all its most important and deepest questions
  depends, when Dr. G. Seidlitz, in an essay on the success of Darwinism
  ("Ausland," 1874, No. 37), states incidentally that teleology is derived
  from the Greek τέλεος perfect.
  It is true that the Greek adjective for perfect is also derived from that
  noun, τέλος, which has the same root
  as the German word Ziel, and there is even an Ionic form for that
  adjective which is τέλεος, but the Attic
  form is τέλειος; and since
  modern languages, when a choice is allowed, do not derive their Greek
  foreign words from the Ionic, but from the Attic dialect, that
  word—were it really derived from that adjective and did it express
  "doctrine of perfection"—would have to be teleiology, or, in
  Latinized form, teliology. As far as we know, the word, since it was
  introduced into scientific language, has never been derived from any
  other root than from τέλος, Gen. τέλεος, end, and
  has never been used in any other sense than to express the doctrine of a
  purpose and end in the world.
[10] Compare "History, Essays, and
  Orations of the 6th General Conference of the Evangelical Alliance," New
  York, Harper Bros., 1874, p. 264-271.
[11] Compare D. F. Strauss, the
  most celebrated moral philosopher of Monism, in § 74 of his "The Old
  Faith and the New."

We hereby authorize the Rev. Dr. G. A. Zimmermann to translate into
  English the book entitled
Die Darwin'schen Theorien und ihre Stellung zur Philosophie,
  Religion und Moral von Rudolf Schmid.
We declare that we know of no other translation of the said book and
  that Dr. Zimmermann's translation will be the only one authorized by us
  for the United States as well as for the British Empire and its
  Dominions.
(The Author) Rudolf Schmid.
(The Publisher) Paul Moser.
AND THEIR RELATION TO
President of the Theological Seminary at Schönthal, Würtemberg.
TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN
With an Introduction by
Copyright
By Jansen, McClurg & Co.
A.D. 1882.
R. R. DONNELLEY & SONS, PRINTERS.
[1]
The movement which received its impulse as well as its name from
  Darwin, seems to have recently passed its distinctest phase; but the more
  prominent points of opposition, religious, ethical, and scientific, which
  have been revealed through it, remain as sharply contrasted as before.
  The author of this book desires, in the first place, to be of service to
  such readers as feel the need of setting themselves right upon these
  questions, which touch the highest interests of mankind, but who lack
  time and opportunity to investigate independently a realm in which so
  many and so heterogeneous sciences come into mutual contact. The
  illogical and confused manner in which some noisy leaders confound these
  sciences and their problems and consequences, renders it still more
  difficult to arrive at a satisfactory result; and thus perhaps many
  readers will look with interest upon an investigation designed to
  simplify the different problems and the different attempts at their
  solution, and to treat them not only in their relations to each other,
  but also separately. But with this primary object, the author combines
  another: to render a service to some among the many who perceive the
  harmony between their scientific conviction and their religious need
  threatened or shaken by the results of science, and who are unwilling to
  lose this harmony, or, having lost it, desire to regain it. Those voices
  are indeed becoming louder, and more generally and willingly heard, which
  proclaim an irreconcilability between faith and [2]knowledge, between the
  religious and the scientific views of the world; which declare that peace
  between the two can only be had at the price either of permitting the
  religious impulses of the heart to be stifled in favor of science, of
  satisfying the religious need of the mind with a nourishment which in the
  light of science proves to be an illusion, or, as sceptics in theory and
  eclectics in practice, of renouncing with resignation a logical
  connection and foundation to their former view of the world. The most
  striking proof of the extent to which these voices are heard, is the fact
  that it has been possible for a one-sided pessimism to become the
  fashionable system of philosophy in a Christian nation. The most
  effective means for opposing such discordant voices, and for making
  amends for the disagreements which they have occasioned, undoubtedly
  consists in the actual proof of the contrary of their theories, in the
  clear presentation of a standpoint from which not only the most
  unrestricted freedom of investigation and the most unreserved
  acknowledgment of its results shall be in perfect harmony with the
  undiminished care of our entire religious possession, but in which this
  peace is preserved and forever established by the very fact that one
  function of the mind directly requires the other, one possession directly
  guarantees the other. This is the standpoint of the author, and from it
  he has endeavored to treat all the questions which are to be taken into
  consideration. Should he, by his exposition of this standpoint, succeed
  in helping even a few readers in reaching the conviction of the actual
  harmony between the scientific, religious, and ethical acquisitions of
  mankind, or in confirming them anew in such conviction, he would find
  himself amply rewarded for this first extended venture before the
  public.
R. S.
[3]
Six years have elapsed since I wrote the book which is now going forth
  in English dress. The great leader of the theories in question has passed
  away; the waves of thought he set in motion are assuming smoother shape;
  and I can only add to what I have already written, that not only have I
  had no occasion to retract any of the statements or views laid down in
  the book, but I perceive the religious as well as the scientific world
  growing more and more into accord with the views I have maintained, and
  which were at first so vehemently opposed.
I owe so much to the literary men of the English tongue on both sides
  of the Atlantic, that I shall be glad if, through the devoted labors of
  the translator, I am enabled to pay them a tribute of gratitude by aiding
  them in clearing the way for thought in these much disputed fields, or in
  reconciling in their minds the conflict between faith and science.
R. S.
Schönthal, Würtemberg, September,
  1882.
[5]
It is well known that Mr. Darwin's theory on the Origin of Species has
  been accepted in Germany more widely, with more absolute faith, and with
  more vehement enthusiasm, than in the country of its birth. In Germany,
  more conspicuously than elsewhere, it has itself become the subject of
  developments as strange and as aberrant as any which it assumes in the
  history of Organic Life. The most extravagant conclusions have been drawn
  from it—invading every branch of human thought, in Science, in
  Philosophy, and in Religion. These conclusions have been preached, too,
  with a dogmatism as angry and as intolerant as any of the old theologies.
  It is the fate of every idea which is new and fruitful, that it is ridden
  to the death by excited novices. We can not be surprised if this fate has
  overtaken the idea that all existing animal forms have had their ancestry
  in other forms which exist no longer, and have been derived from these by
  ordinary generation through countless stages of descent. Although this is
  an idea which, whether true or not, is entirely subordinate to the larger
  idea of creation, it usurps in many minds the character of a substitute.
  This is natural enough. The theory, or at least the language, of
  Evolutionists, puts forward a visible order of phenomena as a complete
  and all-sufficient account of its own origin and cause. However
  unsatisfactory this may be to the higher faculties of the mind, it is
  eminently [6]satisfactory to those other faculties which
  are lower in the scale. It dismisses as needless, or it postpones
  indefinitely, all thought of the agencies which are ultimate and unseen.
  Just as in the physical world, some trivial object which is very near us
  may shut out the whole of a wide horizon, so in the intellectual world,
  some coarse mechanical conception may shut out all the kingdom of Nature
  and the glory of it.
Two great subjects of investigation lie before us. The first is to
  ascertain how far the Theory of Evolution represents an universal fact,
  or only one very partial and fragmentary aspect of a great variety of
  facts connected with the origin and development of Organic Life. The
  second and by far the most important inquiry, is to estimate aright, or
  as nearly as we can, the relative place and importance of these facts in
  the Philosophy of Nature.
Subjects of investigation so rich and manifold as these may well
  attract all the most varied gifts of the human mind. This they have
  already done, and there is every indication that they will continue to do
  so for generations yet to be. Already an immense literature is devoted to
  them; and every fresh effort of observation and of reasoning seems to
  open out new and fruitful avenues of thought. The work which is here
  introduced to the English reader contains an excellent review of this
  literature, so far as it is represented in the English and German
  languages. Knowing the author personally, as I have done for many years,
  I recognize with pleasure in his work all the carefulness of inquiry, and
  all the conscientiousness of reasoning, which belong to a singularly
  candid and patient mind.
Argyll.
Inverary Castle, Scotland,
September, 1882.
[7]
The consideration which this work has received from the leaders of
  religious and philosophic thought in Germany, and, indeed, wherever it
  has been read in its original form, has led the translator to believe
  that an English version of it would be acceptable. Especially in America,
  where religious problems and religious thought are so intimately
  connected with the processes of scientific and philosophic investigation,
  and where the agitation of these problems is so peculiarly active and
  violent, it has seemed that a work marked by so much scholarship,
  profundity, and comprehensiveness and originality of treatment, must
  serve an important purpose to the cause of religious no less than of
  scientific truth. It may be explained here, that the author resided for
  some years in the family of the Duke of Argyll, and there breathed, to a
  certain extent, the scientific air of Darwinism in its very origin; and
  thus his familiarity with all the results of modern scientific research,
  added to his theological and philosophical acquirements, enable him, with
  a most admirable blending of the spirit of fairness and toleration with
  logical severity of treatment, to bring these different domains into
  their proper relation with each other and to establish between them that
  essential harmony in which consists the solution of these most profound
  and vital problems of man's welfare.
Of the translation it may properly be said that, while the aim has
  been to give the work the clearest possible form consistent with that
  strict fidelity to the original which is [8]especially demanded by the
  character of its material, the translator has not hoped to make the work
  altogether "easy" reading. Peculiarities of the author's style have been,
  it is believed, largely preserved; and occasional difficulties of
  apprehension are no doubt to be expected, both from the method of
  treatment and from the profound and abstruse character of the topics
  treated. The translator will be well satisfied if it shall be found that
  he has succeeded in performing his task without adding unduly to the
  seeming obscurities of certain passages—obscurities which, however,
  will no doubt vanish before that degree of mental application without
  which such works may not be read at all intelligibly.
Acknowledgments are properly due and are gladly rendered to George C.
  Dawson, Esq., of Chicago, and to Mr. Francis F. Browne, editor of The
  Dial, for valuable assistance in revising and perfecting this
  version.
G. A. Z.
Chicago, October, 1882.
[9]
Introduction ... 17
The Scientific Problem, ... 23
Rise of the Darwinian Theories.
§1. Direct Predecessors, ... 30
§2. Indirect Preparations, ... 33
History of the Darwinian Theories.
§1. Darwin, ... 38
§2. The Followers of Darwin.—Ernst Häckel, ... 45
§3. Modifications of the Theory.—Moriz Wagner. Wigand, ... 52
Present State of the Darwinian Theories.
§1. The Theory of Descent, ... 61
§2. The Theory of Evolution.—Archćology, Ethnography, Philology, ... 77
§3. The Theory of Selection, ... 100
[10]
The Philosophic Problems, ... 108
THE NATURO-PHILOSOPHIC SUPPLEMENTS OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.
§1. The Origin of Self-Consciousness and of Free Moral Self-Determination, ... 115
§2. The Origin of Sensation and of Consciousness, ... 127
§3. The Origin of Life, ... 132
§4. The Elements of the World; the Theory of Atoms, and the Mechanical View of the World, ... 140
METAPHYSICAL CONCLUSIONS DRAWN FROM THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.
§1. Elimination of the Idea of Design in the World.—Monism, ... 158
[11]
Plan of Treatment, ... 185
More Or Less Negative Position in Reference To Religion.
§1. Extreme Negation: L. Büchner and Consistent Materialism, ... 188
§2. Replacement of Religion Through a Religious Worship of the Universe.—Strauss. Oskar Schmidt. Häckel, ... 190
§3. Pious Renunciation of the Knowability of God. Wilhelm Bleek. Albert Lange. Herbert Spencer, ... 193
§4. Spinoza and Hegel in the Garb of Darwin.—Carneri, Ed. von Hartmann, ... 203
§5. Reëcho of Negation on the Side of the Christian View of the World, ... 206
Reform of Religion, or at Least of the Science of Religion, Through Darwinism.
§1. Heinrich Lang. Friedrich Vischer. Gustav Jäger, ... 210
Peace Between Religion and Darwinism.
§1. Darwin. Wallace. Owen. Asa Gray. Mivart. McCosh. Anderson. K. E. von Baer. Alexander Braun. Braubach, and others, ... 217
[12]
Preliminary View, ... 228
Antagonism Between Darwinism and Morality.
§1. Objections to Darwinism from an Ethical Standpoint, ... 230
Reform of Morality Through Darwinism.
§1. The Materialists and Monists. Darwin and the English Utilitarians. Gustav Jäger, ... 233
Neutrality and Peace Between Darwinism and Morality.
§1. Mivart. Alexander Braun, and others, ... 245
Preliminary View, ... 249
The Darwinian Theories and the Theistic View of The World.
a. The Position of Purely Scientific Darwinism in Reference to Theism.
§1. Scientific Investigation and Theism.—The Idea of Creation, ... 252
§2. The Descent Theory and Theism, ... 259
§3. The Evolution Theory and Theism, ... 263
§4. The Selection Theory and Theism, ... 270
b. The Darwinistic Philosophies in their Position Regarding Theism.
§5. The Naturo-Philosophic Supplements of Darwinism and Theism, ... 273
§6. Elimination of the Idea of Design, or its Acknowledgment and Theism, ... 284
The Darwinian Theories and Positive Christianity.
§1. The Creation of the World, ... 290
§2. The Creation of Man, ... 314
§3. The Primitive Condition of Man.—Paradise, the Fall of Man, and Primitive History, ... 321
§4. Providence, Hearing of Prayer, and Miracles, ... 345
§5. The Redeemer and the Redemption, the Kingdom of God, and the Receiving of Salvation, ... 373
§6. Eschatology, ... 375
Darwinism and Moral Principles.
§1. Darwinistic Naturalism and Moral Principles, ... 379
§2. Scientific Darwinism and Moral Principles, ... 386
Darwinism and Moral Life.
§1. Darwinistic Naturalism and Moral Life, ... 391
§2. Scientific Naturalism and Moral Life, ... 396
Conclusion, ... 399
[14]
Agassiz, Louis, 35, 37, 50, 320.
Anderson, 225.
Anonymus, "the Unconscious," etc., 128, 129, 131, 134, 159.
Anonymus, "Vestiges," etc., 33.
Argyll, Duke of, 50, 91, 92, 135, 172, 202, 288.
Ausland, 159, 240, 281.
Baer, Karl Ernst von, 36, 54, 56, 71, 74, 81, 83, 106, 132, 149, 160, 177, 226, 259, 281, 288, 320.
Barrande, 54.
Baumgärtner, Heinrich, 57, 176.
Blanchard, Emil, 54, 106.
Bleek, Wilhelm, 17, 96, 97, 194, 197, 234, 236.
Boerhave, 36.
Braubach, 226.
Braun, Alexander, 55, 176, 226, 246, 397.
Braun, Julius, 17.
Buch, Leopold von, 52.
Buckle, 17.
Büchner, Ludwig, 42, 118, 141, 158, 188, 205, 219, 233, 396.
Buffon, 31.
Carneri, 203, 238.
Carns, 36.
Christy, 90.
Condillac, 96.
Cotta, Bernhard von, 51.
Curtius, 96.
Cuvier, 31, 32, 34, 37, 320.
Darwin, 17, 18, 25, 27, 38, 118, 171, 177, 217, 240, 320, 389.
Descartes, 127.
Dillman, 295, 301.
Dohrn, 84.
DuBois-Reymond, Emil, 124, 125, 127, 130, 134, 149.
Ebrard, 159, 209.
Ecker, 56.
Escher, von der Linth, 54.
Farrar, 96.
Fechner, Gustav Theodor, 135, 146.
Fichte, Immanuel Hermann, 142, 175.
Fraas, Oskar, 55, 90.
Frohschammer, 175.
Gegenbaur, 56.
Geiger, Lazar, 17, 96.
Geoffrey St. Hilaire, Etienne, 32, 34.
Gerhard, 197.
Giebel, 54.
Göppert, 54.
Göthe, 33, 34, 35, 320.
Gray, Asa, 222.
Grusebach, 55.
Grimm, Jacob, 17, 95.
Häckel, 35, 42, 43, 45, 75, 78, 106, 123, 130, 133, 149, 159, 160, 166, 170, 204, 219, 234, 237, 281, 395.
Hartmann, Eduard von, 56, 60, 106, 131, 142, 168, 176, 191, 205, 334, 376.
Heer, Oswald, 56, 176.
Hegel, 126, 136, 204.
Helmholtz, 136, 159.
Heyse, 96.
Hilgendorf, 82.
His, Wilhelm, 56, 81, 106.
Huber, 175.
Humboldt, Wilhelm von, 17, 95.
Huxley, Thomas, 42, 50, 177, 198, 222, 279.
Jäger, Gustav, 51, 124, 214, 243.
Jellinghaus, 94.
Kant, 195, 282.
Keim, 18, 337.
Kölliker, 56, 81, 176.
Köstlin, Julius, 175, 187.
Köstlin, Otto. 149.
Kowalewsky, A., 42.
Kowalewsky, W., 83.
Kurz, Johann Heinrich, 306.
Lamarck, 27, 30, 31, 33, 320.
Lang, Heinrich, 197, 210.
Lange, Friedrich Albert, 112, 168, 173, 176, 194, 196.
Lartet, 96.
Leibnitz, 127, 217.
Leidy, 83.
Lessing, 405, 407.
Linnaeus, 30.
Livingstone, 93.
Lotze, 142, 145, 149.
Lubbock, Sir John, 18, 91, 93, 242.
Lyell, Sir Charles, 18, 36, 55, 89, 90, 222.
Mädler, 177, 252.
Malthus, 39.
Marsh, 83.
Martensen, 187.
Mayer, Robert von, 37, 129, 149, 155.
McCosh, 224.
Mill, John Stuart, 242.
Mivart, 55, 106, 223, 245.
Moleschott, 42.
Müller, Fritz, 79.
Müller, Max, 18, 96, 98.
Murchison, Sir Roderick, 54.
Nägeli, 56.
Nitzsch, Karl Immanuel, 361.
Noiré, Ludwig, 281.
Oken, 34, 320.
Owen, Richard, 35, 56, 164, 176, 221, 223, 320.
Peschel, Oskar, 279.
Pfaff, 54.
Pfleiderer, Otto, 187.
Planck, Carl Ch., 105, 110.
Preyer, 136, 146, 153.
Rathke, Heinrich, 81.
Reichenbach, 42.
Renan, 18.
Réville, Albert, 334.
Ritschl, 364.
Rütimeyer, 56, 83.
Sandberger, 55, 82.
Schaaffhausen, 56, 85, 177.
Schelling, 109.
Schiller, 180.
Schleicher, 17, 96.
Schleiden, 42, 51.
Schleiermacher, 190.
Schmidt, Oskar, 33, 35, 51, 75, 124, 159, 164, 191, 234.
Schopenhauer, 128, 190.
Schrader, Eberhard, 345.
Seidlitz, 51, 159, 238.
Semper, Karl, 84, 131.
Snell, Karl, 42, 262.
Spencer, Herbert, 128, 139, 194, 242, 279.
Spinoza, 204.
Stael, Madame de, 234.
Steffens, 109.
Steinthal, 17, 96.
Strauss, David Friedrich, 18, 112, 125, 128, 159, 163, 174, 175, 190, 213, 234, 337, 376, 394.
Swammerdam, 36.
Tait, 138.
Thomson, Sir William, 138.
Trümpelmann, 209.
Tübingen School, 18.
Tylor, 91.
Ulrici, 142, 144, 149, 175, 235.
Virchow, 56, 85.
Vischer, Friedrich, 175, 176, 213, 264.
Vogt, Karl, 42, 56.
Volkmann, A. W., 56, 105, 177.
Wagner, Moriz, 52, 56.
Wallace, Alfred Russell, 37, 101, 177, 221, 262.
Wedgewood, 96.
Weismann, 56.
Wigand, Albert, 26, 52, 56, 57, 106, 135, 149, 170, 226.
Wundt, 142.
Würtemberger, 82.
Zittel, 56.
Zöllner, 128, 129, 131, 138, 139.
[17]
AND THEIR RELATION TO
INTRODUCTION.
With the appearance of Darwin's "Origin of Species," on the 24th of
  November, 1859, a new impulse began in the intellectual movement of our
  generation. It is true, the whole theory advocated and inaugurated by
  Darwin is, in the first place, only one of the many links in the long
  chain of phenomena in the realm of the intellectual development of our
  century, all of which have the same character, and give their stamp to
  the entire mental work of the last decades. This stamp consists in the
  tendency of science, which has nearly become universal, not only to
  consider all phenomena, both of the physical and the mental life, in
  connection with their preceding conditions in space and time, but to
  trace them back more or less exclusively to these conditions, and to
  explain them exclusively by means of the same. What a Wilhelm von
  Humboldt, and, still more, a Jacob Grimm, prepared the way for in the
  realm of philology, a Lazar Geiger and a Steinthal, and (under direct
  influence of Darwin) a Schleicher and a Wilhelm Bleek further developed;
  what Julius Braun did in the realm of the history of art; what a Buckle
  and a Sir [18]John Lubbock tried to do in the realm of the
  history of civilization; what a Max Müller did in the realm of the
  history of religion; what the Tübingen School began and its disciples
  carried out in the realm of the exegesis of the Bible; what a Strauss and
  a Renan, and in a certain sense also a Keim, did in the realm of
  christology; what, finally—without being so closely connected with
  individual names—was also done in the realm of the world's history: