# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2015
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, The Master; a Novel
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/49795/49795-h/49795-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Cornpepper made a moue of disgust. “Are we never going to get away
from shop?” he asked, desperately. “What has my chimney to do with the
chronicles of the time? You chaps have always misunderstood me. You all
go by what O’Brien writes of me in the Saturday Spectator. I do wish
he wouldn’t interpret me. I wish he’d leave me alone. It’s bad enough to
have the papers writing about one’s sayings and doings, it’s bad enough
to be afraid of your own friends when, like Levison and Wilfred Smith,
they happen to be journalists; but to be interpreted in leading articles
by O’Brien is the crowning blow. What right has he to meddle with art?
Why the hell doesn’t he stick to his last? If I painted that chimney—”
“Instead of sweeping it,” murmured Jimmy. “Do let me go and meet my
wife.”
“—it was because I saw an opportunity for style, and for giving an epic
sense of London,” little Cornpepper went on, fixing Jimmy with his
basilisk glare. “I don’t care a twopenny damn about posterity or my
contemporaries. I paint as I do everything else—to please myself.”
“We know you don’t please anybody else,” retorted Jimmy. “I must be
off.”
“Well, black and white is going to be the art of the future, anyhow,”
said Butler. “Art is dead in England. Nobody disputes that.”
“Of course not,” said Cornpepper. “Painting’s a lost art. Not one of us
can touch the old men—Watts, Millais, Whistler. No; we none of us can
paint.”
“But English art’ll revive through black and white,” Butler maintained.
“It’s the art of the people. I wish I had discovered that in the days
when I refused to do it.”
“Black and white is not the art of the future, but the future of Art,”
said Herbert. “Nothing else pays.”
“It’s surer than anything else,” admitted Gurney. “And a paper gives you
a far wider appeal than a gallery. It’s the only way of elevating the
people.” His eye lit up. He was meditating a new departure.
Matt pricked up his ears; Herbert had not yet repaid him the twenty-five
pounds, borrowed for a day or two, and in any case he felt he must soon
be earning money. In the stagnation of the picture market, of which he
heard on every side, and on which the talk fell now, it was at once
comforting and distressing to hear of another source of income. Black
and white had scarcely entered into his thoughts before; he looked upon
it as a degraded commercial form of art—a thing manufactured for the
moment in obedience to editorial instructions. Perhaps if times had
changed, if editors allowed the artist to express himself through their
pages, one might think of it; otherwise it was too horrible. Art to
order! The spirit whose essence was freedom chained to a cash-box! It
were as well—and honester—to be a cobbler like William Gregson. He
shuddered violently, remembering his sufferings as a portrait-painter in
Nova Scotia, and very resolved to starve sooner than repeat those
degrading efforts to please customers.
“I don’t talk about it,” said Cornpepper, after ten minutes of general
tragic anecdotage, from which he gathered there was quite a rush into
black and white—a subject concerning which both the journalists seemed
fully posted. “I just go on working; I don’t care whether I sell or not.
The dealers I hate and despise; they have no measure of Art but what
it’ll fetch. I will have nothing to do with them. The world will come to
me sooner or later. You never hear me grumbling about the market.”
“The more I hear of the troubles of you chaps,” said Rapper, “the more
surprised I am that I, with nothing like your talents, should be the one
to get the commissions, as if I had any need of the shiners. I’m going
to Birmingham again next week to do a municipal duffer in his robes.
Even when I studied art in Brussels—”
“The real reason we’re coming to black and white,” broke in the
spectacled Scotchman, “is that we’re all born color-blind. The dulness
of our surroundings, the long centuries of homes without decorations,
with unbeautiful furniture and crockery, have told, and now—”
There was a roar of laughter. “Stow that, Mack!” cried Rapper.
“You can’t keep Mack off shop,” cried Cornpepper. “I’m sick of this talk
about principles. Art, life, nature, realism, the decorative! The
decorative indeed! For what is Art? It isn’t studio-pictures, it’s—”
“It’s half-past ten,” groaned Jimmy, trying to shake off the detaining
hands of his friends. “Where’s Sandstone? Why hasn’t he turned up? He
goes my way.”
“I don’t know,” said Cornpepper. “He’s been quarrelling with the man who
published his lithographs. What a quarrelsome beggar he is! I believe
he’s quarrelled with Clinch now. By-the-way, where is Clinch? He said
he was coming.”
Everybody supposed simultaneously that Clinch was drunk, and their
light-hearted acceptance of the idea jarred upon Matt, who again became
conscious of a curious aloofness from the company, from which he seemed
as cut off on the moral side as from the despised bourgeoisie on the
artistic side. What a strange isolation! The thought made him feel
lonely, and then—by reaction—strong.
Even Rocks laughed. “I prefer Philip drunk to Philip sober,” he said.
“It’s the only time he uses drawing-room English.”
“How can I sup with my wife at the Monico?” persisted Jimmy,
plaintively. “The beastly place closes at eleven on Sundays.”
“Oh, the English Sunday!” said Herbert. “How can you have art and the
English Sunday together? You talk of the art of the people, Curtis. The
real national art of England is oratorio, and Elijah may not appear on
the stage except in evening dress.”
“Don’t talk to me of the middle classes,” groaned Cornpepper. “They will
never be saved till Boccaccio is read aloud in every parlor on Sunday
afternoons.”
“Don’t be an ass, Teddy,” said Butler. “You’ll be moral some day.”
“I can get my stockings darned without marrying,” retorted Cornpepper,
with an irritating laugh, and Butler reddened angrily. He had married a
slipshod, artistic creature who neglected his shirt-buttons, and the
thrust rankled.
“My wife’s waiting at the Monico,” complained Jimmy, in a droll
sing-song.
“Oh, bother! Carrie’s just making the coffee,” replied the host.
“I won’t have coffee,” said Jimmy; “I never mix drinks.”
The coffee came round, and with it sandwiches, and broke up the talk
into duets and trios. Cornpepper planned a house-boat party for the
summer to pick up nautical models and paint the river. Matt’s envious
consciousness that he was too poor and too obscure to share in these
delightful artistic experiences gave him a new and more disagreeable
sense of aloofness. Then the proceedings became musical and remained so
till the next morning, their refusal to depart before the advent of
which the guests melodiously declared.
As the party was breaking up, Cornpepper cried: “Oh, I was nearly
forgetting.”
“What?” said Jimmy. “To offer a prayer?”
“No, to take up a collection,” retorted Cornpepper, his eye-glass
gleaming with joy of the mot. “Lily’s broken her leg.”
“Our Lily?” asked Greme. “But she doesn’t sit now—she’s on the
stage.”
“I know; she’s dislocated her ankle, and can’t dance.”
“She never could dance,” observed Herbert. “How ever did she get an
engagement?”
“Browney put her into his types of English beauty,” replied Cornpepper.
“But she’s a good girl all the same, and she hasn’t got any money. I’ll
lead off with five bob.”
In a few minutes two guineas were collected, Matt giving half a crown,
which he could ill spare. As the men left, Cornpepper stood at the door
exchanging a confidential word with each. “By Jove, you didn’t say a
word during the whole discussion, Mossop,” he said, as he shook hands
with a brown-bearded, middle-aged Scotchman, whose cranium bulged
curiously at the side.
Mossop took his pipe out of his mouth and looked meditatively at the
stem. “If art could be talked, it wouldn’t want to be painted,” he said,
gravely. “Good-night.”
“Good-night, old chap. Ah, good-night, Wilfred!” said Cornpepper to the
journalist. “Understand, this evening is private. I don’t object to your
quoting what I or anybody else said—my opinions are common
property—but, damn it, if you mention who were here in any of your
papers you’ll never cross my door-step again. You don’t mind my
frankness? Good-night, old man.”
“Good-night, Cornpepper,” said Herbert. “I’ll let the governor know
about those things of yours,” he added, in a low tone.
“That’s a good fellow. He won’t regret taking me up. Mind you mention
I’m not unreasonable—I’m open to an offer. I’m awfully glad to have
made your acquaintance. Good-night, old chap. Ah, good-night, Levison!”
he said, shaking hands with the other journalist. “Now, please do
understand that what passes at my gatherings is strictly confidential.
If you can earn half a dollar by mentioning who were here—Rocks is
rather a lion just now—I’m not the man to stand in your light. But I
won’t have what one says in private reported, and that’s straight.
Good-night, old fellow.”
Two o’clock boomed from a neighboring steeple. “Good-night, Teddy,” said
Jimmy, the last man to go. He added, lugubriously: “I’ve still got to
meet my wife.” Then, as he caught sight of himself in the hall-rack
mirror, the gleam in his eye grew droller. “I’m going home in my own hat
and coat,” he grumbled. “I’m sober.”
It was delicious to breathe the balmy night air after the smoky,
alcoholic atmosphere of the studio. Rocks walked a little way with
Herbert and Matt under the silent stars before they came upon a hansom.
“Are you also an artist?” he asked Matt.
“I hope to be,” said Matt, gravely, “but it’s awfully confusing to know
what’s right. They all talk so cleverly, and they all seem to be right.”
He was still worried about formulæ, not having discovered that there are
only men.
Rocks emitted a short laugh. “Don’t you bother your head with theories,
my boy,” he said, laying his hand kindly on Matt’s shoulder. “You just
paint. Every man does what he can, and runs down what he can’t. After
all, Art is very old; there are no great sensational reforms left, like
West’s discarding the toga for the clothes of the period. The plein
air school is this century’s contribution; after that there can only be
permutations and combinations of the old. What is new in the Azure Art
Gallery is not good, and what is good is not new.”
“C’est fini!” said Herbert. “That’s what people always say till genius
comes along. My belief is, going by literature and music, that painting
hasn’t said its last word.”
“It may come back to its first,” admitted Rocks, laughing. “Things go in
cycles. At present the last word of Art is azure.”
“But there are azure shadows?” said Matt.
“Yes; sunshine on a yellow sand gives a suspicion of blue and violet
where the yellow light is cut off. But you exaggerate it and call that a
revolution.”
“Yes, but this intensified violet, made on your canvas out of light
pigments, does produce the illusion of sunlight,” argued Matt. “And, to
my mind, it doesn’t falsify nature or values one bit, because in bright
sunlight the eye really sees the dazzle, not the values.”
“Perhaps you young men see the new ultra-shades at the end of the
spectrum,” said Rocks, a little annoyed to find Matt restive under his
patronizing geniality. “Apelles had only four colors, but his reputation
has survived. It is the craze for novelty that makes these fads catch
on.”
“On the contrary,” retorted Matt, hotly, “people are so accustomed to
the false they have no eyes for the true. It’s the old fable of the man
with the pig under his cloak. I read somewhere that in Sir Joshua’s day
it was the convention to paint portraits with hats under their arm, and
that Sir Joshua, having to paint a man with his hat on, automatically
put a second hat under his arm. If he hadn’t found it out, I don’t
believe the public would have. And weren’t the 1830 men laughed at in
France, though now they’re thrown in the teeth of the Impressionists?
It’s always the same tale—the revolutionary is always wrong till he’s
right. Treason never prospers. What’s the reason? When ’tis successful,
’tis no longer treason.’ Truth and light—that’s the right formula of
landscape-painting.”
Herbert laughed. “My stars, Matt!” he cried, gayly, “that’s the longest
speech I’ve ever heard you make! Is Cornpepper’s whiskey so much better
than mine?”
It was, perhaps, not so much the whiskey as the reaction after the long,
respectful self-repression of the evening. But Rocks caught fire in his
turn.
“Revolution!” he cried, scornfully. “Doing things literally by
halves—there’s a revolution, there’s a revelation for you. The new
art! If the modern young man can’t draw, color’s the thing; and if he’s
got no sense of color, color is vulgar. And even if he doesn’t offend my
sense of line by figures that couldn’t stand and limbs that don’t fit on
he won’t finish his work. He leaves it half-cooked to show his chic;
to take it further would be Academic. It’s mere notes for pictures, not
pictures. And even at that half the ideas come from Paris, like our
ladies’ gowns; if you ran over there as often as I do you could put your
finger on most of these azure fellows’ inspirations. If they would only
search like the French! If they would only really imitate their Monet!
That’s a real worker for you—how he slaves at his hay-stacks! More
science than art to my thinking; but how he searches! These chaps are
such dwarfs. Think of Leonardo, think of Raphael, think of Millet—real
men, with big brains and big souls. No; this Azure Art Club’s a set of
bounders and bad draughtsmen. There’s too much mutual admiration; it
prevents men getting on; they’ll find themselves stranded with a
half-talent.”
“And hasn’t Butler got a big soul?” cried Matt, boiling over. “And
hasn’t Cornpepper got a big brain?”
“Cornpepper?—oh, but this is shop again. He’s a good little chap at
bottom, but he’s succeeding too young.” And in Rocks’s hearty guffaw the
storm-clouds rolled away.
“You mustn’t fancy I agree with him altogether, Mr. Rocks,” said Matt,
simmering down in his turn. “About the morality of Art, now, isn’t
there—”
“Ah, there’s the Methodist parson again,” interrupted Herbert, laughing.
“Hang it all, man, you’re not a virgin, are you?”
“No, of course not,” faltered Matt, mendaciously. He went on in haste:
“There’s a cab!”
“No, I hate four-wheelers!” said Herbert. “Then why the devil do you
always talk such rot? Hansom!”
“They don’t seem as united as the papers make out, anyway,” said Matt,
in shame-faced evasion. He was ashamed of the lie, and ashamed of its
not being true.
“No, there’s no esprit de corps among artists,” returned Rocks.
“People always imagine there are schools. But in London there’s only the
camaraderie of success and the camaraderie of unsuccess. Good-night.”
“Can’t we give you a lift?” said Herbert.
“No, thanks; I’m successful,” rejoined Rocks, and went off chuckling.
“I wish I was,” Herbert grumbled to Matt. “Fancy not being able to
join that house-boat party, but to be stuck down in town by the Old
Gentleman to paint Nebuchadnezzar. I wish I was you, Matt.”
Matt was on the point of consoling him by confessing he was on the brink
of ruin, but that would have seemed like dunning a friend, to whom he
owed so much, for the twenty-five pounds, so he postponed the inevitable
explanation.
It was midsummer, and everybody who was anybody was pent in the
sweltering city.
“The sort of weather to make one want to be a figure-model,” Herbert
said, wearily, as he flicked finically at “Daniel before
Nebuchadnezzar,” now well on its way to completion. “But it seems to
suit the Old Gentleman. You might laugh, Matt. I’m too languid myself.”
Matt did not reply; he was leaning against the marble mantel-piece, pale
and perspiring.
“What do you think is his latest move?” pursued Herbert. “Though that’s
rather a bull, for the mischief is that he refuses to go on our annual
autumn jaunt abroad, lest it should interfere with Daniel and Nebby.
However, I am to have a horse of my own, and that’s some consolation.
Talking of horses, how do you like Nebby’s left leg? You see I’ve
repainted it as you marked it.” He got up, walked backward, and surveyed
the picture approvingly, brush in hand. “By Jove, it’s coming on
splendidly! I could imagine I was in the palace. There is something in
following Nature, after all. The creative part lies in the invention and
color.... What’s the matter with you this morning, Matt? You don’t say a
word. Are you sunstruck? or moonstruck?”
“Both,” said Matt, with a ghastly smile.
“Why, what’s up?” Herbert scrutinized his cousin’s face for the first
time.
Matt looked towards the model.
“You know his English is limited,” Herbert remarked, reassuringly.
“Unless you are bent on talking Arabic.” But Matt still hesitated. At
last, as in desperation, he extracted a letter from his breast-pocket
and tendered it to Herbert, who took it wonderingly, cast a glance at
it, and frowned.
“The scoundrel!” he said. “How dare he send it in so soon? I shall never
recommend him to anybody again.”
“It isn’t soon,” corrected Matt; “it’s more than three months.”
“You’re not going to take any notice of him yet?”
“Oh, I must.”
“Oh, nonsense! Why, the shock would drive him silly. He only sends it in
as a matter of form.”
“I don’t like not to pay.”
“All right,” said Herbert, sulkily; “only you’ll spoil the market for us
poor devils who’re not Crœsuses, that’s all. But don’t give him the
fifteen guineas at once; give him five on account.”
Matt struggled with himself. “I can’t even do that,” he faltered at
last, “unless you can manage to pay me something.”
“Oh, by Jove!” said Herbert, whistling lugubriously. “I’d forgotten you
were among my creditors. But I’m stony-broke just now. So the old
scoundrel will have to wait, after all. Ha! ha! ha! When do you expect
to be flush again? I suppose you draw interest on bonds or something.
All Americans do.”
“I—I don’t,” said Matt, his head drooping shame-stricken. Then, with
the courage of despair, he burst out, “I’ve only got tenpence in the
world; that’s a fact.”
Herbert gave a shrill whistle of surprise and dismay, and let himself
drop upon his painting-stool. “Here, go and play a little, Haroun al
Raschid,” he called over to the model; and Nebuchadnezzar, shedding his
purpureal splendors, cantered joyously down-stairs.
“Now then,” he said, sternly. “What in the devil have you been up to, my
Methodist parson? Gambling, horse-racing, women?”
Matt shook his head, a wan smile struggling with his shame-faced
expression. He already felt happier—the false atmosphere in which he
had moved was dissipated forever. “I’ve never had any money to lose,” he
confessed. “I only saved up fifty or sixty pounds to study in London for
a year, and now it’s all gone—unless you can manage to repay me the
twenty-five pounds.”
“Well, of all the—” cried Herbert, and did not finish the mysterious
phrase. He leaned his elbows on his knees, and supporting his face upon
his palms, stared severely at his cousin. “So this is the man who thinks
Art should be moral,” he said, half musingly, half indignantly. “To go
and let us all think you were a capitalist! And to let me in for
borrowing money of a man who was practically a pauper! Why, I must have
taken almost your last penny!”
Matt, flushing afresh under his reproachful gaze, did not attempt to
deny it.
“Well, if that’s your idea of cousinly behavior, or even decent
behavior—” said Herbert, witheringly.
“I—I didn’t mean to deceive you,” Matt stammered, apologetically. “You
all took it for granted I was well-to-do. All I said was I had money
enough to go along with, and so I thought I had.”
“Yes, but when I asked you for the pony, you consented at once. I gave
you an opportunity to explain, but instead of that you intensified the
original false impression.”
Matt was silent.
“And now you’ve put me into the wretched position of owing money, which
I can’t pay, to a poor relation from whom I never would have borrowed
it, had he been frank and truthful.”
Now both were silent, meditating the painful situation.
“Then you’ve got no money at all?” said Herbert at last, in stern
accents, in which a note of astonishment still lingered.
Matt shook his head. His throat felt parched. “Unless you can pay me,”
he murmured.
Herbert’s face softened, his tones became sympathetic.
“Then what are you going to do?” he asked, anxiously.
Matt was touched by the transition from reproach to solicitude.
“Oh, I shall manage somehow,” he said, huskily. “I don’t want to worry
you—you’ve always been very good to me.”
“Yes, that’s all very well, but suppose you starve?” said Herbert,
sharply.
“Oh, I shall find something to do,” said Matt. “In fact, I’ve already
done some illustrations for the Christian Home, though they haven’t
paid yet. I wouldn’t have told you if it hadn’t been for this tailor’s
bill.”
“Confound him!” cried Herbert, savagely. “I’ll never recommend him
another customer as long as I live.” He started promenading the studio
angrily, muttering maledictions against the snip as the source of all
the mischief.
“What a pity the governor won’t touch a new man’s work!” he said,
pausing.
“Oh, I’d rather not trouble him,” said Matt, shrinking from a
supplementary explanation with the Vandyke beard.
Herbert resumed his promenade with knitted brow. “I wonder if Drücker
would take them. If you did sea-pieces—”
“Oh, please don’t worry,” pleaded Matt, concerned at his cousin’s
anxiety. “I dare say I shall fall on my feet.”
“Yes, but while falling? Tenpence isn’t enough to fall with. You don’t
owe any money into the bargain, I hope.”
Matt turned red. “Three weeks’ rent,” he murmured.
“How much is that?”
Matt shrank weakly from shredding his last rag of dignity.
“Not much,” he said. “She hasn’t said anything yet; I always paid her so
regularly. But I don’t see any reason to despair; it looks as if I can
make my bread and cheese by black and white. They were all agreed that
that was the most paying kind of Art. You remember that night at
Cornpepper’s?”
“Yes, I remember,” said Herbert, curtly. “But I can’t let you go away
with tenpence in your pocket. I wonder if I’ve got anything.” He drew a
handful of silver and copper coins out of his trousers-pocket. “Eight
and fourpence halfpenny,” he announced, dolefully. “And I shall want
seven for Haroun al Raschid this evening. I told you I was stony-broke.
I suppose it’s no use offering you one and fourpence halfpenny.”
“No; then you’d have nothing,” said Matt. “Don’t bother.”
“Oh, but I must bother. I wish I knew how to raise a little cash for you
to keep you going till you get work.”
The grave anxiety of his tones troubled Matt sympathetically. He was
pained to see Herbert so distressed. Suddenly his eyes fell on Herbert’s
battalion of boots ranged against the wall—brown boots, black boots,
patent boots, riding boots, shoes, slippers—and a wild, impish idea
flew into his brain, breathing malicious suggestion, and even kindling a
flash of resentment: “Why should not Herbert sell some of those serried
boots if he was really in earnest?” But the impish idea was extruded in
a moment. It savored of ungenerous cynicism, and, in so far as it
meditated diminishing Herbert’s wardrobe, touched indecency; it was
impossible to imagine Herbert with only a single pair of breeches or
without sub-varieties of ornamental shoes. He moved in a large
atmosphere of discriminate waistcoats and superfluous neckties.
“I’ll give you an introduction to Drücker, if you like,” said Herbert.
“I dare say you have some little things by you.”
“I—I’ve already been to Drücker,” Matt admitted. “A fellow at
Grainger’s told me about him. But he won’t look at my work.”
There was another embarrassing pause. Matt’s eyes wandered distractedly
towards Herbert’s boots. The spotless battalion fascinated him; the
buttons winked maliciously.
“How about portraits?” said Herbert, suddenly. “I thought you did
portraits in Nova Scotia. Was that also—was that, er—true?”
Matt did not at once answer; it had suddenly occurred to him that there
was probably another battalion of boots in Herbert’s dressing-room. When
Herbert’s question at last penetrated to his consciousness, he replied
with a start:
“Oh yes. Perhaps I may get sitters here, too. The only thing that really
worries me is that bill.”
“Oh, well, if that’s all, you can make your mind easy. He can’t touch
you; you’ve no money.” Herbert laughed gleefully. “It’ll serve him
right, the scoundrel!”
“But he can put me in prison,” said Matt, blanching at the mere idea;
“and that I could never survive.”
Herbert’s laugh became more boisterous.
“Oh, you innocent!” he gasped. “We’re not living in the dark ages. A man
without a farthing is the king of creation. Nothing can touch him.”
“Oh, but they put people in prison for debt in Nova Scotia,” said Matt,
surprised.
“Really?” ejaculated Herbert, surprised in his turn. “Well, I had no
idea the country was so uncivilized as that. No, don’t funk. And even
suppose you were put into quod for debt? What then? Why, debt is the
breath of the artistic nostril. Read your Bankruptcy Court daily in your
paper, and cheer up, d’ye hear? Why should you take other people’s
worries on your shoulders?”
“Other people’s?” quoth Matt, puzzled.
“Yes; the worry is for the tailor who can’t get his money, not for you,”
explained Herbert, with the gay smile that showed his white teeth.
“I must pay him,” Matt repeated, stolidly, and, lunch coming up, he
took himself off in spite of every protest. Now that Herbert knew him
in his true colors, his pride would not endure sitting as a pauper at
the mid-day banquet, though he had eaten nothing all day except a
halfpenny roll. He saw Haroun al Raschid in the street luxuriating in
the sultry sunshine, and sent him up to luncheon, then dragged himself
along the hot pavements to his back room, brightened now with unsaleable
sketches, and threw himself upon the little iron bed, and abandoned
himself to bitter reflection. Why, indeed, could he not take life as
lightly as the artistic temperament demanded?
He had already tried other dealers than Drücker, with as little success.
The Irishman at Grainger’s was wont to boast that he always sold his
work by pawning it. Matt had essayed to imitate him, speculating the
outlay for a gold frame; but either his face betrayed him to the
pawnbrokers, or his picture, and it eventually went for less than the
price of the frame. And—O vanity of resolutions and ideals!—his horror
at doing Art to order had dwindled daily. In the actual imminence of
starvation, in the impossibility of sending any further subsidies to his
family, he had broached to other students his desire to get on this or
that paper, but could gain no sympathetic information from them, except
that they had already refused the positions he coveted. On the strength
of some specimens sent by post he had been permitted to illustrate five
short stories for the Christian Home, but only two had yet been
published, and none had yet been paid for. And so the dregs of his
savings had dripped away, slowly, slowly, like honey from an inverted
pot, more and more slowly the less there remained, till only twenty
drops (for he had come down to counting in halfpennies) divided him from
starvation. The arrears of rent had been an agony more gnawing than that
at his stomach, and now this tailor’s bill had come as the crowning
catastrophe.
Yet none of his bitterness was for Herbert, despite the impish
suggestions of the buttons; he did not even blame himself much. In a
sense he had had value for his money, he had bought experience, if not
quite of the kind for which he had saved up his dollars. But for those
frightful fifteen guineas he might have weathered starvation-point, even
though by the practice of a form of art he had not contemplated. To
pawn or sell the unfortunate clothes would be but to cut himself off
from gentility without surmounting the crisis. His hopeless reverie was
interrupted by a tap at the door, and the landlady entered, bearing a
letter. He jumped up from the bed in excitement—it must be his check
for the drawings. But the letter bore an American stamp, and was in
Billy’s writing, and he tore it open, fearful of new evils.
Dear Matt,—I write not because there is anything fresh, but
because there isn’t. Life here is so dreary and monotonous I can no
longer endure it. It isn’t my health, for that is better, and the
fits are very rare now, thank God; but sometimes I think I shall go
mad or cut my throat if something doesn’t happen. Don’t you think I
could come over and stay with you? You’ve seen so much of the
world, and always enjoyed yourself, and I have always been tied
down to one wretched little village. The people are so dismally
religious, and between you and me I am losing faith in everything,
the more I think of it, and how bad the good people are. Deacon
Hailey and Ruth have quarrelled, and she has gone away to the
States. She came to see us before she left—she is just lovely—I
like to picture her before me. I should not be much extra expense,
dear Matt, because you could deduct something from the amount you
are soon going to send us monthly. I have mentioned this to Abner,
and he is willing. I am very little use here in the fields, and in
London I might perhaps earn money by writing. I feel I have it in
me to write tales; I have already written one called “The Whale
Hunters,” and another called “In the Burning Desert.” I do so long
to be famous. We should be a pair, dear Matt. Do you think you
could get these tales printed in a paper? I should not want money
at first. I did not like to send them to you without asking, as the
postage would be heavy, and the winter has been so unusually
protracted we are delayed with the crops. Do please send me some
books if you can; I have read everything in the school library
twice over. Novels and books of travel are what I like best. The
last we heard from Halifax was that mother was less violent. Do
write and say I may come, and if you can let me have the fare I
will repay you out of my tales. Abner and Harriet send their love,
and so do all the boys and girls (Amy is getting quite podgy), and
with the same from me, I remain,

Your affectionate brother,
Billy.

P.S.—Don’t you think “William Strang” would look fine on the cover
of a book?
Matt suddenly felt faint and dizzy. Raising his eyes, he perceived that
the landlady had not gone, that she was effervescing with unuttered
speech.
“I am very sorry, Mrs. Lipchild,” he said, “I thought that your rent
would have been in this letter.”
The lank, elderly woman looked grieved.
“Lor’ bless you, sir,” said she, “I’m not worryin’ about the rent. Don’t
I know an honest face when I see it? Us landladies are always made out
so bad. We’re always stealin’ the lodgers’ provisions and what not, and
we can’t speak proper. I should like to see a book written on the other
side. Why, last year I had an old maid in this very room—she took her
meals here, and said I wasn’t to charge for attendance because she’d be
always out; but bless me if the bell didn’t go tinkely-tinkely every
minute, like an alarm-clock gone wrong in its inside. Believe me, Mr.
Strang, it isn’t the lodgers as is always taken in. I’ve often wished my
son was a writer instead of an artist; I’d get him to write the book.”
“Your son is an artist?” said Matt, in astonishment.
“Yes, Mr. Strang, though not near so clever as you. I could show you
some of his work if you didn’t mind.”
“Oh, I should like to see it,” said Matt, half amused at this unexpected
interlude, though his temples throbbed with a shooting pain.
“Would you mind comin’ down into the parlor, sir?”
“With pleasure,” said Matt.
He followed his landlady down the narrow stairs into the musty little
room, resplendent with oleographs and a gilt mirror and two
fruit-shades.
“There,” said Mrs. Lipchild, proudly. “Me and my husband in uniform.”
Matt surveyed the large colored presentments of Mr. and Mrs. Lipchild in
their oval mounts, further astonished to discover that his landlord was
a policeman.
“What did he do them with?” asked Matt, rather puzzled.
“With his own hand,” replied the proud mother. “They were taken quite
plain, but he colored them lifelike, as you see. They would have charged
half a crown more each, but for a shilling he bought a book telling him
how to do it himself. My cousin Bob, who is in the Post-office, said he
ought to be an artist, but I wouldn’t let him give up his place at
Brown

Brothers. He’s in the grocery department, and earnin’ good money, and
I’ve seen such a heap of artists sittin’ on the pavement, with the risk
any moment of the rain washin’ all the pictures out; don’t you think I
was right, sir?”
“Quite right,” said Matt, heartily.
Mrs. Lipchild thereupon produced a bottle of brandy and what she called
a “seedy-cake” from a cupboard under a sideboard, and insisted on Matt’s
partaking of the same. To refuse would pain her, to accept would refresh
him, so he accepted. In the conversation which ensued it transpired that
Mrs. Lipchild’s daughter was about to marry a young man from Brown
Brothers (haberdashery department), that the young couple were now
furnishing, and that it had occurred to Mrs. Lipchild that they might
get their parlor pictures from Matt instead of from a shop, if they
could get them any cheaper.
So Matt and his art patroness remounted again to the bedroom studio and
haggled over prices, Mrs. Lipchild pointing out that his pictures were
far inferior to shop pictures, not only by their unsympathetic subjects,
but by their absence of frames and glass, and that she could get much
bigger sizes than any of his for five shillings apiece. But as it came
to be understood that ready money would not be required, and that the
price was to be reckoned off the rent, Mrs. Lipchild ultimately departed
in possession of a month’s worth of pictures—six of the prettiest
landscapes and ladies in the collection, with Rapper’s “Library” thrown
in. The poetic street-scenes she scorned, much to Matt’s relief, for he
set no value on the earlier Nova Scotian work she had carried off.
This was Matt’s first sale of pictures in the great Metropolis of Art.
Considerably exhilarated by the change in his fortunes, and revived by
the brandy and the “seedy-cake,” he reviewed the situation again, proof
even against Billy’s letter, which he put by for later consideration. He
found himself actually smiling, for a phrase of Cornpepper’s kept
vibrating in his brain—“Art’s neither moral nor immoral, any more than
it’s lunar or calendar.” Mrs. Lipchild’s last words had been: “Very
well, we’ll reckon it a month,” and he wondered whimsically whether the
month was to be lunar or calendar.
Under the impulse of these gayer sentiments, he resolved to raise money
by pawning whatever he could part with, and by persisting in the search
for an adventurous dealer; and reflecting that, after all, the tailor
would be satisfied with an instalment, he wound himself up to the pitch
of applying to Herbert by letter, though he could not bring himself to a
verbal request.
My dear Herbert,—I am sorry to bother you again, but if you could
let me have only five guineas to offer the tailor I should be very
grateful. I hope soon to find work, or sell some things; and you
will be pleased to hear that I have got over the difficulty with
the rent—at least for the moment.

Yours sincerely,
Matt Strang.

P.S.—Don’t put yourself out if you cannot. You have been very kind
to me, and I shall never forget it. I dare say I shall pull through
somehow.”
Matt carried this request to the pillar-box through the stuffy splendor
of a summer night in Holborn back streets. As he heard the slight thud
of the letter in the box he had a sense of something achieved, and had
no compunction in spending one of his nine remaining pennies on his
supper of “baked fagot” in a muggy pork-butcher’s shop. Nightmare,
followed by a giddy uprising with furred tongue and aching forehead, was
the sequel of this devil-may-care diet, and early in the afternoon the
nightmare seemed to resume its riot in the guise of a reply from
Herbert.
Dear Matt,—What in the name of all that is unholy made you send
that letter to my house instead of to the club? There’s been a
devil of a row. The Old Gentleman opened the letter. He pretends he
did so without noticing, as it came mixed up with his, and so few
come for me to the house. When I got down to breakfast the mater
was in tears and the Old Gentleman in blazes. Of course, he’d
misread it altogether—imagined you wanted to borrow money instead
of to get it back (isn’t it comical? It’s almost an idea for a
farce for our dramatic society), and insisted you had been draining
me all along (you did write you were sorry to bother me again, you
old duffer). Of course I did my best to dispel the misconception,
but it was no use my swearing till all was blue that this was the
first application, he wouldn’t believe a word of it. He said he had
had his suspicions all along, and he called the mater to witness
that the first time he saw you in the shop he said you were a
rogue. And at last the mater, who’d been standing up for you—I
never thought she had so much backbone of her own—was converted,
and confessed with tears that you had been here pretty nigh every
day and swore you should never set foot here again, and the Old
Gentleman dilated on the pretty return you had made for his
kindness (sucking his boy’s blood, he called it, in an unusual
burst of poetry), and he likewise offered some general observations
on the comparative keenness of a serpent’s tooth and ingratitude.
And that’s how it stands. There’s nothing to be done, I fear, but
to let the thing blow over—he’ll cool down after a time.
Meanwhile, you will have to write to me at the club if you want to
meet me. I am awfully sorry, as I enjoyed your visits immensely. Do
let me know if I can do anything for you. I’m in a frightful
financial mess, but I might give you introductions here or there. I
know chaps on papers and that sort of thing. I am sure you have
sufficient talent to get along—and you can snap your fingers at
creditors, as you haven’t got anything they can seize, and can flit
any day you like. I wish I was you. With every good wish,

Yours always,
Herbert Strang.

Matt took this letter more stoically than he would have predicted. He
even grinned like a Red Indian at the stake. In truth, he was already so
prostrated by illness, hunger, and above all by the heat, that there was
nothing left in him to be prostrated. He crawled out soon after the
receipt of the letter, and recklessly bought a halfpenny currant loaf,
which he washed down with water.
The summer rolled heavily along, bringing strange new experiences to
Matt Strang, and strange glimpses of other art-worlds than Herbert’s.
For he did not starve, though Herbert had gone quite out of his life,
and he had none with whom to exchange the thoughts of youth.
Two pounds ten shillings lent on his dress-suit staved off hunger and
his tailor (who got the pounds), till, by the aid of the landlady’s
son’s book, he found out how to tint photographs, and earned sixpences
and shillings by coloring cartes-de-visite and cabinets for cheap
touting photographers, censoriously critical and given to refusing the
work of hours. By-and-by the Christian Home took him to its hearth,
situate at the summit of a cobwebbed ramshackle staircase in Bolt Court,
and paid him seven and sixpence for a half-page illustration of an
unworldly serial. “Pay-day” was a delightful weekly emotion, the staff
adjourning to a public-house in Fleet Street to drink one another’s
health and their own damnation. Matt was forced to join them because
Dick Gattel, the puffy-faced author of the spiritual romance he was
illustrating (“A Godly Atonement”), insisted on standing treat,
declaring with odd oaths that he’d never been so well interpreted before
by any blooming paper-smudger. He also initiated Matt into the secrets
of his craft, summing up in a formula the experience of a quarter of a
century of story-writing. “Emotion for the penny papers, excitement for
the halfpenny, self-sacrifice for the religious.” Strange impecunious
beings gathered in this public-house or outside it, uncouth, unclean,
unshaven; many had drifted down from society, from the universities,
from the army, from the navy, with reserve forces from India and
America, the flotsam of life’s wreckage, and they consoled themselves by
babbling of the seamy side of the successful, rolling under their
tongues the money these others were making, and parading a confident
familiarity with their doings and their pass-books. Matt shuddered at
the thought that he might one day become even as these—the
damned-before-death. There was another artist on the staff—a thick-set
German, whose wife was wont to waylay him on “pay-day,” and who always
wrote on professional paper girdled with his own designs in proof of his
prowess, and expressive of his willingness to undertake wash-drawings,
line-drawings, color-work, or lithography, at reasonable rates and with
prompt deliveries.
Through this German, who was good-natured after his second glass, Matt
procured extra employment in a comic-picture factory managed by a
solemn, snuffy Scotchman, who selected from old comic papers the jokes
that were to be illustrated by his “hands,” and, signing the sketches
with his own name, peddled them in the offices of new comic papers. Matt
was paid half a crown per sketch, and his employer from four to five
shillings; but when the young man tried to send original jokes and
sketches direct to these papers, he got only the same two and sixpence
for the few things they accepted. One editor, whose pages bristled with
ballet-girls, took the trouble to explain to him that the presence of a
clergyman in a sketch was a disqualification, as any attack on the
Church would be distasteful to his public. From another, the Merry
Miracle, whose proprietor was a philanthropist, a member of the school
board, and a candidate for Parliament, he received a prospectus
instructing him to eschew cross-hatching, solid black, line-work, and
society figures, in favor of rough-and-tumble farce in bold outline. The
more sober of the comic papers had settled staffs and settled jokes, and
new-comers were not welcomed. Not that Matt’s jokes were very good:
labored verbal oddities for the most part, intellectual quips and cranks
which, he was quite aware, lacked the true humorous insight of Jimmy
Raven, upon whom he modelled himself, feeling no first-hand impulse.
Humor, indeed, was not his vocation; when he saw the world through
Jimmy’s eyes he was tickled yet fortified, as one set face to face with
the prose of the real, and finding it genial; but he could not see it
like this himself. His was a world of beauty set over a strange,
disquieting substratum of ugliness, from which it were best to avert
one’s eyes, and which, perhaps, existed only as something to aspire away
from.
Jimmy Raven had published A Sketch-Book of Beggars which Matt Strang
had found vastly entertaining; and yet Matt Strang saw rather the
tragedy of beggars than their humor, and this tragedy seemed to him
outside the realm of Art. It was only their occasional picturesqueness
that attracted his artistic interest at this period of his development,
and all the figures of his so-called comic sketches were either pretty
or picturesque. He studied extensively in the streets, note-book in
hand, fearful of losing the subtleties of nature through his inability
to afford even the cheap, casual models of his first days in London, and
training himself to catch the salient points of character or movement at
first glance. Probably no artist ever made comic pictures so seriously
as Matt Strang, with such scrupulous backgrounds, in the which, when
they were done in wash, he strove with entirely unappreciated
thoroughness, by careful adjustment of values, to make his black and
white yield veracious color-effects. When the drawings were accepted,
they came out so reduced and so badly reproduced that the subtleties
were blurred away, and the values quite transmuted. Wood-engraving
falsified the lines or photography the color, and thus their appearance
in print was as much a pain as a pleasure.
Matt’s redemption from comic journalism was partly due to the prosperity
of the proprietor of the comic-picture factory, who started a
serious-art department, where Matt found less uncongenial work in
painting figures into the landscapes of his less competent
fellow-workmen. This gradually opened up to his astonished eyes a new
section of the trade. He saw one of these landscapes near King’s Cross,
resplendent in a gorgeous gold frame, and marked “Original
oil-painting—two guineas only,” and another, in a poor neighborhood
marked “Water-color, hand-painted—a bargain!” and he perceived that he
had been flying too high in his early attempts to approach dealers of
the type of Drücker. Henceforward he haunted furniture dealers,
picture-frame makers, and artists’ colormen, and thus he occasionally
obtained half a sovereign to despatch to his tailor. His drawings in the
Christian Home attracted the attention of the editor of the Working
Man, and Matt was commissioned to accompany a journalist through the
East End to expose the evils of sweating. The Working Man was owned by
a syndicate, and Matt had to settle terms with the manager, a truculent
gentleman with a double chin and a double watch-chain, who agreed to
give him five shillings a sketch. Matt did several sketches for each
article, and the pathetic series caused a great stir and much
correspondence; but at the end of the month—when poor Matt, who had
already nearly starved himself for his tailor’s sake, was expecting a
goodly check to send to Abner Preep—he received only a quarter of what
he had bargained for. He went to the editor, who referred him to the
manager, who insisted the terms were five shillings for the illustration
of a single article. “You must remember, too, what a lift we are giving
you, with our big circulation,” concluded the manager, his double
watch-chain heaving pompously on his abdomen. “It is not every young man
who gets such a chance of showing what he can do.”
“You’re a set of damned scoundrels!” cried Matt, with an access of
ancient rage, and had wellnigh torn up the check and thrown it in the
manager’s face, when his later chastened self plucked at his coat-tails
and bade him begone with it. Who so helpless as the black-and-white
artist, his work poorly paid, and reproduced again and again without his
control; his very originals taken from him and sometimes sold at a
profit?
It was not a happy time for Matt, this period of spiritless work by day
and spiritless study by night, his soul chafing alike against the
degradations of life and the routine of school. For what an actuality
had he exchanged his dreams! Yet he had no option; the tailor must be
paid, his family must be helped, and to these two ends, moreover, he
himself must exist. But the friction of ideals and realities left him
irritable and high-strung; and even when, towards the autumn, he won his
way into the Ladies’ Weekly, at a guinea an illustration, he lost his
work by not concealing his contempt for the art editor, a pragmatic
person, absolutely dead to art, but excessively fastidious about the
drawings, which he refused whenever there was time for alterations.
“This is feeble, but we’re pressed for time,” was his encouraging
apology to the artist for accepting his work, “and I’ll put it into the
hands of a competent engraver.” His first self-revelation to Matt was
his complaint about some rough shadows on the borders of a sketch: “I
wish you would bear in mind, Mr. Strang, that we have to pay as much per
inch for the reproduction of those blotches as for the most finished
work.” But it was not till the “old lady” (as the other artists called
the art editor of the Ladies’ Weekly behind his back) had insisted on
his dressing his figures better that Matt lost control of his tongue and
retorted, “I draw pictures, not fashion-plates.” In after-remorse, he
would have been glad to get fashion-plates to do. He replaced the lost
work by returning to photo-tinting, though he now obtained more
important work on enlarged photographs, which he colored in oil at
three and six apiece, managing to do two or three a day while the light
held, without interfering with his black and white, which could be done
at night; by which means he scraped together enough to pay off the
tailor in full, and to send his promised contribution home, together
with seven fourpenny halfpenny “Notable Novels” to reconcile Billy to
his narrow existence. And then, with these burdens thrown off, his
idealism resurged again, for beneath the placid everyday exterior of
this homely young man, who trudged up foul staircases, portfolio under
arm, or danced attendance on smug h-less photographers smoking twopenny
cigars, a volcanic fire burned, and the thought of his precious youth
wasted and abraded in this inartistic art-drudgery, under the yoke of
vulgar souls, was a dull haunting torment. His qualms of self-distrust
vanished under the pressure of obstacles, and the measure of his
aversion from joyless commercial art became to him the measure of his
genius. One gray windy forenoon of late autumn he had stopped to take a
mental sketch of a strangely attired woman, who was listening to a
Salvation Army exhortation, a woman who was a dab of color upon the
dreary day. Below an enormous white hat with a recumbent ostrich feather
and a broad brim with an upward slant, tied under the chin with black
bands, shone through a black veil a glorious oval-shaped dark face with
flashing eyes, full red lips, large shapely ears, and raven hair curling
low over the forehead. She wore a black, half-masculine jacket, with big
mother-of-pearl buttons and a yellow bow that was awry, and by a shapely
hand cased in a white glove with three black stripes she held the skirts
of a slaty gown clear of the mud.
While Matt was whimsically wondering what the editor of the Christian
Home would say to a sketch of her in his staid organ, he instinctively
noted the other romantic touches about the scene, ineffably grimy though
the roadway was to the inartistic eye, flanked on one side by a coal
office, with a blear-eyed old man at the window, and on the other by a
canal running lengthwise. There were fresh country faces among the
girl-soldiers, and among the men was an ex-heathen in a turban, a
flaring Paisley shawl, flowing robes, and sandals, bearing aloft a red
flag with a blue border and a central yellow star, around which ran the
words “Blood and Fire.” And while his eye selected the picturesque
points, the whole scene passed half insensibly into his
sub-consciousness as into a camera, to be developed in after-years—the
grotesque snag-toothed hags in the crowd, the collarless men with the
air of being connected with the canal, one of them with a
Mephistophelian red tuft on his chin; the ice-cream stall at the corner,
where a postman, a baby of three, and an urchin with his collar
paradoxically up against the cold were licking green glasses. And then a
buxom work-girl with a tambourine began to hold forth, pouring out
breathless sentences all running into one another, clutching her
inspiration tight lest it should escape her, and repeating herself
endlessly rather than pause for a moment.
“Only the blood of Christ can save only the blood of Christ has saved
only the blood of Christ will save.”
And her fellow-soldiers, quivering with unction, punctuated her
shapeless periods with soul-wrung ejaculations.
“Ah, yes.”
“Bless her.”
“Glory to God.”
“You may try earthly pleasures you may go to the theaytre,” she gasped,
“but it brings no peace nothing brings peace but the Rock but the
Lamb—”
“Hallelujah!”
“But the oldest of all religions proved over and over again Christianity
tried in the furnace any day you may die no one knows the end now’s the
time don’t put it off come are you prepared once I had bad companions—”
“A—a—ah!” groaned a melodramatic brother, with folded arms.
“But I gave them up—”
“Glory!” in a great sob of relief from all the palpitating figures.
Matt began to forget the visual aspects of the scene; the infectious
emotion of the girl and her comrades gained upon him. What she was
saying left no dint on his mind—to her dogmas he was become
indifferent. But her earnestness thrilled him, her impassioned
ignorance flashed upon him a clearer sense of baseness, hollowness,
insincere falling away from the ideals that had sailed with him to
England, glorifying the noisome steerage. Turning his head, he saw tears
rolling down the dark passionate face of his dashing neighbor, and he
hurried away, shaken and troubled, pursued by the cacophonous melody
into which the street congregation had broken.
What was the point of his life? What had he become?
At Grainger’s there were fellows who looked to Art as an escape from
some worse-paid calling. That was not, had never been, his idea. To him
Art was an end in itself; he was of those who live to paint, not paint
to live. Even in his boyish days, when the vendibility of pictures first
came within his ken, the money had always seemed to him a pleasant
by-product, not a motive. And now, instead of pouring out on canvas all
that effervescence of youthful poetry that flooded his soul, he was
coloring photographs and illustrating foolish stories for foolish
editors in contravention of all his own ideas of what illustrations
should be. Why, even in Nova Scotia he had painted from the life; in his
lowest days he had decorated furniture at his own pleasure. Oh, it was
sordid, unworthy, humiliating! He would give it all up: if he could not
pursue Art, at least he would not degrade it. Thanks to his Nova-Scotian
training, his good right hand could do more than wield the brush. Better
to earn bread and water for himself and his family by some honest craft,
till such time as honest Art came within his means. Rather an honest
artisan than a dishonest artist. And while he was still hot with the
impulse he looked through the advertisement columns of the Clerkenwell
Chronicle, and answered three demands, one for a “joiner,” another for
a “sugar-boiler,” and the third for a “harness-cleaner.”
The sugar-boiling firm alone answered, and he was asked to call. He
stated that he had had considerable experience of the manufacture in
Nova Scotia, but a brief conversation convinced the manager that the
applicant knew nothing of scientific sugar-boiling, with its elaborate
engines and differentiation of labor; but Matt’s sober, respectable
appearance and his conviction of his capacity stood him in good stead,
and he was given a fortnight’s trial at eighteen shillings a week, with
a prospect of rising to forty. In his confidence of mastering the easy
detail, and to clinch his resolution, he wrote to his art patrons
throwing up his position in each establishment with due form and
superfluous sarcasm, and one happy morning, soon after sunrise, repaired
to the factory with a more buoyant tread than had been his since the
memorable day when he crossed the great bridge which led to the heart of
all the splendors.
The fortnight’s end found him spiritually seared and physically scalded.
The depressing society of the British working-man, the ever-present
contrast of the blank building with the free forest in which he had made
sugar in his boyhood (how happy his boyhood seemed now!), and the
overflowing contents of the seething boilers, demonstrated to him daily
that he had made a mistake. He might have stayed on nevertheless, but
the dread that an accidental scald on the hand might permanently injure
his power with the brush made the trial fortnight his last. He scanned
the advertisement columns again, with no suspicion of what now awaited
him.
He had been misled by the comparative facility with which he had found
work hitherto; he was now destined to re-experience—far more poignantly
than in New Brunswick—the long-drawn agony of unemployment, the
sickness of hope deferred; to bruise himself against the ruthless
indifference of an overstaffed nation; to see and hear the blind, deaf
forces of the social machine grind out happiness for all but him. At
first he did not mind getting no replies, except for the waste of
stamps, for he took feverish advantage of the hours of daylight thus
left free for Art. But as day followed day, and week followed week, the
perturbation of his soul and the weakness of his body, enfeebled by
hunger and cold, made painting difficult; and he had not even the
capital to expend on canvas. Broken in health and pride, he applied
again for his old work, prepared even to tint cartes-de-visite. But his
place had been filled up. The stream of human life had flowed on as if
he had never been. The work he had got was the only work in London open
to a man in his position, and this work he had thrown away. One of the
papers he had so imprudently quarrelled with was willing to take him on
again, but at half the price. Subdued as he was, a pride he afterwards
felt to have been insane spurred him to refuse. He fancied he could get
such terms from a score of other papers, but he was mistaken. In truth,
black and white was no more his métier than humor. The rush into black
and white, of which he had first heard at Cornpepper’s, had filled the
ranks with abler men or of older standing, with a better appreciation of
the market, and of how to draw for reproduction by the new processes
just coming up. And he had yet to learn, also, that the world went very
well without him; that it had no need for him either as artist or
artisan, craftsman or clerk; that every hole had its peg, round or
square; and that he was of no more account in the surging life of London
than the fallen leaves blown about the bleak squares.
He earned a few odd shillings now and then for his old pictures by
persuading some small skinflint dealer to cheat him; and that was all.
Once he was cruelly tantalized—a five-pound commission to copy a
National Gallery picture being dangled before him, only to be withdrawn.
He parted with all but the barest necessities—with the fashionable
morning suit, with his pistol, with the Gregson boots; his only luxury
was the engraving of the “Angelus,” which he had retained because nobody
offered more than eighteenpence for it. The bulk of the money thus
raised was remitted to Abner Preep, as promised; the rest went to pay
Mrs. Lipchild. Himself he so stinted that often when he went to
Grainger’s (which he had fortunately prepaid) he took care to arrive
first, not only because of the warmth, but because the girl students,
whose class preceded his, left stale crusts lying about, whose crumb had
been used up on their charcoal drawings. To such straits may a man sink
in a few weeks, though he sinks slowly, for each week is a year to him.
But outwardly he preserved dignity, brushing his one suit scrupulously,
and glad that, owing to his interlude of fashionable tailoring, it was
still in good condition; for the vision of the lost mortals was ever
before his eyes, and he foresaw that without a decent appearance he
would not be able to grasp an opportunity even when it came, but would
be driven down to the deeps to join the damned souls outside that Fleet
Street public-house, within which the happier staff of the Christian
Home ushered in the Sabbath with beer.
And the more London refused him the more his consciousness of power
grew. As he tramped the teeming streets in quest of a job or a customer,
a thousand ideas for great pictures jostled in his sick brain, a
thousand fine imaginings took form and shape in beautiful
color-harmonies and majestic groupings. In the ecstatic frenzy of
moments of hysterical revolt against the blind forces closing in upon
him like a tomb to shut him out forever from the sunlight, he grew
Titanic to his own thought, capable of masterpieces in any and every
kind of art—great heroic frescos like Michael Angelo’s, great homely
pictures like those of the Dutch, great classic canvases like Raphael’s,
great portraits like Rembrandt’s, great landscapes like Turner’s, great
modern street-pieces like Cornpepper’s, great mediæval romances like
Erle-Smith’s, not to say great new pictures that should found the school
of Strang, combining all the best points of all the schools, the ancient
poetry with the modern realism. Nay, even literary impulses mingled with
artistic in these spasms of nebulous emotion, his immature genius not
having yet grasped the limitations of the paintable. Good God! what did
he ask? Not the voluptuous round of the young men whose elegant
silhouettes standing out against the black, silent night from the warm
lighted windows of great houses athrob with joyous music filled him with
a mad bitterness; not the soft rose-leaf languors of the beautiful white
women who passed in shimmering silks and laces from gleaming
spick-and-span carriages under canvas awnings over purple carpets amid
spruce, obsequious footmen; not the selfish joys of these radiant
shadows dancing their way to dusty oblivion, to be trodden under foot by
the generations over which he would shine as a star, serene, immortal;
but bread and water and a little money for models and properties, and a
top-light straight in touch with heaven, and a few pounds to send home
to his kith and kin; but to paint, to paint, to joy in conception and to
glory in difficult execution, to express the poetry of the ideal through
real flesh and real shadows and real foliage, and find a rapturous agony
in the search for perfection; to paint, to paint, to exult fiercely in
the passing of faces, with their pathos and their tragedy, to catch a
smile on a child’s face and the grace of a girl’s movement and the
passion in the eyes of a woman; to watch the sunrise consecrating tiles
and chimneys, or the river, mirroring a thousand night-lights, glide on,
glorifying its own uncleanness; to express the intense stimulus of the
wonderful city, resonant with the tireless tread of millions of feet,
vibrant with the swirl of perpetual currents of traffic, pulsating with
the rough music of humanity-roaring markets, shrilling trains, panting
steamships; to record in pigment not only the romance of his dreams or
the glamour of the dead past, but the poetry of the quick—the rich,
full life of the town, the restless day and the feverish night, with its
mysterious perspectives of fitful gleams; to paint, to paint, anything,
everything, for the joy of eternalizing the transient beauty that lurked
everywhere—in the shimmer of a sunlit puddle, in the starry heaven, in
the motions of barefoot children dancing to a barrel-organ, in the
scarlet passing of soldiers, in the play of light on the fish in a
huckster’s barrow, in the shadowy aisles of city churches throbbing with
organ diapasons.
Oh, the joy of life! Oh, the joy of Art that expressed the joy of life!
Yes, but in the absence of a few bits of metal, neither joy nor Art nor
even life could be his. He must die, be swept off from among the surging
crowds of which he was an unnoticed unit, and no one would ever know
what mighty things he had dreamed and suffered in his little span of
years. Every supper eaten by radiant couples at richly lit restaurants
would have nourished him for weeks, nor did it diminish the bitter
socialistic sentiment this reflection caused him to remember that he
himself had fared as wantonly once and again. At least, he had earned
his money. What gave those young men with the vacant faces, those women
with the improbable complexions, the right to all the good things at the
table of life? Even Herbert was splashed by this wave of bitterness;
Herbert, the brilliant, with his battalion of boots. Ah! poor little
Billy was right. It was impossible to believe in anything—to see any
justice in life.
And was it worth while going on? The thought presented itself again and
again, especially in those November days when London was as dark as his
own soul; and it made him half sorry, half glad that a grim Providence
had sent his pistol to the pawnshop. He was walking to Grainger’s one
evening in such a double darkness of without and within, when the memory
came to him of a newspaper paragraph concerning people who had wandered
into the river, and, hypnotized by the idea, he bent his steps towards
the docks, with a vague intention of giving death a chance. What did it
matter what became of his brothers and sisters? It were better that they
died too. In any case he could not help them any more; he had just
scraped together the usual remittance, but he could not see where the
next was to come from. But his semi-somnambulistic motion did not bear
him towards the water-side; in the gray obscurity he erred endlessly in
strange ghostly squares, whose chill iron-railed enclosures loomed like
cemeteries through the sepulchral air.
London smelled like a boiled sponge; the raw air reeked with sulphurous
grime, as if the chimneys of hell had been swept. It was not an inviting
world to remain in. A gigantic brown head of a horse suddenly shot past
his. He jumped back, but a shadowy wheel caught him in the pit of the
stomach and hurled him across the road, where he fell on his back,
hearing inarticulate noises from the cabman, and just seeing the hansom
swallowed up again by the yellow sea. He got up, feeling dazed and
indignant, rather than hurt, and staggered along in purposeless pursuit
of the vanished cab. He found himself in a business street, where the
illumined shop-fronts thinned the fog. A familiar face, with a strange
green light upon it from a chemist’s window, burst upon him as
unexpectedly as the horse. It was Tarmigan’s. He studied it abstractedly
for a moment in its greenish pallor, with its deep furrows, seeming to
read clearly a weariness and heart-sickness akin to his own, and struck
for the first time by the shabbiness and flaccidity of the figure. Then
the face took a more joyous expression than he had ever seen in it, and
he heard Tarmigan saying:
“Hullo, Strang! Are you lost, too?”
“Yes, sir—at least, I don’t quite know, sir,” he replied, like one
awaking from a dream.
“You’re usually at Grainger’s at this hour. I’m on my way there. If you
are going to-night we had better keep together.”
“Thank you, sir,” said Matt.
He went into the chemist’s to inquire their whereabouts, and feeling a
little stiff, had the sudden idea of laying out his last coppers in
arnica; then he began to pilot his master with a sense of lofty
responsibility. But they walked in silence, mutually embarrassed.
Tarmigan coughed lengthily.
“Ought you to be out on a night like this, sir?” Matt ventured to say.
“Duty, my boy, duty,” rejoined Tarmigan, gruffly.
“But you are not bound to go, are you, sir?” Matt remonstrated,
remembering that Tarmigan’s services were a voluntary sacrifice at the
shrine of Art.
“I am not forced by an outsider, if that’s what you mean,” said
Tarmigan. “But that wouldn’t be duty, that would be necessity—at least,
in my definition.”
“Then duty is only what you feel you ought to do,” said Matt.
“Decidedly. Any man who knows what true Art is is bound to hand it down
to the next generation, especially in an age when there is so much false
doctrine in the air.”
“But can’t each generation find out its own Art?” Matt asked, timidly.
“Can each generation find out its own science?” Tarmigan retorted,
sharply. “In all things there is a great human tradition, and the torch
is handed down from generation to generation; otherwise we should be in
a nice fog,” he added, grimly, and coughed again. “And a nice fog the
young men are in who reject the light of the past, with their azure Art,
and their violet nonsense, and their slapdash sketchiness.”
“But they seem to be gaining the public ear,” Matt murmured, liking
neither to contradict his master nor to agree with him.
“The public ear!” Tarmigan laughed scornfully. “Yes, they gain that,
but not the public eye, thank God. That can still tell slipshod botchery
from honest, faithful work.”
“But Cornpepper is in the Academy this year,” Matt reminded him.
“Yes; the Academy lets itself be outbawled,” said Tarmigan, sharply. “I
wish I were a member!”
“I wish you were,” said Matt, fervently.
Tarmigan coughed.
“I didn’t mean what you mean,” he said, gruffly.
“Oh, but they ought to elect you, sir!” said Matt, rushing in on
delicate ground in his enthusiasm for the man’s character. “Everybody
says so.”
“Who’s everybody?” Tarmigan inquired, bitterly. “Society doesn’t say so,
for I don’t go to its drawing-rooms; the R.A.’s don’t say so, for I’m
unknown to their wives. But I am unjust. Let us drop the subject. After
all, a man’s work stands, even if he is passed over in his lifetime.”
Matt felt a sharp pang of sympathy for this strong, stern man sustained
by the false dream of immortality. He could not conceive that posterity
would care a rap for Tarmigan’s cold classic pictures. Indeed, now that
he had assimilated all that was good in Tarmigan’s teaching, he only
went to the studio for the sake of the model and the practice. Emotion
and embarrassment kept him silent.
“Do you live with your people?” Tarmigan asked, presently, in an
interested tone.
“No,” said Matt; “they are in America.”
“Oh, ah, yes; so you told me. You’re not married?”
“No.”
“Nor engaged, I hope?”
“No,” said Matt, wonderingly.
“That’s right. No artist should marry. His wife is sure to drag him down
to sacrifice his Art to her pleasures and wants. Fine feathers and fine
houses are ruining English Art. I warn you of this, because you have the
makings of an artist if you work hard.”
“You are very kind, sir,” said Matt, touched.
“Not at all. You have a fine natural talent, still undisciplined. So
long as you keep yourself free from matrimonial complications you may
hope to achieve something. A single man can live on bread and water. I
am heartily glad to hear you have nobody to keep but yourself.”
Matt smiled grimly under the imagined cover of the fog.
“Ah, I know what you’re smiling at,” said Tarmigan, more genially than
he had yet spoken. “You’re wondering whether the preacher is a bachelor.
Well, I am proud to say I’m still single, though I can’t boast of living
on bread and water. You see, it isn’t only the expense; marriage spoils
the silent incubation of ideas; the wife wants her husband, not his
Art.”
“But suppose an artist falls in love—isn’t it hard on him?” asked Matt.
“No man can serve two masters. Every artist has got to ask himself, Does
he want Happiness, or does he want Art? That choice will face you one
day, Mr. Strang.”
“I hope not,” said Matt. “But I guess Art’s enough for me.” He spoke in
a tone of quiet conviction, and his bosom swelled. Happiness, forsooth!
How could there be Happiness apart from Art? Or how could Art be apart
from Happiness?
Their talk fell to a lower level. Matt casually expressed an ardent wish
to see sundry R.A.’s, especially the president. He had only come across
the second-rate painters or the young men. He felt vaguely that he was
at one with Butler and Greme and Herbert, and apparently Tarmigan also,
in despising them, though he had only seen one of their exhibitions;
they were in power and popular, and therefore time-serving mediocrities.
Yet beneath all this prejudice was a keen curiosity about them, and a
latent respect for these oldsters who had arrived. Tarmigan promised to
get him a ticket for the prize distribution of the Academy Schools next
month, when he would see most of them. The suggestion of suicide slunk
into the rear; the spectacle of the Academicians was something to live
for. Then the old man and the young relapsed into silent thoughts of
their art, projecting visions of ideal beauty on the background of
yellow, grimy vapor that shrouded the great dreary city.
But when Matt sat down to paint that night he found himself
incapacitated, a mass of aches and bruises. He went home to anoint
himself with his arnica; in the unconscious optimism of sickness the
suggestion of suicide had vanished altogether.
With a step that faltered from nervousness even more than from the
weakness due to a diet of one meal per diem, Matt Strang passed across
the clangorous court-yard of Burlington House, nigh turned back by the
imposing bustle of broughams and cabs, whose shadows were thrown sharply
on the stones under the keen, frosty starshine of the December night. In
the warm-lighted hall he shrank back, even more timidly, blinking at the
radiance of the company, the white shirt-fronts of the men, the dazzling
shoulders of the women. Before a counter a block of black figures
struggled to get rid of their hats and coats in exchange for numbers.
Matt hid his hat, fortunately flexible, in the pocket of his overcoat,
which, being the least shabby of his vestments by reason of its summer
vacation, he did not dare to take off; otherwise he would not have dared
to keep it on. There were spots of discoloration on the concealed
garments, for they had suffered from the week’s job, which, together
with the expectation of this gala-night, had kept him alive since he had
met Tarmigan in the fog three weeks before. As a house-painter and
distemperer Matt had still hovered on the verge of Art, and if Butler
was right in his interpretation of the Academy of his day, and the
highest art was indeed to conceal paint, then was the young Nova Scotian
strictly Academic in retaining his overcoat on this most Academic of
occasions. He marched with the courage of desperation up a broad crimson
staircase, keenly conscious of the frayed edges of his trousers, and
mistily aware of overarching palms and bordering flower-pots and
fashionable companions, and surrendered the ticket Tarmigan had given
him to a sumptuous official who seemed a part of the ornamental avenue
to the Academic salons. Once safely past this point the haze cleared,
and he saw, to his joy, less fashionable figures in frock-coats and
ladies in hats and jackets, and though he wished they had been more
numerous and more dowdy, he felt a morsel more at ease. There seemed to
be pictures on view, and he eagerly joined the sparse groups of
spectators that promenaded the rooms, in curious contrast with the crush
of the populace the last time he had walked, at the price of a shilling,
within these historic walls. The exhibition was curious: in one room
dozens of semi-detached heads, some evidently from the same model; in
another, cartoons of draped figures; in a third, sculptures. He saw from
a placard that they had been done in competition for the prizes that
were to be adjudged to-night. He heard scraps of foolish criticism from
the people about him, but his commerce with art-editors had blunted his
once sensitive nerves, and he was only amused. From the pictures his
eyes strayed to the spectators, and he wondered which were celebrities.
It occurred to him, with a pang of dismay, that in the absence of any
cicerone he might go away no wiser than he had come, and he remembered
with regret the personally conducted tour he had made through the
Reynolds Club. Would his uncle be here to-night? he thought, with
apprehensive shrinking. As he moved aimlessly about, thinking of the Old
Gentleman, his heart leaped to see—not Matthew Strang, but “Daniel
before Nebuchadnezzar,” and not the “Daniel before Nebuchadnezzar” he
knew, but other Daniels and other Nebuchadnezzars—a veritable vision of
Daniels and Nebuchadnezzars, a gallery of Daniels and Nebuchadnezzars,
perspectives of Daniels and Nebuchadnezzars, stretching away on both
sides of the room; young clean-shaven Daniels and old gray-bearded
Daniels and middle-aged Daniels with mustaches, Daniels with uplifted
arms and Daniels with downcast eyes, Daniels dressed and Daniels
undressed, Daniels with flashing faces and Daniels with turned backs,
and Nebuchadnezzars analogously assorted, and palaces of equal variety
and backgrounds of similar dissimilarity, each tableau differing in
properties and supernumeraries, but all appearing only the more alike
because of their differences, so conventional were the variations.
Matt divined instantly that the picture Herbert had painted must be
among them, and he looked about ardently for the painted palace in which
he had spent so many happy hours. Ah! there it was, the dear old canvas,
though it had an undreamed-of grandeur in its broad gold frame; there
was Daniel and there was “Nebby,” more finished than when he had last
seen Herbert at work on them that fatal midsummer day, but essentially
unchanged. He felt quite a small proprietary interest in it, unconscious
how much it really owed to him; his touches on the actual final canvas
had been but few, and these mainly suggestions in pastel, and his
remembrance of the scaffolding work that preceded was hopelessly blurred
by the countless discussions. He was shaken by a resurgence of pleasant
memories of these artistic talks and merry lunches, with the bright
sunshine streaming down on the skin rugs and the gleaming busts. He
became absorbed in the painting, seeing episodes of the past in it, like
a magician looking into a pool of ink. And then he was pierced to the
marrow as by an icy wind; he heard an ecstatic voice ejaculating “Isn’t
it beautiful? The dear boy!” in charming foreign accents, and he divined
the Vandyke beard hovering haughtily in his rear. He felt the couple had
come to see their son’s work, and he tried to sidle away unperceived,
but an advancing group forced him to turn round, and he found himself
eye to eye with Madame, whose radiant face of praise was exchanged for
one of smiling astonished welcome when she caught sight of him.
“My dear young—” she began, in accents of lively affection. Then Matt
saw her face freeze suddenly, and he quailed beneath the glooming
eyebrows of her dignified consort, who swept round the other way with
the frozen lady on one arm and Herbert on the other, turning three backs
to his nephew in a sort of triple insult. The semicircular sweep which
veered Madame off brought Herbert near, and Matt’s heart beat more
rapidly as his whilom chum’s dress-coat, with its silk facings, brushed
against his tightly buttoned overcoat. The glimpse he had of Herbert’s
face showed it severe, impassive, and devoid of recognition; but ere the
young gentleman had quite swept past he managed to give his homely
cousin a droll dig in the ribs, which was as balm in Gilead to the
lonely youth, and brought back in a great wave all his fondness for his
dashing relative, with whom he now felt himself a fellow conspirator in
a facetious imbroglio. The last lees of his bitterness were extruded by
the dig; he gazed with affectionate admiration after the solemn
swallow-tails of his cousin, receding staidly and decorously up the
avenue of Daniels, at one or other of which his disengaged hand pointed
with no faintest suggestion of droll digs in its immaculate cuff and
delicately tapering fingers. Presently there was a marked move in a
particular direction, and Matt, joining the current, was floated towards
a great room filled with chairs, and already half full of gentlefolks.
He made instinctively for the rear, but finding himself amid a mob of
young fellows in evening dress, some of them sporting the ivory medal of
studentship, he retreated farther towards the front, ultimately taking
up a position on the last chair of the left extremity of the fourth row
from the back, out of view of the incomers streaming through the oaken
panels. It was a broad oblong room, with skylights in the handsome
ceiling, and large watercolors hanging on the walls. A temporary dais
covered by a crimson baize and ascended by a crimson step faced the
audience, and at its central point stood a reading-desk lighted from the
right by a lamp. Matt heard whispered comments on the new-comers from
his neighbors; now it was a knighted brewer who rolled his corporeal
cask into a front seat, now it was a musical conductor with an air of
exile from the central desk. A few painters of eminence with neither
handles nor tails to their names dotted Art about the audience, while
wives and daughters of the Academically distinguished exhaled an aroma
of fashion, striving to banish all reminiscences of paint from
everything but their complexions; here and there was an actor out of
employment or a strayed nondescript celebrity, and on a plush couch to
the right of the platform a popular author chatted noisily with a
pretty, vivacious lady journalist; the mixture was completed by a few
favored relatives of the students, like Mr. and Madame Strang, whose
anxious faces were clearly visible to Matt in a diagonal direction a few
rows ahead. Herbert himself herded with his fellow-students, who had
taken exclusive possession of the back rows, where they stood in
evening dress, a serried gallery of black-and-white figures, prophesying
“all the winners.”
A great round of applause from their ranks set everybody peering towards
the door, only to encounter the stern gaze of the magnificent beadle,
whose entry had prompted the salvoes, and who, arrayed in what appeared
to be a rich red dressing-gown, showed like a Venetian color-study amid
a collection of engravings.
A more general outburst of clapping, accompanied by a buzz of interest,
greeted the arrival of the less picturesque “train” of Academicians,
headed by the president. The procession, bowing and smiling, defiled
slowly towards the dais, especial enthusiasm being reserved for the more
popular or the newest Academicians and Associates, the students having a
ruling hand or hands in the distribution of the noise. Matt craned
forward eagerly to see these pillars of English Art, whose names flew
from lip to lip. As they only looked like men, he had a flash of
self-confidence.
The president takes his seat on the central chair, flanked and backed by
the faithful forty and the trusty thirty, minus the absentees. The
R.A.’s dispose themselves along the front bench, the A.R.A.’s occupy the
rear—a younger set, on the whole, with more hair on their heads and
less on their chins. The beadle solemnly slides the oak panels to,
cloistering the scene from the world, and a religious silence spreads
from him till it infects even the excited back rows. The president rises
bland and stately. There is a roar of welcome, succeeded by a deeper
hush. It is seen that he has papers on his desk, and is about to declare
the results of the competitions, and to determine the destiny of dozens,
if not the future of English Art. There is no vulgar sensationalism.
With a simple dignity befitting the venerable self-sufficient
institution, which still excludes great newspapers—and great
painters—from its banquets, he disdains working up to a climax, and
starts with the tidbit of the evening, “the gold medal and travelling
studentship for £200,” awarded every two years for the best historical
painting, the subject this year being “Daniel before Nebuchadnezzar.”
The president pauses for a breathless instant. The ranks of
black-and-white figures standing in the background have grown rigid with
excitement. The president imperturbably announces “Herbert Strang.”
There is a brief pause for mental digestion, then a great crash of
applause—the harmonious cacophony of clapping hands, generous lungs,
and frenzied feet. Matt, thrilling through and through with joy and
excitement, shouting frantically, and applauding with all his limbs,
turns to look for Herbert amid the students, but sees only rows of
heaving shirt-fronts and animated black arms. Then he becomes aware of
his cousin strolling leisurely along the near side of the room, through
a mad tempest of cheering, towards the president’s desk, a faint smile
playing about his beautiful boyish lips, which yet tremble a little.
Matt feels proud of being the cousin of the hero of the moment, whose
course he follows with tear-dimmed eyes. He sees him reach the
presidential desk and receive a medal and an envelope from the great
man, who shakes hands with him and evidently offers words of
congratulation. He follows his passage back to his fellow-students
through the undiminished tempest. Then his eye lights suddenly on
Matthew Strang’s face, and sees great tears rolling down towards the
Vandyke beard, while beside him Madame Strang, her face radiating
sunshine, her eyes dancing, throws kisses towards the cynosure of all
eyes, who, carrying his honors, and studiously avoiding the weakness of
a glance in the direction of his parents, ploughs his way amid fraternal
back-thumpings to his place among his cronies. There is a rapid exchange
of criticism and gossip among the students, ejaculations of
commiseration for Flinders, whose friends had convinced him that he
would win, and for Rands, a poor devil of talent, the only hope of a
desperately genteel family in Dalston. But comment must be hushed, for
other prizes, some of them important enough, have to be announced. There
is a steady succession of individual students, more or less blushing,
moving to and from the president’s congratulatory hand, some stumbling
nervously against the crimson step placed in front of his desk, probably
by the beadle to disconcert the shy. Some fortunate prize-winners come
up three times, and stumble three times. Sometimes they are girls. One
wears spectacles and a yellow sash, and has the curved back of the
student; another is pretty and petite, and causes a furore by her
multiplex successes and her engaging charm; a third is handsome, but
gawky, with bare red arms. A young man who wins two events attracts
special attention by his poetical head and his rapt air of mystic
reverie, and goes back winking. Then the president commences his
biennial address to an audience of students throbbing with excitement,
afire with the after-glow of all that applause, anxious to canvass the
awards, and dying to run out into the other rooms to look at the winning
pictures, which have, in some instances, been dark horses which nobody
remembers to have noticed.
His theme is the Evolution of Ecclesiastical Art. For half an hour the
audience, always with the exception of the students he is addressing,
listens patiently to the procession of ornate periods, classically
chiselled, hoping to emerge from the dulness and gloom of obscure epochs
into the light of familiar names. Then the seats begin to feel hard. By
the aid of copious shufflings, wrigglings, and whisperings, they drag
through another bad quarter of an hour, relieved only by the mention of
Albrecht Dürer, whose name is unaccountably received with rapturous
cheers, as if he were a political allusion. The next quarter of an hour
is lightened by the feeling that it is to be the last. But, as the
second hour arrives without a harbinger sentence, three brave men arise
and pass through the beadle-guarded portal. There is tremendous cheering
from the back, which is taken up and re-echoed from all parts of the
room, and the president beams and turns over a new page.
The seats become granite, the presidential eloquence flows on as if it
would wear them away; an endlessly trickling stream. He enters into
painful analyses of vanished frescos, painted in churches long since
swept away, and elaborates punctilious appreciations of artists and
architects known only to biographical dictionaries. Some have fancy
without imagination, some imagination without fancy, a few both fancy
and imagination, and the rest neither imagination nor fancy. The stream
strewn with dead names flows on slow and stately, with never a playful
eddy, and another man, greatly daring, fortified by the example of his
gallant predecessors, steals from the room, and blushes to find it fame.
Amid the plaudits that ring around this manful deed, Matt suddenly finds
Herbert at his side. His cousin slips a note into his hand and retreats
hastily to his place. Excited and glad of the relief, he opens it and
reads: “Meet me outside after this rot is over. Don’t let the Old
Gentleman see you.” Matt smiles, proud and happy to resume his old
relations with the hero of the evening, and pleased to find the ancient
password of “the Old Gentleman” supplementing the droll dig in the ribs
in re-setting their camaraderie on its ancient footing. In his eagerness
to talk to Herbert again and to congratulate him personally, the
presidential oration seems to him duller and the seat more adamantine
than ever. He strains his ears to catch instead the babble of the
students, who have finally given up any pretence of interest in mediæval
Flemish cathedrals. His eye, long since satiate with the sight of the
celebrities, roves again over the faces of the Academicians on their
platform, austere in their striving to appear absorbed, and again he
draws confidence from their merely human aspect. He watches the popular
novelist gossiping with the vivacious lady journalist. He examines for
the eighth time the water-colors on the walls, which he gathers, from
one of the many conversations going on in his neighborhood, are by the
competitors for the Turner prize. He sees that the hard-worked newspaper
artist in the row in front of him has given up sketching and gone to
sleep, despairing of escape. The pangs of his own stomach keep him
awake; he looks forward wistfully to the hour of release, resolved to
treat himself to two-pennyworth of supper in honor of Herbert’s triumph.
But the interminable voice goes on, discoursing learnedly and elegantly
of apses and groins and gargoyles. The wrigglings have ceased. All
around, but especially in the quiet front rows under the presidential
eye, apathetic listless beings droop on their chairs. Matt steals a
glance towards his uncle, and finds him the only member of the audience
genuinely alert and interested, his head perked up, his eyes gazing
admiringly towards the rostrum, where perchance in imagination he
already sees his son carrying on the time-honored tradition of the
great Sir Joshua. At his side Madame sustains herself by furtive looks
in the direction of the same young gentleman. Then Matt turns his
attention to the speaker, watching his mouth open and shut, and his
shapely hand turning the perpetual pages. He expects that every moment
will be the orator’s last. But the great man is just warming to his
work. His silvery voice, rising above the buzz and the murmur, descants
dreamily on the spiritual aspirations of uncouthly christened
architects, who had mouldered in their graves long centuries before his
Gracious Majesty George III., patron of arts and letters, gave the
Academy house-room. After an hour and a half he launches lightly into a
treatise on glass-staining. The audience has now given up all hope. It
has the sense of condemnation to an earthly inferno, in which the suave
voice of a fiend of torture, himself everlastingly damned, shall forever
amble on, unwinding endless erudition. A reference to “my young
architectural friends,” greeted with suspicious thunders by all the
students, affords a momentary break in the monotony. The end comes
suddenly, after a “Lastly,” forgotten ten minutes before. There is a
brief interval of incredulity. People awakened by the silence look up
sleepily. Yes, there is no doubt. The president is actually down. Then a
great roar of joy bursts out from all sides. The back benches go
delirious, and then the meeting dissolves in a stampede towards the
oaken panels, at last open in three places. The discharged prisoners
swarm down the grand staircase and besiege the cloak-rooms; some parade
the rooms to inspect the winning pictures, now ticketed, and to express
their surprise at the judges’ decisions.
Outside in the cold air, which immediately began to make him sneeze
through the compulsory imprudence of having worn his overcoat
throughout, Matt lurked about looking for Herbert, and at last the hero
appeared, carefully muffled and wrapped up, and with a murmur of “Wasn’t
it awful? Wait by the Arcade till my people’s cab rolls off,” dashed
back. When he reappeared, smiling sunnily, he explained that he had told
his people he must show up at the Students’ Club in order not to appear
caddish. “I’ve been slobbered over enough,” he added, whimsically
flicking the traces of an imaginary maternal kiss off his fresh, smooth
cheek.
“Oh, but I don’t wonder your people are delighted,” said Matt; “I know I
am. I haven’t congratulated you yet.” And he shook his cousin’s hand
heartily.
“Thank you, old fellow; it’s very good of you. Oh, by-the-way, don’t
mention to anybody I let you see the picture on the easel, will you? One
is supposed to keep it to one’s self, don’t you know. That’s why I
didn’t tell you I was doing it for the Gold Medal.”
“Oh, who should I mention it to?” asked Matt, reassuringly.
“That’s a good chap. You see, if it got out that I talked it over with
you there might be a bother; people are so jealous, especially now that
it has won.”
“Oh, I sha’n’t tell a soul, you may depend,” said Matt. “It was very
good of you to let me come so often and chat about it; and even if I did
save you a little trouble in working out the perspective, I learned a
great deal about composition from you.”
“Don’t mention it,” said Herbert.
“Oh, I won’t,” said Matt, gravely; whereat Herbert laughed, and replied:
“Now you must do an Academy picture, old fellow. There’s three months’
time yet.”
“Would there be any chance of my getting in?” asked Matt, wistfully. He
had been fluttered by the applause of the evening; it seemed impossibly
grand to be the centre of an admiring fashionable assemblage, instead of
a shabby alien hovering on its outside rim. In such company the colossal
self-confidence of his solitary exaltations dwindled to a pitiful sense
of his real insignificance.
“Rather,” replied Herbert. “Why, I thank my stars you weren’t a
competitor. I should never have got the medal if you had been.”
Matt shook his head deprecatingly, but Herbert rattled on with
increasing enthusiasm. “Wouldn’t it be jolly if you got a picture in and
it was hung on the line next to mine? Now that I’ve taught you
composition and educated you up to the Academy’s ideas, you could easily
do something that would take the old buffers’ fancy, and then, once you
got a show in the Academy, the Old Gentleman would take up your work
and run you.”
“I don’t think they’d take what I wanted to do.”
“Oh, but you mustn’t want to do it,” said Herbert. “At least, not till
you can afford it. Besides, I’m not so sure that there isn’t something
in the Academy’s ideas, after all. Candidly, I don’t quite see how
Daniel and Nebuchadnezzar could have been treated any better.”
“I don’t want to treat them at all,” said Matt.
“Well, anyway, do something, you old duffer. You don’t want to go
grubbing along at ten bob a week—or was it tenpence a day? I forget.
Promise me to do a picture for the next show, or I sha’n’t feel easy in
my mind about you.”
“I promise,” Matt murmured.
“That’s right,” said Herbert, considerably relieved. He went on
heartily: “The Academy is the stepping-stone. It’s no good kicking it
out of the way. Put a picture in the Academy, by fair means if thou
canst, but—put a picture in the Academy. You see, even Cornpepper had
to come to us. And even if you will do new-fangled stuff, you can
always get in if you make the picture a certain queer size—just to fit
an awkward corner. I forget the exact measurements, but the Old
Gentleman knows; he took care to find out in case I couldn’t get in
legitimately. I’ll make a point of asking him. Poor old governor! I
don’t suppose he’ll sleep to-night. Why, he was quite blubbery when the
cab drove off. Do you know, there’s a certain pathos about the Old
Gentleman.”
“He’s been very good to you,” said Matt.
“Well, and now he is happy. Virtue rewarded. The cream of the joke is
that now I’ve got to go abroad in spite of him—travelling studentship,
you see—and he can’t possibly chuck business for a year to come with
me.”
“Was the money in that envelope?” Matt asked.
“Only the first quarterly instalment. What a shame I can’t pay you out
of that! Only I must study abroad with the money. It wouldn’t be honest
to use it for any other purpose, would it?”
“Don’t talk of it,” said Matt, flushing from a sense of the
misconstruction of his thoughtless query.
“Oh, don’t be so shocked. You look as if I had already misappropriated
it. I can’t tell you how glad I was to see your dear old phiz to-night.
What have you been doing with yourself? I often wondered why you didn’t
look me up at the club. By-the-way, here we are at the club.”
“Here?” echoed Matt, interrogatively. They had been walking
automatically as they conversed, and had come to a stand-still before a
blank, cheerless building in Golden Square.
“Yes, this is the shanty. Not my club, you duffer. This is only the
students’ little ken. I told my people the truth, you know. It would
be snobbish not to drop in to-night. They make rather a night of it,
though I hadn’t intended to go otherwise. Hang it all, I had an
appointment to sup with a girl at half-past ten! I forgot all about
her—she’ll be mad.” He took out his watch. “Ten past eleven. Why,
Ecclesiastical Art must have evolved till close on eleven! It isn’t my
fault, anyhow. Do you mind trotting round to the Imperial? She’s in the
first ballet. We’d better have a hansom.”
The young men drove round to the stage door, but the fair one had
departed after a few impatient instants. “I think I heard her tell the
cabby ‘Rule’s,’ ” was the sixpenny worth of information obtained from the
janitor.
mother’s. She was afeared to write to you ’bout it. Thet’s on’y Billy in
a fit—you see, Daisy kicked him, and they couldn’t fix his leg back
proper; it don’t fit, so he hes fits now an’ then. He’ll never be a
pirate now. Drive the crutch deeper into the ice, Charley; steady there
with the long pole. The iron pin goes into the crutch, Billy; don’t get
off the ashes, you’ll slide under the sled. Now, then, is the rope
right? Jump on the sled, you girls and fellers! Round with the pole!
Whoop! Hooray! Ain’t she scootin’ jest! Let her rip! Pop! Snap!
Geewiglets! The rope’s give! Don’t jump off, Billy, I tell you; you’ll
kill yourself! Stick in your toes an’ don’t yowl; we’ll slacken at the
dykes. Look at Ruth—she don’t scream. Thunderation! We’re goin’ over
into the river! Hold tight, you uns! Bang! Smash! We’re on the
ice-cakes! Is thet you thet’s screamin’, Billy? You ain’t hurt, I tell
you—don’t yowl—you gooney—don’t—”
But it was not Billy’s voice that he heard screaming when the films of
sleep really cleared away. The little cripple was nestling close up to
him with the same panic-stricken air as when they rode that flying sled
together. This time it was impossible to mistake their mother’s voice
for the wind—it rose clearly in hysterical vituperation.
“An’ you orter be ’shamed o’ yourself, I do declare, goin’ home all
alone in a sleigh with a young man—in the dead o’ night, too!”
“There were more nor ourn on the road; and since Abner Preep was perlite
enough—”
“Yes, an’ you didn’t think o’ me on the road oncet, I bet! If young
Preep wanted to do the perlite, he’d’ a’ took me in his father’s sleigh,
not a wholesome young gal.”
“But I was tar’d out with dancin’ e’en a’most, and you on’y—”
“Don’t you talk about my dancin’, you blabbin’ young slummix! Jest
keep your eye on your Preeps with their bow-legs an’ their pigeon-toes.”
“His legs is es straight es yourn, anyhow.”
“P’raps you’ll say thet I’ve got Injun blood next. Look at his round
shoulders and his lanky hair—he’s a Micmac, thet’s what he is. He on’y
wants a few baskets and butter-tubs to make him look nateral. Ugh! I kin
smell spruce every time I think on him.”
“It’s you that hev hed too much spruce-beer, hey?”
“You sassy minx! Folks hev no right to bring eyesores into the world.
I’d rather stab you than see you livin’ with Abner Preep. It’s a squaw
he wants, thet’s a fact, not a wife!”
“I’d rather stab myself than go on livin’ with you.”
For a moment or two Matt listened in silent torture. The frequency of
these episodes had made him resigned, but not callous. Now Harriet’s
sobs were added to the horror of the altercation, and Matt fancied he
heard a sound of scuffling. He jumped out of bed in an agony of alarm.
He pulled on his trousers, caught up his coat, and slipped it on as he
flew barefoot down the rough wooden stairs, with his woollen braces
dangling behind him.
In the narrow icy passage at the foot of the stairs, in the bleak light
from the row of little crusted panes on either side of the door, he
found his mother and sister, their rubber-cased shoes half-buried in
snow that had drifted in under the door. Mrs. Strang was fully dressed
in her “frolickin’ ” costume, which at that period included a crinoline;
she wore an astrakhan sacque, reaching to the knees, and a small
poke-bonnet, plentifully beribboned, blooming with artificial flowers
within and without, and tied under the chin by broad, black, watered
bands. Round her neck was a fringed afghan, or home-knit muffler. She
was a tall, dark, voluptuously-built woman, with blazing black eyes and
handsome features of a somewhat Gallic cast, for she came of old
Huguenot stock. She stood now drawing on her mittens in terrible
silence, her bosom heaving, her nostrils quivering. Harriet was nearer
the door, flushed and panting and sobbing, a well-developed auburn
blonde of sixteen, her hair dishevelled, her bodice unhooked, a strange
contrast to the other’s primness.
“Where you goin’?” she said, tremulously, as she barred her mother’s way
with her body.
“I’m goin’ to drownd myself,” answered her mother, carefully smoothing
out her right mitten.
“Nonsense, mother,” broke in Matt. “You kin’t go out—it’s snowin’.”
He brushed past the pair and placed himself with his back to the door,
his heart beating painfully. His mother’s mad threats were familiar
enough, yet they never ceased to terrify. Some day she might really do
something desperate. Who knew?
“I’m goin’ to drownd myself,” repeated Mrs. Strang, carefully winding
the muffler round her head.
She made a step towards the door, sweeping the limp Harriet roughly
behind her.
“You kin’t get out,” Matt said, firmly. “Why, you hevn’t hed breakfast
yet.”
“What do I want o’ breakfus? Your sister is breakfus ’nough for me.
Clear out o’ the way.”
“Don’t you let her go, Matt!” cried Harriet. “I’ll quit instead.”
“You!” exclaimed her mother, turning fiercely upon her, while her eyes
spat fire. “You are young and wholesome—the world is afore you. You
were not brought from a great town to be buried in a wilderness. Marry
your Preeps an’ your Micmacs, and nurse your pappooses. God has cursed
me with froward children an’ a cripple, an’ a husband that goes
gallivantin’ onchristianly about the world with never a thought for his
’mortal soul, an’ the Lord has doomed me to worship Him in the wrong
church. Mother yourselves; I throw up the position.”
“Is it my fault if father hesn’t wrote you lately?” cried Harriet. “Is
it my fault if there’s no Baptist church to Cobequid village?”
“Shut your mouth, you brazen hussy! You’ve drove your mother to her
death! Stand out o’ my way, Matthew; don’t you disobey my dyin’
reques’.”
“I sha’n’t,” said the boy, squaring his shoulders firmly against the
door. “Where kin you drownd yourself? The pond’s froze an’ the tide’s
out.”
He could think of no other argument for the moment, and he had an
incongruous vision of her sliding down to the river on her stomach, as
the boys often did, down the steep, reddish-brown slopes of greasy mud,
or sinking into a squash-hole like an errant horse.

“Why, there’s on’y mud-flats,” he added.
“I’ll wait on the mud-flats fur the merciful tide.” She fastened her
bonnet-strings firmly.
“The river is full of ice,” he urged.
“There will be room fur me,” she answered. Then, with a sudden
exclamation of dismay, “My God! you’ve got no shoes and socks on! You’ll
ketch your death. Go up-stairs d’reckly.”
“No,” replied Matt, becoming conscious for the first time of a cold wave
creeping up his spinal marrow. “I’ll ketch my death, then,” and he
sneezed vehemently.
“Put on your shoes an’ socks d’reckly, you wretched boy. You know what a
bother I hed with you last time.”
He shook his head, conscious of a trump card.
“D’ye hear me! Put on your shoes and socks!”
“Take off your bonnet an’ sacque,” retorted Matt, clinching his fists.
“Put on your shoes an’ socks!” repeated his mother.
“Take off your bonnet an’ sacque, an’ I’ll put on my shoes an’ socks.”
They stood glaring defiance at each other, like a pair of duellists,
their breaths rising in the frosty air like the smoke of pistols—these
two grotesque figures in the gray light of the bleak passage, the tall,
fierce brunette, in her flowery bonnet and astrakhan sacque, and the
small, shivering, sneezing boy, in his patched homespun coat, with his
trailing braces and bare feet. They heard Harriet’s teeth chatter in the
silence.
“Go back to bed, you young varmint,” said Matt, suddenly catching sight
of Billy’s white face and gray night-gown on the landing above. “You’ll
ketch your death.”
There was a scurrying sound from above, a fleeting glimpse of other
little night-gowned figures. Matt and his mother still confronted each
other warily. And then the situation was broken up by the near approach
of sleigh-bells. They stopped slowly, mingling their jangling with the
creak of runners sliding over frosty snow, then the scrunch of heavy
boots travelled across the clearing. Harriet flushed in modest alarm and
fled up-stairs. Mrs. Strang hastily retreated into the kitchen, and for
one brief moment Matt breathed freely, till, hearing the click of the
door-latch, he scented gunpowder. He dashed towards the door and pressed
the thumb-latch, but it was fastened from within.
“Harriet!” he gasped, “the gun! the gun!”
He beat at the door, his imagination seeing through it. His loaded gun
was resting on the wooden hooks fastened to the beam in the ceiling. He
heard his mother mount a chair; he tried to break open the door, but
could not. The chances of getting round by the back way flashed into his
mind, only to be dismissed as quickly. There was no time—in breathless
agony he waited the report of the gun. Crash! A strange, unexpected
sound smote his ears—he heard the thud of his mother’s body striking
the floor. She had stabbed herself, then, instead. Half mad with
excitement and terror, he backed to the end of the passage, took a
running leap, and dashed with his mightiest momentum against the frail
battened door. Off flew the catch, open flew the door with Matt in
pursuit, and it was all the boy could do to avoid tumbling over his
mother, who sat on the floor among the ruins of a chair, rubbing her
shins, her bonnet slightly disarranged, and the gun, still loaded,
demurely on its perch. What had happened was obvious; some of the little
Strang mice, taking advantage of the cat’s absence at the “muddin’
frolic,” had had a frolic on their own account, turning the chair into a
sled, and binding up its speedily-broken leg to deceive the maternal
eye. It might have supported a sitter; under Mrs. Strang’s feet it had
collapsed ere her hand could grasp the gun.
“The pesky young varmints!” she exclaimed, full of this new grievance.
“They might hev crippled me fur life. Always a-tearin’ an’ a-rampagin’
an’ a-ruinatin’. I kin’t keep two sticks together. It’s ’nough to make a
body throw up the position.”
The sound of the butt-end of a whip battering the front-door brought her
to her feet with a bound. She began dusting herself hastily with her
hand.
“Well, what’re you gawkin’ at?” she inquired. “Kin’t you go an’ unbar
the door, ’stead o’ standin’ there like a stuck pig?”
Matt knew the symptoms of volcanic extinction; without further parley he
ran to the door and took down the beechen bar. The visitor was “ole
Hey,” who drove the mail. The deacon came in, powdered as from his own
grist-mill, and added the snow of his top-boots to the drift in the
hall. There were leather-faced mittens on his hands, ear-laps on his
cap, tied under the chin, a black muffler, hoary with frost from his
breath, round his neck and mouth, and an outer coat of buffalo-skin
swathing his body down to his ankles, so that all that was visible of
him was a little inner circle of red face with frosted eyebrows.
Mrs. Strang stood ready in the hall with a genial smile, and Matt, his
heart grown lighter, returned to the kitchen, extracted the family
foot-gear from under the stove, where it had been placed to thaw, and
putting on his own still-sodden top-boots, he set about shaving
whittlings and collecting kindlings to build the fire.
“Here we are again, hey!” cried the deacon, as heartily as his
perpetual, colossal quid would permit.
“Do tell! is it really you?” replied Mrs. Strang, with her pleasant
smile.
“Yes—dooty is dooty, I allus thinks,” he said, spitting into the
snow-drift and flicking the snow over the tobacco-juice with his whip.
“Whatever Deacon Hailey’s hand finds to do he does fust-rate—thet’s a
fact. It don’t seem so long a while since you and me were shakin’ our
heels in the Sir Roger. Nay, don’t look so peaked—there’s nuthin’ to
make such a touse about. You air a partic’ler Baptist, hey? An’ I
guess you kinder allowed Deacon Hailey would be late with the mail, hey?
But he’s es spry es if he’d gone to bed with the fowls. You won’t find
the beat of him among the young fellers nowadays—thet’s so. They’re a
lazy, slinky lot; and es for doin’ their dooty to their country or their
neighbor—”
“Hev you brought me a letter?” interrupted Mrs. Strang, anxiously.
“I guess—but you’re goin’ out airly?”
“I allowed I’d walk over to the village to see if it hed come.”
“Oh, but it ain’t the one you expec’.”
“No?” she faltered.
“I guess not. Thet’s why I brought it myself. I kinder scented it was
suthin’ special, and so I reckoned I’d save you the trouble of trudgin’
to the post-office. Deacon Hailey ain’t the man to spare himself trouble
to obleege a fellow-critter. Do es you’d be done by, hey?” The deacon
never lost an opportunity of pointing the moral of a position. Perhaps
his sermonizing tendency was due to his habit of expounding the Sunday
texts at a weekly meeting, or perhaps his weekly exposition was due to
his sermonizing tendency.
“Thank you.” Mrs. Strang extended her hand for the letter. He produced
it slowly, apparently from up the sleeve of his top-most coat, a wet,
forlorn-looking epistle, addressed in a sprawling hand. Mrs. Strang
turned it about, puzzled.
“P’raps it’s from Uncle Matt,” ejaculated Matt, appearing suddenly at
the kitchen door.
“You’ve got Uncle Matt on the brain,” said Mrs. Strang. “It’s a Halifax
stamp.” She could not understand it; her own family rarely wrote to her,
and there was no hand of theirs in the address. Deacon Hailey lingered
on, apparently prepared, in his consideration for others, to listen to
the contents of his “fellow-critter’s” letter.
“Ah, sonny,” he said to Matt, “only jest turned out, and not slicked up
yet. When I was your age I hed done my day’s chores afore the day hed
begun. No wonder the Province is so ’tarnally behindhand, hey?”
“Thet’s so,” Matt murmured. Pop! pop! pop! was all that he heard, so
that ole Hey’s moral exhortations left him neither a better nor a wiser
boy.
Mrs. Strang still held the letter in her hand, apparently having become
indifferent to it. Ole Hey did not know she was waiting for him to go,
so that she might put on her spectacles and read it. She never wore her
spectacles in public, any more than she wore her nightcap. Both seemed
to her to belong to the privacies of the inner life, and glasses in
particular made an old woman of one before one’s time. If she had worn
out her eyes with needle-work and tears, that was not her neighbors’
business.
The deacon, with no sign of impatience, elaborately unbuttoned his outer
buffalo-skin, then the overcoat beneath that, and the coat under that,
and then, pulling up the edge of his cardigan that fitted tightly over
his waistcoats, he toilsomely thrust his horny paw into his
breeches-pocket and hauled out a fig of “black-jack.” Then he slowly
produced from the other pocket a small tool-chest in the guise of a
pocket-knife, and proceeded to cut the tobacco with one of the
instruments.
“Come here, sonny!” he cried.
“The deacon wants you,” said Mrs. Strang.
Matt moved forward into the passage, wondering. Ole Hey solemnly held up
the wedge of black-jack he had cut, and when Matt’s eye was well fixed
on it he dislodged the old “chaw” from his cheek with contortions of the
mouth, and blew it out with portentous gravity. Lastly, he replaced it
by the wedge of “black-jack,” mouthed and moulded the new quid
conscientiously between tongue and teeth, and passed the ball into his
right cheek.
“Thet’s the way to succeed in life, sonny. Never throw away dirty afore
you got clean, hey?”
Poor Matt, unconscious of the lesson, waited inquiringly and
deferentially, but the deacon was finished, and turned again to his
mother.
“I ’spect it ’ll be from some of the folks to home, mebbe.”
“Mebbe,” replied Mrs. Strang, longing for solitude and spectacles.
“When did you last hear from the boss?”
“He was in the South Seas, the capt’n, sellin’ beads to the savages.
He’d a done better to preach ’em the Word, I do allow.”
“Ah, you kin’t expect godliness from sailors,” said the deacon. “It’s in
the sea es the devil spreads his nets, thet’s a fact.”
“The Apostles were fishermen,” Mrs. Strang reminded him.
“Yes; but fishers ain’t sailors, Mrs. Strang. It’s in furrin parts that
the devil lurks, and the further a man goes from his family the nearer
he goes to the devil, hey?”
Mrs. Strang winced. “But he’s gittin’ our way now,” she protested,
unguardedly. “He’s comin’ South with a freight.”
“Ah, joined the blockade-runners, hey?”
Mrs. Strang bit her lip and flushed. “I don’t kear,” the deacon said,
reassuringly. “I don’t see why Nova Scotia should go solid for the
North. What’s the North done for Nova Scotia ’cept ruin us with their
protection dooties, gol durn ’em. They won’t have slaves, hey? Ain’t we
their slaves? Don’t they skin us es clean es a bear does a sheep? Ain’t
they allus on the lookout to snap up the Province? But I never talk
politics. If the North and South want to cut each other’s throats,
that’s not our consarn. Mind your own business, I allus thinks, hey? And
if your boss kin make a good spec by provisionin’ the Southerners,
you’ll be a plaguy sight better off, I vow. And so will I—for, you
know, I shall hev to call in the mortgage unless you fork out thet thar
interest purty slick. There’s no underhandedness about Deacon Hailey. He
gives you fair warnin’.”
“D’rectly the letter comes you shall have it—I’ve often told you so.”
“Mebbe thet’ll be his letter, after all—put his thumb out, I guess, and
borrowed another feller’s, hey?”
“No—he’d be nowhere near Halifax,” said Mrs. Strang, her feverish
curiosity mounting momently. “Don’t them thar sleigh-bells play a tune!
I guess your horses air gettin’ kinder restless.”
“Well—there’s nuthin’ I kin do for you to Cobequid Village?” he said,
lingeringly.
Mrs. Strang shook her head. “Thank you, I guess not.”
“You wouldn’t kear to write an answer now—I’d be tolerable pleased to
post it for you down thar. Allus study your fellow-critters, I allus
thinks.”
“No, thank you.”
Deacon Hailey spat deliberately on the floor.
“Er—you got to home safe this mornin’?”
“Yes, thank you. We all come together, me and Harriet and Matt. ’Twere a
lovely walk in the moonlight, with the Aurora Borealis a-quiverin’ and
a-flushin’ on the northern horizon.”
“A-h-h,” said the deacon slowly, and rather puzzled. “A roarer! Hey?”
At this moment a sudden stampede of hoofs and a mad jangling of bells
were heard without. With a “Durn them beasts!” the deacon breathlessly
turned tail and fled in pursuit of the mail-sleigh, mounting it over the
luggage-rack. When he had turned the corner, Matt’s grinning face
emerged from behind the snow-capped stump of a juniper.
“I reckon I fetched him thet time,” he said, throwing away the remaining
snowball, as he hastened gleefully inside to partake of the contents of
the letter.
He found his mother sitting on the old settle in the kitchen, her
spectacled face gray as the sand on the floor, her head bowed on her
bosom. One limp hand held the crumpled letter. She reminded him of a
drooping foxglove. The room had a heart of fire now, the stove in the
centre glowed rosily with rock-maple brands, but somehow it struck a
colder chill to Matt’s blood than before.
“Father’s drownded,” his mother breathed.
“He’ll never know ’bout Billy now,” he thought, with a gleam of relief.
Mrs. Strang began to wring her mittened hands silently, and the letter
fluttered from between her fingers. Matt made a dart at it, and read as
follows:
Dear Marm,—Don’t take on but ime sorrie to tell you that the Cap
is a gone goose we run the block kade oust slick but the 2 time we
was took by them allfird Yanks we reckkend to bluff ’em in the fog
but about six bells a skwad of friggets bore down on us sudden like
ole nick the cap he sees he was hemd in on a lee shoar and he
swears them lubberly northers shan’t have his ship not if he goes
to Davy Jones his loker he lufs her sharp up into the wind and
sings out lower the longbote boys and while the shot was tearin and
crashin through the riggin he springs to the hall-yards and hauls
down the cullers then jumps through the lazzaret into the store
room kicks the head of a carsk of ile in clinches a bit of oakem
dips it in the ile and touches a match to it and drops it on the
deck into the runin ile and then runs for it hisself jumps into the
bote safe with the cullers and we sheer off into the fog mufflin
our oars with our caps and afore that tarnation flame bust out to
show where we were we warnt there but we heard the everlastin fools
poundin away at the poor old innocent Sally Bell till your poor
boss dear marm he larfs and ses he shipmets ses he look at good old
Sally she’s stickin out her yellow tongue at em and grinnin at
the dam goonies beg pardon marm but that was his way he never
larfed no more for wed disremembered the cumpess and drifted outer
the fog into a skwall and the night was comin on and we drov blind
on a reef and capsized but we all struck out for shore and allowed
the cap was setting sale the same way as the rest on us but when we
reached the harbor the cap he warnt at the helm and a shipmet ses
ses he as how he would swim with that air bundle of cullers that
was still under his arm and they tangelled round his legs and
sorter dragged him under and kep him down like sea-weed and now
dear marm he lays in the Gulf of Mexiker kinder rapped in a shroud
and gone aloft I was the fust mate and a better officer I never
wish to sine with for tho he did sware till all was blue his hart
was like an unborn babbys and wishing you a merry Christmas and God
keep you and the young orfuns and giv you a happy new year dear
marm you deserve it.

ime yours to command,
Hoska Cuddy (Mate).

p s.—i would have writ erlier, but i couldn’t get your address
till i worked my way to Halifax and saw the owners scuse me not
puttin this in a black onwellop i calclated to brake it eesy.
Matt hastily took in the gist of the letter, then stood folding it
carefully, at a loss what to say to the image of grief rocking on the
settle. From the barn behind came the lowing of Daisy—half
protestation, half astonishment at the unpunctuality of her breakfast.
Matt found a momentary relief in pitying the cow. Then his mother’s
voice burst out afresh.
“My poor Davie,” she moaned. “Cut off afore you could repent, too deep
down fur me to kiss your dead lips. I hevn’t even got a likeness o’ you;
you never would be took. I shall never see your face again on airth, and
I misdoubt if I’ll meet you in heaven.”
“Of course you will—he saved his flag,” said Matt, with shining eyes.
His mother shook her head, and set the roses on her bonnet nodding gayly
to the leaping flame. “Your father was born a Sandemanian,” she sighed.
“What is thet?” said Matt.
“Don’t ask me; there air things boys mustn’t know. And you’ve seen in
the letter ’bout his profane langwidge. I never would’ve run off with
him; all my folks were agen it, and a sore time I’ve hed in the
wilderness ’way back from my beautiful city. But it was God’s finger. I
pricked the Bible fur a verse, an’ it came: ‘An’ they said unto her,
Thou art mad. But she constantly affirmed it was even so. Then said
they, It is his angel.’ ”
She nodded and muttered, “An’ I was his angel,” and the roses trembled
in the firelight. “If you were a good boy, Matt,” she broke off, “you’d
know where thet thar varse come from.”
“Hedn’t I better tell Harriet?” he asked.
“Acts, chapter eleven, verse fifteen,” muttered his mother. “It was the
finger of God. What’s thet you say ’bout Harriet? Ain’t she finished
tittivatin’ herself yet—with her father layin’ dead, too?” She got up
and walked to the foot of the stairs. “Harriet!” she shrieked.
Harriet dashed down the stairs, neat and pretty.
“You onchristian darter!” cried Mrs. Strang, revolted by her
sprightliness. “Don’t you know father’s drownded?”
Harriet fell half-fainting against the banister. Mrs. Strang caught her
and pulled her towards the kitchen.
“There, there,” she said, “don’t freeze out here, my poor child. The
Lord’s will be done.”
Harriet mutely dropped into the chair her mother drew for her before the
stove. Daisy’s bellowing became more insistent.
“An’ he never lived to take me back to Halifax, arter all!” moaned Mrs.
Strang.
“Never mind, mother,” said Harriet, gently. “God will send you back some
day. You hev suffered enough.”
Mrs. Strang burst into tears for the first time. “Ah, you don’t know
what my life hes been!” she cried, in a passion of self-pity.
Harriet took her mother’s mittened hand tenderly in hers. “Yes we do,
mother—yes we do. We know how you hev slaved and struggled.”
As she spoke a panorama of the slow years was fleeting through the minds
of all three—the long blank weeks uncolored by a letter, the fight with
poverty, the outbursts of temper; all the long-drawn pathos of lonely
lives. Tears gathered in the children’s eyes—more for themselves than
for their dead father, who for the moment seemed but gone on a longer
voyage.
“Harriet,” said Mrs. Strang, choking back her sobs, “bring down my poor
little orphans, and wrap them up well. We’ll say a prayer.”
Harriet gathered herself together and went weeping up the stairs. Matt
followed her with a sudden thought. He ran up to his room and returned,
carrying a square sheet of rough paper.
His mother had sunk into Harriet’s chair. He lifted up her head and
showed her the paper.
“Davie!” she shrieked, and showered passionate kisses on the
crudely-colored sketch of a sailor—a figure that had a strange touch of
vitality, a vivid suggestion of brine and breeze. She arrested herself
suddenly. “You pesky varmint!” she cried. “So this is what become o’ the
fly-leaf of the big Bible!”
Matt hung his head. “It was empty,” he murmured.
“Yes, but there’s another page thet ain’t—thet tells you to obey your
parents. This is how you waste your time ’stead o’ wood-choppin’.”
“Uncle Matt earns his livin’ at it,” he urged.
“Uncle Matt’s a villain. Don’t you go by your Uncle Matt, fur lan’s
sake.” She rolled up the drawing fiercely, and Matt placed himself
apprehensively between it and the stove.
“You said he wouldn’t be took,” he remonstrated.
Mrs. Strang sullenly placed the paper in her bosom, and the action
reminded her to remove her bonnet and sacque. Harriet, drooping and
listless, descended the stairs, carrying the two-year-old and
marshalling the other little ones—a blinking, bewildered group of
cherubs, with tousled hair and tumbled clothes. Sprat came down last,
stretching himself sleepily. He had kept the same late hours as Matt,
and, returning with him from the “muddin’ frolic,” had crept under his
bed.
The sight of the children moved Mrs. Strang to fresh weeping. She almost
tore the baby from Harriet’s arms.
“He never saw you!” she cried, hysterically, closing the wee yawning
mouth with kisses. Her eyes fell on Billy limping towards the red-hot
stove where the others were already clustered.
“An’ he never saw you,” she cried to him, as she adjusted the awed
infant on the settle. “Or it would hev broke his heart. Kneel down and
say a prayer for him, you mischeevious little imp.”
Billy, thus suddenly apostrophized, paled with nervous fright. His big
gray eyes grew moist, a lump rose in his throat. But he knelt down with
the rest and began bravely:
“Our Father, which art in heaven—”
“Well, what are you stoppin’ about?” jerked his mother, for the boy had
paused suddenly with a strange light in his eyes.
“I never knowed what it meant afore,” he said, simply.
His mother’s eye caught the mystic gleam from his.
“A sign! a sign!” she cried, ecstatically, as she sprang up and clasped
the little cripple passionately to her heaving bosom.
The death of his father—of whom he had seen so little—gave Matt a
haunting sense of the unsubstantiality of things. What! that strong,
wiry man, with the shrewd, weather-beaten face and the great tanned
hands and tattooed arms, was only a log swirling in the currents of
unknown waters! In vain he strove to figure him as a nebulous
spirit—the conception would not stay. Nay, the incongruity seemed to
him to touch blasphemy. His father belonged to the earth and the seas;
had no kinship with clouds. How well he remembered the day, nearly three
years ago, when they had parted forever, and, indeed, it had been
sufficiently stamped upon his memory without this final blow.
It is a day of burning August—so torrid that they have left their coats
on the beach. They are out on the sand flats, wading for salmon among
the giant saucers of salt water, the miniature lakes left by the tide,
for this is one of the rare spots in the Province where the fish may be
taken thus. What fun it is spearing them in a joyous rivalry that makes
the fishers wellnigh jab each other’s toes with their pitchforks, and
completely tear each other’s shirt-sleeves away in the friendly tussle
for a darting monster, so that the heat blisters their arms with great
white blobs that stand out against the brown of the boy’s skin and the
ornamental coloring of the man’s. Now and then in their early course,
when tiny threads of water spurt from holes in the sand, they pause to
dig up the delicate clam, with savory anticipations of chowder. Farther
and farther they wander till their backs are bowed with the spoil, the
shell-fish in a little basket, the scaly fish strung together by a small
rope passing through their gills. The boy carries the shad and the man
the heavier salmon. At last, as they are turning homeward, late in the
afternoon, Matt stands still suddenly, rapt by the poetry of the scene,
the shimmering pools, the stretch of brown sand, strewn with sea-weeds,
the background of red head-lands, crowned with scattered yellow farms
embosomed in sombre green spruces, and, brooding over all, the windless
circle of the horizon, its cold blue veiled and warmed and softened by a
palpitating, luminous, diaphanous haze of pale amethyst tinged with
rose. He knows no word for what he sees; he only feels the beauty.
“Come along, sonny,” says his father, looking back.
But the boy lingers still till the man rejoins him, puzzled.
“What’s in the wind?” he asks. “Is Farmer Wade’s barn on fire?”
“Everythin’s on faar,” says the boy, waving his pitchfork
comprehensively. His dialect differs a whit from his more-travelled
father’s. In his little God-forsaken corner of Acadia the
variously-proportioned mixture of English and American which, with local
variations of Lowland and Highland Scotch, North of Ireland brogue and
French patois, loosely constitutes a Nova-Scotian idiom, is further
tinged with the specific peculiarities that spring from illiteracy and
rusticity.
David Strang smiles. “Why, you are like brother Matt,” he says, in
amused astonishment. All day his son’s prattle has amused the stranger,
but this is a revelation.
“Like your wicked brother Matt?” queries the boy in amaze. David’s smile
gleams droller.
“Avast there, you mustn’t hearken to the mother. She knows naught o’
Matt ’cept what I told her. She is Halifax bred, and we lived ’way up
country. I ran away to sea, and left him anchored on dad’s farm. When I
made port again dad was gone to glory, and Matt to England with a
petticoat in tow.”
“But mother said he sold the farm, an’ your share, too.”
“And if he didn’t it’s a pity. He had improved the land, hadn’t he? and
I might have been sarved up at fish dinners for all he knew. I don’t
hold with this Frenchy law that says all the bairns must share and share
alike. The good old Scotch fashion is good ’nough for me—Matt’s the
heir, and God bless him.”
“Then why didn’t you marry a Scotchwoman?” asked Matt, with childish
irrelevance.
“ ‘Twas your mother’s fault,” answers David, with a half-whimsical,
half-pathetic expression.
“And why didn’t you take her to sea with you?”
“Nay, nay; the mother has no stomach for it, nor I either. And then
there was Harriet—a little body in long clothes. And the land was
pretty nigh cleared,” he adds, with a suspicion of apology in his
accent, “and we couldn’t grow ’nough to pay the mortgage if I hadn’t
shipped again.”
“And why am I like uncle?”
“Oh, he used to be allus lookin’ at the sky—not to find out whether to
git the hay in, mind you, but to make little picturs on the sly in the
hay-mow on Sundays, and at last he sold the farm and went to London to
make ’em.”
Matt’s heart begins to throb—a strange new sense of kinship stirs
within him.
“Hev you got any of them thar picturs?” he inquires, eagerly.
“Not one,” says David, shaking his head contemptuously. “His clouds were
all right, because clouds may be anything; but when he came to cows,
their own dams wouldn’t know ’em; and as for his ships—why, he used to
hoist every inch o’ canvas in a hur’cane. I wouldn’t trust him to tattoo
a galley-boy. But he had a power of industry, dear old Matt; and I guess
he’s larnt better now, for when I writ to him tellin’ him I was alive
and goin’ to get spliced, he writ back he was settled in London in the
pictur line, and makin’ money at it, and good-luck to him.”
Matt’s heart swells. That one can actually make money by making pictures
is a new idea. He has never imagined that money can be made so easily.
Why, he might help to pay off the mortgage! He does not see the need of
going to London to make them—he can make them quite well here in his
odd moments, and one day he will send them all to this wonderful kinsman
of his and ask him to sell them. Five hundred at sixpence each—why, it
sounds like one of those faëry calculations with which McTavit sometimes
dazzles the school-room. He wonders vaguely whether pictures are equally
vendible at that other mighty city whence his mother came, and, if so,
whether he may not perhaps help her to accomplish the dream of her
married life—the dream of going back there.
“An’ uncle’s got the same name as me!” he cries, in ecstasy.
“I should put it t’other way, sonny,” says his father, dryly; “though
when I give it you in his honor I didn’t calc’late it ’ud make you take
arter him. But don’t you git it into your figurehead that you’re goin’
to London—you’ve jest got to stay right here and look arter the farm
for mother. See? The picturs that God’s made are good ’nough for
me—that’s so.”
“Oh yes, dad, I shall allus stay on here,” answers Matt, readily. “It’s
Billy who allus wants to be a pirate. Silly Billy! He says—”
His father silences him with a sudden “Damn!”
“What’s the matter?” he asks, startled.
“I guess you’re the silly Billy, standin’ jabberin’ when the tide’s
a-rushin’ in. We’ll have to run for it.”
Matt gives a hasty glance to the left, then takes to his heels straight
across the sands in pace with his father. The famous “bore” of the Bay
of Fundy, in a northerly inlet of which they have been fishing, is
racing towards them from the left, and to get to shore they must shoot
straight across the galloping current. They are at the head of the bay,
where the tide reaches a maximum speed of ten miles an hour, and the
sailor, so rarely at home, has forgotten its idiosyncrasy.
“You might ha’ kep’ your weather-eye open,” he growls. “I wonder you’ve
never been drownded afore.”
“We shall never do it, father,” pants Matt, taking no notice of the
reproach, for the waves are already lapping the rim of the little sand
island (cut out by fresh-water rivulets) on which they find themselves,
and the pools in which they had waded are filling up rapidly.
“Throw ’em away,” jerks the father; and Matt, with a sigh of regret,
unstrings his piscine treasures, and, economically putting the string
into his pocket, speeds on with renewed strength. But the sun flares
mercilessly through the fulgent haze; and when they reach the end of
their island they step into three feet of water, with the safe shore a
quarter of a mile off. David Strang, a human revolver in oaths, goes off
in a favorite sequence of shots, but hangs fire in the middle, as if
damped.
“Strikes me the mother ’ll quote Scripture,” he says, grimly, instead.
“I suppose you can’t swim, sonny?” he adds.
“Not so fur nor thet,” says Matt, meekly.
David grunts in triumphant anger, and, shifting his pitchfork to his
left hand, he grasps Matt with his right, and lifts him back on to the
burning sand, already soddened by a thin frothy wash.
“Now then, han’ us your fork,” he says, crossly. He knocks out the iron
prongs of both the pitchforks, ties the wooden handles securely together
by the string from Matt’s discarded fish, and fixes the apparatus across
the boy’s breast and under his arms. To finish the job easily he has to
climb back on the sand island; for, though he stands in a little eddy,
it is impossible to keep his feet against the fierce swirl of the
waters; and even on the island, where there are as yet only a few inches
of sea, the less sturdy Matt is almost swept away to the right by the
mad cavalry charge of the tide on his left flank.
“Now then,” cries David, “it’s about time we were home to supper. I’ll
swim ye for your flapjacks.”
“But, father,” says Matt, “you’re not going to carry the fish on your
back?”
“They won’t carry me on theirs,” David laughs, regaining his good-humor
as the critical moment arrives. “What would the mother think if we came
home without a prize in tow! Avast there! I’ll larn you how I’ll get out
of carryin’ ’em on my back.”
And with a chuckle he launches himself into the eddy, and shoots forward
with a vigorous side-stroke. “This side up with care,” he cries
cheerily. “Jump, sonny, straight for’ards.” And in a moment the man and
the boy are swimming hard for the strip of shore directly opposite the
sand island, the spot where they had left their coats hours before; but
neither has the slightest expectation of reaching it, for the tide is
sweeping them with fearful velocity to the right of it, so that their
course is diagonal; and if they make land at all, it will be very far
from their original starting-point. David keeps the boy to port, and
adjusts his stroke to his. After a while, feeling himself well buoyed up
by the handles, Matt breathes more easily, and gradually becomes quite
happy, for the water is calm on the surface, and of the warmth and color
of tepid café au lait, quite a refreshing coolness after the tropical
air, and he watches with pleasure the rosy haze deepening into purple
without losing its transparency. They pass sea-gulls fighting over the
dead fish which Matt left behind, and which have been carried ahead of
him in their unresisting course.
“We’re drifting powerful from them thar coats,” grumbles David. “ ’Twill
be a tiresome walk back. If it warn’t for them we could cut across
country when we make port.”
Matt strains his vision to the left, but sees only the purple outline of
Five Islands, and in the far background the faint peaks of the Cobequid
Hills.
“Waal, I’m darned!” exclaims his father, suddenly. “If them thar coats
ain’t comin’ to meet us, it’s a pity.”
And presently, sure enough, Matt catches sight of the coats hastening
along near the shore.
“We must cut ’em off afore they pass by,” cries his father, hilariously.
“Spurt, sonny, spurt. ’Tis a race ’twixt them and us.”
Sea-birds begin to circle low over their heads, scenting David’s fish;
but he pushes steadily on, animating his son with playful racing cries.
“We oughter back the coats,” he observes. “They’ve backed us many a
time. Just a leetle quicker,” he says, at last, “or they’ll git past
yonder p’int, and then they’re off to Truro.”
Matt kicks out more lustily, then his heart almost stops as he suddenly
sees Death beneath the lovely purple haze. It is the human swimmers who
are in danger of being carried off to Truro if they do not make the
shore earlier than “yonder p’int,” for Matt remembers all at once that
it is the last point for miles, the shore curving deeply inward. Even if
they reach the point in time, they will be thrown back by the
centrifugal swirl; they must touch the shore earlier to get in safely.
He perceives his father has been aware of the danger from the start, and
has been disguising his anxiety under the pretext of racing the coats.
He feels proud of this strong, brave man, the cold terror passes from
his limbs, and he spurts bravely.
“That’s a little man,” says David; “we’ll catch ’em yet. Lucky it’s
sandstone yonder ’stead o’ sand—no fear o’ gettin’ sucked in.”
Now it is the shore that seems racing to meet them—the red reef sticks
out a friendly finger, and in another five minutes they are perched upon
it, like Gulliver on the Brobdingnagian’s thumb; and what is more, they
tie with their coats, meeting them just at the landing-place.
David laughs a long Homeric laugh at the queerness of the incident,
quivering like a dog that shakes himself after a swim, and Matt smiles
too.
“Them thar sea-birds air a bit off their feed, that’s a fact,” chuckles
David, as he surveys his fish; and then the two cut across the forest,
drying and steaming in the sun, the elder exhorting the younger to
silence, and hiding the prongless pitchforks in the hay-mow before they
enter the house, all smiles and salmon.
At the early tea-supper they sit in dual isolation at one end of the
table, their chairs close. But lo! Mrs. Strang, passing the hot
flapjacks, or “corn-dodgers,” with the superfluous perambulations of an
excitable temperament, brushes the back of her hand against Matt’s
shoulder, starts, pauses, and brushes it with her palm.
“Why, the boy’s wringin’ wet!” she cries.
“We went wadin’,” David reminds her, meekly.
“Yes, but you don’t wade on your heads,” she retorts.
“I sorter tumbled,” Matt puts in, anxious to exonerate his father.
Mrs. Strang passes her hand down her husband’s jacket.
“An’ father kinder stooped to pick me up,” adds Matt.
“You’re a nice Moloch to trust with one’s children!” she exclaims in
terrible accents.
David shrinks before the blaze of her eyes, almost feeling his coat
drying under it.
“An’ when you kin’t manage to drownd ’em you try to kill ’em with
rheumatics, and then I hev all the responsibility. It’s ’nough to make
a body throw up the position. Take off your clothes, both o’ you.”
Both of them look at each other, feeling vaguely the indelicacy of
stripping at table. They put their hands to their jackets as if to
compromise, then a simultaneous recollection crimsons their faces—their
shirt-sleeves are gone. So David rises solemnly and leads the way
up-stairs, and Matt follows, and Mrs. Strang’s voice brings up the rear,
and goes with them into the bedroom, stinging and excoriating. They shut
the door, but it comes through the key-hole and winds itself about their
naked limbs (Mrs. Strang distributing flapjacks to her brood all the
while); and David, biting his lips to block the muzzle of his
oath-repeater—for he never swears before mother and the children except
when he is not angry—suddenly remembers that if he is to join his ship
at St. John’s by Thursday he must take the packet from Partridge Island
to-morrow. His honey-moon is over; he has this honey-moon every two or
three years, and his beautiful beloved is all amorousness and
amiability, and the best room with the cane-bottomed chairs is thrown
open for occupation; but after a few weeks Mrs. Strang is repossessed of
her demon, and then it is David who throws up the position, and goes
down to the sea in a ship, and does more business—of a mysterious
sort—in the great waters. And so on the morrow of the adventure he
kisses his bairns and his wife—all amorousness and amiability
again—and passes with wavings of his stick along the dusty road, under
the red hemlocks over the brow of the hill, and so—into the great
Beyond. Passes, and with him all that savor of strange, romantic seas,
all that flavor of bustling, foreign ports, that he brings to the lonely
farm, and that cling about it even in his absence, exhaling from
envelopes with picturesque stamps and letters with exotic headings;
passes, narrowing the universe for his little ones, and making their own
bit of soil sterner and their winter colder. He is dead, this brawny,
sun-tanned father, incredibly dead, and the dead face haunts Matt—no
vaporous mask, but stonily substantial, bobbing grewsomely in a green,
sickly light, fathoms down, with froth on its lips, and slimy things of
the sea twining in its hair. He looks questioningly at his own face in
the fragment of mirror, trying to realize that it, too, will undergo
petrifaction, and wondering how and when. He looks at his mother’s face
furtively, and wonders if the volcano beneath it will ever really sleep;
he pictures her rigid underground, the long, black eyelashes neatly
drawn down, and is momentarily pleased with the piquant contrast they
make with the waxen skin. Is it possible the freshness and beauty of
Harriet’s face can decay too? Can Billy sink to a painless rest, with
his leg perhaps growing straight again? Ah! mayhap in Billy’s case Death
were no such grisly mystery.
Morbid thoughts enough for a boy who should be profiting by the goodness
of the northwester towards boykind. But even before this greater tragedy
last year’s accident had taken the zest out of Matt’s enjoyment of the
ice; in former good years he had been the first to cut fancy figures on
the ponds and frozen marshes, or to coast down the slopes in a
barrel-stave fitted with an upright and a cross-piece—a machine of his
own invention worthy of the race of craftsmen from which he sprang. But
this year the glow of the skater’s blood became the heat of remorse when
he saw or remembered Billy’s wistful eyes; he gave up skating and
contented himself with modelling the annual man of snow for the school
at Cobequid Village.
In the which far-straggling village (to take time a little by the
forelock) his father’s death did not remain a wonder for the proverbial
nine days. For a week the young men chewing their evening quid round
the glowing maple-wood of the store stove, or on milder nights tapping
their toes under the verandas of the one village road as they gazed up
vacantly at the female shadows flitting across the gabled dormer-windows
of the snow-roofed wooden houses, spoke in their slightly nasal accent
(with an emphasis on the “r”) of the “pear’ls of the watter,” and
calling for their night’s letters held converse with the postmistress on
“the watter and its pear’ls,” and expectorated copiously, presumably in
lieu of weeping. And the outlying farmers who dashed up with a lively
jingle of sleigh-bells to tether their horses to the hitching-posts
outside the stores, or to the picket-fence surrounding the little wooden
meeting-house (for the most combined business with religion), were
regaled with the news ere they had finished swathing their beasts in
their buffalo robes and “boots”; and it lent an added solemnity to the
appeal of the little snow-crusted spire standing out ghostly against the
indigo sky, and of the frosty windows glowing mystically with blood in
the gleam of the chandelier lamps, and, mayhap, wrought more than the
drawling exposition of the fusty, frock-coated minister. And the old
grannies, smoking their clay pipes as they crouched nid-nodding over the
winter hearth, their wizened faces ruddy with firelight, mumbled and
grunted contentedly over the tidbit, and sighed through snuff-clogged
nostrils as they spread their gnarled, skinny hands to the dancing,
balsamic blaze. But after everybody had mourned and moralized and
expectorated for seven days a new death came to oust David Strang’s from
popular favor; a death which had not only novelty, but equal
sensationalism, combined with a more genuinely local tang, for it
involved a funeral at home. Handsome Susan Hailey, driving her horses
recklessly, her black feather waving gallantly in the wind, had dashed
her sleigh upon a trunk, uprooted by the storm and hidden by the snow.
She was flung forward, her head striking the tree, so that the brave
feather dribbled blood, while the horses bolted off to Cobequid Village
to bear the tragic news in the empty sleigh. And so the young men, with
the carbuncles of tobacco in their cheek, expectorated more and spoke of
the “pear’ls of the land,” and walking home from the singing-class the
sopranos discussed it with the basses, and in the sewing-circles, where
the matrons met to make undergarments for the heathen, there was much
shaking of the head, with retrospective prophesyings and whispers of
drink, and commiseration for “Ole Hey,” and all the adjacent villages
went to the sermon at the house, the deceased lady being, as the
minister (to whose salary she annually contributed two kegs of rum)
remarked in his nasal address, “universally respected.” And everybody,
including the Strangs and their collie, went on to the lonesome
graveyard—some on horse and some on foot and some in sleighs, the
coffin leading the way in a pung, or long box-sleigh—a far-stretching,
black, nondescript procession, crawling dismally over the white, moaning
landscape, between the zigzag ridges of snow marking the buried fences,
past the trailing disconsolate firs, and under the white funereal plumes
of the pines.
Other rumors, too, came by coach to the village—rumors of blizzard and
shipwreck—each with its opportunities of exhortation and expectoration.
But in the lonely forest home, past which the dazzling mail-coach
rattled with only a blast on the horn, the tragic end of David Strang
stood out in equal loneliness. For Death, when he smites the poor, often
cuts off not only the beloved, but the bread-winner; and though, in a
literal sense, the Strangs made their own bread, yet it was David who
kept the roof over their head and the ground under their feet. But for
his remittances the interest on the mortgage, under which they held the
farm and the house, could not have been paid, for the produce of the
clearing, the bit of buckwheat and barley, barely maintained the
cultivators, both Harriet and Matt eking out the resources of the family
by earning a little in kind, sometimes even in money. Matt was a skilful
soapmaker, decorating his bars with fanciful devices; and he delighted
in “sugaring”—a poetic process involving a temporary residence in a
log-hut or a lumberman’s cabin in the heart of the forest.
Now that the overdue mortgage money had gone to the bottom of the sea,
more money must be raised immediately. That the dead man had any claim
upon the consideration of his employers did not occur to the bereaved
family; rather, it seemed, he owed the owners compensation for the lost
Sally Bell. A family council was held on the evening of the day so
blackly begun. Not even the baby was excluded—it sat before the
open-doored stove on its mother’s lap and crowed at the great burning
logs that silhouetted the walls with leaping shadows. Sprat, too, was
present, crouched on “Matt’s mat” (as the children called the rag mat
their brother had braided), thrusting forward his black muzzle when the
door rattled with special violence, and by his side lay the boy staring
into the tumbling flames, yet taking the lead in the council with a new
authoritative ring in his voice.
Wherever the realities of life beleaguer the soul, there children are
born serious, and experience soon puts an old head on young shoulders.
The beady-eyed pappoose that the Indian squaw carries sandwichwise
’twixt back and board does not cry. Dump it down, and it stands stolid
like a pawn on a chessboard. Hang it on a projecting knot in the props
of a wig-wam, and it sways like a snared rabbit. Matt Strang, strenuous
little soul, had always a gravity beyond his years: his father’s removal
seemed to equal his years to his gravity. He knew himself the head of
the house. Harriet, despite her superior summers, was of the wrong sex,
and his mother, though she had physical force to back her, was not a
reasoning being. For a time, no doubt, she would be quieted by the peace
of the grave which all but the crowing infant felt solemnizing the
household, but Matt had no hope of more than a truce.
It was the boy’s brain and the boy’s voice that prevailed at the
council-fire. Daisy was to be killed and salted down and
sold—fortunately she was getting on in years, and, besides, they could
never have had the heart to eat their poor old friend themselves, with
her affectionate old nose and her faithful udders. The calves were to
become veal, and all this meat, together with the fodder thus set free,
Deacon Hailey was to be besought to take at a valuation, in lieu of the
mortgage money, for money itself could not be hoped for from Cobequid
Village. Though the “almighty dollar” ruled here as elsewhere, it was an
unseen monarch, whose imperial court was at Halifax. There Matt might
have got current coin, here barter was all the vogue. Accounts were kept
in English money; it was not till a few years later that the dollar
became the standard coin. For their own eating Matt calculated that he
would catch more rabbits and shoot more partridges than in years of
yore, and in the summer he would work on neighboring farms. Harriet
would have to extend her sewing practice, and collaborate with Matt in
making shad-nets for the fishermen, and Mrs. Strang would get spinning
jobs from the farmers’ wives. Which being settled with a definiteness
that left even a balance of savings, the widow handed the infant in her
arms to Harriet, and, replacing it by the big Bible, she slipped on her
spectacles with a nervous, involuntary glance round the kitchen, and
asked the six-year-old Teddy to stick a finger into the book. Opening
the holy tome at that place, she began to read from the head to the end
of the chapter in a solemn, prophetic voice that suited with her black
cap pinched up at the edges. She had no choice of texts; pricking was
her invariable procedure when she felt a call to prelection, and the
issue was an uncertainty dubiously delightful; for one day there would
be a story or a miracle to stir the children’s blood, and another day a
bald genealogy, and a third day a chapter of Revelation, all read with
equal reverence as equally inspiring parts of an equally inspired whole.
Matt breathed freely when his mother announced Ezra, chap. x., not
because he had any interest in Ezra, but because he knew it was a
pictureless portion. When the text was liable to be interrupted by
illustrations, the reading was liable to be interrupted by
remonstrances, for scarce a picture but bore the marks of his
illuminating brush, and his rude palette of ground charcoal, chalk, and
berry-juice. He had been prompted to color before his hand itched to
imitate, and in later years these episodes of the far East had found
their way to planed boards of Western pine, with the figures often in
new experimental combinations, and these scenes were in their turn
planed away to make room for others equally unsatisfactory to the
critical artist. But his mother had never been able to forgive the
iniquities of his prime, not even after she had executed vengeance on
the sinner. She had brought the sacred volume from her home at Halifax,
and a colored Bible she had never seen; color made religion cheerful,
destroyed its essential austerity—it could no more be conceived apart
from black and white than a minister of the Gospel. An especial
grievance hovered about the early chapters of Exodus, for Matt had
stained the Red Sea with the reddish hue of the Bay of Fundy—a
sacrilege to his mother, to whose fervid imagination the Sea of Miracles
loomed lurid with sacred sanguineousness to which no profane water
offered any parallel.
But Ezra is far from Exodus, and to-night the reminder was not likely. A
gleam of exaltation illumined the reader’s eyes when she read the first
verse; at the second her face seemed to flush as if the firelight had
shot up suddenly.
“ ‘Now when Ezra hed prayed an’ when he hed confessed, weepin’ an’
castin’ himself down before the house of God, there assembled unto him
out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children:
fur the people wept very sore.
“ ‘An’ Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered
an’ said unto Ezra, We hev trespassed against our God, an’ hev taken
strange wives of the people of the land....’ ”
She read on, pausing only at the ends of the verses. Harriet knitted
stockings over baby’s head; the smaller children listened in awe. Matt’s
thoughts soon passed from Shechaniah, the son of Jehiel, uninterested
even by his relationship to Elam. Usually when the subject-matter was
dull, and when he was tired of watching the wavering shadows on the
gray-plastered walls, he got up a factitious interest by noting the
initial letter of each verse and timing its length, in view of his
Sunday-school task of memorizing for each week a verse beginning with
some specified letter. His verbal memory being indifferent, he would
spend hours in searching for the tiniest verse, wasting thereby an
amount of time in which he could have overcome the longest; though, as
he indirectly scanned great tracts of the Bible, it may be this A B C
business was but the device of a crafty deacon skilled in the young
idea. However this be, Matt’s mind was deeplier moved to-night. The
shriek of the blind wind without contrasted with the cheerful crackle of
the logs within, and the woful contrast brought up that weird image
destined to haunt him for so long.
He shuddered to think of it—down there in the cold, excluded forever
from the warm hearth of life. Was not that its voice in the
wind—wailing, crying to be let in, shaking the door? His eyes filled
with tears. Vaguely he heard his mother’s voice intoning solemnly.
“ ‘An’ of the sons of Immer; Hanani, and Zebadiah. An’ of the sons of
Harim; Maaseiah, an’ Elijah, an’ Shemaiah, an’ Jehiel, an’ Uzziah. An’
of the sons of Pashur....’ ”
The baby was still smiling, and tangling Harriet’s knitting, but Billy
had fallen asleep, and presently Matt found himself studying the flicker
of the firelight upon the little cripple’s pinched face.
“ ‘An’ of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, an’ Jeremoth,
an’ Zabad, an’ Aziza. Of the sons also of Bebai....’ ”
The prophetic voice rose and fell unwaveringly, unwearyingly.
“Don’t you think I ought to write and tell Uncle Matt?” came suddenly
from the brooding boy’s lips.
“Silence, you son of Belial!” cried his mother indignantly. “How dare
you interrupt the chapter, so near the end, too! Uncle Matt, indeed!
What’s the mortal use of writin’ to him, I should like to know? Do you
think he’s likely to repent any, to disgorge our land? Why, he don’t
deserve to know his brother’s dead, the everlastin’ Barabbas. If he’d
hed to do o’ me he wouldn’t hev found it so easy to make away with our
inheritance, I do allow, and my poor David would hev been alive, and to
home here with us to-night, thet’s a fact. Christ hev mercy on us all.”
She burst into tears, blistering the precious page. Harriet ceased to
ply her needles; they seemed to be going through her bosom. The baby
enjoyed a free hand with the wool. Billy slept on. Presently Mrs.
Strang choked back her sobs, wiped her eyes, and resumed in a steady,
reverential voice:
“ ‘Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai, Azareel, an’ Shelemiah, Shemariah,
Shallum, Amariah, an’ Joseph. Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah,
Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, an’ Joel, Benaiah.
“ ‘All these hed taken strange wives, an’ some of them hed wives by whom
they hed children.’ ”
Her voice fell with the well-known droop that marked the close.
“Anyways,” she added, “I don’t know your uncle’s address. London is a
big place—considerable bigger nor Halifax; an’ he’ll allow we want to
beg of him. Never!” She shut the book with an emphatic bang, and Matt
rose from Sprat’s side and put it away.
“Of course, I sha’n’t go back to school any more,” he said, lightly,
remembering the point had not come up.
“Oh yes, you will.” His mother’s first instinct was always of
contradiction.
“I may get a job an’ raise a little money towards the mortgage.”
“What job kin you get in the winter?”
“Why, I kin winnow wheat some,” he reminded her, “an’ chop the
neighbors’ wood, an’ sort the vegetables in their cellars.”
“An’ whatever you make by thet,” she reminded him, “you’ll overbalance
by what you’d be givin’ away to the school-master. You’ve paid Alic
McTavit to the end o’ the season.”
“I guess you’re off the track this load o’ poles, mother,” said Matt,
amused by her muddled finance.
Yet it was the less logical if even more specious argument of completing
the snow months (for only young and useless children went to school in
the summer) that appealed to him. The human mind is strangely under the
sway of times and seasons, and the calendar is the stanchest ally of
sloth and procrastination, and so Mrs. Strang settled in temporary
triumph to her task of making new black mourning dresses for the girls
out of her old merino, and a few days afterwards, when Matt had carried
out his financial programme satisfactorily (except that Deacon Hailey’s
valuation did not afford the estimated surplus), he joined the other
children in their pilgrimage schoolward. The young Strangs amounted to a
procession. At its head came Matt, drawing Billy on a little hand-sled
by a breast-rope that came through the auger-holes in the peaks of the
runners, and the end of Sprat, who sneaked after the children, formed a
literal tail to it, till, arriving too far to be driven back, the animal
ran to the front in fearless gambollings. This morning the air was keen
and bright, the absence of wind preventing the real temperature from
being felt, and the sun lit up the white woods with cold sparkle. Ere
the children had covered the two miles most of them conceived such a new
appetite that their fingers itched to undo their lunch packets. A halt
was called, the bread-and-molasses was unwrapped, and while the future
was being recklessly sacrificed to the present by the younger savages,
Matt edified them by drawing on the snow with the point of Billy’s
crutch. They followed the development of these designs with vociferous
anticipation, one shouting, “A cow,” and another “Ole Hey” before more
than a curve was outlined. Matt always amused himself by commencing at
the most unlikely part of the figure, and working round gradually in
unexpected ways, so as to keep the secret to the last possible moment.
Sometimes, when it had been guessed too early, he would contrive to
convert a fox into a moose, his enjoyment of his dexterity
countervailing the twinge of his conscience. To-day all the animals were
tamer than usual. The boy drew listlessly, abstractedly, unresentful
when his secret was guessed in the first stages. And at last, half of
itself, the crutch began to shape a Face—a Face with shut eyes and
dripping hair, indefinably uncanny.
“Father!” cried Ted, in thick, triumphant tones, exultation tempered by
mastication. But the older children held their breath, and Teddy’s
exclamation was succeeded by an awesome silence. Suddenly a sagging
bough snapped and fell, the collie howled, and Matt, roused from his
reverie, saw that Billy’s face had grown white as the dead snow. The
child was palsied with terror; Matt feared one of his fits was coming
on. In a frenzy of remorse he blurred out the face with the crutch, and
hustled the sled forward, singing cheerily:
The children took up the burden, sifting themselves instinctively into
trebles and seconds in a harmony loud enough to rouse the hibernating
bear. Billy’s face returned to its normal pallor, and Matt’s to its
abstraction.
In the school-room—a bare, plastered room, cold and uninviting, with a
crowd of boys and girls at its notched pine desks—he continued pensive.
There was nothing to distract his abstraction, for even Ruth Hailey was
away. The geography lesson roused him to a temporary attention. London
flitted across his dreams—the Halifax of England, that mighty city in
which pictures were saleable for actual coin, and a mighty
picture-maker, the Matt Strang of England, was paid for play as if for
work. But the reading-book, with its menu of solid stories and essays,
peppered with religious texts, restored him to his reveries. McTavit,
who was shaping quills with his knife, called upon him to commence the
chapter; but he stared at the little pedagogue blankly, unaware of the
call. He was noting dreamily how his jagged teeth showed beneath the
thin, snuffy upper lip, and the trick the mouth had of remaining wide
open after it had ceased talking. He tried to analyze why McTavit was
not smiling. Months ago, seeking to make his figures smile, the boy had
discovered the rident effect of a wide mouth, and now he essayed to
analyze the subtle muscular movements that separate the sublime from the
ridiculous. Suddenly the haunting thought recurred to him with a new
application. Even McTavit’s freckled face would one day be frozen—those
twitching eyelids still, the thin wide lips shut forever. How long more
would he stride about his motley school-room, scattering blows and
information? Would he come to a stop in the school-room as the clock
sometimes did, grown suddenly silent, its oil congealed by the intense
cold? Or would Death find him in bed, ready stretched? And the restless
boys and girls around him—good God!—they, too, would one day be very
peaceful—mere blocks—Carroty Kitty, who was pinching Amy Warren’s arm,
and Peter Besant, who was throwing those pellets of bread, and even
Simon the Sneak’s wagging tongue would be still as a plummet. They would
all grow rigid alike, not all at once, nor in one way, but some very
soon, perhaps, and others when they were grown tall, and yet others when
they were bent and grizzled; some on sea and some on land, some in this
part of the map and some in that, some peacefully, some in pain;
petrified one by one, ruthlessly, remorselessly, impartially; till at
last all the busy hubbub was hushed, and of all that lively crew of
youngsters not one was left to feel the sun and the rain. The pity of it
thrilled him; even McTavit’s freckled face grew softer through the veil
of mist. Then, as his vision cleared, he saw the face was really darker:
strange emotions seemed to agitate it.
“So ye’re obstinate, are ye?” it screamed, with startling suddenness. At
the same instant something shining flew through the air, and, whizzing
past Matt’s ear, sent back a little thud from behind. Matt turned his
head in astonishment, and saw a penknife quivering in the wall. He
turned back in fresh surprise, and saw that McTavit’s face had changed,
lobster-like, from black to red, as its owner realized how near had been
Matt’s (and his own) escape.
“Eh, awake at last, sleepy-head,” he blustered. “There’s na gettin’ your
attention. Well, what are ye starin’ at? Are ye na goin’ to fetch me my
knife?”
“I’m not a dog,” answered Matt, sullenly.
“Then dinna bark! Ye think because ye’ve lost your father ye’re
preevileged—to lose your manners,” he added, with an epigrammatic
afterthought that mollified him more than an apology. “I’m verra
obleeged to you,” he concluded, with elaborate emphasis, as Simon the
Sneak handed him the knife.
“Now, then, sleepy-head,” he said again, “p’r’aps ye’ll read your
paragraph—that’s richt, Simon; show him the place.”
McTavit hailed from Cape Breton Isle, and was popularly supposed to
soliloquize in Gaelic. This hurt him when he proposed to the
postmistress, who had been to boarding-school in Truro. She declared she
would not have a man who did not speak good English.
“I do speak guid English,” he protested, passionately. “Mebbe not in the
school-room, when I’m talkin’ only to my pupils, and it dinna matter,
but in private and in society I’m most parteecular.”
McTavit was still a bachelor, and still spoke guid English. When the
reading-lesson had come to an end, Matt was left again to his own
thoughts, for while poor McTavit gave the juniors an exercise in grammar
which they alleviated by gum-chewing, Matt and a few other pupils were
allotted the tranquillizing task of multiplying in copy-books £3949
17s. 11¾d. by 7958. The sums were so colossal that Matt wondered
whether they existed in the world; and if so, how many pictures it would
be necessary to make to obtain them. An awful silence brooded over the
room, for when written exercises were on, the pupils took care to do
their talking silently, lest they should be suspected of copying, this
being what they were doing. There was a little museum case behind
McTavit’s desk, containing stuffed skunks and other animals and local
minerals lovingly collected by him—stilbite and heulandite and quartz
and amethyst and spar and bits of jasper and curiously clouded agate,
picked up near Cape Blomidon amid the débris of crumbling cliffs. At
such times McTavit would stand absorbed in the contemplation of his
treasures, his rod carelessly tucked under his arm, as one “the world
forgetting, by the world forgot.” Then the tension of silence became
positively painful, for the school-room had long since discovered that
the museum case was a reflector, and McTavit, though he prided himself
on the secret of his Argus eye, never caught any but novices not yet
initiated into the traditions. Imagine, therefore, the shock both to him
and the room, when to-day the acute stillness was broken by a loud cry
of “Bang! bang! bang!” An irresistible guffaw swept over the school, and
under cover of the laughter the cute and ready collogued as to
“answers.”
“Silence!” thundered McTavit. “Who was that?”
In the even more poignant silence of reaction a small still voice was
heard.
“Please, sir, it was me,” said Matt, remorsefully.
“Oh, it was you, was it? Then here’s bang! bang! bang! for ye.” And as
he spoke the angry little man accentuated each “bang” with a vicious
thwack. Then his eye caught sight of Matt’s copy-book. In lieu of ranged
columns of figures was a rough pen-and-ink sketch of a line of great
war-ships overhung by smoke-clouds, and apparently converging all their
batteries against one little ship, on whose deck a stalwart man stood
solitary, wrapped in a flag.
McTavit choked with added rage.
“D-defacin’ your books agen. What—what d’ye call that?” he spluttered.
“Blockade,” said Matt, sulkily.
“Blockhead!” echoed McTavit, and was so pleased with the universal
guffaw (whereof the cute and ready took advantage to compare notes as
before) that he contented himself with the one slash that was necessary
to drive the jest home. But it was one slash too much. Matt’s vocal
cannonade had been purely involuntary, but he was willing to suffer for
his over-vivid imagination. The last insult, however—subtly felt as an
injury to his dead father, too—set his blood on fire. He suddenly
remembered that this blockhead was, at any rate, the “head” of a family;
that he could no longer afford to be degraded before the little ones,
who were looking on with pain and awe. He rose and walked towards the
door.
“Where are ye goin’?” cried McTavit.
“To find Captain Kidd’s treasure. I’ve learned all I want to know,” said
Matt.
“Ye’d better come back.”
Matt turned, walked back to his seat, possessed himself of his
half-empty copy-book, and walked to the door.
“Good-bye, you fellers,” he said, cheerfully, as he passed out. The
girls he ignored.
McTavit gave chase with raised rod, regardless of the pandemonium that
rose up in his wake. Matt was walking slowly across the field, with
Sprat leaping up to lick his face. The dog had rejoined him. McTavit
went back, his rod hanging down behind.
Matt walked on sadly, his blood cooled by the sharp air. Another link
with the past was broken forever. He looked back at the simple wooden
school-house, with the ensign of smoke fluttering above its pitched
roof; kinder memories of McTavit surged at his heart—his little jests
at the expense of the boys, his occasional reminiscences of his native
Cape Breton and of St. John, New Brunswick, with its mighty cathedral,
the Life of Napoleon he had lent him last year, his prowess with line
and hook the summer he boarded with the Strangs in lieu of school-fees,
and then—with a sudden flash—came the crowning recollection of his
talent for cutting turreted castles, and tigers, and anything you
pleased, out of the close-grained biscuits and the chunks of
buckwheat-cake the children brought for lunch. Matt’s thoughts went back
to the beginnings of his school career, when McTavit had spurred him on
to master the alphabet by transforming his buckwheat-cake into any
animal from ass to zebra. He remembered the joy with which he had
ordered and eaten his first elephant. Pausing a moment to cut a stick
and drive Sprat off with it, he walked back into the wondering
school-room.
“Please, sir, I’m sorry I went away so rudely,” he said, “and I’ve cut
you a new birch rod.”
McTavit was touched.
“Thank you,” he said, simply, as he took it. “What’s the matter?” he
roared, seeing Simon the Sneak’s hand go up.
“Please, sir, hedn’t you better try if he hesn’t split it and put a hair
in?”
“Grand idea!” yelled McTavit, grimly. “How’s that?”
And the new birch rod made its trial slash at the raised hand.
Mrs. Strang was busy in Deacon Hailey’s kitchen. The providential death
of Mrs. Hailey had given her chores to do at the homestead; for female
servants—or even male—were scarce in the colony, and Ruth had been
brought up by her mother to play on the harpsichord.
When Mrs. Strang got home after a three mile walk, sometimes through
sleet and slush, she would walk up and down till the small hours,
spinning carded wool into yarn at her great uncouth wheel, and weeping
automatically at her loneliness, reft even of the occasional husband for
whom she had forsaken the great naval city of her girlhood, the
beautiful century-old capital. “It’s ’nough to make a body throw up the
position,” she would cry hysterically to the deaf rafters when the
children were asleep and only the wind was awake. But the droning wheel
went round just the same, steady as the wheel of time (Mrs. Strang
moving to and fro like a shuttle), till the task was completed, and
morning often found her ill-rested and fractious and lachrymose. Matt
would have pitied her more if she had pitied herself less. In the
outside world, however, she had no airs of martyrdom, bearing herself
genially and independently. At the “revivals” held in private houses she
was an important sinful figure, though neither Harriet nor Matt had yet
found grace or membership. She smiled a pleasant response to-night when
Deacon Hailey came in from the tannery and said “Good-evenin’.” It was a
large, low kitchen, heated by an American stove, with a gleaming dresser
and black wooden beams, from which hams hung. The deacon felt more
comfortable there than in the room in which Ruth was at that moment
engaged in tinkling the harpsichord, a room that contained other
archaic heirlooms: old china, a tapestry screen, scriptural mottoes
worked in ancestral hair, and a large colored lithograph of the Ark on
Mount Ararat, for refusing to come away from which Matt had once been
clouted by his mother before all the neighbors. The house was, indeed,
uncommonly luxurious, sheltered by double doors and windows, and warmly
wrapped in its winter cincture of tan-bark.
“An’ how’s Billy?” asked the deacon. “Some folks ’ud say how’s Billy’s
mother, but thet I can see fur myself—rael bonny and han’sum, thet’s a
fact. It’s sick folk es a Christian should inquire arter, hey?”
“Billy’s jest the same,” replied Mrs. Strang, her handsome face
clouding.
“No more fits, hey?”
“No; not for a long time, thank God. But he’ll never be straight again.”
“Ah, Mrs. Strang, we’re all crooked somehow. ’Tis the Lord’s will, you
may depend. Since my poor Susan was took, my heart’s all torn and
mangled; my heartstrings kinder twisted ’bout her grave. Ah! never kin I
forgit her. Love is love, I allus thinks. My time was spent so happy,
plannin’ how to make her happy—for ’tis only in makin’ others happy
that we git happy ourselves, hey? Now I hev no wife to devote myself to
my han’s are empty. I go ’bout lookin’ everyways fur Sunday.”
“Oh, but I’m sure you’ve never got a minute to spare.”
“You may depend,” said the deacon, proudly. “If I ain’t ’tarnally busy
what with the tannery an’ the grist-mill an’ the farm an’ the local
mail, it’s a pity. I don’t believe in neglectin’ dooty because your
heart’s bustin’ within.” He spat sorrowfully under the stove. “My motto
is, ‘Take kear o’ the minutes, and the holidays ’ll take kear o’
themselves.’ A man hes no time to waste in this oncivilized Province,
where stinkin’ Indians, that never cleared an acre in their lazy lives,
hev the right to encamp on a man’s land, an’ cut down his best firs an’
ashes fur their butter-butts and baskets, and then hev the imperence to
want to swop the identical same for your terbacco. It’s thievin’, I
allus thinks; right-down breakin’ o’ the Commandments, hey?”
“Well, what kin you expec’ from Papists?” replied Mrs. Strang. “Why, fur
sixpence the holy fathers forgive ’em all their sins.”
“ ‘Tain’t often they’ve got sixpence, hey? When ’lection-day comes round
agen I won’t vote fur no candidate that don’t promise to coop all them
greasy Micmacs up in a reservation, same es they do to Newfoundland.
They’re not fit to mix with hard-workin’ Christian folk. Them thar kids
o’ yourn, now, I hope they’re proper industrious. A child kin’t begin
too airly to larn field-work, hey?”
“Ah, they’re the best children in the world,” said Mrs. Strang. “They’ll
do anythin’ an’ eat anythin’ e’en a’most, an’ never a crost word; thet’s
a fact.”
The deacon suppressed a smile of self-gratulation. Labor was scarcer
than ever that year, and in his idea of marrying Harriet Strang, which
he was now cautiously about to broach, the possibility of securing the
gratuitous services of the elder children counted not a little,
enhancing the beauty of his prospective bride. He replied, feelingly:
“I’m everlastin’ glad to hear it, Mrs. Strang, for I know you kin’t
afford t’ employ outside labor. They’re goin’ to arx three shillin’s a
day this summer, the blood-suckers.”
“The laborer is worthy of his hire,” quoted Mrs. Strang.
“Yes; but he allus wants to be highered, hey? A seasonable joke ain’t
bad in its right place, I allus thinks. You needn’t allus be pullin’ a
long face. Thet Matt of yourn, now, I’ve seen him with a face like ole
Jupe’s fiddle, and walkin’ along es slow es a bark-mill turns a’most.”
Mrs. Strang sighed.
“Ah, you’re a good woman, Mrs. Strang. There’s no call to blush, fur
it’s true. D’ye think Deacon Hailey hesn’t got eyes for what’s under his
nose? The way you’re bringing up them thar kids is a credit to the
Province. I only hopes they’ll be proper thankful fur it when they’re
growed up. It makes my heart bleed a’most, I do declare. Many a time
I’ve said to myself, ‘Deacon Hailey, ’tis your dooty to do somethin’ fur
them thar orphans.’ Many a time I’ve thought I’d take the elder ones
off your han’s. There’s plenty o’ room in the ole farm—’twere built for
children, but there’s on’y Ruth left. An’ she isn’t my own, though
when you see a gal around from infancy you forgits you ain’t the father,
hey? What a pity poor Sophia’s two boys were as delicate as herself.”
“Sophia?” murmured Mrs. Strang, interrogatively.
“Thet was my fust wife afore you came to these parts. She died young,
poor critter. Never shall I forgit her. Ah, there’s nothin’ like fust
love, I allus thinks. If I hedn’t wanted to hev children to work fur, I
should never ha’ married agen. But it’s a selfish business, workin’ for
one’s own han’, I allus thinks, knowin’ thet when you die all you’ve
sweated fur ’ll go to strangers. An’ now thet I’ve on’y got one soul
dependent on me, I feels teetotally onswoggled. What do you say? s’pose
I relieve you of Matt—dooty don’t end with passin’ the bag round in
church, hey?—it’s on this airth that we’re called upon to sacrifice
ourselves—or better still—s’pose I take Harriet off your han’s?”
Mrs. Strang answered, hesitatingly: “It is rael kind o’ you, deacon.
But, of course, Harriet couldn’t live here with you.”
“Hey? Why not?”
“She’s too ole.”
“An’ how ole might she be?”
“Gittin’ on for seventeen.”
“I guess thet’s not too ole for me,” he said, with a guffaw.
Mrs. Strang paused, startled. The idea took away her breath. The deacon
smiled on. In the embarrassing silence the tinkle of Ruth’s harpsichord
sounded like an orchestra.
“You—would—raelly—like my Harriet?” Mrs. Strang said, at last.
“You may depend—I’ve thought a good deal of her, a brisk an’ handy
young critter with no boardin’-school nonsense ’bout her.” He worked his
quid carefully into the other cheek, complacently enjoying Mrs. Strang’s
overwhelmed condition, presumably due to his condescension. “Of course
there’s heaps of han’sum gals every ways, but booty is only skin-deep, I
allus thinks. She’s very young, too, but thet’s rather in her favor.
You can eddicate ’em if you take ’em young. Train up a child, hey?”
“But I’m afeared Harriet wouldn’t give up Abner Preep,” said Mrs.
Strang, slowly. “She’s the most obstinate gal, thet’s a fact.”
“Hey? She walks out with Abner Preep?”
“No—not thet! I’ve sot my face agin thet. But I know she wouldn’t give
him up, thet’s sartin.”
Ruth’s harpsichord again possessed the silence, trilling forth
“Doxology” with an unwarranted presto movement. Mrs. Strang went on:
“The time o’ your last muddin’ frolic she danced with him all night e’en
a’most and druv off home in his sleigh, an’ there ain’t a quiltin’ party
or a candy-pullin’ or an infare but she contrives to meet him.”
“Scendalous!” exclaimed the deacon.
“I don’t see nothin’ scendalous!” replied Mrs. Strang, indignantly. “The
young man wants to marry her genuine. ’Pears to me your darter is
more scendalous a’most, playin’ hymns as if they were hornpipes. I
didn’t arx my folks if I might meet my poor Davie; we went to dances and
shows together, and me a Baptist, God forgive me! And Harriet’s jest
like that—the hussy—she takes arter her mother.”
“But if you were to talk to her!” urged the deacon.
Mrs. Strang shook her head.
“She’d stab herself sooner.”
“Stab herself sooner’n give up Abner Preep!”
“Sooner’n marry any one else.”
The deacon paused to cut himself a wedge of tobacco imperturbably. There
was no trace of his disappointment visible; with characteristic
promptitude he was ready for the next best thing.
“Well, who wants her to marry anybody else?” he asked, raising his
eyebrows. “You don’t, do you?”
“N-n-o,” gasped Mrs. Strang, purpling.
“Thet’s right. Give her her head a bit. It don’t do to tie a grown-up
gal to her mammy’s apron-strings. You may take a horse to the water, but
you kin’t make her drink, hey? No, no, don’t you worry Harriet with
forcin’ husbands on her.”
“I—I—kinder—thought—” gasped Mrs. Strang, looking handsomer than
ever in the rosy glow of confusion.
“You kinder thought—” echoed Old Hey, spitting accurately under the
stove.
“Thet you wanted Harriet—”
“Thet’s so. I guessed she could live here more comfortable than to home.
I don’t ask no reward; ‘the widder and the orphan,’ as Scripter
says—hey?”
“You didn’t mean marriage?”
“Hey?” shouted the deacon. “Marriage? Me? Well, I swow! Me, whose Susan
hes only been dead five months! A proper thing to suspec’ me of! Why,
all the neighbors ’ud be sayin’, ‘Susan is hardly cold in her grave
afore he’s thinkin’ of another.’ ”
“I beg your pardin,” said the abashed woman.
“An’ well you may, I do declare! Five months arter the funeral, indeed!
Why, ten months at least must elapse! But you teetotally mistook my
meanin’, Mrs. Strang; it’s a woman I’d be wantin’—a woman with a
heart an’ a soul, not an unbroken filly. All I was a-thinkin’ of was,
Could thet thar Abner Preep clothe and feed your darter? But I ain’t the
man to bear malice; and till you kin feel you kin trust her to him or
some other man, my house is open to her. I don’t draw back my offer, and
when I made it I was quite aware you would hev to be on the spot, too,
to look arter her—hey?”
“Me?”
“Well, you’re not too ole, anyways.” And the deacon smiled again.
“A’ready you’re here all day e’en a’most.” Here he half knelt down to
attend to the stove, which was smoking very slightly. “It wouldn’t be
much of a change to sleep here, hey?”
“Oh, but you’re forgittin’ the other children, deacon.”
“Deacon Hailey ain’t the man to forgit anythin’, I guess,” he said, over
his shoulder. “Afore he talks he thinks. He puts everythin’ in the
tan-pit an’ lets it soak, hey? Is it likely I’d take you over here an’
leave the little uns motherless? I never did like this kind of stove.”
He fidgeted impatiently with the mechanism at the back, making the iron
rattle.
“I—I—don’t—understand,” faltered Mrs. Strang, her heart beginning to
beat painfully.
“How you do go on ter-day, Mrs. Strang! When I ain’t talkin’ o’ marriage
you jump at it, and when I am you hang back like a mare afore a six-foot
dyke. Ah! thet’s better,” and he adjusted the damper noisily, with a
great sigh of satisfaction.
“You want to marry me?” gasped Mrs. Strang. The dark, handsome
features flushed yet deeper; her bosom heaved.
“You’ve struck it! I do want ter, thet’s plain!” He rose to his feet,
and threw his head back and his chest forward. “You’ll allus find me
straightforward, Mrs. Strang. I don’t beat about the bush, hey? But I
shouldn’t hev spoke so prematoor if you hedn’t druv me to it by your
mistake ’bout Harriet. Es if I could marry a giddy young gal with her
head full o’ worldly thoughts! Surely you must hev seen how happy I’ve
been to hev you here, arnin’ money to pay off your mortgage. Not that
I’d a-called it in anyways! What’s thet thar little sum to me? But I was
thinkin’ o’ your feelin’s; how onhappy you would be to owe me the
money. And then thinkin’ how to do somethin’ for your children, I saw it
couldn’t be done without takin’ you into account. A mother clings to her
children. Nater is nater, I allus thinks. And the more I took you into
account, the more you figured up. There’s a great mother, I thinks;
there’s a God-fearin’ woman. An’ a God-fearin’ woman is a crown to her
husban’, hey? If ever I do bring myself to marry agen, thet’s the woman
for my money, I vow! When I say money, it’s on’y speakin’ in parables
like, ’cause I’m not thet sort o’ man. There air men as ’ud come to
you an’ say, ‘See here, Mrs. Strang, I’ve got fifty acres of fust-class
interval-land, an’ a thousand acres of upland and forest-land, an’
thirty head o’ cattle, an’ a hundred sheep a’most, an’ a tannery thet,
with the shoemaker’s shop attached, brings me in two hundred pound a
year, an’ a grist-mill, an’ I carry the local mail, an’ I’ve shares and
mortgages thet would make you open your eyes, I tell you, an’ I’m free
from encumbrances e’en a’most, whereas you’ve got half a dozen.’ But
what does Deacon Hailey say? He says, jest put all thet outer your mind,
Mrs. Strang, an’ think on’y o’ the man—think o’ the man, with no one
to devote himself to.”
He took her hand, and she did not withdraw it. Emotion made her
breathing difficult. In the new light in which he appeared to her she
saw that he was still a proper man—straight and tall and sturdy and
bright of eye, despite his grizzled beard and hair.
“An’ if you kin’t give him devotion in return, jest you say so plump;
take a lesson from his straightforwardness, hey? Don’t you think o’ your
mortgage, or his money-bags, ’cause money ain’t happiness, hey? An’
don’t you go sacrificin’ yourself for your children, thinkin’ o’ poor
little Billy’s future, ’cause I don’t hold with folks sacrificin’
themselves wholesale; self-preservation is the fust law of nater, hey?
an’ it wouldn’t be fair to me. All ye hev to arx yourself is jest
this: Kin you make Deacon Hailey happy in his declinin’ years?” He drew
himself up to his full height without letting go her hand, and his eyes
looked into hers. “Yes, I say declinin’ years—there’s no deception, the
’taters air all up to sample. How ole might you think me?”
“Fifty,” she said, politely.
“Nearer sixty!” he replied, triumphantly. “But I hev my cold bath every
mornin’—I’m none o’ your shaky boards that fly into etarnal bits at the
fust clout, hey?”
“But you hev been married twice,” she faltered.
“So will you be—when you marry me, hey?” And the deacon lifted her
chin playfully. “We’re neither on us rough timber—we’ve both hed our
wainy edges knocked off, hey? My father hed three wives—and he’s still
hale and hearty—a widower o’ ninety. Like father like son, hey? He’s a
deacon, too, down to Digby.”
As Deacon Hailey spoke of his father he grew middle-aged to Mrs.
Strang’s vision. But she found nothing to reply, and her thoughts
drifted off inconsequently on the rivulet of sacred music.
“But Ruth won’t like it,” she murmured at last.
“Hey? What’s Ruth got to say in the matter? I guess Ruth knows her fifth
commandment, an’ so do I. My father is the on’y person whose blessin’ I
shall arx on my ’spousals. I allus make a pint o’ thet, you may depend.”
The pathetic picture of Deacon Hailey beseeching his father’s blessing
knocked off ten years more from his age, and it was a young and ardent
wooer whose grasp tightened momently on Mrs. Strang’s hand.
“We might go to see him together,” he said. “It’s an everlastin’ purty
place, Digby.”
“I’d rayther see Halifax,” said Mrs. Strang, weakly. In the whirl of her
thoughts Ruth’s tinkling tune seemed the only steady thing in the
universe. Oh, if Ruth would only play something bearing on the
situation, so that Heaven might guide her in this sudden and fateful
crisis!
“Halifax, too, some day,” said the deacon, encouragingly, laying his
disengaged hand caressingly on her hair. “We’ll go to the circus
together.”
She withdrew herself spasmodically from his touch.
“Don’t ask me!” she cried; “you’re Presbyterian!”
“Well, and what was your last husban’?”
“Don’t ask me. Harriet and Matt air ongodly ’nough as it is; they’ve
neither on ’em found salvation.”
“Well, I won’t interfere with your doctrines, you bet. Freedom o’
conscience, I allus thinks. We all sarve the same Maker, hey? I guess
you’re purty reg’lar at our church, though.”
“Thet’s God’s punishment on me for runnin’ away from Halifax, where I
hed a church of my own to go to, but he never cared nuthin’ ’bout the
’sential rite, my poor Davie. I ought to ha’ been expelled from
membership there and then, thet’s a fact, but the elders were merciful.
Sometimes I think ’tis the old French nater that makes me backslide; my
grandfather came from Paris in 1783, at the end o’ the Amur’can war, and
settled to St. Margaret’s Bay; but then he married into a god-fearin’
German family that emigrated there the same time a’most, and that ought
to ha’ made things straight agen.”
Mrs. Strang talked on, glad to find herself floating away from the
issue. But the deacon caught her by the hand again and hauled her back.
“There won’t be no backslidin’ in Deacon Hailey’s household, you may
depend,” he said. “When a woman hes a godly stay-to-home husband, Satan
takes to his heels. It’s widders and grass-widders es he flirts with,
hey?”
Mrs. Strang colored up again, and prayed silently for help from the
harpsichord.
“I kin’t give you an answer yet,” she said, feebly.
Old Hey slowly squirted a stream of tobacco-juice into the air as
imperturbably as a stone fountain figure.
“I don’t want your answer yet. Didn’t I tell you I couldn’t dream of
marryin’ agen for ages? It don’t matter your bein’ in a hurry ’cause
your pardner left you three years back, but I hev the morals o’ the
township to consider; it’s our dooty in life to set a good example to
the weaker brethren, I allus thinks. Eight months at least must elapse!
I on’y spoke out now ’cause o’ your onfortunate mistake ’bout Harriet,
and all I want is to be sure thet when I do come to ask you in proper
form and in doo course, you won’t say ‘no.’ ”
Mrs. Strang remained silent. And the harpsichord was silent too. Even
that had deserted her; its sound might have been tortured into some
applicability, but its silence could be construed into nothing, unless
it was taken to give consent. And then all at once Ruth struck a new
chord. Mrs. Strang strained her ears to catch the first bar. The deacon
could not understand the sudden gleam that lit up her face when the
instrument broke into the favorite Nova Scotian song, “The Vacant
Chair!” At last Heaven had sent her a sign; there was a vacant chair,
and it was her mission to fill it.
“Well, is thet a bargen?” asked the deacon, losing patience.
“If you’re sure you want me,” breathed Mrs. Strang.
In a flash the deacon’s arms were round her and his lips on hers. She
extricated herself almost as quickly by main force.
“ ‘Twarn’t to be yet,” she cried, indignantly.
“Of course not, Mrs. Strang,” retorted the deacon, severely. “On’y you
asked if I was sure, and I allowed I’d show you Deacon Hailey was
genuine. It’s sorter sealin’ the bargen, hey? I couldn’t let you
depart in onsartinty.”
“Well, behave yourself in future,” she said, only half mollified, as she
readjusted her hair, “or I’ll throw up the position. I guess I’ll be
off now,” and she took bonnet and mantle from a peg.
“Not in anger, Mrs. Strang, I hope. ‘Let all bitterness be put away from
you,’ hey? Thet thar han’sum face o’ yourn warn’t meant for
thunder-clouds.”
He hastened to help her on with her things, and in the process effected
a reconciliation by speaking of new ones—”store clothes”—that would
set off her beauty better. Mrs. Strang walked airily through the slushy
forest road as on a primrose path. She was excited and radiant—her
troubles were rolled away, and her own and her children’s future
assured, and Heaven itself had nodded assent. Her lonely heart was to
know a lover’s tenderness again; it was swelling now with gratitude that
might well blossom into affection. How gay her home should be with
festive companies, to be balanced by mammoth revivalist meetings! She
would be the centre of hospitality and piety for the country-side.
But as she neared the house—which seemed to have run half-way to meet
her—the primroses changed back to slush, and her face to its habitual
gloom.
Matt and Harriet were alone in the kitchen. The girl was crocheting, the
boy daubing flowers on a board, which he slid under the table as he
heard his mother stamping off the wet snow in the passage. Mrs. Strang
detected the board, but she contented herself by ordering him to go to
bed. Then she warmed her frozen hands at the stove and relapsed into
silence. Twenty times she opened her lips to address Harriet, but the
words held back. She grew angry with her daughter at last.
“You’re plaguy onsociable to-night, Harriet,” she said, sharply.
“Me, mother?”
“Yes, you. You might tell a body the news.”
“There’s no news to Cobequid. Ole Jupe’s come back from fiddlin’ at a
colored ball way down Hants County. He says two darkies hed a fight over
the belle.”
Harriet ceased, and her needles clicked on irritatingly. Mrs. Strang
burst forth:
“You might ask a body the news.”
“What news can there be down to Ole Hey’s?” Harriet snapped.
“Deacon Hailey,” began Mrs. Strang, curiously stung by the familiar
nickname, and pricked by resentment into courage; then her voice failed,
and she concluded, almost in a murmur, “is a-thinkin’ of marryin’ agen.”
“The ole wretch!” ejaculated Harriet, calmly continuing her crocheting.
“He’s not so ole!” expostulated Mrs. Strang, meekly.
“He’s sixty! Why, you might as well think o’ marryin’! The idea!”
“Oh, but I’m on’y thirty-five, Harriet!”
“Well, it’s jest es ole. Love-makin’ is on’y for the young.”
“Thet’s jest where you’re wrong, Harriet. Youth is enjoyment enough of
itself. It is the ole folks that hev nothin’ else to look fur thet want
to be loved. It’s the on’y thing thet keeps ’em from throwin’ up the
position, an’ they marry sensibly. Young folks oughter wait till
they’ve got sense.”
“The longer they wait the less sense they’ve got! If two people love
each other they ought to marry at once, thet’s a fact.”
“Yes; if they’re two ole sensible people.”
“I’m tar’d o’ this talk o’ waitin’,” said Harriet, petulantly. “How ole
were you when you ran away with father?”
“You ondecent minx!” ejaculated Mrs. Strang.
“You weren’t no older nor me,” persisted Harriet, unabashed.
“Yes, but I lived in a great city. I saw young men of all shapes and
sizes. I picked from the tree—I didn’t take the fust thet fell at my
feet; an’ how you can look at an onsightly critter like Abner Preep! I’d
rayther see you matched with Roger Besant, for though his left shoulder
is half an inch higher than the right a’most, from carrying heavy
timbers in the ship-yard, he don’t bend his legs like a couple o’ broken
candles.”
“Don’t talk to me o’ Roger Besant—he’s a toad. It’s Abner I love. I
don’t kear ’bout his legs; his heart’s in the right place!”
“You mean he’s give it to you!”
“I reckon so!”
“An’ you will fly in my face?”
“I must,” said Harriet, sullenly, “if you don’t take your face out o’
the way.”
“You imperent slummix! An’ you will leave your mother alone?”
“Es soon es Abner kin build a house.”
“Then if you marry Abner Preep,” said Mrs. Strang, rising in all the
majesty of righteous menace, “I’ll marry Deacon Hailey.”
“What!” Harriet also rose, white and scared.
“You may depend! I’m desprit! You kin try me too far. You know the wust,
now. I will take my face out o’ the way, you onnatural darter! I will
take it to one thet ’preciates it.”
There was a painful silence. Mrs. Strang eyed her daughter nervously.
Harriet seemed dazed.
“You’d marry Ole Hey?” she breathed at last.
“You’d marry young Preep!” retorted the mother
“I’m a young gal!”
“An’ I’m an ole woman! Two ole folks is es good a match es two young
uns.”
“Ah, but you don’t allow Abner and me is a good match!” said Harriet,
eagerly.
“If you allow the deacon and me is.”
Their eyes met.
“You see, there’s the young uns to think on,” said Mrs. Strang. “If you
were to go away, how could I get along with the mortgage?”
“Thet’s true,” said Harriet, relenting a little.
“An’ if we were all to go to the farm, there’d be the house for you and
Abner.”
Harriet flushed rosily.
“An’ mebbe the deacon wouldn’t be hard with the mortgage!”
“Mebbe,” murmured Harriet. Her heart went pit-a-pat. But suddenly her
face clouded.
“But what will Matt say?” she half whispered, as if afraid he might be
within hearing. “I guess he’ll be riled some.”
“Oh, he’ll be all right if you kinder break the news to him an’ explain
the thing proper. I reckon he won’t take to the deacon at first.”
“The deacon! It’s Abner I’m thinkin’ on!”
“Abner! What does it matter what he thinks of Abner? ’Tain’t es if Matt
was older nor you. He’s got nothin’ to say in the matter, I do allow.”
“But he calls him Bully Preep, and says he used to wallop him at
McTavit’s.”
“And didn’t he desarve it?” asked Mrs. Strang, indignantly.
“He says he won’t hev him foolin’ aroun’. He calls him a mean skunk.”
“And who’s Matt, I should like to know, to pass his opinions on his
elders an’ betters? You jest take no notice of his ’tarnation imperence
and he’ll dry up. It’s hevin’ a new father he’ll be peaked about. Thet’s
why you’d better do the talkin’ to Matt!”
“Then you’ll hev to tell him ’bout Abner,” bargained Harriet.
But neither had the courage.
The old year had rolled off into the shadows, and the new had spun round
as far as April. Spring came to earth for a few hours a day, and behind
her Winter, whistling, clanged his iron gates, refreezing the morass to
which she had reduced the roads. Even at noon there was no genial
current in the air, unless you took the sheltered side of hills and
trees, and found Spring nestling shyly in windless coverts, though many
a se’n-night had still to pass ere, upon some more shaded hummock, the
harbinger Mayflower would timidly put forth a white bud laden with
delicate odor. Everywhere, down the hills and along the tracks, in every
rut and hollow, the sun saw a thousand dancing rivulets gleam and run,
and great freshets stir up the sullen, ice-laden rivers to sweep away
dams and mills, but the moon looked down on a white country demurely
asleep.
Early in the month, Matt having previously said farewell in earnest to
McTavit’s school-room, left home for the spring sugaring. Billy, alas!
could not accompany him as of yore, so Sprat was left behind, too, by
way of compensation to Billy. For company and co-operation, Matt took
with him an Indian boy whose Christian name (for he was a Roman
Catholic) was Tommy.
Matt had picked up Tommy in the proximate woods, where the noble savage
ran wild in cast-off Christian clothes. Tommy belonged to a tribe that
had recently pitched its wigwams in the backlands, a mile from Cobequid
Village. To Mrs. Strang, who despatched the sugaring expedition and
provisioned it, he was merely “a filthy brat who grinned like a Chessy
cat,” but to Matt he incarnated the poetry of the primitive, and even
spoke it. Not that Matt had more than a few words of Algonquinese, but
Tommy broke English quite unhesitatingly; and his remarks, if terse and
infrequent, were flowery and sometimes intelligible. They generally ran
backward, after the manner of Micmac, which is as highly inflected as
Greek or Hebrew. For the admiring Matt there was an atmosphere of
romance about the red man which extended even to the red boy, and he had
set himself to win Tommy’s heart in exchange for tobacco, which was
itself obtained by another piece of barter. Tommy smoked a clay pipe,
being early indurated to hardship, after the Spartan custom of his
tribe. There were sketches of Tommy, colored like the Red Sea or the Bay
of Fundy, in Matt’s secret gallery. Tommy was easy to do, owing to his
other tribal habit of sitting silent for hours without moving a muscle.
It was only rarely that Matt could extract from him native legends about
Glooscap, the national hero, and Mundu, the devil.
The two boys set out together for a rock-maple district five miles off,
drawing their impedimenta heaped high on a large sled. They were
fortified for a three weeks’ stay. Mrs. Strang had baked them several
batches of bread, and with unwonted enthusiasm supplied them with
corn-meal for porridge, and tea and sugar, and butter and molasses, and
salt pork and beef, all stowed into the barrel that would come home
full of sugar. Their kitchen paraphernalia embraced a teapot and a
teakettle, a frying-pan and a pot, while their manufacturing apparatus
comprised tin pails, Yankee buckets, dippers, and axes. Guns,
ammunition, and blankets completed their equipment. Matt’s painting
materials were stowed away on his person unobtrusively.
They took possession of a disused log-cabin, formerly the property of a
woodsman, as the advertising agent would have put it, had he penetrated
to the backwoods. Possibly under his roseate vision it might have
expanded into a detached villa without basement, or a bungalow standing
in its own grounds, but a non-professional eye would have seen nothing
but four walls and a pitched roof with a great square hole in it to let
the light in and the smoke out. These walls were built of unhewn logs in
their rough, natural bark. The floor was even more primitive, being
simply the soil. It was necessary to thaw it by lighting the fire on it
before the stakes could be driven in to support the cross-pieces from
which the sugar-pot depended.
Then the boys chopped down a vast store of hardwood for fuel, and lanced
the tall maples, catching their blood in birch-bark troughs through pine
spills. They emptied the troughs into pails, and carried the sap to
their cabin, and boiled it in the big pot, and cooled it again to sugar.
A halcyon fortnight passed, full of work, yet leaving Matt leisure for
daubing boyish fancies on pieces of birch-bark to cover withal the
wooden walls of his home, which the aforesaid advertiser might not
unwarrantably have described as a studio with a novel top-light in a
quiet neighborhood. Possibly Matt’s mural decorations would have
enhanced the description. They comprised a fantastic medley of angels
with faces more or less like Ruth Hailey, and devils fashioned more or
less after the similitude of Bully Preep, and strange composite animals
more or less like nothing on earth, moving amid hills and ships and
lurid horizons. One night Matt sat by the fire in the centre of the hut
painting a more realistic picture and meditating a weeding of his
gallery. There had been no sap running that day, a sudden return of
winter had congealed it, and so this extra artistic output during the
comparatively idle hours had almost exhausted his hanging-space. While
he painted he gave an eye to the seething pot in which the sap must
change to molasses, and then thicken to maple syrup, and then to maple
wax ere it was ladled into the birch-bark dishes and set to cool outside
the hut. A piece of fat pork hanging from a hook in the cross-piece just
touched the surface of the sap and prevented it from effervescing. Tommy
was asleep on a heap of fir boughs in a corner, for the boys took it in
turn to watch the pot and replenish the fire. The soundness of Tommy’s
sleep to-night astonished Matt, for usually the young Micmac slept the
sleep of the vigilant, a-quiver at the slightest unwonted sound. Matt
did not know that his ingenious partner had just completed the
distillation of a crude rum from a portion of sap arrested at the
molasses stage, and that he had imbibed gloriously thereof.
Matt’s painting-stool was an inverted bucket. He wore a fur cap with
pendent earlaps that gave him an elderly appearance; and his feet were
cased in moccasins, made from the green shank of a cow. For some time he
painted steadily, trying to reproduce the picturesque interior of the
cabin with his rude home-made colors and brush. The air was warm and
charged with resinous odors. The camp-fire burned brightly, the hardwood
flaming without snapping or crackling, with only the soft hissing and
spurting of liberated gases; the fire purred as if enjoying the warmth.
The yellow billows curled round the bulging bottom of the three-legged
pot, and sent up delicate spirals of blue smoke, tinged below with
flame, to mingle with the white sappy steam that froze as soon as it got
outside and disentangled itself from the wood smoke by falling as
hoar-frost. At moments when all this smoke lifted Matt could see the
stars shining on him through the hole in the roof, stainless and far
away in a deep blue patch of heaven. Somehow they made him dissatisfied
with his work; they seemed like calm, sovran eyes watching his puny
efforts to reproduce, with his pitiable palette, the manifold hues and
shades of the simple scene around him—the greasy copper of the Indian
boy’s face, glistening against the yellow blanket which covered him and
the olive-green boughs on which he lay; the motley firewood, the dull
brown tones of the spruce branches, the silver of birch, the yellow of
beech; the empty birch-bark troughs, silver-white outside and dull
salmon within, touched with tints of light gold or gray. Why, there was
a whole color-scheme of subdued rich tints in the moss alone—the dead
dry moss that filled up the uneven rifts in the log-roof, and gleamed
with a mottle of green and olive and russet. He threw down his brush in
despair, longing for the rich, thick paints he vaguely imagined his
uncle in London must have—real paints that did not fade as his did,
despite the gums he mixed experimentally with them—pure reds and blues
and greens and yellows, capable of giving real skies and real grass and
real water, and of being mixed into every shade of color the heart could
desire. Then he slipped out through the door, shutting it quickly to
prevent the hut filling with smoke. The ground was white under a
brilliant moon, with here and there patches of silver that wellnigh
sparkled. Overhead mystic pallid-gold rays of northern light palpitated
across the clear star-strewn heaven. The trees showed more sombre, the
birches and maples bare of leafage, the spruces and hemlocks and all the
tangled undergrowth reduced to a common gray in the moonlight. Here and
there a brown hummock stood solemnly with bared head. And from all this
sleeping woodland rose a restless breathing, that incessant stir of a
vast alien, self-sufficient life, the rustle of creatures living and
moving and having their being in another world than the human, in that
dim, remote, teeming underworld of animal life, with its keen joys and
transient pains. And every now and then a definite sound disengaged
itself from the immense murmur: a chickadee chirped, a black-headed
snow-bird twittered, a cat-owl hooted, a rabbit ran from the underwood,
as faintly distinguishable from the snow in his white winter coat as he
had been from the dead leaves over which he pattered in autumn in his
gray homespun.
Matt stood leaning against the door, absorbed into the multifarious
night, and hardly conscious of the cold; then he went in, thrilling with
vague, sweet emotion, and vast manful resolutions that cast out despair.
But he did not take up his brush again. He sat down before the fire in
dreamy bliss; all the asperities of his existence softened by its
leaping light, and even that dead face of his father thawed into the
pleasant motions of life. The past shone through a mellow, rosy mist,
and the future was like the scarlet sunrise of the forest, flaming from
splendor to splendor—a future of artistic achievement upon which Ruth
Hailey’s face smiled applause; a future of easy, unsought riches which
banished the gloom upon his mother’s.
And then all of a sudden he caught sight of Tommy’s clay pipe, fallen
from his mouth on to the blanket; and an unforeseen desire to smoke it
and put the seal on this hour of happiness invaded the white boy’s
breast. He rose and picked it up. It was full of charred tobacco. The
craving to light it and taste its mysterious joys grew stronger. His
mother had sternly forbidden him to smoke, backing up her prohibition by
the text in Revelation—“And he opened the bottomless pit, and there
arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the
sun and air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.” But now he
remembered he had left school; he was a man. He put the stem into his
mouth and plucked a brand from the fire, then stood for a moment
irresolute. He wondered if any instinct warned his mother of what he was
doing, and from that thought it was an easy transition to wondering what
she was doing. His fancy saw her still running backward and forward,
working that great buzzing wheel with stern, joyless face. He put down
his pipe.
There was a fresh element in his dreamy bliss as he resumed his seat
before the fire, a sense of something high and tranquillizing like the
clear stars, yet touching the spring of tears. His head drooped in the
drowsy warmth, he surrendered himself to voluptuous sadness, and the
outside world grew faint and fading.
When he looked up again his heart almost ceased to beat. At his side
loomed a strange female figure, her head covered with a drab shawl that
hid her face. She stood in great snow-shoes as on a pair of pedestals,
and the log walls repeated her form in contorted shadow.
The gentle purring of the fire, the Indian boy’s breathing, sounded
painfully in the weird stillness. From without came the manifold rustle
of the night.
“Who are you?” he whispered.
“Give me a glass of water,” she replied, sweetly.
“I hev’n’t any water,” he breathed.
“I am afire with thirst,” she cried. “Quench me! quench me!” Her shawl
slipped back, revealing a face of wild, uncanny beauty crowned with an
aureola of golden hair. But the awesome thrill that had permeated Matt’s
being passed into one of æsthetic pleasure mingled with astonished
recognition.
“Why, it’s Mad Peggy!” he murmured.
“Aye, it’s the Water-Drinker!” assented the beautiful visitor, in soft,
musical tones, thereupon crying out, “Water, water, for God’s sake!”
“I hev’n’t any water, I tell you. Not till I git some from the spring in
the mornin’. Hev some sap!”
And Matt, starting to his feet, plunged the dipper into the barrel of
raw sap that stood on the floor. Mad Peggy seized it greedily and
drained the great ladle to the dregs. Then she filled it again with
delicious fluid, and then again, and yet again, leaving Matt aghast at
her gigantic capacity. She was filling the dipper a fourth time, but he
pulled it out of her hand, fearing she would do herself a mischief.
“I’m so thirsty!” she whispered, plaintively, in her musical accents.
“What are you doin’ in the woods at this hour?” answered Matt, sternly.
“I’m looking for Peter. What a bonny fire!” And she bent over it,
holding out her long, white hands to the flames.
Matt divined vaguely that Peter must be the sweetheart whose desertion
had crazed the poor creature. It was reported in Cobequid Village that
the handsome German immigrant who had been betrothed to her had gone off
forever on the pretext of “sugaring” when he learned that she was one of
the Water-Drinkers—the unhappy family whose ancestor had refused a cup
of cold water to a strange old woman, who thereupon put the curse upon
him and his descendants that they

might drink water and drink water and never quench their thirst. Peggy
was reputed quite harmless.
“You haven’t seen Peter, have you?” she cooed, suddenly.
“No,” replied Matt, with a fresh, nervous thrill. “But this is not a
night for you to be out and about. It’s bitter cold.”
“It’s bitter cold,” she repeated, “bitter cold for an old man like you,
but not for a girl like me, loved by the handsomest young fellow in the
Province; the heart within me keeps me warm, always warm and thirsty.
Give me more water.”
“No, you’ve hed ’nough,” said Matt. “It’s a shame your folks don’t look
arter you better.”
“Look after me! They’re all up at the ball, the heartless creatures; but
I saw the weddings, both of them, in spite of them all, and I think it’s
high time Peter came back from the sugaring to our wedding, and I’ve
come to tell him so. This is the spot he used to sugar at. Are you sure
you haven’t seen him? You are his partner; confess, now,” she wound up,
cajolingly, turning her lovely face towards his troubled gaze.
“Can’t you see I’m only a boy?” he replied.
“Nonsense. You’re not a boy. Boys always call after me and pull my
shawl. I know all the boys.”
Matt felt the moisture gathering afresh under his eyelids.
“What’s your name, then?” she went on, sweetly.
“Matt,” he murmured.
“Ah, mad!” she cried, in ecstasy. “We are cousins—I knew it! That’s
what they call me.”
Her wild eyes shone in the firelight. The boy shuddered.
“Not mad, but Matt!” he corrected her.
“Ah, yes, Mad Matt! Cousins! Mad Peggy—Mad Matt!”
“I’m not mad,” he protested, feebly.
“Yes, yes, you are!” she cried, passionately. “I can see it in your
face. And yet you won’t give me a cup of water.”
“You’ve drunk ’nough,” said the boy, soothingly.
“Oh, what lovely little devils,” she exclaimed, catching sight of the
wall decorations. “Do you see devils, too? Didn’t I say we were
cousins? Why, there’s one of the bridegrooms—ha! ha! ha! I guess he
didn’t show the cloven hoof this morning.”
“Which is the bridegroom?” asked Matt, piqued into curiosity.
“There—there he is! There is the boy!” She pointed to the best portrait
of Bully Preep. “He always called after me, the little devil.”
Matt’s heart beat excitedly, his face crimsoned. But his strange
visitor’s next words threw him back into uneasy chaos.
“Oh, but everybody is saying how scandalous it is! with his wife only
six months in her grave. Look how long Peter and I have waited. Most of
the girls in the village get engaged half a dozen times; they don’t know
what love is, they don’t know anything, they’ve got no education. But
I’ve only been engaged once, and I’m so thirsty. And you’ve got her too,
the little angel! Everybody is saying how hard it is for her! And yet
they all go to the ball. May they dance till they drop, the hypocrites!”
“What are you sayin’?” faltered Matt. “Hard for Ruth Hailey? Why, she’s
only a little girl.”
“She isn’t a little girl. Little girls run after me. I know all the
little girls. She’s a little angel! Just as you’ve pictured her. Give me
some more water.”
This time Matt surrendered the dipper to her.
“Thank you, Cousin Matt,” she said, and drank feverishly. But seeing
that she was about to dip again, he placed himself between her and the
barrel. She turned away with a marvellously dexterous movement
considering her cumbrous foot-gear, and dipped the ladle into the
seething caldron instead. But Matt seized her arm and stayed her from
extracting the dipper.
“You’ll scald yourself,” he said.
“Let go my arm,” she cried, threateningly. “How dare you touch me—you
are not Peter!”
“You mustn’t drink any more.”
“You are very cruel!” she moaned. “Who is that sleeping there? Perhaps
it is Peter. I will wake him up; he will give me water. I am so
thirsty.” She moaned and crooned over the three-legged caldron, stirring
the sap feebly with the ladle in her efforts to wrest herself free, and
the white steam curled about her face, and gave her the air of a young,
beautiful witch bent over a caldron. Matt forgot everything except that
he would like to make a picture of her as she appeared now.
“You’d best go to sleep,” he said at last, awakening to a remembrance of
the strange situation. “There’s my bed—those fir-boughs—you kin lie
down there till the mornin’, and I’ll cover you with my blanket.”
“I want water,” she crooned.
“You kin’t get it,” said Matt.
“Then may the curse light on you and yours,” she cried, stirring the sap
more fiercely in her struggle, while the vapor and the wood smoke rose
in denser volumes around her. “May you thirst and thirst, and never be
satisfied! And that is to be your fate, Cousin Matt. I read it in your
face, in your eyes. Never to quench your thirst—never, never, never! To
thirst and thirst and thirst for everything, and never to be satisfied,
never to have anything you want. Mad Matt and Mad Peggy—cousins, you
and I! Ha! ha! ha!” Her laugh of malicious glee made the boy’s blood run
cold. From without came the answering screech of a wild-cat.
“Lie down and rest!” repeated Matt, imperatively.
“What! stay here with you? No, no, no, Cousin Matt. I know what you
want. You want to paint me and put me on the wall among the devils! No,
no, I must be off to find Peter. I shall stay with him in his cabin.”
Her grip of the dipper relaxed; it reeled against the side of the pot.
She turned away, and Matt let go her arm and watched her, spellbound.
She drew the thick dun shawl over her head, again veiling the glory of
the golden hair, and almost brought the edges together over her sad
beautiful face, so that the eyes alone shone out with unearthly
radiance. Then she moved slowly towards the door and thrust it open, and
the wind came in, and filled the entire cabin with heavy, acrid smoke,
which got into Matt’s eyes and throat, and woke even the Indian boy, who
sat up choking and rubbing his black, beady eyes.
“Dam door shuttum!” he cried, with unusual vehemence.
The words broke Matt’s spell. He rushed to the door, but his smarting
eyes could detect no gray-shawled figure gliding among the gray trunks.
He closed the door, wondering if he had been dreaming.
“ ‘Tain’t your turn yet, Tommy,” he said, waving away the smoke with his
hand, and Tommy fell back asleep, as if mesmerized. Matt was as relieved
at not having to explain as at Tommy’s momentary wakefulness, which had
braced him against the superstitious awe that had been invading him
while the mad beauty cursed him with that sweet voice of hers that no
anger could make harsh. He thought of the apparition with pity, mingled
with a thrill of solemn adoration; she had for him the beauty and
wildness of the elemental, like the sky or the sea. And yet she had left
in him other feelings—not only the doubt of her reality, but an uneasy
stirring of apprehensions. Was there nothing but insane babble in this
talk of Ruth Hailey and Abner Preep? A fear he could not define weighed
at his heart. Even if he had been dreaming, if he had drowsed over the
fire—as he must in any case have done not to have heard the scrape and
clatter of snow-shoes entering—the dream portended something evil. But,
no! it was not a dream. Assuredly the sap in the barrel had sunk to a
lower level. With a new thought he lit a resinous bough and slipped out
quickly and examined the dry stiff snow. The double trail of departing
snow-shoes was manifest, meandering among the bark dishes and
irregularly intersecting the trail of arrival. The radiant moonlight
falling through the thin bare maple-boughs made his torch superfluous,
except in the fuscous glade of leafy evergreens, along which he followed
the giant footmarks for some little distance. He paused, leaning against
a tall hemlock. Doubt was impossible. He had really entertained a
visitor. Not seldom in former years had he entertained visitors who came
to camp out for the night, which they made uproarious. But never had his
hut sheltered so strange a guest. He was moved at the thought of her
drifting across the wastes of snow like some fallen spirit. He looked up
and abstractedly watched a crow sleeping with its head under its wing on
the top of the hemlock, then his vision wandered to the flashing
streamers of northern light, and, higher still, to those keen depths of
frosty sky where the stars stood beautiful, and they drew up his
thoughts yearningly to the infinite spaces. Something cried within him
for he knew not what—save that it was very great and very majestic and
very beautiful, mystically blending the luminousness of light and color
with the scent of flowers and the troubled sweetness of music; and at
the back of his dim, delicious craving for it was a haunting certainty
that he would never reach up to it, never, never. The prophecy of mad
Peggy recurred to the boy like a cutting blast of wind. Was it true,
then, that he would thirst and thirst, and nothing ever quench his
thirst? He held up his torch yearningly to the stars, while the night
moaned around him, and the flaring pinewood cast a grotesque shadow of
him on the pure white snow, an uncouth image that danced and leered as
in mockery.
As soon as he could get away next morning Matt drew on his oversocks and
started for home, racked by indefinite fears. He had not troubled to
rouse Tommy to take his watch, for he knew he himself would not sleep a
wink, and it seemed a pity to disturb so deep and healthy a slumber; so
he bustled about to blur his thoughts, and had breakfast ready an hour
after sunrise, which his anxiety did not prevent him from observing. To
see sky and forest take fire in gradual glory was an ecstasy
transcending the apprehensions of the moment.
Tommy had asked no questions during the morning meal, and made no
complaints about Matt’s failure to rouse him; but on being apprised of
his companion’s intended journey, he had pointed to the scanty
wood-pile—a reminder that had delayed Matt by a couple of hours spent
in felling and chopping up a straddle or two. But at last he got away,
Tommy undertaking, in a minimum of monosyllables, to attend to
everything else. Matt felt afresh the strength and stability of Tommy.
Tommy was like Sprat—firm, faithful, and uninquisitive.
He had five miles of clogged walking before him, but he made fairly good
progress, for he was unencumbered by snow-shoes, having a light step and
an instinct for hollows and drifts, and his oversocks, which reached
beyond the knee, kept out the snow when he trod deep. The freshness and
buoyancy of the morning dispelled his alarm; dread was impossible under
that wonderful blue sky. But as he got deeper and deeper into the
recesses under thick boughs that shut out the living blue with dead
gray, and took the sparkle out of the snow, his gloom returned, and
lasted till he was nearly at his journey’s end, when the road caught the
sunlight again just as the thought of home flooded his soul. And soon a
bend brought the goal in sight. There it was, the dear old house,
standing back from the road, in the midst of its little clearing, the
sun shining on its bleached clapboards, the black window-sashes standing
out fantastically against the white panes, opaque with frosty designs.
The smoke curled tranquilly from the chimney towards the overarching
azure, making the home seem a living creature whose breath was thus
condensed to visibility. It seemed months since he had left it, yet it
was absolutely unchanged. And then he heard the cock crow from the rear,
and his last fears vanished like evil spirits of the night, and a wave
of pleasurable anticipation bore him to the porch.
He opened the door—no one ever fastened doors by day, for burglars came
only in the milder form of peddlers, and other visitors were accustomed
to stable their horses and take their seats at the board without
ceremony or warning. It was not far from noon, but he heard no sounds
about the house, except the crowing of the cock, which continued, and
brought up to memory a grotesque and long-obliterated image of his
mother holding on to the leg of a soaring hawk that had picked up a
chicken. He listened for the lowing of Daisy; then, remembering she was
dead and salted, he moved forward into the passage. But he found nobody
in the living-room. There was not even a fire. The clumsy spinning-wheel
stood silent. The table was bare and tidy; the chairs were neatly
ranged. He ran into the kitchen—it radiated bleaker desolation. Matt
fought against the cold chill that was gathering at his heart. Of course
there would be nobody at home. Harriet was sewing somewhere, most of
the children were at school; and his mother, instead of leaving the baby
in the kitchen with one of them, must have taken it with her to her
work. And yet it was all very depressing and very disappointing. Then he
remembered, with a fresh shock, the smoke he had seen curling from the
roof, and for an instant he was oppressed by a sense of the uncanny. An
atmosphere of horror seemed to brood over the house. But the
recollection of a proverb of Deacon Hailey’s, “There’s no smoke without
fire, hey?” uttered in a moment of unusual articulateness, brought back
common-sense. He ran up to the bedrooms, but there was not even a stove,
except in his mother’s room—a room tapestried with texts worked in
Berlin wool on perforated card-board—where the bed had not been made,
and where there were traces of extinct logs. Immeasurably puzzled, and
wondering if the smoke had been an optical illusion, he returned to the
living-room. There was only one room he had not gone into—the best
room—and when he at last recollected the existence of it he did not
immediately enter it. Only visitors had the enjoyment of this room and
the privilege of sitting gingerly on its cane chairs and surveying its
papered walls; and, in the absence of the family, there could be no
reception in progress. When, for the sake of logical exhaustiveness, he
did approach the door, it was listlessly and with a certain constraint,
amounting to awe. His nostrils already scented the magnificent mustiness
of its atmosphere. He opened the door with noiseless reverence. Then he
stood rigid, like one turned to stone by the sight of Medusa’s head. It
was indeed a head that petrified him—or, rather, two heads, one pressed
against the other. Though he had only a back view of them, he knew them
both. The lank black hair was Bully Preep’s, the long auburn-brown
tresses were Harriet Strang’s. A fire had been lighted, regardless of
the polish of the Franklin stove and the severity of its fancy
scroll-work and ornamental urn; and before this fire his sister sat on
Abner’s knee, and Abner sat on a cane chair, tilting it with a
familiarity that hovered on contempt. The treble shock was too great.
Matt was dumb and sick and cold, though red-hot thoughts hurtled in his
brain. What! The skunk had sneaked in during his mother’s absence, and
it was thus that Harriet did the honors!
He struggled to get his voice back. “Harriet!” he cried, in raucous
remonstrance.
Harriet gave a little shriek and turned her head. The color fled from
her soft cheeks as she caught sight of her outraged junior, then the
blush returned in fuller crimson. Matt fixed her with a stern, imperious
eye.
“What are you doin’ in the best room?” was the phrase that leaped to his
angry lips.
Abner turned on him a face of smiling friendship.
“The best thing,” he replied, gayly.
“How dare you kiss my sister?” thundered Matt.
“Don’t be a fool, Matt!” said Abner, amiably. “She isn’t on’y your
sister—she’s my wife.”
“Your wife!” breathed Matt.
“Yes, don’t be streaked, dear. We were married yesterday.” And Harriet
disentangled herself from Abner and ran to throw her arms round Matt.
But the boy repulsed her with a commanding gesture.
“Don’t come near me!” he cried, huskily. “Where’s mother? Does she
know?”
“Oh, Matt!” cried Harriet, reproachfully, “d’you think I’d marry without
her consent!”
“I call it rael mean, anyways,” he cried, tears of vexation getting into
his eyes and his voice, “to take advantage of a feller like that, jest
because his back’s turned!”
“Waal, we won’t do it agen!” cried Abner, with unshakable good-humor.
“See here, Matt,” and he rose, too, revealing the slight tendency to
crookedness of lower limb that offended the exigent eye of his
mother-in-law, “let’s be pals. You were allus a spunky little chap, and
I liked you from the day you stood up agin me and blacked my eye, though
you had to jump up a’most to reach it. I was a beast in them thar days,
but I raelly ain’t now, thanks to Harriet—God bless her! I know you
don’t like my legs,” he added, with a flash of humor, “but there’s on’y
two of ’em, anyways.”
“An’ thet’s two too many, you crawlin’ reptile,” retorted Matt. Then,
turning to Harriet, he went on in slow, measured accents, “And is
this—chap—goin’ to—live here?”
“He is so,” retorted Harriet.
“Then,” said Matt, with ominous calm—”then you won’t hev me here,
thet’s all.”
“Of course we won’t,” said Harriet, with a pleasant laugh. “You’ll live
with mother.”
“With mother?” repeated Matt, staring.
“Yes; down to Deacon Hailey’s.”
“Hes mother gone to live to Deacon Hailey’s?” he asked, excitedly.
“You bet!” put in Abner, grinning genially.
“What—altogether?” exclaimed Matt. The world seemed going round as it
did in the geography books.
“I guess so.”
“I won’t hev it!” cried Matt, agitatedly. “I won’t hev her slavin’ like
a nigger. It was bad enough afore, when she hed to go there every day.
But now she’s naught but a servant. It’s a shame, I do declare. An’ you,
Harriet!” he said, turning fiercely on her again; “ain’t you ’shamed o’
yourself, drivin’ mother out of house and home?”
“No,” said Harriet, stoutly.
The laughter that lurked about her mouth filled him with a trembling
presentiment of the truth.
“Don’t you understand?” said Abner, kindly. “Your mother’s been and gone
and married the deacon, and a good thing for all o’ you, I do allow.”
“You’re a liar!” hissed the boy. The world spun round more fiercely.
Abner shrugged his shoulders good-temperedly.
“You see, it was all arranged in a hurry, Matt,” said Harriet,
deprecatingly. “An’ mother thought we’d best get it all over, an’ so we
were both married yesterday, an’ we thought it a pity to bother you to
come all the way. But you hevn’t finished, hev you? Where’s the sugar?”
“An’ a nice scandal, I vow!” he cried, furiously. “Everybody is talkin’
’bout it.”
“Oh come, Matt, thet’s a good un,” laughed Abner. “Why, you’ve heerd
nuthin’ ’bout it.”
“Oh, hevn’t I?” returned Matt, with sullen mysteriousness. “I don’t know
thet everybody went there an’ everybody said it was a shame. Oh no; I’m
blind and deaf, thet’s what I am.”
“Don’t make such a touse, Matt,” said Harriet, putting her hair behind
her ears with some calmness. “Don’t you see things air ever so much
better? I’ve got a man to support me,” and she put her arms lovingly
round Abner’s neck, as if supporting him, “an’ mother’ll be quite a
lady, not a servant, as you were silly ’nough to allow, an’ you won’t
hev to work so hard. An’ I’ll tell you what, Matt, you shall come here
sometimes an’ draw your picters, an’ mother won’t know.”
But Matt clinched his teeth. The bait was tempting, but unfortunately it
reminded him of his obedience to his mother the night before, when in
deference to her views he had denied himself the joy of Tommy’s pipe.
Oh, how he had been duped and bamboozled! At the very hour his inner eye
had seen her toiling, sorrowful at her spinning-wheel, she was
frolicking at her wedding-ball in gay attire. A vast self-compassion
softened his indignation and raw misery. He turned his back on the
newly-married couple, and strode from the house, lest they should
misinterpret his tears. But the tears did not come—anger rekindling
evaporated them unshed. What right had the deacon to steal his mother
without even asking him? And how ignoble of his mother to forget his
father thus! He figured Ruth Hailey replacing himself by another boy
merely because he was dead. It seemed sacrilege. And yet no doubt Ruth
was as bad as the rest of her sex. Had she not submitted tamely to the
supplanting of her dead mother—nay, was she not a necessary accomplice
in the conspiracy to keep him ignorant of the double marriage? Then he
had a vague remembrance that he had once heard she was not originally
the deacon’s daughter, but only the late Mrs. Hailey’s, which somehow
seemed to exonerate her from the full burden of his doings. Still, she
had unquestionably been sly.
His feet had turned instinctively back towards the lonely forest. No,
he would not go and live with the deacon, not even though it brought
Ruth within daily proximity. His attitude towards the deacon had never
been cordial—nay, the auditory strain upon him when “Ole Hey” spoke to
him had gone far towards making him antipathetic. It seemed monstrous
that such an old mumbler should have been deemed fit to replace the
cheery sailor who had gone down wrapped in his flag. No, Matt at least
would have none of him. Life under his roof would be a discord of
jarring memories. He would go back to his hut and live in the wood. He
would shoot enough to live upon, and there, alone and self-sufficient
and free as its denizens, he would pass his life painting and sketching.
Or, if he wanted society, he would seek that of the Indian, the simple,
noble Indian, and pitch his lot with his for a time or forever. Or
perhaps Tommy would stay with him—Tommy who was deep without being
wily, and restful without being dull. What a pity Billy was disabled;
they might have seceded together, but fate had separated them, not his
will.
The five miles were longer now, and the sky had grown a shade colder,
but he trod the gloomiest paths unchilled. His heart was hot with
revolt. As he came to the little open space round the hut a curious
phenomenon arrested his attention. There was no smoke curling above the
chimney-hole. A problem—the exact reverse of that which had greeted him
at the other terminus of his journey—clamored for solution. Surely
Tommy had not let the fire go out! He hastened his steps, and saw that
the door stood wide open on its leather hinges, projecting outwards into
the forest. Outside, too, empty birch-bark troughs were scattered about
in lieu of being piled up neatly. The air of desolation sobered him like
a cold douche. He was frightened. He had not even courage to dwell on
the thought of what foreboding whispered. But perhaps Tommy had only
gone to sleep again, and forgotten about the fire. With a gleam of hope
he ran to the entrance, then leaped back with a wild thrill, and slammed
the door to and put his back to it and stood palpitating, restrained
only by excitement from breaking down in childish tears. The interior of
the hut had been transformed as by enchantment. Of barrels, axes,
ironware, provender, even of his rude paints, there was not a trace,
though the birch-bark picture exhibition was undisturbed. The
birch-boughs were littered over the floor. There was no Tommy. But in
the centre of the cabin, where the fire had been, lay a matted bear,
voluptuously curled up on the warm ashes, and licking the mellifluous
soil, which was syrup-sodden by drops that had fallen from the sap-pot.
The beautiful sunshine had lured the animal from its winter
sleeping-chamber, famished after its long fast.
It was a moment Matt never forgot; one of those moments that age and
imbitter. As he stood with squared shoulders against the rough, battened
door, that was built of stout slabs, he shook from head to foot with
mingled emotions. Numb misery alternated with burning flashes of
righteous indignation against humanity, red and white. And with it all
was a stirring of the hunter’s instinct—an itching to shoot the
creature on the other side of the door—which aggravated his vexation by
the reminder that even his gun had been stolen. It eased him a little to
let his mind dwell on the prospect of potting such glorious game; but
first of all he must run Tommy to earth. Tommy could not have gone far,
burdened as he would be with the spoil.
The broken-hearted boy moved stealthily from the door and pushed up a
small trunk that he had cut down that morning, but not yet chopped up.
With some difficulty he raised this and propped it against the door,
which, being already latched, could not easily be burst open by the
bear. The creature was, moreover, likely to resume its winter nap in the
snug, sweet quarters in which it found itself. Having thus trapped his
bear, Matt started off by a cross-cut in the direction of the Indian
encampment, to which he presumed Tommy would naturally have returned
full-handed. But he had not gone a hundred yards before he called
himself a fool, and ran back. In his agitation he had forgotten to note
the trail of the sled in which Tommy must have drawn off the things.
This he now discovered ran quite in the opposite direction, and was
complicated not only by Tommy’s footmarks, but by a man’s. Whither had
Tommy decamped? The day seemed made up of surprises and puzzles.
However, there was everything to gain, or rather regain, by following
the dusky young impostor and the accomplice who had helped him to draw
the heavy sled. Matt discovered that the trail led towards Long Village,
two and a half miles off, and instantly it flashed upon him that Tommy
had gone there to dispose of the things. He quickened his pace, and in
less than half an hour strode into a truer solution of the mystery, for
suddenly he found himself amid dogs grubbing in the sunshine and
swaddled pappooses swinging on the poles of birch-bark wigwams, and
perceived that the vagrant Micmacs had shifted their encampment during
the fortnight. Tommy’s knowledge of the migration argued secret
correspondence, unless a tribal tempter had visited him accidentally
during Matt’s absence—which seemed rather improbable.
Matt’s soul was aflame with wrath and resentment. He rushed about among
the wigwams, unceremoniously peering behind the blankets that overhung
the doorways, which were partly blocked by spruce boughs arranged to
spring back and forth. Bow-legged, round-shouldered, dumpy men, with
complexions of grayish copper, squatting cross-legged on fir boughs
before the central fire, smoked on unresentful, a few ejaculating
sullenly, “Kogwa pawotumun?” (“What is your wish?”) Their faces had
nothing of the American hatchet-shape; they would have been round but
for the angularity of the jaw, and Chinese but for the eyes, which did
not slant upward, but were beady and wide apart. The cheek-bones were
high, the nose was of a negro flatness, and the straight black hair was
long and matted. In attire the men had an air of shabby civilization,
which went ill with the blankets and skins overwrapping the white men’s
leavings. Near the door—in the quarter of less distinction—sitting
with feet twisted round to one side, one under the other, as befits the
inferior sex—were women good-looking but greasy, who wore shawls and
blankets over their kerchiefed heads, and necklaces of blue beads
twinkling against their olive throats, and smoked as gravely as their
lords. But Tommy was invisible. Nor could Matt see anything of the
stolen goods. But in one tent he found Tommy’s father, and,
discourteously omitting the “Kwa” of greeting, plied him with indignant
questions in a mixture of bad English and worse Indian.
Tommy’s father understood little and knew nothing. He did not invite the
visitor into the tent, but smoked on peacefully and whittled a shaving,
and Matt’s admiration of the red man’s taciturnity died a painful death.
Had Tommy’s father not even seen Tommy? No; Tommy’s father had not seen
Tommy for half a moon, and the smoke curled peacefully round Tommy’s
father’s greasy head. Never had the unspeakable uncleanliness of the
picturesque figure struck Matt as it did now. He moved away with heavy
heart and heavy footstep, and interviewed other Indians, equally dingy
and equally reticent; even the squaws kept the secret.
Matt went back in despairing anger and poured out his passion in a flood
of remonstrance upon the unwashed head of Tommy’s father; he pointed to
the trail of the sled that drew up at Tommy’s father’s tent, he
reasoned, he threatened, he clinched his fist and stamped his foot; and
Tommy’s father smoked the pipe of peace and whittled the shaving. The
Indian held the stick on his knee and drew the knife towards himself,
unlike the white man, who cuts away from himself. It was a crooked
knife, with a notch for the thumb in the handle. Matt’s spirit oozed
away before its imperturbable movement to and fro. He felt sick and
faint; he became vaguely conscious that he had eaten nothing since
breakfast. Then he remembered the bear waiting in the cabin—waiting to
be killed. With a happy thought he informed Tommy’s father that he had
trapped a bear and could conduct him to the spot, and Tommy’s father
instantly began to understand him better; and when Matt proceeded to
offer him the beast in exchange for the stolen goods, the Micmac
betrayed a complete comprehension of the offer, and with a courteous
exclamation of “Up-chelase,” invited him into the furthermost and most
honorable portion of the tent. He even rose and held colloquy with some
of his brethren gathered round. A bear was a valuable property—dead.
His snout alone was worth five dollars, when presented as a death
certificate to a grateful government, anxious to extinguish him. These
five dollars were a great consideration to a tribe paid mainly in kind,
and hard pushed to find coin for the annual remission of sin at the
hands of the priests. The bear’s skin would fetch four or five dollars
more; while its three or four hundred pounds of flesh would set up the
larder for the season. As a result of the native council, Tommy’s father
informed Matt that he had just learned Tommy had been seen that morning,
but that he had hauled the sled past the encampment on his way to Long
Village to sell the freight (which nobody had suspected was not his own
property, the much dam thief). He had, however, left a gun with a boy
friend, and if Matt was content to swop the bear for this, he could have
it. Matt, fuming at his own helplessness, consented. The gun was
accordingly produced; Matt recognized his old friend, but Tommy’s father
explained in easy pantomime that when bear was dead boy would get gun,
and not before; and he handed it to a blanketless by-stander, who had
evidently bartered external heat for internal fire-water. Then,
shouldering his own gun, he motioned to Matt to lead the way. The little
procession of three set forth, the second Indian prudently providing
himself with a flat, wide sledge. The afternoon was waning, the blue
overhead had lost in luminousness, leaving the coloring of the earth
more vivid. But the shifting of nature’s kaleidoscope had ceased to
interest Matt; humanity occupied him exclusively, and the evil that was
done under the sun. Man or woman, white or red, they were all alike—a
skulking, shifty breed. It was not only he that had been betrayed; it
was truth, it was honor. Were these things, then, merely lip-babble?
On their arrival at the hut Matt explained the position. He was about to
remove the log that braced up the door, but Tommy’s father pulled him
violently back, and gestured that it was much more convenient to shoot
the animal through the chimney-hole. Matt felt a qualm of disgust and
remorse. It seemed cowardly to give the poor beast that had taken refuge
in his hut no chance. He leaned sullenly against the door, feeling
almost like one who had betrayed the laws of hospitality, and conscious,
moreover, of a strange savage sympathy with the bear in its strife with
humanity. His last respect for the noble red man vanished when the two
Micmacs clambered upon the low-pitched roof. They uttered “ughs” of
satisfaction as they peeped over the great square hole and perceived
their prey asleep. After some amiable banter of the animal they began to
put their guns into position. But Tommy’s father insisted on having the
glory of the deed, since he was paying for the bear with Matt’s gun, and
his rival ungraciously yielded. In his cocksureness, however, Tommy’s
father merely hit the bear’s shoulder. The creature started up with a
fierce growl, and began biting savagely at the bleeding wound. Excited
by his failure and the brute’s leap up, Tommy’s father leaned more over
the hole for his second shot; but his companion, exclaiming that it was
his turn now, pushed him back, and strove to get his body in front.
Tommy’s father, who was now effervescing with excitement, thrust himself
more forward still, and in his zeal succeeded so well that he suddenly
found himself flying head-foremost into the hut, while the gun went off
at random. The bullet missed, but the man struck the obfuscated creature
with a thud, ricochetted off its back, and lay prostrate on the
branch-strewn floor.
The sound of the fall, the explosion, the cry of dismay from the roof,
informed Matt of what had happened. In a flash his sympathy went back to
man. He cried to the other Indian to shoot, but the latter’s arm was
shaking, and the bear, after a few seconds of bewilderment, had risen on
its hind legs and stood over the fallen man growling fiercely, so that
the Micmac was afraid of hitting his friend. Matt reached up impatiently
for his gun, which the Micmac readily handed to him in unforeseen
violation of orders, and Matt, overthrowing the door-prop with the butt
end, lifted the latch and dashed in. Tommy’s father was already in the
bear’s grip, the infuriated animal’s elastic fore-paws beginning to
press horribly upon his ribs. Matt clapped the barrel of the gun to the
bear’s ear; then he was overswept by a fearsome doubt lest the gun had
been unloaded since it had left his hands. But his suspense was short.
He pressed the trigger; there was a ringing explosion, and the creature
bounded into the air, relaxing its hold of the Indian, upon whom it fell
again in its death-agony. Matt, aided by the other Micmac, who hurried
in, grunting, disentangled Tommy’s father from the writhing heap, and
found him bruised and breathless, but practically uninjured. Tommy’s
father vowed eternal gratitude to his rescuer, and said his life was
henceforward at Matt’s disposal. The boy curtly asked for his property
instead, whereupon the Indian shook his head and shrugged his shoulders
in token of impotence. Rolling the bear over with a prod of his
contemptuous foot, he produced his knife and started scalping and
skinning the dead enemy, while his brother-in-arms lit some boughs, and
cut a juicy steak from the carcass and set it to broil. The warmth was
grateful, for the shadows were fast gathering and the hyperborean hours
returning. A covey of bob-whites whirred past, and the weird note of a
hoot-owl was borne on the bleak air.
The Indians offered the boy “a cut from the joint,” and he refused
sulkily—a deadly insult in normal circumstances. But the keen pangs of
hunger and the delicious odor of the meat weakened him, and a later
invitation to join the squatting diners found him ravenously responsive,
though he felt he had bartered away his righteous indignation for a mess
of pottage. During the meal his guests or his hosts (he knew not which
they were) betrayed considerable interest in his mural decorations,
which they evidently regarded as symptoms of a relapse from
Christianity, and they were astonished, too, at his refusal to quaff
more than a mouthful or two of their rum—the coarse concoction locally
nicknamed “rot-gut.” While Matt, who had started last, was still eating
from the birch-bark dish he had utilized for the purpose, Tommy’s father
lit his after-dinner pipe, and, having taken a few whiffs, passed it on
to his companion, who in turn held out to Matt the long, reedy stem with
its feather ornaments.
The offer sent a thrill through the boy’s whole being. All his
grievances ascended afresh from the red stone bowl and mingled with the
fragrant smoke. How good, how obedient he had been! And all for what? A
lump gathered in his throat, so that he could not swallow his bit of
bear. He nodded assent, his heart throbbing with defiant manhood, and
motioned to the Micmac to place the pipe beside his dish till he was
ready for it. The two Indians then hauled the carcass athwart the sledge
hastily, for night had come on as though shed from the starless sky, and
they called to Matt to come along, but Matt shouted back that he did not
intend to accompany them. He no longer craved to cast in his lot with
the red man. Yet he went to the door of his tent to watch his
fellow-hunters disappear among the sombre groves, and a deeper dusk
seemed to fall on the landscape when the very rustle of their passage
died away. But as he turned in again and fastened up the door, his heart
leaped up afresh with the leaping flames. The sense of absolute solitude
became exultation—a keen, bitter joy. Here was his home; he had no
other. He had parted company with humanity forever.
He reseated himself on a little pile of fir boughs in his deserted home,
that was naked but for the wall-pictures—the least comforting of all
possible salvage, since they were the only things Tommy had not thought
worth stealing. As Matt sat brooding, darker patches on the soil, and
spots upon some of those pictures, caught his eye. He saw they were of
blood. In one place there was quite a little pool which had not yet sunk
into the earth or evaporated. He touched it curiously with his finger,
and wiped away the stain against a leaf. Then with a sudden thought he
curled a piece of bark and scooped up the blood into his birchen dish,
as a possible color, murmuring, gleefully:
In moving the “little dish” he laid bare Tommy’s father’s calumet,
forgotten. He took it up. How the universe had changed since last he
held a pipe in his hand—only last night! Again he heard the howl of a
wild-cat, and he looked round involuntarily, as if expecting to find Mad
Peggy at his elbow. But he had no sense of awe just now—though he had
barred his door inhospitably against further bears—only the
voluptuousness of liberty and loneliness, the healthy after-glow of
satisfied appetite, and the gayety born of flaming logs and a couple of
mouthfuls of fire-water. The Water-Drinker’s prophecy seemed peculiarly
inept in view of the pipe he held in his hand. With tremulous
anticipation of more than mortal rapture he relit it. The sensation was
unexpectedly pungent, but Matt puffed away steadily in hope and trust
that this was merely the verdict of an unaccustomed palate, and he found
a vast compensatory pleasure in his ability to make the thing work, to
send the delicate wreaths into the air as ably as any Micmac or deacon
of them all.
But soon even this pleasure began to be swamped by a wave of less
agreeable sensation, and Matt, puzzled and chagrined, after a gallant
stand, threw down the calumet, and hastened into the cold air with
palpitating heart and splitting head, and there, in the maple wood,
Bruin was avenged. That night, despite his vigil of the night before,
Matt Strang vainly endeavored to close his eyes upon an unsatisfactory
world.
The long, endless years, crowded with petty episodes and uniformities,
and moving like a cumbrous, creeping train that stops at every station,
flash like an express past the eye of memory. Yet it is these unrecorded
minutiæ of monotonous months that color the fabric of our future lives,
eating into our souls like a slow acid. When, in after years, Matt
Strang’s youth defiled before him, the panorama seemed more varied than
when he was living the scenes in all their daily detail of dull routine,
and when, whatever their superficial differences, they were all linked
for him by an underlying unity of toil and aspiration.
First came his apprenticeship in Cattermole’s saw-mill, at the opposite
outskirt of the forest, twenty miles from Cobequid. For, though he early
tired of savagery, as a blind-alley on the road to picture-painting, he
refused, in the dogged pride of his boyish heart, to return to his
folks, contenting himself with informing them of his whereabouts and of
his intention to apprentice himself (with or without their consent).
Labor being so scarce that year, Deacon Hailey drove over in great haste
to offer him a loving home. Matt, who happened to be in the house, which
was only parted from the mill-stream by a large vegetable-garden, saw
through a window the deacon’s buggy arrive at the garden-path, and the
deacon himself alight to open the wooden gate. The boy’s resentment
flamed afresh, and it was supplemented by dread of the deacon’s
inarticulate conversation. He fled to Mrs. Cattermole in the kitchen.
She was a shrewish, angular person, economical of everything save angry
breath. A black silk cap with prim bows and ribbons sat severely on her
head, and a thread-net confined her hair. Cattermole, a simple,
religious, hen-pecked creature, had gone to the village store to trade
off butter.
“There’s Ole Hey coming!” cried Matt, breathlessly.
“Kin’t you speak quietly?” thundered Mrs. Cattermole. “You made my heart
jump like a frog. You don’t mean Ole Hey from Cobequid, the man es you
said married your mother?”
“Yes, thet’s the skunk. I reckon he’s come to take me back.”
Mrs. Cattermole’s eyes flashed angrily. “Well, I swan! But you’ve
promised to bide with us.”
“Thet’s so. I wouldn’t go back fur Captain Kidd’s treasure! I won’t see
him.”
“I’ll tell him you’re gone away.”
“No,” said Matt, sturdily. “I wrote that I was goin’ to be ’prenticed
here, and there ain’t any call for lies. Tell him I’m in the kitchen and
I won’t come out, and I don’t want to hev anythin’ to do with him. See!”
“Well, set there and mind the cradle, and I’ll jest give him
slockdologee. You uns allow you’re considerable smart, Cobequid way, but
I reckon he’s struck the wrong track this time.”
Matt grinned joyously. “Spunk up to him, ma’am!” he cried, with stirring
reminiscences of fights at McTavit’s. “Walk into him full split!”
“You mind the baby, young man. There won’t be no touse at all. He don’t
set foot in my kitchen, and there’s an end of it.”
Mrs. Cattermole greeted the deacon politely, and informed him that the
lad he was inquiring after was sulking in the kitchen, and that he
refused to receive his visitor on any account. The deacon sighed
unctuously with an air of patient martyrdom. Matt’s obduracy heightened
his estimate of the lad’s value as a gratuitous field-worker, and
sharpened his sense of being robbed of what small dowry Mrs. Strang had
brought him.
“The boy is dreadful set agin me,” he complained. “But, es I told his
poor mother, if you let a boy run wild, wild he runs, hey? Anyways, it
ain’t fur me to fail in lovin’-kindness. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth,
ain’t the gospel we’re called upon to practise. I allus thinks there’s
no sort o’ use in bein’ a Christian on Sundays and a heathen on
week-days.”
“No, thet thar ain’t,” Mrs. Cattermole assented, amiably.
“Even to beasts a man kin be a Christian, hey? I reckon I’d better wait
in your kitchen an’ give the mare a rest. If I’ve come on a fool’s
errand, thet ain’t a reason my ole nag should suffer, hey?”
Mrs. Cattermole, seeing the outworks taken, directed the deacon, by a
flank movement, into the parlor, as alone befitting his dignity. To Matt
this parlor, far finer than the best room at home, was a chamber of awe,
but also of attraction, for its walls were hung with sober Bible prints.
Mrs. Cattermole stood there among her splendors with her back to the
door, partly for defensive purposes, partly so as not to depreciate one
of the hair-cloth chairs by sitting down. It was enough for one day that
her guest sat solidly on the rocking-chair of honor.
“We’ve been hevin’ too much soft weather, Mrs. Cattermole, arter all
thet heavy snow.”
“Yes, I’m afeard the dam will go out,” responded Mrs. Cattermole,
gloomily.
They discussed the disastrous thaw of a few years back, with a vivid
remembrance of the vegetables and dairy produce spoiled in the flooded
cellars.
“But it’s the Lord’s will,” summed up the deacon. “It ain’t any use
heapin’ up worldly treasure, I allus thinks.”
“Thet’s a fact.” Mrs. Cattermole shook her head in sad acquiescence.
“Heaven’s the only safe place to lay up your goods, hey? So I guess I’m
just goin’ to forgive thet durned boy all the anxiety he’s giv his poor
mother an’ me, an’ take him back right along.”
“Oh, but I guess you ain’t,” said Mrs. Cattermole. “We’ve promised to
take him on here.”
“We’ll let you off thet thar promise, Mrs. Cattermole. We ain’t folks as
allus wants to hold people tight to every onthinkin’ word. An’ you won’t
be the loser hardly, for the lad ain’t worth a tin pint to mortal man.
He’s a dreamy do-nuthin’, an’ the worry he’s been to his poor mother
you’ve no idee—allus wastin’ the Lord’s hours, unbeknown to her, in
scrawlin’ picters an’ smutchin’ boards with colors.”
“I reckon he’ll come in handy in our paint-shop, then.”
The deacon shook his head, as if pitying her bubble delusions.
“He ain’t smart, an’ he ain’t good-tempered. You see for yourself how
grouty he is to the best friend a boy ever hed.”
“He ain’t smart, I know. Thet’s why we ain’t goin’ to pay him no wages.”
The deacon chawed his quid and swayed in silent discomfiture.
“Ah, it’s his poor mother I’m thinkin’ of,” he said, after a while.
“She’s thet delicate she’d kinder worry if he was to—a mother’s heart,
hey? If ’twas my boy, I’d be proper glad to see him in the han’s of sech
a hard-workin’, God-fearin’ couple.”
“You hedn’t ought to talk to me,” said Mrs. Cattermole, softening.
“Father’d be terrible ugly if I was to settle anythin’ while he was to
the store.”
“And if he wouldn’t it’s a pity. Wives, obey your husbands, hey? But
there ain’t no call for hurry. More haste less speed, I allus thinks.
But I don’t want to keep you from your occupations. There air some
visitors who forgit folks kin’t afford to keep more’n one Sunday a week,
hey? Sorter devil’s darnin’-needles flyin’ into your ear—they worry
you, and they don’t do themselves no good. So don’t you take no notice
of me. I’ll jest talk to Matt to fill up the time.”
Mrs. Cattermole straightened herself against the door. “He won’t listen;
he’s too mad.”
“I reckon I could tone him down some.”
“Guess not. He’s too sot—he won’t come in.”
“I ain’t proud. I’ll go to him. True pride is in doin’ what’s right, I
allus thinks. Some folks kin’t see the difference between true pride an’
false pride. I’ll go to the kitchen.”
“I’d rayther you didn’t, deacon. It’s all in a clutter.”
The conversation drooped. The deacon’s mouth moved in mere chawing.
Swallowing his quid in deference to the parlor, he cut himself a new
chunk.
“You’ve heerd about the doctor, Mrs. Cattermole?” he began again.
“I dunno es I hev.”
“What! Not heerd about our doctor es was said to practise the Black
Art?”
“Oh, the sorcerer es lives on the ole wood-road. My brother who drives
the stage was tellin’ me ’bout it. He sets spirits turnin’ tables,
tellin’ the future, an’ nobody’ll go past his house arter dark.”
“Ah, but the elders called on him last week,” said the deacon. “Of
course we couldn’t hev him in the vestry. An’ he explained to the
committee thet sperrits or devils ain’t got nuthin’ to do with it.”
“Lan’ sakes! An’ you believed him?”
“Waal, my motto is allus believe your fellow-critters. An evil mind sees
a lookin’-glass everyways, hey? He jest showed us how to make a table
turn and answer questions. He says it’s no more wonderful than turnin’ a
grindstone.”
“I guess he’s pulled the wool over the eyes o’ the Church,” said Mrs.
Cattermole, sceptically.
“Not hardly! He turned thet thar table in broad daylight with the Bible
open upon it, to show thet Satan didn’t hev a look in.”
“The Bible on it! ’Pears to me terrible ongodly.”
“Ongodly! Why, you an’ me kin do it—two pillars o’ the Church! I guess
the Evil One couldn’t come nigh us, hey?”
“I dunno es it would turn if you an’ me was to do it.”
“You bet! It told me ’bout the future world, an’ my poor Susan’s
Christian name, an’ how much to ast for my upland hay.”
“Good lan’!” cried Mrs. Cattermole. “An’ would it tell me whether my
sister is through her sickness yet?”
“You may depend!”
“My! Thet’s jest great!” And Mrs. Cattermole eagerly inquired how one
set about interrogating the oracle.
The deacon explained, adding that the parlor table would not do. It must
be a rough deal table.
“Ah, the kitchin table,” said Mrs. Cattermole, walking into the
elaborately laid trap.
“I dunno,” said the deacon, shaking his head. “Air you sure it ain’t too
large for us to span around?”
“We could let the flaps down.”
The deacon chawed reflectively.
“Waal, it might,” he said, cautiously, at last. “There ain’t no harm in
tryin’. We hedn’t ought to give up anythin’ without tryin’, I allus
thinks. One never knows, hey?”
“I kinder think we ought to try,” said Mrs. Cattermole.
The deacon rose ponderously, and followed his guide into the kitchen.
“Why, there’s Matt!” he cried, in astonished accents. “Good-day, sonny.”
Matt strained his ears, but pursed his lips and rocked the cradle in
violent impassivity. The deacon was uneasy at the boy’s sullen
resentment. He could not understand open enemies.
“How’s your health, hey?” he asked, affectionately.
“Oh, I’m hunky dory,” said Matt, in off-hand school-boy slang.
“I’m considerable glad you’ve found a good place with rael Christians,
Matt. I on’y hope you’ve made up your mind to work hard an’ turn over a
new leaf. It’s never too late to mend, I allus thinks. You’re growin’ a
young man, now; no more picter-makin’, hey? If it warn’t that you air so
moony an’ lay-abed I’d give you a chanst on my own land, with
pocket-money into the bargain, hey, an’ p’raps a pair o’ store shoes fur
a Chrismus-box.”
A flame shot from Mrs. Cattermole’s now-opened eyes. She shut the cellar
door with a vicious bang, but ere she could speak Matt cried out, “I
wouldn’t come, not fur five shillin’s a week!”
“An’ who wants you to come fur money? What is money, hey? Is it health?
Is it happiness? No, no, sonny. If money was any use, my poor Susan
would hev been alive to this day. You’ll know better when you’re my
age.”
He spat out now, directing the stream into the sink under the big wooden
pump.
“Don’t worry ’bout him,” interposed Mrs. Cattermole. “Here’s the table.”
Deacon Hailey waved a rebuking palm. “Dooty afore pleasure, Mrs.
Cattermole. See here, sonny, I’ve been talkin’ with Mrs. Cattermole
’bout you. She’s promised me to be a mother to you, Heaven bless her!
But I kin’t forget you’ve got a mother o’ your own.”
“She ain’t my mother now, she’s Ruth’s mother,” said Matt, half divining
the mumble of words.
“She’s mother to both o’ you. A large heart, thet’s what she’s got. An’
if she’s Ruth’s mother, then I’m your father, hey? An’ it ain’t right of
you to disobey your father and mother. But young folks nowadays treats
the commandments like old boots,” and the deacon sighed, as if in
sympathy with the sorrows of a neglected decalogue.
“I’ve got no father an’ no mother,” said Matt. “An’ I’m goin’ to be a
picture-painter soon es I kin. I won’t do anything else, thet’s flat.
An’ when I’m bigger I’m goin’ to write to my uncle Matt and see if he
kin sell my pictures fur me. If you was to drag me back by force, I’d
escape into the woods. An’ I’d work my way to London to be handy my
uncle Matt. I reckon he takes in ’prentices same es the boss here. So
you jest tell my mother I’m done with her, see! I don’t want to hear any
more ’bout it.”
His face resumed its set expression, and his rocking foot its violence.
The deacon cast a reproachful, irate glance at Mrs. Cattermole.
“Did I tell you a lie when I said he warn’t worth thet thar?” he
vociferated, snatching the tin dipper from the water-bucket. The noise
disturbed the baby, which began to whimper feebly. Matt turned his
chair’s back on the deacon and gazed studiously towards the wood-house
in the yard. The deacon’s face grew apoplectic. He seemed about to throw
the dipper at the back of Matt’s head, but mastering himself he let it
fall with a splash, and said, quietly: “I guess you won’t hev me to
blame if he turns out all belly an’ no han’s. Some folks’d say I’m
offerin’ you a smart, likely young man, with his heart in the wood-pile.
But thet’s not Deacon Hailey’s way. He makes a pint of tellin’ the bad
pints. He’s a man you could swap a horse with, hey? I tell you, Mrs.
Cattermole, thet durned boy is all moonshine an’ viciousness, stuffed
with conceit from floor to ridge-piece. Picters, picters, picters, is
all he thinks about! Amoosin’ himself—thet’s his idee of life in this
vale of tears. I reckon he thinks he’s goin’ to strike Captain Kidd’s
treasure. But, arter all, he ain’t your burden. I’ve giv his poor
mother a home, an’ I ain’t the man to grudge bite an’ sup to her boy. So
even now I don’t mind lettin’ you off. He’s my crost, and I’ve got to
bear him. ’Tain’t no use bein’ a Christian only in church, hey?”
“I guess I’m a Christian, too,” said Mrs. Cattermole. “So I must bear
with the poor lad an’ train him up some in the way he should go. An’
then there’s father. You’re a rael saint, deacon, but I sorter think
where heaven is consarned father ’ud like a look-in es well. So let’s
say no more ’bout it. Now, then, deacon, the table’s waitin’!”
He ignored the patient piece of furniture. “Waal, don’t blame me any if
the buckwheat turns out bad,” he shouted, losing his self-control again,
and spurting out his nicotian fluid at the stove like an angry
cuttle-fish.
“Thet’s so,” acquiesced Mrs. Cattermole, quietly. “Now, then, Deacon
Hailey, jest you set there.” She had taken a chair and placed her hands
on the table.
“Hush!” said the deacon. “Don’t you see thet thar young un wakin’ up?
The tarnation boy hes been shakin’ him like an earthquake. I didn’t know
es you kep’ your baby in the kitchin or I wouldn’t hev troubled to come.
When thet thar table kinder began to dance and jump, you wouldn’t thank
me fur rousin’ the innocent baby, hey? Sleep, sleep, thet’s what a baby
wants! A baby kin’t hev too much sleep an’ a grown-up person kin’t hev
too little, hey? They’re a lazy slinky lot, the young men o’ the
Province, sleepin’ with their mouths open, expectin’ johnny-cakes to
fall into ’em. I wonder this young man here don’t get into a cradle
hisself. He’d be es much use to his fellow-critters es makin’ picters, I
do allow. This life’s a battle, I allus thinks, an’ star-gazin’ ain’t
the way to sight the enemy, hey? I reckon I’ll git back now, Mrs.
Cattermole. There’s ’nough time been wasted over thet limb of Satan.
Jest you tell Cattermole what I say ’bout him, an’ if ever you git
durned sick an’ tired feedin’ an onthankful lazybones, es you’re bound
to git, sure es skunks, jest you remember Deacon Hailey is the Christian
you’re lookin’ fur. An’ don’t you forgit it!” And very solemnly he
strode without.
Mrs. Cattermole lifted her hands and brought them down again on the
table with a thump. “The tarnation ole fox!” she cried, “tryin’ to
bamboozle me with tales ’bout turnin’ tables. ’Tain’t likely es a table
is goin’ to dance of itself, an’ tell me ’bout Maria’s sickness. Jest
you come here, Matt, an’ lay your hands alongside o’ mine. What’s thet
you’re doin’?”
For Matt had begun pensively adorning the hood of the cradle by means of
a burned stick he had pulled from the stove.
“It’s on’y Ole Hey,” he said, reddening.
“Jest you leave off makin’ fun o’ your elders an’ betters,” she said,
sharply. “There’ll be plenty of work fur you in the paint-shop.”
There was plenty of work, Matt found, in numerous other directions, too.
Many more things than mechanical wood-cutting did the boy practise at
Cattermole’s saw-mill. To begin with, Mrs. Cattermole’s apprehensions
were justified and the spring freshets swept away the dam, and so Matt
was set to work hauling brushwood and gravel and logs to build up a kind
of breast-work. Cattermole was really a house-joiner and house-builder,
so Matt acquired cabinet-making, decoration, and house-building. His
farming and cattle-rearing experience was also considerably enlarged. He
milked the cows, looked after four stage-horses (driven by Mrs.
Cattermole’s brother) and thirty-six sheep, cut firewood, cleared out
barns, turned churns, hoed potatoes, mowed hay, fed fowls and pigs, and
rocked the cradle, and, in the interval of running the circular and
up-and-down saws in the mill, worked in the paint-shop at the back,
graining and scrolling the furniture and ornamenting it with roses and
other gorgeous flowers, sometimes even with landscapes. This was his
only opportunity of making pictures, for recreation hours he had none.
He rose at four in the morning and went to bed at ten at night. His
wages were his food and clothes, both left off.
Mrs. Cattermole made his garments out of her husband’s out-worn
wardrobe, itself of gray homespun.
But the hours in the paint-shop threw their aroma over all the others
and made them livable.
And Cattermole, though a hard was not a harsh taskmaster, and had gentle
flashes of jest when Mrs. Cattermole was out of ear-shot. And, though
winter was long, yet there were seasons of delicious sunshine, when the
blueberries ripened on the flats, or the apples waxed rosy in the
orchard; when the air thrilled with the song of birds, and the dawn was
golden.
In one of these seasons of hope he wrote to his uncle of his father’s
death and his own existence, and Cattermole paid the postage; an
ingenuous letter full of the pathetic, almost incredible ignorance of
obscure and sequestered youth, and inquiring what chances there would be
for him to reap fortune by painting pictures in London. He addressed the
letter—with vague recollection of something in his school
reading-book—to Mr. Matthew Strang, Painter, National Gallery, London.
It was not an ill-written letter nor an ill-spelt. Here and there the
orthography was original, but in the main McTavit had been not
ineffectual, and there were fewer traces of illiteracy about the epistle
than might have been imagined from Matt’s talk. But in Matt’s mind the
written and the spoken were kept as distinct as printed type and the
manuscript alphabet; they ran on parallel lines that never met, and that
“Amur’can” should be spelled “American” seemed no more contradictory
than that “throo” should be spelled “through.” The grammar he had used
in scholastic exercises was not for everyday wear; it was of a
ceremonious dignity that suited with the stateliness of epistolary
communication. Alas! For all the carefulness of the composition, his
uncle of the National Gallery gave no sign.
Matt’s suspense and sorrow dwindled at last into resignation, for he had
come to a renewed sense of religion. As Mrs. Strang would have put it,
he had found grace. There were a few pious books and tracts about the
Cattermole establishment, to devour in stolen snatches or by bartering
sleep for reading, and among these dusty treasures he lighted on The
Pilgrim’s Progress, with quaint wood-cuts. In the moral fervor with
which the dramatic allegory informed him Matt felt wickedness an
impossibility henceforward; his future life stretched before him white,
fleckless, unstainable. Meanness or falsehood or viciousness could never
touch his soul. How curiously people must be constituted who could
knowingly prefer evil, when good thrilled one with such rapture, bathed
one in such peace! Already he felt the beatitude of the New Jerusalem.
The pictures he painted should be good, please God. They should
exhibit the baseness of Mr. Worldly Wiseman, castigate the town of
Carnal Policy; he would uplift the eyes of the wicked to the
contemplation of the Shining Ones. Though, after all, he began to ask
himself, could any picture equal Bunyan’s book? Was not a book
immeasurably the better medium of expression? The suspicion was
strengthened by the reading of a dime novel which his mistress’s
brother, the stage-driver, had left lying about. It was the first
unadulterated novel he had read, and the sensational episodes stirred
his blood, his new-born religious enthusiasm died. He loved Mike the
Bush-ranger, who was the hero of the novel. Action, strong,
self-dependent action, a big personality—there lay the admirable in
life. The Christians and Hopefuls were pale-blooded figures after all,
and unreal at that. In actual life one only came across mimics who used
their language: the Deacon Haileys or the Abner Preeps, to whom even
thieving Tommy were preferable. No wonder Mike had been driven to
bush-ranging! What a pity he himself had not remained in his forest hut,
rebel against humanity, king of the woods! Ah! and how inadequate was
paint to express the fulness of life; the medium was too childishly
simple. At most one could fix a single scene, a single incident, and
that only in its outside aspect. Books palpitated with motion and
emotion. He set to work to write a dime novel, stealing an hour from his
scanty night. He made but slow progress, though he began with an
exciting episode about a white boy besieged in his log-hut by a party of
Indians, and saved by the sudden advent of a couple of bears. The words
he wrote down seemed a paltry rendition of his thought and inner vision,
they were tame and scant of syllable. He discovered that his literary
palette was even more pitiful than his pictorial. Still he labored on,
for the goal was grand. And, despite his mental divorce between
pronunciation and orthography, his spoken English improved imperceptibly
through all this contact with literature.
Then one wonderful day—to be marked with a white stone and yet also
with a black—he received a letter from England. All his artistic
ambition flamed up furiously again as he broke the seal:

London, Limners’ Club.
Dear Nephew,—Your letter gave me mingled pain and pleasure. I was
deeply grieved to hear of the sad death of your dear father. My
poor brother had not written to me nor had I seen him since his
marriage, but I knew I should somehow hear of it if anything went
wrong with him. I am shocked to have remained ignorant for so many
months after his death. I really think your mother should have let
me know, as she could have discovered my address through my wife’s
relatives, who live in Halifax. However, I hope God has given her
strength to bear the blow. And now, my dear Matthew, let me tell
you your letter is very childish, and not what I should have
expected of a young man of fourteen as you describe yourself. It is
very nice to amuse yourself by painting pictures; it keeps you out
of mischief. But how can you fancy that your pictures are worth any
money? Why, painting is the most difficult of all the arts; it
requires years and years of study under great masters, and it costs
a heap of money to pay models—that is, men or women who sit or
stand in uncomfortable positions while you are painting them. No
picture is any good that is done without models; if you wanted to
paint a horse you would have to hire a horse, and that is even more
expensive than hiring a man. Otherwise your horse would be all
wrong. Why, a friend of mine painted a picture of a forge, and he
had to have it all built up in his studio, and it cost a hundred
and twenty pounds. Studio! The word reminds me that an artist must
have a special room to work in, with windows on top, and these
rooms are very expensive. London is crammed full of artists who
have had all these advantages and yet they are starving. The
pictures that you do now everybody would laugh at. And where would
you get the money for frames? A nice gold frame might redeem your
pictures, but gold frames are dear. No, my dear Matthew, you must
not be a little fool. How could you, a poor orphan, think of coming
to London? Why, you would die in the streets. No; remain where you
are, and thank God that you are earning your clothes and your keep
with an honest sawyer in a land of peace and plenty, and are not a
burden on your poor mother. I hope you will listen to your uncle
like a good boy, and grow up to be grateful to him for saving you
from starvation. Believe me,

Your affectionate uncle,
Matthew Strang.

Matt’s tears blistered the final sheet of this discouraging document.
His roseate visions of the future faded to cold gray, his heart ached
with a sudden sense of the emptiness of existence. But when he had come
to the last word his hand clinched the letter fiercely. A great glow of
resolution pervaded his being, like the heat that returns after a cold
douche. “I will be a painter. I will, I will, I will!” he hissed. And he
tore up the embryo of the dime novel and wrote again to his uncle:
My dear Uncle,—How good you are to write to me and tell me
everything I want to know. Don’t be afraid that I will starve in
London, dear uncle. I could always earn my living there in the
fields and paint late at night, but I won’t come till I have enough
money for lessons and models and a studio, though I think I could
draw horses without hiring them. I have always been very good at
animals. Besides, what do they do when they want bears, as the
geography book says there aren’t any bears in England? I could live
in the attic, and knock a hole in the roof. My mother doesn’t need
anything from me, thank God, as she is married again and bears the
blow well, and my sister Harriet is married too, so you see it will
be easy for me to save up money. As soon as my apprenticeship is
over I shall go on to the States, where the greatest fools make
heaps of money, and so in a few years, please God, I shall be able
to come over like you did, and be a great artist like you.
Good-bye, dear uncle, God bless you.

From your loving nephew,
Matthew Strang.

P.S.—When I come over I will change my name if you like, so as not
to clash with yours. I know you would not like it if people thought
you had done my pictures.
P.P.S.—Besides, my real name now might be Matthew Hailey, as
mother has changed hers to that.

This letter evoked no answer.
When Matt’s apprenticeship was at an end, the first item of his
programme broke down, for he lacked the money to carry him to the
States, so he had to stay on at Cattermole’s farm at a petty wage,
though a larger than Mrs. Cattermole was aware of, till he had scraped a
little together. And then an accident occurred that bade fair to dispose
of all the other items. He was at work in the saw-mill, when his leg got
jammed between the log he was operating upon and the carriage that was
bearing it towards the gang of up-and-down saws. There would not be room
for his body to pass between the gang of saws and the framework that
held them. It was an awful instant. He cried out, but his voice was lost
in the roar of the water and the clatter of the machinery. Round went
the water-wheel, the carriage glided along, offering inch after inch of
the log to the cruel teeth, and Matt was drawn steadily with it towards
the fatal point. With an inspiration he drew out the stout string he
always carried in his pocket, and, making a noose, threw it towards a
lever. It caught, and Matt was saved, for he had only to pull this lever
to close the gate in the flume and shut out the water. When the
machinery stopped the racket ceased, too, and Matt’s voice could be
heard, and Cattermole rushed in from the adjoining furniture
manufactory, and, knocking away the dogs at the end of the log, lifted
it and released the prisoner, and then made him kneel down and offer a
prayer for his salvation. Matt’s awakening sense of logic dimly
insinuated that this was thanking Providence for having failed to
mutilate him, but the atmosphere of Puritan acceptance in which he moved
and had his being asphyxiated the nascent scepticism.
Shortly after, Matt bade farewell to Cattermole farm, with its complex
appurtenances—a proceeding which Mrs. Cattermole christened
“onchristian ingratitood.” She declared that he ought to strip off the
clothes she had made him, and depart naked as he had come. From a dim
corner of the kitchen Cattermole’s face signalled, “Don’t mind her. God
bless you.”
Softened by the saw-mill accident, Matt tramped to Cobequid to see his
mother before departing for Boston, and thence ultimately for England.
He felt guilty, a sort of Prodigal Son, and kept assuring himself of
his innocence and economy. The third Mrs. Hailey received him with a
rapture that almost surpassed Billy’s. She hugged him to her bosom with
sobs and told him her grievances. These were manifold, but seemed
analyzable into four categories: one, the remissness of Harriet, whose
visits were rare, and whose baby had bow-legs; two, the naughtiness of
the children, of whom Matt had always been the only satisfactory
specimen; three, the cruelty of their step-father in chastising them for
the same; four, the deacon’s breach of contract in refusing to migrate
to Halifax, or to permit her to hold Baptist prayer-meetings. Her black
eyes flashed with strange fire when she spoke of her new husband’s
crimes and derelictions. And there was the old dreaded hysteria in her
threats to throw up the position. Evidently remarriage had not made her
happy, he thought with added tenderness. Perhaps nothing could. He
shuddered at his own deeper perception of unhappiness implanted in
temperament and finding nutriment in any conditions.
In conclusion, she besought her boy—the only person in the world who
loved her, the only person to whom she could tell her troubles—to go to
Halifax instead of the States. It was far nearer, and money could be
made just as easily. Her folks lived at Halifax, and though he must not
dream of seeking their assistance, for they had been very bad to her,
mewing her up strictly so that she had been forced to elope with her
poor Davie, still it would be a consolation to know that he was near her
own people, likewise not far from herself, in case of anything happening
to either of them. Perhaps she would persuade her husband to move there,