# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2017
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Johann Georg Zimmermann, Solitude
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/55898/55898-h/55898-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

But nature will not be argued out of her rights; and
these absurd doctrines introduced into every monastic
institution throughout Europe a private intercourse, hostile,
from its evil example to the interests both of morality
and religion. The nuns of the convent of
Argenteuil, who chose Eloisa for their Abbess, were
in all probability, influenced in their choice by the recollections
of her former frailty, and their knowledge
of the present ruling passion of her heart; they meant
to provide the abbey with a superior who, if she were[261]
not inclined to promote, would feel no disposition to
interrupt their intrigues. The fact certainly was, that
during the time Eloisa presided over the convent, the
conduct of the nuns was so extremely licentious, that
Sugger, abbot of St. Dennis, complained of their irregularities
to Pope Honorius, in such a manner as to
induce his holiness to give the abbot possession of it;
and he immediately expelled the negligent prioress and
her intriguing sisters, and established in their place a
monastery of his own order. Strong suspicions may,
perhaps, prevail against the virtue and integrity of
Eloisa’s character, from the dissoluteness which existed
in this society; but she was certainly not included
by name in the articles of accusation which the abbot
of St. Dennis transmitted upon this subject to the court
of Rome; and there is every reason to believe that
these irregularities were carefully concealed from her
knowledge. When this lovely victim was presented
with the veil, some persons who pitied her youth, and
admired her beauty, represented to her the cruel sacrifice
she would make of herself by accepting it: but she
immediately exclaimed, in the words of Cornelia, after
the death of Pompey the great—
and accepted the fatal present with a constancy not to
have been expected in a woman who had so high a
taste for pleasures which she might still enjoy. It will
therefore, be easily conceived, that her distress, on being
ignominiously expelled from this retreat, was exceedingly
severe. She applied to Abelard to procure her
some permanent asylum, where she might have the opportunity
of estranging herself from all earthly weaknesses
and passions; and he, by the permission of the
bishop of Troyes, resigned to her the house and the
chapel of Paraclete, with its appendages, where she settled
with a few sisters, and became herself the foundress
of a nunnery. Of this monastery she continued the
superior until she died; and whatever her conduct was
among the licentious nuns of Argenteuil, she lived so
regular in this her new and last retreat, and conducted
herself with such exemplary prudence, zeal, and piety,
that all her former failings were forgot, her character[262]
adored by all who knew her, and her monastery in a
short time enriched with so great a variety of donations,
that she was celebrated as the ablest cultivator of
the virtues of forgiveness and Christian charity then
existing. The bishop of the district behaved to her as
if she had been his own daughter; the neighboring
priors and abbots treated her with all the tenderness
and attention of a real sister: and those who were distressed
and poor, revered her as their mother. But all
her cares, and all her virtues, could not protect her
against the returning weakness of her heart. “Solitude,”
says she, “is insupportable to a mind that is ill
at ease; its troubles increase in the midst of silence,
and retirement heightens them. Since I have been
shut up within these walls, I have done nothing but
weep for our misfortunes: this cloister has resounded
with my cries, and like a wretch condemned to eternal
slavery, I have worn out my days in grief and sighing.”
The useful regulations imposed by the wisdom of
St. Benedict upon the votaries of monastic retirement,
were soon neglected. Abstinence and prayer were succeeded
by luxury and impiety. The revenues of the
several orders had, by the increased value of property,
become so great, that they were expended in purchasing
a remission of those duties which their founders had enjoined.
The admission of the poor laity relieved the initiated
members from the toil of cultivating the demesne
lands, and produced a system of indolence and laziness.
They exchanged their long fast and unsavory diet, for frequent
feasts, and the richest repasts; substituted indolent
pride for laborious humility; and lost entirely their original
piety and virtue. Abelard, indeed, and some few
other abbots of the tenth century, endeavored to restore
the ancient discipline, but they were reviled and
persecuted with the most vindictive malice by their
contemporaries. The duke of Brittany, in order
to secure Abelard from the rage with which he was
pursued, for exercising qualities which ought to have
procured him admiration and esteem, gave him the
convent of St. Gildas, as an asylum from their hatred.
The high character which this monastery comparatively
enjoyed for regularity and good order, excited a
hope that he might there find rest from his vexations,
and consolation for his griefs. But instead of finding
it the seat of wisdom and piety, and the mansion of
tranquillity, he discovered the most dissolute manners
and abandoned conduct prevailing in every part of the[263]
convent. His mild and rational attempts to reclaim
these disorderly brethren, were so far from producing
the desired effect upon their minds, that it only provoked
their rage, and gave new edge to their malice.
Foiled in their endeavors, by conspiracy and calumny,
to dispossess him of his situation, they attempted, several
times at their common repasts, to infuse poison into
his victuals: and at length, dreadful to relate! actually
administered, in the sacramental cup, the poisoned
chalice to his lips, but which he was miraculously prevented
from tasting. It is, indeed, impossible to read
the description he has given of his dreadful situation
in this wild and savage community, without shuddering
at the idea how much an irrational solitude tends to
corrupt the manners and deprave the heart. “I live,”
says he, in his letter to Philintus, “in a barbarous country,
the language of which I do not understand. I
have no conversation but with the rudest people. My
walks are on the inaccessible shore of a sea which is
perpetually stormy. My monks are only known by
their dissoluteness, and living without any rule or
order. Ah! Philintus, were you to see my habitation,
you would rather think it a slaughter house than a
convent. The doors and walks are without any ornament
except the heads of wild boars, the antlers of
stags, the feet of foxes and the hides of other animals,
which are nailed up against them. The cells are hung
with the skins of victims destroyed in the chase. The
monks have not so much as a bell to wake them, and
are only roused from their drowsiness by the howling
of dogs and the croaking of ravens. Nothing disturbs
their laziness or languor but the rude noises of hunting;
and their only alternatives are riot and rest. But I
should return my thanks to heaven if that were their
only fault. I endeavor in vain to recall them to their
duty; they all combine against me; and I only expose
myself to continual vexations and dangers. I imagine
I see every moment a naked sword hanging over my
head. Sometimes they surround me, and load me with
the vilest abuse; and even when they abandon me, I
am still left to my own dreadful tormenting thoughts.”
This single example would be sufficient to prove the
extraordinary dominion which solitude has over the
human mind. It is, indeed, unless it be managed
with great good sense, the complete nursery of mischief.
The mind is without those numerous incentives
to action which are continually occurring in the busy[264]
world; and nothing can contribute to produce irregular
and disorderly passions more than the want of some
pursuit by which the heart is interested and the mind
employed. The minds of idle persons are always restless;
their hearts never at perfect ease; their spirits
continually on the fret; and their passions goaded to
the most unwarrantable excess.
Idleness, even in social life, inflicts the severest torments
on the soul; destroys the repose of individuals;
and, when general, frequently endangers the safety
of the state. Timotheus, an Egyptian monk, surnamed
the Cat, a short time after the Eutychian Controversy,
in the year 457, felt an ambition to fill the
episcopal and patriarchal chair. The splenetic restlessness
which prevailed among the monks in their several
monastic solitudes, seemed to present to his observing
eye proper instruments for the execution of his scheme.
He was conscious, from his profound knowledge of the
human character, that if men who had so long remained
in uneasy and dissatisfied indolence, could be provoked
to activity, their zeal would be as turbulent as
their former life had been lazy and supine; and that
their dispositions might be easily turned to the accomplishment
of his wishes. The better to effect his purpose,
he clothed himself in a white garment, crept silently
in the dead of night to the cells of his companions,
and, through a tube, which concealed his voice
while it magnified the sound of it, hailed every monk
by his name. The sound seemed to convey the voice
of heaven to the superstitious ears of the awakened
auditors; and the sagacious and enterprising trumpeter
did not fail to announce himself as an ambassador of
heaven, sent in the name of the Almighty to command
the monks to assemble immediately, to consult on the
most likely mode of deposing the Nestorian heretic
Proterus, and of raising the favored and orthodox Timotheus
to the episcopal throne. The idea of being
thus elected to execute this pious rebellion, roused all
the sleeping powers of these solitary and hitherto idle
fanatics; they rose tumultuously at the sacred signal;
proclaimed him as a heaven elected patriarch; solicited
him with friendly violence, not to refuse the promised
boon; and burning with all the ardor of expected success,
marched, in a few days under the banner of the
imposter, to Alexandria, where they inspired the members
of other monasteries with their own delusion, and
created throughout Egypt the wildest and most tremendous[265]
commotions. The populace caught the religious
frenzy, and joined in vast numbers the monastic
rout. Assisted by this desperate rabble, Timotheus
proceeded to the principal church of Alexandria, where
he was, by a preconcerted arrangement, pompously received
by two deposed bishops, and ordained the metropolitan
of the whole Egyptian territory. Proterus
was astonished at this sudden irruption, and hurled his
anathemas with great art and dexterity against the impious
audacity of the obscure monastic who had thus
dared to depart from the humility of his station, and to
invade with his indolent brethren, the rights of sovereignty;
but being well aware of the fury with which
this description of men generally act when they are
once set in motion, and being informed of the vast
multitude by which they had been joined, he
thought it prudent to quit his palace, and to retire
to the sacred shelter of the church of St. Quirinus.
Heathens and barbarians had heretofore respected
this venerable sanctuary; but, upon the present occasion,
it was incapable of giving safety to its aged refugee.
The furious troops of the holy imposter burst
with irresistible violence through the walls of this
consecrated edifice, and with their daggers drank the
blood of the innocent pontiff, even upon that altar, the
very sight of which ought to have paralyzed the hand
of guilt. His surrounding and numerous friends, particularly
six ecclesiastics of great eminence, learning,
and piety, shared the fate of their unhappy master, and
were found, when the dreadful massacre was over,
clinging with fondness, in the arms of death, round his
mangled body. But it was necessary for the murderers
to calumniate the purity of that life which they had
thus violently and injuriously destroyed. They accordingly
dragged the corpse of this virtuous patriarch to
the most public part of the city, and, after the grossest
abuse of his character, and most scandalous misrepresentation
of his conduct, hung it on an elevated cross,
and exposed it to the brutal insults of the misguided
and deluded populace. To complete this unmanly outrage,
they at length committed the torn and mangled
remains of this excellent prelate to the flames, and
hurled his ashes, amidst the most opprobrious and insulting
epithets, into the darkened air; exclaiming
with horrid imprecations, that the mortal part of such
a wretch was not entitled to the right of sepulchre,
or even the tears of friends. So furious and undaunted,[266]
indeed, were all the oriental monks, when once
roused from their monastic lethargy, that even the soldiers
of the Greek emperors cautiously avoided meeting
them in the field. The fury by which they were actuated
was so blind, that the pious Chrysostom, the
warmest and most zealous advocate for monastic institutions,
trembled at his approach. This celebrated
father of the church was born in the year 344, of one
of the first families of the city of Antioch, and added
new lustre to their fame by his virtues and his eloquence.
Having finished his studies with wonderful success,
under Libanus, the greatest rhetorician of the age, he
devoted himself to the study of the law; but religion
having planted itself deeply in his mind, he quitted all
secular concerns, and retired into solitude among the
mountains in the vicinity of the city, where, in the
dreary caves, he devoted two entire years to penitence
and prayer. Ill health, however, obliged him to return
to Antioch; he began to preach the Word, and was
soon followed by a host of disciples. The life of this
excellent pastor was an example to his whole flock.
He endeavored to drive away the wolves from the folds,
and sent missionaries even into Scythia, to convert its
inhabitants to Christianity. These missions, and his
various charities, required either considerable revenues
or the most rigid economy; and the holy patriarch was
contented to live in the extremest poverty, that he
might have the better opportunity of relieving the sufferings
of his fellow creatures. The character and
conduct of this virtuous pontiff soon gained him the
hearts of his people, and he set himself earnestly to reform
the many abuses which at this time prevailed at Constantinople.
The severity and vehemence, however,
with which he declaimed against the pride, the luxury,
and the rapacity of the great; the zeal with which he
endeavored to reform the vices and misconduct of the
clergy; and the eagerness he discovered for the conversion
of heretics, created him a multitude of enemies;
and Eutropius, the favorite of the Emperor Arcadius;
Gainas, the tyrant to whom he had refused protection
for the Arians; Theophilus, of Alexandria, the patron
of the Origenists; and the disciples of Arius, whom he
banished from Constantinople, entered into a conspiracy
against him; and an occasion soon happened, which gave
them the opportunity of taking ample vengeance. The
intrepid preacher, convinced that while he declaimed
against vice in general, the peculiar vices which prevailed[267]
in the court of the Empress Eudoxia, and the
personal misconduct of the Empress herself, called
aloud for his severest animadversions, he took every
opportunity of exposing them to the public abhorrence.
The resentment of the court encouraged the discontent
of the clergy and monks of Constantinople, who had
been very severely disciplined by the zeal of the archbishop.
He had condemned from the pulpit the domestic
females of the clergy of Constantinople, who, under
the name of servants or sisters, afforded a perpetual
occasion either of sin or scandal. The silent and solitary
ascetics, who had secluded themselves from the
world, were entitled to the warmest appprobation of
Chrysostom; but he despised and stigmatized, as the
disgrace of their holy profession, the crowd of degenerate
monks, who from some unworthy motives of pleasure
or profit, so frequently infested the streets of the
metropolis. To the voice of persuasion, the archbishop
was obliged to add the lesson of authority; and in his
visitation through the Asiatic provinces, he deposed
thirteen bishops of Lydia and Phrygia; and declared
that a deep corruption of simony and licentiousness
had infected the whole episcopal order. These bishops
also entered into the confederacy above mentioned,
and the excellent Chrysostom was studiously represented
as the intolerable tyrant of the eastern church.
This ecclesiastical conspiracy was managed by the
archbishop of Alexandria, who, by the invitation of
Eudoxia, landed at Constantinople with a stout body of
Egyptian mariners, to encounter the populace, and a
train of dependant bishops, to secure, by their voices, a
majority of a synod. The synod was convened in the
suburbs of Chalcedon, and was called the Oak; in
which Chrysostom, was accused of treason against the
empress; rudely arrested, and driven into exile; from
whence, however, he was in two days recalled; but,
upon a repetition of his imputed offences, was again
banished to the remote and desolate town of Cucusus
among the ridges of mount Taurus, in the Lesser Armenia.
On his way to this place, he was detained by
sickness at Cesarea, and at length confined to his bed.
The bishop of Cesarea, who had long entertained a
secret enmity against him, unmoved by his fallen fortunes
and helpless state, stirred up the lazy monks of
the surrounding monasteries to vengeance against him.
The fury with which they issued from their respective
cells was incredible; like the sleeping powder of the[268]
present age, they burst into immediate conflagration
and explosion at the touch of that hand by which they
were fired, and directing their heated animosity against
the dying Chrysostom, surrounded his house and
threatened, that if he did not immediately depart, they
would involve it in flames, and bury him in its ruins.
The soldiers of the garrison were called out to protect
the life of this virtuous ecclesiastic; and, on their arrival
at the scene of action, very courteously requested
the enraged monks to be quiet and depart; but the request
was treated with contempt and defiance; and it
was by the humane resolution of Chrysostom himself
that this tumult was quelled; for, rather than the blood
of his fellow creatures should be shed on his account,
he desired a litter might be procured, into which, in
his almost expiring state, he was roughly laid, and, by
his departure from the city, escaped the fury which thus
assailed his life. It is evident, from these facts, that the
irrational solitude of monastic institutions, particularly
that which prevailed in the early ages of Christianity
in the eastern parts of the converted world, instead of
rendering the votaries of it mild, complacent and humane,
filled their minds with the wildest notions, and
the most uncharitable and acrimonious passions, and
fostered in their hearts the most dangerous and destructive
vices. It is truly said, by a very elegant writer
and profound observer of men and manners, that
monastic institutions unavoidably contract and fetter
the human mind; that the partial attachment of a monk
to the interest of his order, which is often incompatible
with that of other citizens, the habit of implicit obedience
to the will of a superior, together with the frequent
return of the wearisome and frivolous duties of
the cloister, debase his faculties, and extinguish that
generosity of sentiment and spirit which qualifies men
for thinking and feeling justly, with respect to what is
proper in life and conduct; and that father Paul of
Venice was, perhaps, the only person educated in a
cloister, that ever was altogether superior to its prejudices,
or who viewed the transactions of men, and reasoned
concerning the interests of society, with the enlarged
sentiments of a philosopher, with the discernment
of a man conversant in affairs, and with the liberality
of a gentleman. Depraved, however, as this order of
men has ever been, it was to their prayers and masses
that all the princes and potentates of more than half
the discovered regions of the earth confided their salvation,[269]
and expected from their intercession, divine favor
from the fountain of all goodness and truth. But the
fears which these artful and intriguing ecclesiastics
raised in the weak or guilty minds of their contemporaries,
instead of being quieted by the conciliatory and
comforting doctrines of the gospel of Christ, were converted
to the purposes of their own sordid avarice, and
made subservient to the enjoyment of their vices, and
the advancement of their power. They inculcated the
notion, that the surest passport to eternal bliss was to
overwhelm them with riches, and to indulge them with
extraordinary privileges; and every haughty noble, or
despotic sovereign, who was anxious to gratify his own
wanton pleasures, and capricious vices, at the expense
of his people’s prosperity and happiness, endeavored to
reconcile himself to his offended God, by bribing these
ambitious and greedy monastics to grant them absolution
for their deepest crimes. Their history exhibits,
in full view, the melancholy truth, that their hearts
were corrupted by the worst passions that disgrace humanity,
and that the discipline of the convent was seldom
productive of a single virtue. Enthusiasts, indeed,
of every description, whose sentiments and feelings
are continually at war with the dictates of nature, and
who renounce all the pleasing sympathies, gentle endearments,
kind connexions, and rational enjoyments of
life, are not likely to entertain any great anxiety for the
interest or happiness of others, or to feel the least commiseration
for their sorrows. Occupied by sordid and
selfish pursuits, they must hate and despise a society, to
the lively enjoyments of which they look back with
such keen regret. When the mind, alas! has numbed
its sense of social joys, and become a stranger to
the delightful charms of sweet domestic love; when
all affection for the world and its concerns has been
studiously expelled from the bosom, and no kind feeling
or social inclination suffered to fill the vacant heart;
when man has separated himself from his species, and
has not united his soul with his Creator, he has lost all
power of being happy himself, or of communicating
happiness to others.
The bishop exceeded the inferior clergy in every kind
of profligacy, as much as in opulence and power; and,
of course, their superintending and visitorial authority
was not exerted to lessen or restrain the prevalence of
those vices which their evil example contributed so
greatly to increase. Time and chance sometimes produce[270]
extraordinary events; and if a really pious, vigilant,
and austere prelate arose amidst the general dissoluteness
of the age, his single effort to reclaim these solitary
ecclesiastics was seldom attended with success.
These fathers, indeed, frequently scrutinized with great
minuteness into the practices of the convents; and as
they were not so able to detect the guilt of incontinency,
as some philosophers of the present age pretend to
be, by the lines and features of the face, they proceeded
upon evidence less delicate, perhaps, but certainly more
demonstrative and unerring.
The celebrated Boccace has, by his witty and ingenious
tales, very severely satirized the licentiousness
and immorality which prevailed during his time in the
Italian monasteries; but, by exposing the scandalous
lives, and lashing the vices, of the monks, nuns, and
other orders of the Catholic clergy, he has been decried
as a contemner of religion, and as an enemy to true
piety. Contemporary historians have also delivered the
most disgusting accounts of their intemperance and
debauchery. The frailty, indeed, of the female monastics
was even an article of regular taxation; and the
holy father did not disdain to fill his coffers with the
price of their impurities. The frail nun, whether she
had become immured within a convent, or still resided
without its walls, might redeem her lost honor, and be
reinstated in her former dignity and virtue, for a few
ducats. This scandalous traffic was carried to an extent
that soon destroyed all sense of morality, and
heightened the hue of vice. Ambrosius, bishop of Camadoli,
a prelate of extraordinary virtue, visited various
convents in his diocese, but, on inspecting their proceedings,
he found no traces of virtue, or even of decency
remaining in any one of them; nor was he able, with
all the sagacity he exercised on the subject, to reinfuse
the smallest particle of these qualities into the degenerated
minds of the sisterhood.
The reform of the nunneries was the first step that
distinguished the government of Sextus IV. after he
ascended the papal throne, at the close of the fifteenth
century. Bossus, a celebrated canon, of the strictest
principles, and most inflexible disposition, was the agent
selected by his holiness for this arduous achievement.
The Genoese convents, where the nuns lived in open
defiance of all the rules of decency and precepts of religion,
were the first objects of his attention. The
orations which he publicly uttered from the pulpit, as[271]
well as the private lectures and exhortations which he
delivered to the nuns from the confessional chair, were
fine models, not only of his zeal and probity, but of his
literature and eloquence. They breathed, in the most
impressive manner, the true spirit of Christian purity;
but his glowing representations of the bright beauties
of virtue, and the dark deformities of vice made little
impression upon their corrupt hearts. Despising the
open calumnies of the envious, and the secret hostilities
of the guilty, he proceeded, in spite of all discouragement
and opposition, in his highly honorable pursuit;
and at length, by his wisdom and assiduity, beheld the
fairest prospects of success daily opening to his view.
The rays of hope, however, had scarcely beamed upon
his endeavors, when they were immediately overclouded
by disappointment. The arm of magistracy, which
he had wisely called upon to aid the accomplishment of
his design, was enervated by the venality of its hand;
and the incorrigible objects of his solicitude having
freed themselves by bribery from the terror of the civil
power, contemned the reformer’s denunciation of eternal
vengeance hereafter, and relapsed into their former
licentiousness and depravity. A few, indeed, among
the great number of nuns who inhabited these guilty
convents, were converted by the force of his eloquent
remonstrances, and became afterward highly exemplary
by the virtue and piety of their lives; but the rest
abandoned themselves to their impious courses; and
though more vigorous methods were, in a short time,
adopted against the refractory monastics, they set all
attempts to reform them at defiance. The modes, perhaps,
in which their vices were indulged, changed with
the character of the age; and as manners grew more
refined, the gross and shameful indulgences of the
monks and nuns were changed into a more elegant and
decent style of enjoyment. Fashion might render them
more prudent and reserved in their intrigues; but their
passions were not less vicious, nor their dispositions
less corrupt.
The disorderly manners of these solitary devotees
were among the principal causes that produced the reformation.
There is a point beyond which even depravity
cannot go in corrupting the manners of the age.
The number and power of the monastics, or, as they
were at that time called, the regular clergy, was certainly
great, and their resistance to the approaches of
reformation obstinate; but the temper of the times had[272]
changed, and the glorious and beneficial event was at
length accomplished. The Catholics viewed the dismemberment
of their church as a fatal stroke to their
interest and power; but it has since been confessed, by
every candid and rational member of this communion
to be an event which has contributed to advance morals
to a higher degree of perfection than they had ever before
attained since the introduction of Christianity, and
to restore the discipline of the church to some portion
of its original purity.
The pure spirit of the gospel of Christ breathes forth
a holy religion, founded on meekness, charity, kindness,
and brotherly love; but fanaticism, when joined to a
systematic and irrational solitude, only produces the
rank and poisonous fruits we have already described.
The trivial, querulous, and intolerant superstitions,
which, during so many ages, eclipsed the reason and
morals of mankind, and obscured, in clouds of lust
and cruelty, the bright rays of evangelical truth, were
the sad effects of irrational solitude. The best affections
of nature were perverted or suppressed; all the
gentle offices of humanity were neglected; moral sentiments
despised; and the angel voice of piety unheard,
or converted into the violent vociferations of hatred,
and the cries of persecution. The loud clangors of
pretended orthodoxy resounded with sanguinary hostilities
from shore to shore; the earth was deluged with
the blood of those who dared to deny, or even to doubt
the absurd and idle dogmas which the monks every
where invented: and their horrid barbarities were attempted
to be justified by propagating the notion that
severity with heretics was the only mode of preserving
the true faith. Oh! how blind is human folly! How
obdurate are hearts vitiated by pride! How can that
be the true faith which tears asunder every social tie;
annihilates all the feelings of nature; places cruelty and
horror on the throne of humanity and love, and scatters
ferocious fury and insatiable hatred through the
paths of life? But we may now indulge a pleasing
hope, that the period is at hand, when the sacred temple
of religion, purified by the labors of learned and truly
pious men, from the foul stains with which fanaticism
and ambition have so long defaced it, shall be restored
to its own divine simplicity; and only the voice of gentleness,
of love, of peace of virtue, and of goodness, be
heard within its walls. Then will every Christian be
truly taught the only means by which his days may be[273]
useful and his life happy; and Catholics, Lutherans,
Calvinists, Protestants, and every really religious class
of men, will unite in acts of sincere benevolence and
universal peace. No austere, gloomy, and dispiriting
duties: no irrational penances and unnatural mortification,
will be enjoined; no intolerant cruelties be inflicted;
no unsocial institutions established; no rites of
solitary selfishness be required; but reason and religion
in divine perfection, will reassume their reign; and unaffected
and sincere devotion will occupy every mind;
the Almighty will be worshipped in spirit and in truth;
and we shall be convinced that “the wicked are like
the troubled sea when it cannot rest; but that the work
of righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietude and assurance for ever.” To effect this,
a rational retirement from the tumults of the world
will be occasionally necessary, in order to commune
with our own hearts, and be still, and to dispose our
minds to such a train of thinking, as shall prepare us,
when the giddy whirl of life is finished for the society
of more exalted spirits.
[274]
Idleness is truly said to be the root of all evil; and
solitude certainly encourages in the generality of its votaries
this baneful disposition. Nature has so framed
the character of man, that his happiness essentially depends
on his passions being properly interested, his
imagination busied, and his faculties employed; but
these engagements are seldom found in the vacant
scenes and tedious hours of retirement from the world,
except by those who have acquired the great and happy
art of furnishing their own amusements; an art which,
as we have already shown, can never be learnt in the
irrational solitude of caves and cells.
The idleness which solitude is so apt to induce, is
dangerous in proportion to the natural strength, activity,
and spirit of the mind; for it is observed, that the highest
characters are frequently goaded by that restlessness
which accompanies leisure, to acts of the wildest
outrage and greatest enormity. The ancient legislators
were so conscious that indolence, whether indulged
in solitude or in society, is the nurse of civil commotion,
and the chief instigator of moral turpitude, that
they wisely framed their laws to prevent its existence.
Solon, observing that the city was filled with persons
who assembled from all parts on account of the great
security in which the people lived in Attica, that the
country withal was poor and barren, and being conscious
that merchants, who traffic by sea, do not use to
transport their goods where they can have nothing in
exchange, turned the attention of the citizens to manufactures;
and for this purpose made a law, that he who
was three times convicted of idleness, should be deemed
infamous; that no son should be obliged to maintain
his father if he had not taught him a trade;
that trade should be accounted honorable; and that the
council of the Areopagus should examine into every
man’s means of living, and chastise the idle with the
greatest severity. Draco conceived it so necessary to
prevent the prevalency of a vice to which man is by
nature prone, and which is so destructive to his character,
and ruinous to his manners, that he punished idleness
with death. The tyrant Pisistratus, as Theophrastus
relates, was so convinced of the importance of preventing[275]
idleness among his subjects, that he made a
law against it, which produced at once industry in the
country, and tranquillity in the city. Pericles, who, in
order to relieve Athens from a number of lazy citizens,
whose lives were neither employed in virtuous actions,
nor guarded from guilt by habits of industry, planted
colonies in Chersonesus, Naxos, Andros, Thrace, and
even in Italy, and sent them thither; for this sagacious
statesman saw the danger of indulging this growing
vice, and wisely took precautions to prevent it. Nothing,
indeed, contributes more essentially to the tranquillity
of a nation, and to the peaceful demeanor of its inhabitants,
than those artificial wants which luxury introduces;
for, by creating a demand for the fashionable
articles, they engage the attention, and employ the
hands of a multitude of manufacturers and artificers,
who, if they were left in that restless indolence which
the want of work creates, would certainly be unhappy
themselves, and in all probability would be fomenting
mischief in the minds of others. To suspend only for
one week, the vast multitudes that are employed in the
several mechanical trades and manufactories in Great
Britain, would be to run the risk of involving the metropolis
of that great, flourishing, and powerful country,
once more in flames; for it would be converting the
populace into an aptly disposed train of combustible
matter, which being kindled by the least spark of accidental
enthusiasm, by the heat of political faction, or,
indeed, by their own internal fermentation, would explode
into the most flagrant enormities. Nature, it is
said, abhors a vacuum; and this old peripatetic principle
may be properly applied to the intellect, which will
embrace any thing, however absurd or criminal, rather
than be wholly without an object. The same author
also observes, that every man may date the predominance
of those desires that disturb his life, and contaminate
his conscience, from some unhappy hour when
too much leisure exposed him to their incursions; for
that he has lived with little observation, either on himself
or others, who does not know that to be idle is to
be vicious. “Many writers of eminence in physic,”
continues this eminent writer, whose works not only
disclose his general acquaintance with life and manners,
but a profound knowledge of human nature, “have
laid out their diligence upon the consideration of those
distempers to which men are exposed by particular
states of life; and very learned treatises have been produced[276]
upon the maladies of the camp, the sea, and the
mines. There are, indeed, few employments which a
man accustomed to academical inquiries and medical
refinements, would not find reason for declining, as
dangerous to health, did not his learning or experience
inform him, that almost every occupation, however inconvenient
or formidable, is happier and safer than a
life of sloth. The necessity of action is not only demonstrable
from the fabric of the body, but evident
from observation of the universal practice of mankind;
who for the preservation of health in those whose rank
or wealth exempts them from the necessity of lucrative
labors, have invented sports and diversions, though
not of equal use to the world with manual trades, yet
of equal fatigue to those who practice them, and differing
only from the drudgery of the husbandman or
manufacturer, as they are acts of choice, and therefore
performed without the painful sense of compulsion.
The huntsman rises early, pursues his game through
all the dangers and obstructions of the chase, swims
rivers, and scales precipices, till he returns home, no
less harassed than the soldier, and has, perhaps, sometimes
incurred as great hazard of wounds and death;
yet he has no motive to excite his ardor; he is neither
subject to the command of a general, nor dreads the
penalties of neglect or disobedience: he has neither
profits nor honors to expect from his perils and conquests:
but acts with the hope of mural or civic garlands,
and must content himself with the praise of his
tenants and companions. But such is the constitution
of man, that labor is its own reward; nor will any external
incitements be requisite, if it be considered how
much happiness is gained, and how much misery
escaped, by frequent and violent agitation of the body.
Ease is the most that can be hoped from a sedentary
and inactive habit; but ease is a mere neutral state, between
pain and pleasure. The dance of spirits, the
bound of vigor, readiness of enterprise, and defiance of fatigue,
are reserved for him that braces his nerves, and hardens
his fibres; that keeps his limbs pliant with motion;
and, by frequent exposure fortifies his frame against the
common accidents of cold and heat. With ease, however,
if it could be secured, many would be content;
but nothing terrestrial can be kept at a stand. Ease, if
it is not rising into pleasure, will be settling into pain;
and whatever hopes the dreams of speculation may
suggest, of observing the proportion between retirement[277]
and labor, and keeping the body in a healthy state by
supplies exactly equal to its weight, we know that, in
effect, the vital powers, unexcited by motion, grow gradually
languid, decay, and die. It is necessary to that
perfection of which our present state is capable, that
the mind and body should both be kept in action; that
neither the faculties of the one nor the other should be
suffered to grow lax or torpid for want of use; that
neither health can be purchased by voluntary submission
to ignorance, nor knowledge cultivated at the expense
of that health, which must enable it either to
give pleasure to its possessor, or assistance to others.
It is too frequently the pride of students, to despise
those amusements which give to the rest of mankind
strength of limbs and cheerfulness of heart. Solitude
and contemplation are, indeed, seldom consistent with
such skill in common exercises or sports, as is necessary
to make them practised with delight; and no man is
willing to do that of which the necessity is not pressing,
when he knows that his awkwardness but makes
him ridiculous. I have always admired the wisdom of
those by whom our female education was instituted,
for having contrived that all women, of whatever condition,
should be taught some arts of manufacture, by
which the vacuities of recluse and domestic leisure
may be filled up. These arts are more necessary, as
the weakness of their sex, and the general system of
life, debar ladies from many enjoyments, which, by diversifying
the circumstances of men, preserve them
from being cankered by the rust of their own thoughts.
I know not how much of the virtue and happiness of
the world may be the consequence of this judicious regulation.
Perhaps the most powerful fancy might be
unable to figure the confusion and slaughter that would
be produced by so many piercing eyes and vivid understandings,
turned loose upon mankind, with no other
business than to sparkle and intrigue, to perplex and
destroy. For my own part, whenever chance brings
within my observation a knot of misses busy at their
needles, I consider myself as in the school of virtue;
and though I have no extraordinary skill in plain work,
or embroidery, look upon their operations with as much
satisfaction as their governess, because I regard them
as providing a security against the most dangerous ensnarers
of the soul, by enabling them to exclude idleness
from their solitary moments, and with idleness,
her attendant train of passions, fancies, chimeras, fears,[278]
sorrows, and desires. Ovid and Cervantes will inform
them that love has no power but on those whom he
catches unemployed: and Hector, in the Iliad, when
he sees Andromache overwhelmed with tears, sends
her for consolation to the loom and the distaff. Certain
it is, that wild wishes, and vain imaginations, never
take such firm possession of the mind, as when it is
found empty and unemployed.”
Idleness, indeed, was the spreading root from which
all the vices and crimes of the oriental nuns so luxuriantly
branched. Few of them had any taste for science,
or were enabled by the habits either of reflection, or
industry to charm away the tediousness of solitude, or
to relieve that weariness which must necessarily accompany
their abstracted situation. The talents with
which nature had endowed them were uncultivated;
the glimmering lights of reason were obscured by a
blind and headlong zeal; and their temper soured by
the circumstances of their forlorn conditions. Certain
it is, that the only means of avoiding unhappiness and
misery in solitude, and perhaps in society also, is to
keep the mind continually engaged in, or occupied by,
some laudable pursuit. The earliest professors of a
life of solitude, although they removed themselves
far from the haunts of men, among “caverns deep and
deserts idle,” where nature denied her sons the most
common of her blessings, employed themselves in endeavoring
to cultivate the rude and barren soil during
those intervals in which they were not occupied in the
ordinary labors of religion; and even those whose extraordinary
sanctity confined them the whole day in
their cells, found the necessity of filling up their leisure,
by exercising the manual arts for which they were respectively
suited. The rules, indeed, which were originally
established in most of the convents, ordained
that the time and attention of a monk should never be
for a moment vacant or unemployed: but this excellent
precept was soon rendered obsolete; and the sad consequences
which resulted from its non-observance, we
have already, in some degree, described.
[279]
The anxiety with which I have endeavored to describe
the advantages and the disadvantages which,
under particular circumstances, and in particular situations,
are likely to be experienced by those who devote
themselves to solitary retirement, may perhaps, occasion
me to be viewed by some as its romantic panegyrist,
and by others as its uncandid censor. I shall
therefore endeavor, in this concluding chapter, to prevent
a misconstruction of my opinion, by explicitly declaring
the inferences which ought, in fairness, to be
drawn from what I have said.
The advocates for a life of uninterrupted society will,
in all probability, accuse me of being a morose and
gloomy philosopher; an inveterate enemy to social intercourse;
who, by recommending a melancholy and
sullen seclusion, and interdicting mankind from enjoying
the pleasures of life, would sour their tempers, subdue
their affections, annihilate the best feelings of the
heart, pervert the noble faculty of reason, and thereby
once more plunge the world into that dark abyss of barbarism,
from which it has been so happily rescued by
the establishment and civilization of society.
The advocates for a life of continual solitude will
most probably, on the other hand, accuse me of a design
to deprive the species of one of the most pleasing
and satisfactory delights, by exciting an unjust antipathy,
raising an unfounded alarm, depreciating the uses,
and aggravating the abuses, of solitude; and by these
means endeavoring to encourage that spirit of licentiousness
and dissipation which so strongly mark
the degeneracy, and tend to promote the vices of
the age.
The respective advocates for these opinions, however,
equally mistake the intent and view I had in composing
this treatise. I do sincerely assure them, that it was
very far from my intention to cause a relaxation of the
exercise of any of the civil duties of life; to impair in
any degree, the social dispositions of the human heart;
to lessen any inclination to rational retirement: or to
prevent the beneficent practice of self-communion,
which solitude is best calculated to promote. The fine
and generous philanthropy of that mind which, entertaining[280]
notions of universal benevolence, seeks to feel
a love for, and to promote the good of, the whole human
race, can never be injured by an attachment to
domestic pleasures, or by cultivating the soft and gentle
affections which are only to be found in the small
circles of private life, and can never be truly enjoyed,
except in the bosom of love, or the arms of friendship:
nor will an occasional and rational retirement from
the tumults of the world lessen any of the noble sympathies
of the human heart: but on the contrary, by
enlarging those ideas and feelings which have sprung
from the connexions and dependencies which its votary
may have formed with individuals, and by generalizing
his particular interests and concerns, may enable
him to extend the social principle and increase the circle
of his benevolence.
The chief design of this work was, to exhibit the necessity
of combining the uses of solitude with those of
society; to show, in the strongest light, the advantages
they may mutually derive from each other; to convince
mankind of the danger of running into either extreme;
to teach the advocate for uninterrupted society, how
highly all the social virtues may be improved, and its
vices easily abandoned, by habits of solitary abstraction;
and the advocate for continual solitude, how
much that indocility and arrogance of character which
is contracted by a total absence from the world, may
be corrected by the urbanity of society, and by the
company and conversation of the learned and polite.
Petrarch, while in the prime of life, and amidst the
happiest exertions of his extraordinary genius, quitted
all the seducing charms of society, and retired from
love and Avignon, to indulge his mind in literary pursuits,
and to relieve his heart, from the unfortunate passion
by which it was enthralled. No situation, he conceived,
was so favorable for these purposes as the highly
romantic and delightful solitude of Vaucluse. It was
situated within view of the Mediterranean sea, in a little
valley, inclosed by a semicircular barrier of rocks,[281]
on a plain as beautiful as the vale of Tempe. The
rocks were high, bold, and grotesque; and the valley
was divided by a river, along the banks of which were
meadows and pastures of a perpetual verdure. A path
on the left side of the river, led, by gentle windings, to
the head of this vast amphitheatre. At the foot of the
highest rock, and directly in front of the valley, was a
prodigious cavern, hollowed by the hand of nature, from
whence arose a spring almost as celebrated as that of
Helicon. The gloom of the cavern, which was accessible
when the waters were low, was tremendous. It
consisted of two excavations; the one forming an arch
of sixty feet high; and the other, which was within, of
thirty feet. In the centre of this subterraneous rock
was an oval basin, of one hundred and eight feet diameter,
into which that copious stream which forms the
river Sorgia rises silently, without even a jet or bubble.
The depth of this basin has eluded all attempts to fathom
it. In this charming retreat, while he vainly endeavored,
during a period of twenty years, to forget, he
enabled himself to endure the absence of his beloved
Laura, and to compare, with the highest satisfaction,
the pure pleasures of rural retirement with the false
joys of a vicious and corrupted court, the manners and
principles of which, indeed, he had always had good
sense enough to discover and despise. But this solitude,
with all its charms, could not at length prevent
him from returning to the more splendid and busy
scenes of public life. The advantages he had derived
from a retreat of twenty years, would, he conceived,
enable him to mix with the world without the danger
of being corrupted by its vices; and after reasoning
with himself for some time in this way, he suddenly
abandoned the peaceful privacy of Vaucluse, and precipitated
himself into the gayest and most active scenes
of a luxurious city. The inhabitants of Avignon were
amazed to behold the hermit of Vaucluse, the tender
fugitive from love, the philosophic contemner of society,
who could scarcely exist, except in the midst of romantic
rocks and flowery forests, shining all at once the
bright star of the fashionable hemisphere, and the
choice spirit of every private and public entertainment.
It has already been observed, upon the authority of a
very accurate and profound observer of nature, that a
very extraordinary temperament of mind and constitution
of body are required to sustain, with tranquillity
and endurance, the various fatigues of continued solitude;
and certain it is, that a human creature who is
constantly pent up in seclusion, must, if he be not of a
very exalted character, soon become melancholy and
miserable. Happiness, like every other valuable quality,
cannot be completely possessed, without encountering
many dangers, and conquering many difficulties. The
prize is great, but the task is arduous. A healthy body,
and vigorous mind, are as essentially necessary to the
enterprise, as equal courage and fortitude are to its success.
The bold adventurer, who, destitute of these resources,
quits the bays and harbors of society, shallow,
rocky, and dangerous, as they undoubtedly are, and
commits himself to the wild and expansive sea of solitude,
will sink into its deep and disastrous bed without
a hold to save him from destruction. The few instances
we have already given, to which many more might
easily be added, furnish unequivocal testimony of the
truth of this grand precept, it is not good for man to be
alone: which was given by the great Author of nature,
and imprinted in characters sufficiently legible on the
human heart.
Content cannot be procured, except by social intercourse,
or a judicious communion with those whom
congenial tastes, and similar talent and dispositions,[283]
point out for our companions. The civilization of man,
from whence the species derive such happy consequences,
results entirely from a proper management of the
social principles; even the source of his support, the
melioration of the otherwise rude and unprofitable
earth, can only be attained by social combination. How
erroneous a notion, therefore, must the minds of those
men have formed of “their being’s end and aim,” and
how strong must their antipathies to the species be, who
like a certain celebrated French hermit, would choose
a station among the craters of Vesuvius, as a place which
afforded them greater security than the society of mankind!
The idea of being able to produce our own happiness
from the stores of amusement and delight which
we ourselves may possess, independently of all communication
with, or assistance from others, is certainly
extremely flattering to the natural pride of man; but
even if this were possible, and that a solitary enthusiast
could work up his feelings to a higher and more lasting
degree of felicity, than an active inhabitant of the world,
amid all its seducing vices and enchanting follies, is capable
of enjoying, it would not follow that society is not
the province of all those whom peculiar circumstances
have not unfitted for its duties and enjoyments. It is,
indeed, a false and deceitful notion, that a purer stream
of happiness is to be found in the delightful bowers of
solitude than in the busy walks of men. Neither of
these stations enjoy exclusively this envied stream: for
it flows along the vale of peace, which lies between the
two extremes; and those who follow it with a steady
pace, without deviating too widely from its brink on
either side, will reach its source, and taste it at its
spring. But devious, to a certain degree, must be the
walk; for the enjoyments of life are best attained by
being varied with judgment and discretion. The finest
joys grow nauseous to the taste when the cup of pleasure
is drained to its dregs. The highest delight loses
its attraction by too frequent recurrence. It is only by
a proper mixture and combination of the pleasures of
society with those of solitude, of the gay and lively recreations
of the world with the serene and tranquil satisfactions
of retirement, that we can enjoy each in its
highest relish. Life is intolerable without society; and
society loses half its charms by being too eagerly and
constantly pursued. Society, indeed, by bringing men
of congenial minds and similar dispositions together,
uniting them by a community of pursuits, and a reciprocal[284]
sympathy of interests, may greatly assist the
cause of truth and virtue, by advancing the means of
human knowledge and multiplying the ties of human
affections; and so far as the festive board, the lively
dance, the brilliant coterie, and other elegant and fashionable
pastimes, contribute to these ends, they are
truly valuable, and deserve, not only encouragement,
but approbation. On this principle, the various clubs
which are formed by artizans, and other inferior orders
in society, ought to be respected. The mind, in order
to preserve its useful activity and proper tone, must be
occasionally relaxed, which cannot be so beneficially
effected as by means of associations founded on the
pursuit of common pleasure. A friendly meeting, or a
social entertainment, exhilarates the spirits, exercises
the faculties of the mind; calls forth the feelings of the
heart, and creates, when properly formed and indulged,
a reciprocity of kindness, confidence, and esteem. It
softens the severity of virtue, while it strengthens and
enforces its effects. I therefore sincerely exhort my
disciples not to absent themselves morosely from public
places, nor to avoid the social throng; which cannot
fail to afford to judicious, rational, and feeling minds,
many subjects both of amusement and instruction. It
is true, that we cannot relish the pleasures, and taste
the advantages of society, without being able to give a
patient hearing to the tongue of folly, to excuse error,
to bear with infirmity, to view mediocrity of talents
without scorn, and illiberality of sentiment without retort;
to indulge frivolity of behavior, and even to forgive
rudeness of manners: but the performance of
these conditions meets with its own reward; for it is
scarcely credible, how very much our own tempers and
dispositions are meliorated, and our understandings improved,
by bearing with the different tempers, and humoring
the perverse dispositions of others; we experience
by such a conduct the high delight of pleasing
others, and the great advantage of improving ourselves.
Delightful, however, as social pleasures naturally are
to the human mind; necessary as they certainly are,
under proper regulations, to the preservation of the
spirits; and beneficial as they may undoubtedly be rendered,
by judicious choice and wise reflection, it is not
every person who withdraws himself from the highly
colored scenes of public life, to the shades of privacy
and retirement, that deserves the imputation generally[285]
cast on such characters, of being inclined to sullenness
and misanthropy. There are many who seek the retreats
of solitude, for the very purpose of rendering
their efforts more useful to society; many who relinquish
the endearments of private friendship, and the
applauses of public approbation, only the more nobly to
deserve them; and many, whose souls are so bitterly
tormented by the anguish of misfortune, and the sickness
of sorrow, that they find no relief from society, and
recede from its scenes to avoid giving disturbance to
that gayety which they are incapable of enjoying, and
to prevent their fractious feelings from molesting any
but themselves. There are others who retire from the
world to pursue objects the most glorious to the individual,
and most useful to mankind; the attainment of
which can only be hoped for from the advantages which
solitude affords. Glowing with a sublime and generous
spirit, they sacrifice the joys of life, the charms of
society, and even the advantages of health, to show
their attachment to the species; and, immured from
the sight of this world, toil, with indefatigable industry,
for its benefit, without expecting any other reward than
the satisfaction resulting from the sense of having promoted
the interest, and advanced the happiness of their
fellow creatures. So also,
The state of the mind, if properly consulted, will discover
whether solitude may be safely indulged. The
bosom that, amidst the gay delights and luxurious pleasures
of the world, feels a rising discontent and uneasiness,
may try the retreats of solitude without danger:
and if, after a certain period, an attachment to its mild
and tranquil scenes continues, and the heart enjoys that
quietude and content which it before so vainly wished
to experience, society may be advantageously relinquished.
The patient may, under such circumstances,
safely indulge the natural inclinations of the mind, and[286]
gratify the habitual feelings of his heart: he may then
exclaim in the language of the poet,
But when that delightful tranquillity of mind, which
an excess of social pleasure has impaired or destroyed,
is not restored to its original purity by the uninterrupted
quietude of seclusion, it may fairly be concluded,
that there is some natural and constitutional defect,
that defeats the remedy, and prevents the soul from
tasting that serenity which is so essential to the enjoyment
of human happiness. Under such circumstances
it is dangerous to indulge the pleasures of solitude; the
sufferer should fly back to society; cultivate the duties
of active life, and solicit, with temperate indulgence,
its more agreeable enjoyments. For, although the
pleasures and occupations of the world cannot eradicate
this species of intellectual disease, they may, by
being judiciously followed, suspend its progress, and
alleviate its pangs. That case must always be desperate,
when the antidote is too weak to reach the poison,
or to counteract its operation. A pious resignation to
his fate can alone afford relief.
There are, however, circumstances under which it is
absolutely necessary to retire from the world, in order
to avoid the recurrence of sentiments and feelings that[287]
are pregnant with unhappiness. To a mind that feels
unconquerable disgust of the manners and maxims of
a world which it cannot reform; to a heart that turns
with horror from the various sights the world exhibits
of human wo, which he is incapable of relieving; to a
bosom that is stung by the various vices which he cannot
prevent or restrain, and which are hourly practised
among the sons of men, retirement becomes an obligation
which the justice that every good man owes to his
own felicity demands. The impulse of solitude may in
such cases be conscientiously indulged, in the firmest
confidence of its rectitude. It is a retreat necessary to
the preservation, not only of happiness but of virtue;
and the world itself may be benefited by its effects. Removed
from the sad scenes of inactivity, wretchedness,
and guilt, the tender feelings of pity are regulated with
composure; the mind views its own operations with
nicer discrimination; the high sense of virtue is rendered
less indignant; and the hatred against vice more
temperate and discerning. The violent emotions which
created the disgusting pain gently subside; and as our
reflections on the condition of human nature prevail,
the soul feels how incumbent it is to endeavor to bear
with the follies, to alleviate the miseries, and to reform
the vices of mankind; while the leisure and quietude
which solitude affords, enables a man, who has thus retired,
to point out the most likely means of accomplishing
the ends which his lonely meditation, and philanthropic
feelings, have generally inspired.
[288]
Those who have passed their lives in the domestic
privacies of retirement; who have been only used to
the soft and gentle offices of friendship, and to the tender
endearments of love; who have formed their notion
of virtue from those bright images which the purity
of religion, the perfection of moral sentiments, and the
feelings of an affectionate heart, have planted in their
minds, are too apt to yield to the abhorrence and disgust
they must unavoidably feel on a first view of the
artificial manners and unblushing vices of the world.
Issuing from the calm retreats of simplicity and innocence,
and fondly hoping to meet with more enlarged
perfection in the world, their amiable, just and benevolent
dispositions are shocked at the sour severities, the
sordid selfishness, the gross injustice, the base artifices,
and the inhuman cruelties, which deform the fairest
features of social life, and disgrace the best famed fabric
of human polity. Revolting, however, as this disappointment
must certainly be, and grievously as the
feelings of such characters be wounded on their entering
the world, it is a cowardly desertion of their duty
to shrink from the task, and withdraw their services
from their fellow creatures. Constituted as society is,
human happiness, and the improvement of the species,
materially depend upon the active concurrence of every
individual in the general scheme of nature; and the
man who withholds his assistance to promote the public
good, loosens or destroys a link in that chain of
things, by which the whole is intended to be kept together
and preserved. The doctrine, therefore cannot
be too forcibly inculcated, that is indispensably incumbent
on every individual so to accommodate himself to
the manners of his contemporaries, and the temper of
the times, that he may have an opportunity of promoting
the happiness of others, while he increases, his
own; of extending the scale of human knowledge by
his social industry; of relieving distress by his bounty;
and of exhibiting the deformities of vice, and the beauties
of virtue, both by his precept and example. And
this sacred obligation, by which every good man feels
himself so firmly bound to promote the welfare and
happiness of his fellow creatures, of course enjoins him
to shun, with equal perseverance, the giddy multitude
in their pursuits of lawless pleasure, and to avoid the
thoughtless votaries, and baneful orgies, of wit, intemperance,
and sensual debauchery. This is best effected
by every individual forming a rational scheme of domestic[289]
enjoyment, and engaging in some useful occupation,
in which neither the frivolous pursuits of the
vainly busy, the ostentatious parade of the richly proud,
the faithless pleasures of the unthinking gay, the insatiable
anxieties of avarice, nor the distracting compunctions
of vice, shall form any part; but in which,
with a few amiable and faithful friends, he shall pass
the intervals of virtuous industry, or charitable exertion,
in the bosom of a fond and cheerful family, whose
mutual endearments and affections will confer on each
other the highest happiness human nature is capable
of enjoying.
Retirement, however, when it is not inconsistent
with our duties to society, or injurious to those family
interests which it is one of our principal foundations
of happiness to promote, is capable of producing the
most beneficial effects on our minds. The self-communion
which must accompany a wise and rational
solitude, not only fosters and confirms our virtuous inclinations,
but detects and expels those latent vices
which have secretly crept into and corrupted the heart.
It induces a habit of contemplation, which invigorates
the faculties of the soul; raises them to the highest
energies, and directs them to purposes more elevated
and noble than it was possible for them, amidst the
business and pleasures of public life, to attain. It
tends, indeed, to unfold the powers of the mind to so
great an extent, that we are ashamed of having thought
that our talents were confined within the limits we had
prescribed, and blush at the ignorance and cowardice
by which we were deceived. The activity of genius
is unlimited, and the measure of its effects depends entirely
upon a steady exertion of its powers. A courageous
and persevering industry is capable of surmounting
every difficulty, and of performing the highest
achievements. A sense of intellectual weakness so
far from being indulged, ought to be combated with[290]
fortitude and resolution, until it is completely destroyed.
The human mind, like a noble tree, extends its
branches widely round, and raises them to the skies,
in proportion as the soil on which it grows is more
or less cultivated and manured: but not being fixed
to any certain spot, its growth may be improved
to any size, by transplanting it to the soil in which it
most delights to dwell. By that firm reliance on its
natural strength, that indefatigable exertion of its improved
powers, that steady observance of its successful
operations, that warm and active zeal for excellence
to which it is invited by the advantages, and encouraged
by the opportunities, which seclusion affords,
it will ascend from one stage of improvement to another,
from acquisition to acquisition; and, by a gradual
and steady progress, reach a comprehensive elevation,
as great and surprising as it was once thought
visionary and unattainable. To these sublime and
noble effects of human intellect, solitude is the sincerest
guide and most powerful auxiliary; and he who
aspires to mental and moral excellence, whose soul is
anxious to become both great and good, will, of course,
seek its inspiring shades.
Solitude, indeed, under any circumstances, can only
become injurious by being carried to excess, or by
being misapplied; and what is there that will not, by
being abused, or misapplied, be rendered equally injurious?
The highest advantages society is capable of
conferring, the loftiest flights of fancy, the best affections
of the heart, the greatest strength of body, the
happiest activity of the mind, the elements of fire and
water, the blessings of liberty, and, in short, all the
excellent gifts of Providence, as well as all the ingenious
contrivances of man, may, by these means be
perverted, their uses destroyed, their ends and objects
defeated, and their operations and effects rendered extensively
mischievous and detrimental.
The general disadvantages which solitude is certainly
capable of producing, cannot be lessened by conceding
to its adversaries, that it is, when sought under
unfavorable circumstances, inauspicious to human happiness.[291]
It would be overstepping the sacred boundaries
of truth, and violating the rights of candor, not to
admit that irrational solitude frequently overclouds the
reason, contracts the understanding, vitiates the manners,
inflames the passions, corrupts the imagination,
sours the temper, and debases the whole character of
its votaries. Nor is it necessary to deny, that many of
them instead of employing the delightful leisure which
retirement affords, to hush the jarring passions, to
chastise the fancy, to elevate and adorn the mind, and
to reform and meliorate the heart, have been too often
occupied in the most frivolous pursuits, and in the indulgence
of the most sordid and criminal desires.
But these instances in which the pure and peaceful
retreats of solitude have been tainted and disturbed by
the vicious and turbulent desires of the world, only
demonstrate the infirm, corrupt, and imperfect nature
of the species, and not in the smallest degree, depreciate
the value of those high advantages which result
from occasional and well regulated solitude.
It is said, by a celebrated German writer, in a poetical
personification of solitude, that she holds in one
hand a cup of bliss, in which she presents unceasing
sweets to the lips of the happy; and in the other
grasps an envenomed dagger, which she plants with
increasing tortures in the bosom of the wretched; but
this must be considered as the language of the muse,
and mere flight of poetic fancy; except, indeed, so far
as it tends to enforce the idea, that virtue will always
be happy, and vice forever miserable; for retirement,
while it pours the balm of comfort into the aching bosom
of the unfortunate, and offers a cordial, cheering
as nectar, to the drooping spirits of the wise and virtuous,
only operates as a corrosive, agonizing poison,
on the constitutions of the weak and vicious.
It is a gross mistake, to suppose that the pleasures
of social life are incompatible with the benefits to be
derived from solitude. They may not only be intermingled
with, but made mutually to aid and augment
each other. Solitude may surely be enjoyed without
undergoing an exile from the world; and society may[292]
be freely mixed with, without absolutely renouncing
the pleasures of retirement. The circumstances of
life, indeed, call loudly on every mind to interchange
the pursuits of activity and scenes of quietude and repose.
The alliance of solitude and society is necessary
to the perfection not only of the intellectual character,
but to the corporeal constitution of man. To conclude
that the duties of life must necessarily be neglected
by devoting a portion of our time to solitude, is
much more erroneous than to conclude that those duties
are not always fulfilled amidst the pleasures or business
of society.
Daily observation proves most clearly, that many of
the charms, and some of the benefits, of rural retreat,
may be enjoyed without retiring to any very considerable
distance from the metropolis, the seat of social
joys and interested activity. Petrarch, during his residence
in the city of Parma, though extremely flattered
by the friendship shown him, was glad to steal from
public life as often as he could, and to indulge the
high delight he naturally felt in wandering through
the fields and woods which surrounded the metropolis.
One day, led by his love of exercise, he passed the
river of Lenza, which is three miles from Parma, and
found himself in the territory of Rhegio, in a forest
which is called Sylva Plana, or Low Wood: though
it is situated upon a hill, from whence are discovered
the Alps, and all Cisalpine Gaul. Aged oaks, whose
heads seemed to touch the clouds, sheltered the avenues
of the forest from the rays of the sun: while the
fresh breezes which descended from the neighboring
mountains, and the little rivulets which brawled along
its skirts, tempered the meridian heats of the day, and
preserved to the earth, even in the greatest droughts,
a soft verdure, enamelled with the finest flowers.
Birds of every kind warbled forth their rural songs
from the thick coverts, while deer, and every animal
of the chase, sported through the purlieus. In the
middle of this beautiful forest nature had formed a
romantic theatre, which, from its enchanting decorations,
she seemed to have designed for the residence[293]
of the muses. The charms of this delightful retreat
struck the mind of Petrarch with a sort of inspiration,
and revived so strongly his original taste for solitude
that on his return to Parma, he endeavored to procure
some spot near the environs of the city, to which he
might occasionally retire from the fatigues of his archdeaconry,
and indulge his mind in the blessings of innocence,
and the delights of rural repose. The industry
of his inquiries soon furnished him with a small
cottage, exactly suited to his wishes, situated at the
end of the city, near the abbey of St. Anthony. To
this place he fondly and frequently retired, whenever
he could escape from the duties of his church, and the
invitations of his friends. The superiority of his talents
had at this time attracted the attention and applause
of mankind; and his engaging manners secured
to him the respect and esteem of the nobles of
Parma, who besieged him with the most friendly and
flattering importunities to partake of their daily parties
of pleasure. Petrarch, however, had formed notions
of happiness very foreign to those which result from
the society of luxurious lords or fashionable females,
to whom, in general poetry afforded no delight, nor
philosophy instruction; and the companions to whom
he could afford neither amusement nor information,
were not likely to afford him much satisfaction. The
quiet and simple pleasures of retirement were more
delightful to his mind than all the elegances and splendors
of Parma; but this partiality to retirement did
not induce him to renounce the rational society which
a few select friends, with whom he had closely connected
himself, was occasionally capable of affording
him. “So conveniently,” says he, “is this delightful
cottage situated, that I enjoy all the advantages of
rural retirement, and yet retain within my reach all
the pleasures with which this gay and elegant city
abounds. The society of a few select friends recreates
my mind whenever it is distracted by the anxieties of
study, or stagnated by the stilness of solitude; and
when I am satiated with the pleasures of the town, I
fly with rapture to the sweet repose, and to all the interesting[294]
and endearing occupations of this charming
retreat. Oh! may the kindness of fortune long indulge
me in the enjoyment of this neutral state; this
happy alternation of rural tranquillity and convivial
solace! a state of felicity to which neither the anchorites
of Egypt, nor the philosophers of Greece, ever
attained. In this humble abode, let me quietly pass
the remainder of my days, unseduced by the charms
of greatness, and uninterrupted by the pleasures of the
world. Fly, all ye vain delusions and fantastic dreams,
from this cottage of content, and seek your native territories,
the palaces of princes, and the altars of ambition!”
The voice of wisdom and virtue calls aloud
on every man to adopt the scheme of happiness which
Petrarch so successfully practised. By thus dividing
our time between the busy cares and innocent amusements
of public life, and the studious and tranquil
pleasures of retirement, between the gay pursuits of
personal gratifications, and the more noble and elevated
exercises of intellect, we may avoid the dangers
of contracting, on the one hand, a passion for light
and frivolous dissipation, and on the other a joyless
disposition to misanthropic severity; and may shun
the most, if not all the evil consequences which either
solitude or society is capable of producing, which when
indulged irrationally, or indiscreetly, in general prove
the Scylla or Charybdis of our lives.
These are the observations which it has occurred to
me to make upon the advantages or disadvantages
with which those important means of human happiness
are respectively pregnant. I can truly say, that I have
felt, whenever the cares of life, and the duties of my
profession, have allowed me leisure to retire, the most
sublime and satisfactory enjoyment from solitude; and
I sincerely wish that every one who is disposed to
taste it, may receive the same comfort and pleasure
from its charms. But I exhort them, while they enjoy
the sacred blessings of repose, not to neglect the social
virtues, the consolations of friendship, or the endearments
of love; but so manage the wants of nature, and
arrange the business and concerns of life, as to find an[295]
adequate portion of leisure for the noble duties of retirement,
as well as for company and conversation of
the world. May they in short, enjoy the admiration
and esteem of their friends, and a complacent approbation
of their own conduct, without losing that relish
for the pleasures of rational retirement, by which alone
these high advantages are most likely to be gained.
To love all mankind, and to promote, to the utmost
of our power, the happiness of all those with whom
we are more intimately connected, is the highest injunction
both of morality and religion. But this important
duty certainly does not require that we should
surrender ourselves with servile obedience, or abject
submission, to any one, however superior he may be,
either in talents, in station, or in merit. On the contrary,
it is the duty of every one, not only to cultivate
the inclination, but to reserve the power of retiring occasionally
from the world, without indulging a disposition
to renounce its society or contemn its manners.
While we assert, with manly resolution, the independent
spirit of human nature, our happiness may be
considerably augmented, by extracting from the multitudinous
affairs of the world, the various enjoyments
and wise instructions it is capable of affording. Society
is the school of wisdom, and solitude the temple
of virtue. In the one we learn the art of living with
comfort among our fellow creatures, and in the other,
of living with quietude by ourselves. A total retreat
from the world would place us aside from that part
which Providence chiefly intended us to act; but without
occasional retreat it is certain that we must act
that part very ill. There will be neither consistency
in the conduct, nor dignity in the character, of one
who sets apart no share of his time for meditation and
reflection. “In the heat and bustle of life,” says an
eloquent preacher, “while passion is every moment
throwing false colors on the objects around us, nothing
can be viewed in a just light. If you wish that reason
should exert her native power, you must step aside
from the crowd into the cold and silent shade. It is
thus that with sober and steady eye she examines what[296]
is good or ill, what is wise or foolish, in human conduct:
she looks back on the past; she looks forward
to a future: and forms plans not for the present moment
only, but for the whole life. How should that
man discharge any part of his duty aright, who never
suffers his passions to cool? And how should his
passions cool, who is engaged, without interruption, in
the tumults of the world? This incessant stir may
be called the perpetual drunkenness of life. It raises
that eager fermentation of spirit, which will be ever
sending forth the dangerous fumes of rashness and
folly. Whereas he who mingles rational retreat with
worldly affairs, remains calm and master of himself.
He is not whirled round, and rendered giddy by the
agitation of the world: but from that sacred retirement,
in which he has been conversant among higher objects,
comes forth into the world with manly tranquillity,
fortified by principles which he has formed, and
prepared for whatever may befal.”
THE END.
[1] Dissertatio Physiologica de irritabilitate quam publice defendet.
Joh. Georgius Zimmerman. Goett. 4to. 1751.
[2] The following is a correct list of his writings, in the order in which
they appear to have been published:
1. Dissertatio Inauguralis de Irritabilitate, 4to. Gottingen, 1751.
2. The life of Professor Haller, 8vo. Zurich, 1755.
3. Thoughts on the earthquake which was felt on the 9th of December,
1755, in Swisserland, 4to. 1756.
4. The Subversion of Lisbon, a Poem, 4to. 1776.
5. Meditations on Solitude, 8vo. 1756.
6. Essay on National Pride, 8vo. Zurich, 1764.
7. Treatise on Experience in Physic, 8vo. Zurich, 1764.
8. Treatise on the Dysentery, 8vo. Zurich, 1767.
9. Essay on Solitude, 4to. 1773.
10. Essay on Lavator’s Phisiognomy. Hanover, 1778.
11. Essays, consisting of agreeable and instructive Tales, 8vo. 1779.
12. Conversations with the king of Prussia.
13. Treatise on Frederick the Great, 1788.
14. Select views of the Life, Reign and Character of Frederick the
Great.
15. A variety of works published in the Helvetic Journal and in the
Journals of the Physiological Society at Zurich.
16. A Work on Zoology.
[3] The king only survived the departure of his physician five weeks;
he died on the 11th of August, 1786.
[4] Hœnigsberg.

[2]
BY
JOHN G. ZIMMERMAN.
With the Life of the Author.
IN TWO PARTS.
NEW-YORK:—C. WELLS.
56, Gold-street.
1840.
[3]
[4]
[5]
Weak and delicate minds may, perhaps, be alarmed
by the title of this work. The word solitude, may possibly
engender melancholy ideas; but they have only
to read a few pages to be undeceived. The author is
not one of those extravagant misanthropists who expect
that men, formed by nature for the enjoyments of
society, and impelled continually towards it by a multitude
of powerful and invincible propensities, should
seek refuge in forests, and inhabit the dreary cave or
lonely cell; he is a friend to the species, a rational philosopher,
and the virtuous citizen, who, encouraged by
the esteem of his sovereign, endeavors to enlighten the
minds of his fellow creatures upon a subject of infinite
importance to them, the attainment of true felicity.
No writer appears more completely convinced than
M. Zimmerman, that man is born for society, or feels
its duties with more refined sensibility.
It is the nature of human society, and its correspondent
duties, which he here undertakes to examine.
The important characters of father, husband, son, and
citizen, impose on man a variety of obligations, which
are always dear to virtuous minds, and establish between
him, his country, his family, and his friends, relations
too necessary and attractive to be disregarded.
[6]
But it is not amidst tumultuous joys and noisy pleasures;
in the chimeras of ambition, or the illusions of
self-love; in the indulgence of feeling, or the gratification
of desire, that men must expect to feel the charms
of those mutual ties which link them so firmly to society.
It is not in such enjoyments that men can feel
the dignity of those duties, the performance of which
nature has rendered productive of so many pleasures,
or hope to taste that true felicity which results from an
independent mind and a contented heart: a felicity seldom
sought after, only because it is so little known,
but which every individual may find within his own
bosom. Who, alas! does not constantly experience
the necessity of entering into that sacred asylum to
search for consolation under the real or imaginary
misfortunes of life, or to alleviate indeed more frequently
the fatigue of its painful pleasures? Yes, all men,
from the mercenary trader, who sinks under the anxiety
of his daily task, to the proud statesman, intoxicated
by the incense of popular applause, experience the desire
of terminating their arduous career. Every bosom
feels an anxiety for repose, and fondly wishes to steal
from the vortex of a busy and perturbed life, to enjoy
the tranquillity of solitude.
It is under the peaceful shades of solitude that the
mind regenerates and acquires fresh force; it is there
alone that the happy can enjoy the fulness of felicity,
or the miserable forget their wo; it is there that the
bosom of sensibility experiences its most delicious
emotions; it is there that creative genius frees itself
from the thraldom of society, and surrenders itself to
the impetuous rays of an ardent imagination. To this
desired goal all our ideas and desires perpetually tend.[7]
“There is,” says Dr. Johnson, “scarcely any writer,
who has not celebrated the happiness of rural privacy,
and delighted himself and his readers with the melody
of birds, the whisper of groves, and the murmurs of
rivulets; nor any man eminent for extent of capacity,
or greatness of exploits, that has not left behind him
some memorials of lonely wisdom and silent dignity.”
The original work from which the following pages
are selected, consists of four large volumes, which have
acquired the universal approbation of the German empire,
and obtained the suffrages of an empress celebrated
for the superior brilliancy of her mind, and who
has signified her approbation in the most flattering
manner.
On the 26th of January, 1785, a courier, dispatched
by the Russian envoy at Hamburg, presented M. Zimmerman
with a small casket, in the name of her majesty
the empress of Russia. The casket contained a
ring set round with diamonds of an extraordinary size
and lustre; and a gold medal bearing on one side the
portrait of the empress, and on the other the date of
the happy reformation of the Russian empire. This
present the empress accompanied with a letter, written
with her own hand, containing these remarkable words:—“To
M. Zimmerman, counsellor of state, and physician
to his Britannic majesty, to thank him for the excellent
precepts he has given to mankind in his treatise
upon solitude.”
[8]
[9]
John George Zimmerman was born on the 8th day
of December, 1728, at Brugg, a small town in the canton
of Berne.
His father, John Zimmerman, was eminently distinguished
as an able and eloquent member of the provincial
council. His mother, who was equally respected
and beloved for her good sense, easy manners, and
modest virtues, was the daughter of the celebrated
Pache, whose extraordinary learning and great abilities,
had contributed to advance him to a seat in the
parliament of Paris.
The father of Zimmerman undertook the arduous
task of superintending his education, and, by the assistance
of able preceptors, instructed him in the rudiments
of all the useful and ornamental sciences, until
he had attained the age of fourteen years, when he
sent him to the university of Berne, where, under
Kirchberger, the historian and professor of rhetoric,
and Altman, the celebrated Greek professor, he studied,
for three years, philology and the belles lettres,
with unremitting assiduity and attention.
Having passed nearly five years at the university, he
began to think of applying the stores of information
he had acquired to the purposes of active life; and after
mentioning the subject cursorily to a few relations,
he immediately resolved to follow the practice of physic.
The extraordinary fame of Haller, who had recently
been promoted by king George II. to a professorship
in the university of Gottingen, resounded at
this time throughout Europe: and Zimmerman determined
to prosecute his studies in physic under the auspices
of this great and celebrated master. He was admitted[10]
into the university on the 12th of September,
1747, and obtained his degree on the 14th of August,
1751. To relax his mind from severer studies, he cultivated
a complete knowledge of the English language,
and became so great a proficient in the polite and elegant
literature of this country, that the British poets,
particularly Shakspeare, Pope, and Thomson, were as
familiar to him as his favorite authors, Homer and Virgil.
Every moment, in short, of the four years he
passed at Gottingen, was employed in the improvement
of his mind; and so early as the year 1751, he
produced a work in which he discovered the dawnings
of that extraordinary genius which afterwards spread
abroad with so much effulgence.[1]
During the early part of his residence at Berne, he
published many excellent essays on various subjects in
the Helvetic Journal; particularly a work on the talents
and erudition of Haller. This grateful tribute,
to the just merits of his friend and benefactor, he afterwards
enlarged into a complete history of his life
and writings, as a scholar, a philosopher, a physician,
and a man.
The health of Haller, which had suffered greatly by
the severity of study, seemed to decline in proportion
as his fame increased; and, obtaining permission to
leave Gottingen, he repaired to Berne, to try, by the
advice and assistance of Zimmerman, to restore, if
possible, his decayed constitution. The benefits he
experienced in a short time were so great, that he determined
to relinquish his professorship, and to pass
the remainder of his days in that city. In the family
of Haller, lived a young lady, nearly related to him,
whose maiden name was Mely, and whose husband, M.
Stek, had been sometime dead. Zimmerman became
deeply enamored of her charms: he offered her his
hand in marriage; and they were united at the altar
in the bands of mutual affection.
Soon after his union with this amiable woman, the
situation of physician to the town of Brugg became
vacant, which he was invited by the inhabitants to fill;
and he accordingly relinquished the pleasures and advantages
he enjoyed at Berne and returned to the place
of his nativity, with a view to settle himself there for
life. His time, however, was not so entirely engrossed[11]
by the duties of his profession, as to prevent him from
indulging his mind in the pursuits of literature; and
he read almost every work of reputed merit, whether
of physic, or moral philosophy, belles lettres, history,
voyages, or even novels and romances, which the various
presses of Europe from time to time produced.
The novels and romances of England, in particular,
gave him great delight.
But the amusements which Brugg afforded were
extremely confined: and he fell into a state of nervous
langor, or rather into a peevish dejection of spirits,
neglecting society, and devoting himself almost entirely
to a retired and sedentary life.
Under these circumstances, this excellent and able
man passed fourteen years of an uneasy life; but neither
his increasing practice, the success of his literary
pursuits,[2] the exhortations of his friends, nor the endeavors
of his family, were able to remove the melancholy
and discontent that preyed continually on his
mind. After some fruitless efforts to please him, he
was in the beginning of April, 1768, appointed by the
interest of Dr. Tissot, and baron Hockstettin, to the
post of principal physician to the king of Great Britain,
at Hanover; and he departed from Brugg, to take
possession of his new office, on the 4th of July, in the
same year. Here he was plunged into the deepest
affliction by the loss of his amiable wife, who after
many years of lingering sufferance, and pious resignation,
expired in his arms, on the 23d of June, 1770;[12]
an event which he has described in the following work,
with eloquent tenderness and sensibility. His children
too, were to him additional causes of the keenest anguish
and the deepest distress. His daughter had from
her earliest infancy, discovered symptoms of consumption,
so strong and inveterate as to defy all the powers
of medicine, and which, in the summer of 1781, destroyed
her life. The character of this amiable girl,
and the feelings of her afflicted father on this melancholy
event, his own pen has very affectingly described
in the following work.
But the state and condition of his son was still more
distressing to his feelings than even the death of his
beloved daughter. This unhappy youth, who, while
he was at the university, discovered the finest fancy
and the soundest understanding, either from a malignant
and inveterate species of scrofula, with which he
had been periodically tortured from his earliest infancy,
or from too close an application to study, fell very early
in life into a state of bodily infirmity and mental
langor, which terminated in the month of December,
1777, in a total derangement of his faculties; and he
has now continued, in spite of every endeavor to restore
him, a perfect idiot for more than twenty years.
The domestic comforts of Zimmerman were now
almost entirely destroyed; till at length, he fixed upon
the daughter of M. Berger, the king’s physician at
Lunenbourg, and niece to baron de Berger, as a person
in every respect qualified to make him happy, and they
were united to each other in marriage about the beginning
of October, 1782. Zimmerman was nearly thirty
years older than his bride: but genius and good sense
are always young: and the similarity of their characters
obliterated all recollection of disparity of age.
It was at this period that he composed his great and
favorite work on solitude, thirty years after the publication
of his first essay on the subject. It consists of
four volumes in quarto: the two first of which were
published in 1784; and the remaining volumes in 1786.
“A work,” says Tissot, “which will always be read
with as much profit as pleasure, as it contains the most
sublime conceptions, the greatest sagacity of observation,
and extreme propriety of application, much ability
in the choice of examples, and (what I cannot commend
too highly, because I can say nothing that does
him so much honor, nor give him any praise that would[13]
be more gratifying to his own heart) a constant anxiety
for the interest of religion, with the sacred and solemn
truths of which his mind was most devoutly impressed.”
The king of Prussia, while he was reviewing his
troops in Silesia, in the autumn of the year 1785, caught
a severe cold, which settled on his lungs and in the
course of nine months brought on symptoms of an approaching
dropsy. Zimmerman, by two very flattering
letters of the 6th and 16th of June, 1786, was solicited
by his majesty to attend him, and he arrived at Potzdam
on the 23d of the same month; but he immediately
discovered that his royal patient had but little
hopes of recovery; and, after trying the effect of such
medicines as he thought most likely to afford relief, he
returned to Hanover on the 11th of July following.[3]
But it was not Frederick alone who discovered his abilities.
When in the year 1788, the melancholy state
of the king of England’s health alarmed the affection
of his subjects, and produced an anxiety throughout
Europe for his recovery, the government of Hanover
dispatched Zimmerman to Holland, that he might be
nearer London, in case his presence there became necessary;
and he continued at the Hague until all danger
was over.
Zimmerman was the first who had the courage to
unveil the dangerous principles of the new philosophers,
and to exhibit to the eyes of the German princes
the risk they ran in neglecting to oppose the progress
of so formidable a league. He convinced many
of them, and particularly the emperor Leopold II. that
the views of these illuminated conspirators were the
destruction of Christianity, and the subversion of all
regular government. These exertions, while they contributed
to lessen the danger which threatened his
adopted country, greatly impaired his health.
In the month of November, 1794, he was obliged to
have recourse to strong opiates to procure even a short
repose: his appetite decreased; his strength failed him;
and he became so weak and emaciated, that, in January
1795, he was induced to visit a few particular patients
in his carriage, it was painful to him to write a
prescription, and he frequently fainted while ascending
to the room. These symptoms were followed by[14]
a dizziness in his head, which obliged him to relinquish
all business. At length the axis of his brain
gave way, and reduced him to such a state of mental
imbecility, that he was haunted continually by an idea
that the enemy was plundering his house, and that he
and his family were reduced to a state of misery and
want. His medical friends, particularly Dr. Wichman,
by whom he was constantly attended, contributed
their advice and assistance to restore him to health;
and conceiving that a journey and a change of air were
the best remedies that could be applied, they sent him
to Eutin, in the duchy of Holstein, where he continued
three months, and about the month of June, 1795, returned
to Hanover greatly recovered. But the fatal
dart had infixed itself too deeply to be entirely removed;
he soon afterwards relapsed into his former imbecility,
and barely existed in lingering sufferance for
many months, refusing to take any medicines, and
scarcely any food; continually harassed and distressed
by the cruel allusion of poverty, which again haunted
his imagination. At certain intervals his mind
seemed to recover only for the purpose of rendering
him sensible of his approaching dissolution; for he frequently
said to his physicians, “My death I perceive
will be slow and painful;” and, about fourteen hours
before he died, he exclaimed, “Leave me to myself;
I am dying.” At length his emaciated body and exhausted
mind sunk beneath the burden of mortality,
and he expired without a groan, on the 7th October,
1795, aged 66 years and ten months.
[15]
Solitude is that intellectual state in which the mind
voluntarily surrenders itself to its own reflections.
The philosopher, therefore, who withdraws his attention
from every external object to the contemplation of
his own ideas, is not less solitary than he who abandons
society, and resigns himself entirely to the calm
enjoyments of lonely life.
The word “solitude” does not necessarily import a
total retreat from the world and its concerns: the dome
of domestic society, a rural village, or the library of a
learned friend, may respectively become the seat of solitude,
as well as the silent shade of some sequestered
spot far removed from all connection with mankind.
A person may be frequently solitary without being
alone. The haughty baron, proud of his illustrious descent,
is solitary unless he is surrounded by his equals:
a profound reasoner is solitary at the tables of the witty
and the gay. The mind may be as abstracted amidst
a numerous assembly; as much withdrawn from every
surrounding object; as retired and concentrated in itself;
as solitary, in short, as a monk in his cloister, or a
hermit in his cave. Solitude, indeed, may exist amidst
the tumultuous intercourse of an agitated city as well
as in the peaceful shades of rural retirement; at London
and at Paris, as well as on the plains of Thebes and
the deserts of Nitria.
The mind, when withdrawn from external objects,
adopts, freely and extensively, the dictates of its own
ideas, and implicitly follows the taste, the temperament,
the inclination, and the genius, of its possessor. Sauntering
through the cloisters of the Magdalen convent[16]
at Hidelshiem, I could not observe, without a smile,
an aviary of canary birds, which had been bred in the
cell of a female devotee. A gentleman of Brabant, lived
five-and-twenty years without ever going out of his
house, entertaining himself during that long period
with forming a magnificent cabinet of pictures and
paintings. Even unfortunate captives, who are doomed
to perpetual imprisonment, may soften the rigors of
their fate, by resigning themselves, as far as their situation
will permit, to the ruling passion of their souls.
Michael Ducret, the Swiss philosopher, while he was
confined in the castle of Aarburg, in the canton of
Berne, in Swisserland, measured the height of the
Alps: and while the mind of baron Trenck, during his
imprisonment at Magdebourg, was with incessant
anxiety, fabricating projects to effect his escape, general
Walrave, the companion of his captivity, contentedly
passed his time in feeding chickens.
The human mind, in proportion as it is deprived of
external resources, sedulously labors to find within
itself the means of happiness, learns to rely with confidence
on its own exertions, and gains with greater
certainty the power of being happy.
A work, therefore, on the subject of solitude, appeared
to me likely to facilitate man in his search after true
felicity.
Unworthy, however, as the dissipation and pleasures
of the world appear to me to be, of the avidity with
which they are pursued, I equally disapprove of the
extravagant system which inculcates a total dereliction
of society; which will be found, when seriously
examined, to be equally romantic and impracticable.
To be able to live independent of all assistance, except
from our own power, is, I acknowledge, a noble effort
of the human mind; but it is equally great and dignified
to learn the art of enjoying the comforts of society
with happiness to ourselves, and with utility to
others.
While, therefore, I exhort my readers to listen to the
advantages of occasional retirement, I warn them
against that dangerous excess into which some of the
disciples of this philosophy have fallen; an excess
equally repugnant to reason and religion. May I happily
steer through all the dangers with which my subject
is surrounded; sacrifice nothing to prejudice; offer
no violation to truth; and gain the approbation of[17]
the judicious and reflecting! If affliction shall feel
one ray of comfort, or melancholy, released from a
portion of its horrors, raise its down cast head; if I
shall convince the lover of rural life, that all the finer
springs of pleasure dry up and decay in the intense joys
of crowded cities, and that the warmest emotions of
the heart become there cold and torpid; if I shall
evince the superior pleasures of the country; how many
resources rural life affords against the langors of
indolence; what purity of sentiment, what peaceful
repose, what exalted happiness, is inspired by verdant
meads, and the view of lively flocks quitting their rich
pastures to seek, with the declining sun, their evening
folds: how highly the romantic scenery of a wild and
striking country, interspersed with cottages, the habitations
of a happy, free, contented race of men, elevates
the soul; how far more interesting to the heart are
the joyful occupations of rural industry, than the dull
and tasteless entertainments of a dissipated city; how
much more easily, in short, the most excruciating sorrows
are pleasingly subdued on the fragrant border of
a peaceful stream, than in the midst of those treacherous
delights which occupy the courts of kings—all my
wishes will be accomplished, and my happiness complete.
Retirement from the world may prove peculiarly
beneficial at two periods of life: in youth, to acquire
the rudiments of useful information, to lay the foundation
of the character intended to be pursued, and to
obtain that train of thought which is to guide us
through life; in age, to cast a retrospective view on
the course we have run; to reflect on the events we
have observed, the vicissitudes we have experienced:
to enjoy the flowers we have gathered on the way, and
to congratulate ourselves upon the tempests we have
survived. Lord Bolingbroke, in his “Idea of a Patriot
King,” says, there is not a more profound nor a finer
observation in all lord Bacon’s works, than the following:
“We must choose betimes such virtuous objects
as are proportioned to the means we have of pursuing
them, and belong particularly to the stations we are
in, and the duties of those stations. We must determine
and fix our minds in such manner upon them,
that the pursuit of them may become the business, and
the attainment of them the end of our whole lives.
Thus we shall imitate the great operations of nature,[18]
and not the feeble, slow, and imperfect operations of
art. We must not proceed in forming the moral character,
as a statuary proceeds in forming a statue, who
works sometimes on the face, sometimes on one part,
and sometimes on an other; but we must proceed, and
it is in our power to proceed, as nature does in forming
a flower, or any other of her productions; rudimenta
partium omnium simul parit et producit: she
throws out altogether, and at once, the whole system
of every being, and the rudiments of all the parts.”
It is, therefore, more especially to those youthful
minds, who still remain susceptible of virtuous impressions,
that I here pretend to point out the path which
leads to true felicity. And if you acknowledge that I
have enlightened your mind, corrected your manners,
and tranquillized your heart, I shall congratulate myself
on the success of my design, and think my labors
richly rewarded.
Believe me, all ye amiable youths, from whose minds
the artifices and gayeties of the world have not yet obliterated
the precepts of a virtuous education; who are
yet uninfected with its inglorious vanities; who, still
ignorant of the tricks and blandishments of seduction,
have preserved the desire to perform some glorious
action, and retained the power to accomplish it; who,
in the midst of feasting, dancing, and assemblies, feel
an inclination to escape from their unsatisfactory delights;
solitude will afford you a safe asylum. Let
the voice of experience recommend you to cultivate a
fondness for domestic pleasures, to incite and fortify
your souls to noble deeds, to acquire that cool judgment
and intrepid spirit which enables you to form
correct estimates of the characters of mankind, and of
the pleasures of society. But to accomplish this high
end, you must turn your eyes from those trifling and
insignificant examples which a degenerated race of
men affords, and study the illustrious characters of the
ancient Greeks, the Romans, and the Modern English.
In what nation will you find more celebrated instances
of human greatness? What people possesses more
valor, courage, firmness, and knowledge; where do
the arts and sciences shine with greater splendor, or
with more useful effect? But do not deceive yourselves
by a belief that you will acquire the character of
an Englishman by wearing a cropped head of hair; no,
you must pluck the roots of vice from your mind, destroy[19]
the seeds of weakness in your bosoms, and imitate
the great examples of heroic virtue which that nation
so frequently affords. It is an ardent love of liberty,
undaunted courage, deep penetration, elevated
sentiment, and well cultivated understanding, that
constitute the British character; and not their cropped
heads, half-boots, and round hats. It is virtue alone,
and not dress or titles, that can ennoble or adorn the
human character. Dress is an object too minute and
trifling wholly to occupy a rational mind; and an illustrious
descent is only advantageous as it renders
the real merits of its immediate possessor more conspicuous.
Never, however, lose sight of this important
truth, that no one can be truly great until he has
gained a knowledge of himself: a knowledge which
can only be acquired by occasional retirement.
The true value of liberty can only be conceived by
minds that are free: slaves remain indolently contented
in captivity. Men who have been long tossed upon
the troubled ocean of life, and have learned by severe
experience to entertain just notions of the world and
its concerns, to examine every object with unclouded
and impartial eyes, to walk erect in the strict and thorny
paths of virtue, and to find their happiness in the
reflections of an honest mind, alone are free.
The path of virtue, indeed, is devious, dark and dreary;
but though it leads the traveller over hills of difficulty,
it at length brings him into the delightful and
extensive plains of permanent happiness and secure
repose.
The love of solitude, when cultivated in the morn
of life, elevates the mind to a noble independence; but
to acquire the advantage which solitude is capable of
affording, the mind must not be impelled to it by melancholy
and discontent, but by a real distaste to the
idle pleasures of the world, a rational contempt for the
deceitful joys of life, and just apprehensions of being
corrupted and seduced by its insinuating and destructive
gayeties.
[20]
Many men have acquired and exercised in solitude
that transcendent greatness of mind which defies
events; and, like the majestic cedar, which braves the
fury of the most violent tempest, have resisted, with
heroic courage, the severest storms of fate.
Solitude, indeed, sometimes renders the mind in a
slight degree arrogant and conceited; but these effects
are easily removed by a judicious intercourse with mankind.
Misanthropy, contempt of folly, and pride of spirit,
are, in noble minds, changed by the maturity of
age into dignity of character; and that fear of the opinion
of the world which awed the weakness and inexperience
of youth, is succeeded by firmness, and a high
disdain of those false notions by which it was dismayed:
the observations once so dreadful lose all their
stings; the mind views objects not as they are, but as
they ought to be; and, feeling a contempt for vice,
rises into a noble enthusiasm for virtue, gaining from
the conflict a rational experience and a compassionate
feeling which never decay.
The science of the heart, indeed, with which youth
should be familiarized as early as possible, is too frequently
neglected. It removes the asperities and polishes
the rough surfaces of the mind. This science is
founded on that noble philosophy which regulates the
characters of men; and operating more by love than
by rigid precept, corrects the cold dictates of reason by
the warm feelings of the heart; opens to view the dangers
to which they are exposed; animates the dormant
faculties of the mind, and prompts them to the practice
of all the virtues.
Dion was educated in all the turpitude and servility
of courts, accustomed to a life of softness and effeminacy,
and, what is still worse, tainted by ostentation,
luxury, and every species of vicious pleasure; but no
sooner did he listen to the divine Plato, and acquire
thereby a taste for that sublime philosophy which inculcates
the practice of virtue, than his whole soul became
deeply enamored of its charms. The same love
of virtue with which Plato inspired the mind of Dion,
may be silently, and almost imperceptibly infused by
every tender mother into the mind of her child. Philosophy,
from the lips of a wise and sensible woman,
glides quietly, but with strong effect, into the mind
through the feelings of the heart. Who is not fond of
walking, even through the most rough and difficult[21]
paths, when conducted by the hand of love? What
species of instruction can be more successful than soft
lessons from a female tongue, dictated by a mind profound
in understanding, and elevated in sentiment,
where the heart feels all the affection that her precepts
inspire? Oh! may every mother, so endowed, be blessed
with a child who delights to listen in private to her
edifying observations; who, with a book in his hand,
loves to seek among the rocks some sequestered spot
favorable to study; who when walking with his dogs
and gun, frequently reclines under the friendly shade
of some majestic tree, and contemplates the great and
glorious characters which the pages of Plutarch present
to his view, instead of toiling through the thickest
of the surrounding woods hunting for game.
The wishes of a mother are accomplished when the
silence and solitude of the forests seize and animate
the mind of her loved child; when he begins to feel
that he has seen sufficiently the pleasures of the world;
when he begins to perceive that there are greater and
more valued characters than noblemen or esquires,
than ministers or kings; characters who enjoy a more
elevated sense of pleasure than gaming tables and assemblies
are capable of affording; who seek, at every
interval of leisure, the shades of solitude with rapturous
delight; whose minds have been inspired with a
love of literature and philosophy from their earliest infancy;
whose bosoms have glowed with a love of science
through every subsequent period of their lives;
and who, amidst the greatest calamities, are capable of
banishing, by a secret charm, the deepest melancholy
and most profound dejection.
The advantages of solitude to a mind that feels a
real disgust at the tiresome intercourses of society, are
inconceivable. Freed from the world, the veil which
obscured the intellect suddenly falls, the clouds which
dimmed the light of reason disappear, the painful burden
which oppressed the soul is alleviated; we no longer
wrestle with surrounding perils; the apprehension
of danger vanishes; the sense of misfortune becomes
softened; the dispensations of Providence no longer
excite the murmur of discontent; and we enjoy the
delightful pleasures of a calm, serene and happy mind.
Patience and resignation follow and reside with a contented
heart; every corroding care flies away on the
wings of gayety; and on every side agreeable and interesting[22]
scenes present themselves to our view; the
brilliant sun sinking behind the lofty mountains tinging
their snow-crowned turrets with golden rays; the
feathered choir hastening to seek within their mossy
cells a soft, a silent, and secure repose; the shrill crowing
of the amorous cock; the solemn and stately march
of oxen returning from their daily toil, and the graceful
paces of the generous steed. But, amidst the vicious
pleasures of a great metropolis, where sense and
truth are constantly despised, and integrity and conscience
thrown aside as inconvenient and oppressive, the
fairest forms of fancy are obscured, and the purest virtues
of the heart corrupted.
But the first and most incontestable advantage of
solitude is, that it accustoms the mind to think; the
imagination becomes more vivid, and the memory
more faithful, while the sense remains undisturbed,
and no external object agitates the soul. Removed far
from the tiresome tumults of public society, where a
multitude of heterogeneous objects dance before our
eyes and fill the mind with incoherent notions, we
learn to fix our attention to a single subject, and to
contemplate that alone. An author, whose works I
could read with pleasure every hour of my life, says,
“It is the power of attention which, in a great measure
distinguishes the wise and great from the vulgar and
trifling herd of men. The latter are accustomed to
think, or rather to dream, without knowing the subject
of their thoughts. In their unconnected rovings they
pursue no end, they follow no track. Every thing floats
loose and disjointed on the surface of their minds, like
leaves scattered and blown about on the face of the
waters.”
The habit of thinking with steadiness and attention
can only be acquired by avoiding the distraction which
a multiplicity of objects always create; by turning our
observation from external things, and seeking a situation
in which our daily occupations are not perpetually
shifting their course, and changing their direction.
Idleness and inattention soon destroy all the advantages
of retirement; for the most dangerous passions,
when the mind is not properly employed, rise into fermentation,
and produce a variety of eccentric ideas
and irregular desires. It is necessary, also, to elevate
our thoughts above the mean consideration of sensual
objects; the unincumbered mind then recalls all that[23]
it has read; all that has pleased the eye or delighted
the ear; and reflecting on every idea which either observation,
experience, or discourse, has produced, gains
new information by every reflection, and conveys the
purest pleasures to the soul. The intellect contemplates
all the former scenes of life; views by anticipation
those that are yet to come, and blends all ideas of
past and future in the actual enjoyment of the present
moment. To keep, however, the mental powers in
proper tone, it is necessary to direct our attention invariably
toward some noble and interesting study.
It may, perhaps, excite a smile, when I assert, that
solitude is the only school in which the characters of
men can be properly developed; but it must be recollected,
that, although the materials of this study must
be amassed in society, it is in solitude alone that we
can apply them to their proper use. The world is the
great scene of our observations; but to apply them with
propriety to their respective objects is exclusively the
work of solitude. It is admitted that a knowledge of
the nature of man is necessary to our happiness; and
therefore I cannot conceive how it is possible to call
those characters malignant and misanthropic, who
while they continue in the world, endeavor to discover
even the faults, foibles and imperfections of human
kind. The pursuit of this species of knowledge, which
can only be gained by observation, is surely laudable,
and not deserving the obloquy that has been cast on it.
Do I, in my medical character, feel any malignity or
hatred to the species, when I study the nature, and explore
the secret causes of those weaknesses and disorders
which are incidental to the human frame? When
I examine the subject with the closest inspection, and
point out for the general benefit, I hope, of mankind,
as well as for my own satisfaction, all the frail and imperfect
parts in the anatomy of the human body?
But a difference is supposed to exist between the observations
which we are permitted to make upon the
anatomy of the human body, and those which we assume
respecting the philosophy of the mind. The
physician, it is said, studies the maladies which are incidental
to the human frame, to apply such remedies
as particular occasion may require: but it is contended,
that the moralist has a different end in view. This distinction,
however, is certainly without foundation. A
sensible and feeling philosopher views both the moral[24]
and physical defects of his fellow creatures with an
equal degree of regret. Why do moralists shun mankind,
by retiring into solitude, if it be not to avoid the
contagion of those vices which they perceive so prevalent
in the world, and which are not observed by those
who are in the habit of seeing them daily indulged
without censure or restraint? The mind, without
doubt feels a considerable degree of pleasure in detecting
the imperfections of human nature; and where
that detection may prove beneficial to mankind, without
doing an injury to any individual, to publish them
to the world, to point out their qualities, to place them,
by a luminous description before the eyes of men, is
in my idea, a pleasure so far from being mischievous,
that I rather think, and I trust I shall continue to think
so even in the hour of death, it is the only real mode
of discovering the machinations of the devil, and destroying
the effects of his work. Solitude, therefore,
as it tends to excite a disposition to think with effect,
to direct the attention to proper objects, to strengthen
observation, and to increase the natural sagacity of the
mind, is the school in which a true knowledge of the
human character is most likely to be acquired.
Bonnet, in an affecting passage of the preface to his
celebrated work on the Nature of the Soul, relates the
manner in which solitude rendered even his defect of
sight advantageous to him. “Solitude,” says he, “necessarily
leads the mind to meditation. The circumstances
in which I have hitherto lived, joined to the
sorrows which have attended me for many years, and
from which I am not yet released, induced me to seek
in reflection those comforts which my unhappy condition
rendered necessary; and my mind is now become
my constant retreat: from the enjoyments it affords I
derive pleasures which, like potent charms, dispel all
my afflictions.” At this period the virtuous Bonnet
was almost blind. Another excellent character, of a
different kind, who devotes his time to the education
of youth, Pfeffel, at Colmar, supports himself under the
affliction of total blindness in a manner equally noble
and affecting, by a lifeless solitary indeed, but by the
opportunities of frequent leisure which he employs in
the study of philosophy, the recreations of poetry, and
the exercises of humanity. There was formerly in
Japan a college of blind persons, who, in all probability,
were endued with quicker discernment than many[25]
members of more enlightened colleges. These sightless
academicians devoted their time to the study of
history, poetry, and music. The most celebrated traits
in the annals of their country became the subject of
their muse; and the harmony of their verses could
only be excelled by the melody of their music. In reflecting
upon the idleness and dissipation in which a
number of solitary persons pass their time, we contemplate
the conduct of these blind Japanese with the highest
pleasure. The mind’s eye opened and afforded
them ample compensation for the loss of the corporeal
organ. Light, life, and joy, flowed into their minds
through surrounding darkness, and blessed them with
high enjoyment of tranquil thought and innocent occupation.
Solitude teaches us to think, and thoughts become the
principal spring of human actions; for the actions of
men, it is truly said, are, nothing more than their
thoughts embodied, and brought into substantial existence.
The mind, therefore, has only to examine with
candor and impartiality the idea which it feels the
greatest inclination to pursue, in order to penetrate and
expound the mystery of the human character; and he
who has not been accustomed to self-examination, will
upon such a scrutiny, frequently discover truths of extreme
importance to his happiness, which the mists
of worldly delusion had concealed totally from his
view.
Liberty and leisure are all that an active mind requires
in solitude. The moment such a character finds
itself alone, all the energies of his soul put themselves
into motion, and rise to a height incomparably greater
than they could have reached under the impulse of a
mind clogged and oppressed by the encumbrances of
society. Even plodding authors, who only endeavor to
improve the thoughts of others, and aim not at
originality for themselves, derive such advantages from
solitude, as to render them contented with their humble
labors; but to superior minds, how exquisite are
the pleasures they feel when solitude inspires the idea
and facilitates the execution of works of virtue and
public benefit! works which constantly irritate the passions
of the foolish, and confound the guilty consciences
of the wicked. The exuberance of a fine fertile imagination
is chastened by the surrounding tranquility
of solitude: all its diverging rays are concentrated to[26]
one certain point; and the mind exalted to such powerful
energy, that whenever it is inclined to strike, the
blow becomes tremendous and irresistible. Conscious
of the extent and force of his powers, a character thus
collected cannot be dismayed by legions of adversaries;
and he waits, with judicious circumspection, to render
sooner or later, complete justice to the enemies of virtue.
The profligacy of the world, where vice usurps
the seat of greatness, hypocrisy assumes the face of candor,
and prejudice overpowers the voice of truth, must,
indeed, sting his bosom with the keenest sensations of
mortification and regret; but cast his philosophic eye
over the disordered scene, he will separate what ought
to be indulged from what ought not to be endured;
and by a happy, well-timed stroke of satire from his pen,
will destroy the bloom of vice, disappoint machinations
of hipocrisy, and expose the fallacies on which prejudice
is founded.
Truth unfolds her charms in solitude with superior
splendor. A great and good man; Dr. Blair, of Edinburgh,
says, “The great and the worthy, the pious
and the virtuous, have ever been addicted to serious retirement.
It is the characteristic of little and frivolous
minds to be wholly occupied with the vulgar objects
of life. These fill up their desires, and supply all the
entertainment which their coarse apprehensions can relish.
But a more refined and enlarged mind leaves
the world behind it, feels a call for higher pleasures,
and seeks them in retreat. The man of public spirit has
recourse to it in order to reform plans for general good;
the man of genius in order to dwell on his favorite
themes; the philosopher to pursue his discoveries; and
the saint to improve himself in grace.”
Numa, the legislator of Rome, while he was only a
private individual, retired on the death of Tatia, his beloved
wife, into the deep forests of Aricia and wandered
in solitary musings through the thickest groves and
most sequestered shades. Superstition imputed his lonely
propensity, not to disappointment, discontent, or hatred
to mankind, but to a higher cause: a wish silently
to communicate with some protecting deity. A rumor
was circulated that the goddess Egeria, captivated by
his virtues, had united herself to him in the sacred bonds
of love, and by enlightening his mind, and storing it with
superior wisdom, had led him to divine felicity. The
Druids also, who dwelt among the rocks, in the woods,[27]
and in the most solitary places, are supposed to have
instructed the infant nobility of their respective nations
in wisdom and in eloquence, in the phenomena of nature,
in astronomy, in the precepts of religion, and the
mysteries of eternity. The profound wisdom thus bestowed
on the characters of the Druids, although it
was, like the story of Numa, the mere effects of
imagination, discovers with what enthusiasm every
age and country have revered those venerable characters
who in the silence of the groves, and in the tranquillity
of solitude, have devoted their time and talents
to the improvement of the human mind, and the reformation
of the species.
Genius frequently brings forth its finest fruit in solitude,
merely by the exertion of its own intrinsic powers,
unaided by the patronage of the great, the adulation
of the multitude, or the hope of mercenary reward.
Flanders, amidst all the horrors of civil discord, produced
painters as rich in fame as they were poor in circumstances.
The celebrated Correggio had so seldom
been rewarded during his life, that the paltry payment
of ten pistoles of German coin, and which he was obliged
to travel as far as Parma, to receive, created in his
mind a joy so excessive, that it caused his death. The
self-approbation of conscious merit was the only recompense
these great artists received; they painted with
the hope of immortal fame; and posterity has done
them justice.
Profound meditation in solitude and silence frequently
exalts the mind above its natural tone, fires the imagination,
and produces the most refined and sublime
conceptions. The soul then tastes the purest and most
refined delight, and almost loses the idea of existence
in the intellectual pleasure it receives. The mind on
every motion darts through space into eternity; and
raised, in his free enjoyment of its powers by its own
enthusiasm, strengthens itself in the habitude of contemplating
the noblest subjects, and of adopting the
most heroic pursuits. It was in a solitary retreat,
amidst the shades of a lofty mountain near Byrmont,
that the foundation of one of the most extraordinary
achievements of the present age was laid. The king
of Prussia, while on a visit to Spa, withdrew himself
from the company, and walked in silent solitude
amongst the most sequestered groves of this beautiful
mountain, then adorned in all the rude luxuriance of[28]
nature, and to this day distinguished by the appellation
of “The Royal Mountain”.[4] On this uninhabited
spot, since become the seat of dissipation, the youthful
monarch, it is said first formed the plan of conquering
Silesia.
Solitude teaches with the happiest effect the important
value of time, of which the indolent, having no
conception, can form no estimate. A man who is ardently
bent on employment, who is anxious not to
live entirely in vain, never observes the rapid movements
of a stop watch, the true image of transitory
life, and most striking emblem of the flight of
time, without alarm and apprehension. Social intercourse,
when it tends to keep the mind and
heart in a proper tone, when it contributes to enlarge
the sphere of knowledge, or to banish corroding care,
cannot, indeed, be considered a sacrifice of time.
But where social intercourse, even when attended with
these happy effects engages all our attention, turns the
calmness of friendship into violence of love, transforms
hours into minutes, and drives away all ideas, except
those which the object of our affection inspires, year
after year will roll unimproved away. Time properly
employed never appears tedious; on the contrary, to
him who is engaged in usefully discharging the duties
of his station, according to the best of his ability, it
is light, and pleasantly transitory.
A certain young prince, by the assistance of a number
of domestics, seldom employs above five or six minutes
in dressing. Of his carriage it would be incorrect
to say he goes in it; for it flies. His table is superb and
hospitable, but the pleasures of it are short and frugal.
Princes, indeed, seem disposed to do every thing with
rapidity. This royal youth who possesses extraordinary
talents, and uncommon dignity of character,
attends in his own person to every application, and affords
satisfaction and delight in every interview. His
domestic establishment engages his most scrupulous
attention; and he employs seven hours every day without
exception, throughout the year, in reading the best
English, Italian, French, and German authors. It
may therefore be truly said, that this prince is well acquainted
with the value of time.
The hours which a man of the world throws idly
away, are in solitude disposed of with profitable pleasure;[29]
and no pleasure can be more profitable than that
which results from the judicious use of time. Men
have many duties to perform: he, therefore, who wishes
to discharge them honorably, will vigilantly seize the
earliest opportunity, if he does not wish that any part of
the passing moments should be torn like a useless page
from the book of life. Useful employment stops the
career of time, and prolongs our existence. To think
and to work, is to live. Our ideas never flow with
more rapidity and abundance, or with greater gayety,
than in those hours which useful labor steals from idleness
and dissipation. To employ our time with economy,
we should frequently reflect how many hours escape
from us against our inclination. A celebrated
English author says, “When we have deducted all
that is absorbed in sleep, all that is inevitably appropriated
to the demands of nature, or irresistably engrossed
by the tyranny of custom; all that is passed in
regulating the superficial decorations of life, or is given
up in the reciprocation of civility to the disposal of
others; all that is torn from us by the violence of disease,
or stolen imperceptibility away by lassitude and
langor; we shall find that part of our duration very
small of which we can truly call ourselves masters, or
which we can spend wholly at our own choice. Many
of our hours are lost in a rotation of petty cares, in a
constant recurrence of the same employments, many of
our provisions for ease or happiness are always exhausted
by the present day, and a great part of our existence
serves no other purpose than that of enabling us to enjoy
the rest.”
Time is never more misspent than while we declaim
against the want of it; all our actions are then tinctured
with peevishness. The yoke of life is certainly the
least oppressive when we carry it with good humor;
and in the shades of rural retirement, when we have
once acquired a resolution to pass our hours with
economy, sorrowful lamentations on the subject of
time misspent, and business neglected, never torture the
mind.
Solitude, indeed, may prove more dangerous than all
the dissipation of the world, if the mind be not properly
employed. Every man, from the monarch on the throne
to the peasant in the cottage, should have a daily
task, which he should feel it his duty to perform without
delay. “Carpe diem,” says Horace; and this recommendation[30]
will extend with equal propriety to
every hour of our lives.
The voluptuous of every description, the votaries of
Bacchus and the sons of Anacreon, exhort us to drive
away corroding care, to promote incessant gaiety, and
to enjoy the fleeting hours as they pass; and these precepts,
when rightly understood, and properly applied,
are founded in strong sense and sound reason; but
they must not be understood or applied in the way
these sensualists advise; they must not be consumed
in drinking and debauchery; but employed in steadily
advancing toward the accomplishment of the task
which our respective duties require us to perform.
“If,” says Petrarch, “you feel any inclination to serve
God, in which consists the highest felicities of our nature;
if you are disposed to elevate the mind by the
study of letters, which, next to religion, procures us
the truest pleasures; if by your sentiments and writings,
you are anxious to leave behind you something
that will memorize your name with posterity; stop the
rapid progress of time, and prolong the course of this
uncertain life—fly, ah; fly, I beseech you, from the
enjoyment of the world, and pass the few remaining
days you have to live in … Solitude.”
Solitude refines the taste, by affording the mind
greater opportunities to call and select the beauties of
those objects which engage its attention. There it depends
entirely upon ourselves to make choice of those
employments which afford the highest pleasure; to
read those writings, and to encourage those reflections
which tend mostly to purify the mind, and store it
with the richest variety of images. The false notions
which we so easily acquire in the world, by relying upon
the sentiments of others, instead of consulting our
own, are in solitude easily avoided. To be obliged
constantly to say, “I dare not think otherwise,” is insupportable.
Why, alas! will not men strive to form
opinions of their own, rather than submit to be guided
by the arbitrary dictates of others? If a work please
me, of what importance is it to me whether the beau
monde approve of it or not?—What information do I
receive from you, ye cold and miserable critics?—Does
your approbation make me feel whatever is truly noble,
great and good, with higher relish or more refined
delight?—How can I submit to the judgment of men
who always examine hastily, and generally determine
wrong?
[31]
Men of enlightened minds, who are capable of correctly
distinguishing beauties from defects, whose
bosoms feel the highest pleasure from the works of
genius, and the severest pain from dullness and depravity,
while they admire with enthusiasm, condemn
with judgment and deliberation; and, retiring from
the vulgar herd, either alone or in the society of selected
friends, resign themselves to the delights of a
tranquil intercourse with the illustrious sages of antiquity,
and with those writers who have distinguished
and adorned succeeding times.
Solitude, by enlarging the sphere of its information,
by awakening a more lively curiosity, by relieving fatigue,
and by promoting application, renders the mind
more active, and multiplies the number of its ideas. A
man who is well acquainted with all these advantages,
has said, that, “by silent, solitary reflection, we exercise
and strengthen all the powers of the mind. The
many obstacles which render it difficult to pursue our
path disperse and retire, and we return to a busy, social
life, with more cheerfulness and content. The sphere
of our understanding becomes enlarged by reflection;
we have learned to survey more objects, and to behold
them more intellectually together; we carry a clearer
sight, a juster judgment, and firmer principles with us
into the world in which we are to live and act; and
are then more able, even in the midst of all its distractions,
to preserve our attention, to think with accuracy,
to determine with judgment, in a degree proportioned
to the preparations we have made in the hours of retirement.”
Alas! in the ordinary commerce of the
world, the curiosity of a rational mind soon decays,
whilst in solitude it hourly augments. The researches
of a finite being necessarily proceed by slow degrees.
The mind links one proposition to another, joins experience
with observation, and from the discovery of one
truth proceeds in search of others. The astronomers
who first observed the course of the planets, little
imagined how important their discoveries would prove
to the future interests and happiness of mankind. Attached
by the spangled splendor of the firmament, and
observing that the stars nightly changed their course,
curiosity induced them to explore the cause of this
phenomenon, and led them to pursue the road of science.
It is thus that the soul, by silent activity, augments
its powers; and a contemplative mind advances[32]
in knowledge in proportion as it investigates the various
causes, the immediate effects, and the remote consequences
of an established truth. Reason, indeed, by
impeding the wings of the imagination, renders her
flight less rapid, but it makes the object of attainment
more sure. Drawn aside by the charms of fancy, the
mind may construct new worlds; but they immediately
burst, like airy bubbles formed of soap and water;
while reason examines the materials of its projected
fabric, and uses those only which are durable and
good.
“The great art to learn much,” says Locke, “is to
undertake a little at a time.” Dr. Johnson, the celebrated
English writer, has very forcibly observed, that
“all the performances of human art, at which we look
with praise or wonder, are instances of the resistless
force of perseverance: it is by this that the quarry becomes
a pyramid, and that distant countries are united
by canals. If a man was to compare the effect of a
single stroke with the pick-axe, or of one impression
of a spade, with the general design and last result, he
would be overwhelmed with the sense of their disproportion;
yet those petty operations, incessantly continued,
in time surmount the greatest difficulties; and
mountains are levelled, and oceans bounded by the
slender force of human beings. It is therefore of the
utmost importance that those who have any intention
of deviating from the beaten roads of life, and acquiring
a reputation superior to names hourly swept away
by time among the refuse of fame, should add to their
reason and their spirit the power of persisting in their
purposes; acquire the art of sapping what they cannot
batter; and the habit of vanquishing obstinate resistance
by obstinate attacks.”
It is activity of mind that gives life to the most
dreary desert, converts the solitary cell into a social
world, gives immortal fame to genius, and produces
master-pieces of ingenuity to the artist. The mind
feels a pleasure in the exercise of its powers proportioned
to the difficulties it meets with, and the obstacles
it has to surmount. When Apelles was reproached
for having painted so few pictures, and for the incessant
anxiety with which he retouched his works, he
contented himself with this observation, “I paint for
posterity.”
The inactivity of monastic solitude, the sterile tranquillity[33]
of the cloister, are ill suited to those who, after
a serious preparation in retirement, and an assiduous
examination of their own powers, feel a capacity and
inclination to perform great and good actions for the
benefit of mankind. Princes cannot live the lives of
monks; statesmen are no longer sought for in monasteries
and convents; generals are no longer chosen
from the members of the church. Petrarch, therefore,
very pertinently observes, “that solitude must not be
inactive, nor leisure uselessly employed. A character
indolent, slothful, languid, and detached from the affairs
of life, must infallibly become melancholy and
miserable. From such a being no good can be expected;
he cannot pursue any useful science, or possess
the faculties of a great man.”
The rich and luxurious may claim an exclusive right
to those pleasures which are capable of being purchased
by pelf, in which the mind has no enjoyment, and which
only afford a temporary relief to langor, by steeping
the senses in forgetfulness; but in the precious pleasures
of intellect, so easily accessible by all mankind,
the great have no exclusive privilege; for such enjoyments
are only to be procured by our own industry, by
serious reflection, profound thought, and deep research;
exertions which open hidden qualities to the mind, and
lead it to the knowledge of truth, and to the contemplation
of our physical and moral nature.
A Swiss preacher has in a German pulpit said, “The
streams of mental pleasures, of which all men may
equally partake, flow from one to the other; and that
of which we have most frequently tasted, loses neither
its flavor nor its virtues, but frequently acquires new
charms, and conveys additional pleasure the oftener it
is tasted. The subjects of these pleasures are as unbounded
as the reign of truth, as extensive as the
world, as unlimited as the divine perfections. Incorporeal
pleasures, therefore, are much more durable
than all others; they neither disappear with the light
of the day, change with the external form of things,
nor descend with our bodies to the tomb; but continue
with us while we exist; accompany us under all the
vicissitudes not only of our natural life, but of that
which is to come; secure us in the darkness of the
night, and compensate for all the miseries we are
doomed to suffer.”
Great and exalted minds, therefore, have always,[34]
even in the bustle of gaiety, or amidst the more agitated
career of high ambition, preserved a taste for intellectual
pleasures. Engaged in affairs of the most important
consequence, notwithstanding the variety of
objects by which their attention was distracted, they
were still faithful to the muses, and fondly devoted
their minds to works of genius. They disregarded the
false notion, that reading and knowledge are useless
to great men; and frequently condescended, without a
blush, to become writers themselves.
Philip of Macedon, having invited Dionysius the
younger to dine with him at Corinth, attempted to deride
the father of his royal guest, because he had blended
the characters of prince and poet, and had employed
his leisure in writing odes and tragedies. “How could
the king find leisure,” said Philip, “to write those trifles?”
“In those hours,” answered Dionysius, “which
you and I spend in drunkenness and debauchery.”
Alexander who was passionately fond of reading and
whilst the world resounded with his victories, whilst
blood and carnage marked his progress, whilst he
dragged captive monarchs at his chariot wheels, and
marched with increasing ardor over smoking towns
and desolated provinces in search of new objects of
victory, felt during certain intervals, the langors of
unemployed time; and lamenting that Asia afforded
no books to amuse his leisure, he wrote to Harpalus to
send him the works of Philistus, the tragedies of Euripides,
Sophocles, Æschylus, and the dithyrambics of
Thalestes.
Brutus, the avenger of the violated liberties of Rome,
while serving in the army under Pompey, employed
among books all the moments he could spare from the
duties of his station; and was even thus employed during
the awful night which preceded the celebrated
battle of Pharsalia, by which the fate of the empire was
decided. Oppressed by the excessive heat of the day,
and by the preparatory arrangement of the army,
which was encamped in the middle of summer on a
marshy plain, he sought relief from the bath, and retired
to his tent, where, whilst others were locked in
the arms of sleep, or contemplating the event of the
ensuing day, he employed himself until the morning
dawned, in drawing a plan from the History of Polybius.
Cicero, who was more sensible of mental pleasures[35]
than any other character, says, in his oration for the
poet Archias, “Why should I be ashamed to acknowledge
pleasures like these, since for so many years the
enjoyment of them has never prevented me from relieving
the wants of others, or deprived me of the courage
to attack vice and defend virtue? Who can justly
blame, who can censure me, if, while others are pursuing
the views of interest, gazing at festal shows and
idle ceremonies, exploring new pleasures, engaged in
midnight revels, in the distraction of gaming, the madness
of intemperance, neither reposing the body, nor
recreating the mind, I spend the recollective hours in
a pleasing review of my past life, in dedicating my
time to learning and the muses?”
Pliny the elder, full of the same spirit devoted every
moment of his life to learning. A person read to him
during his meals; and he never travelled without a
book and a portable writing-desk by his side. He made
extracts from every work he read; and scarcely conceiving
himself alive while his faculties were absorbed
in sleep, endeavored by his diligence, to double the duration
of his existence.
Pliny the younger, read upon all occasions, whether
riding, walking, or sitting, whenever a moment’s leisure
afforded him the opportunity; but he made it an
invariable rule to prefer the discharge of the duties of
his station to those occupations which he followed only
as amusement. It was this disposition which so strongly
inclined him to solitude and retirement. “Shall I
never,” exclaimed he in moments of vexation, “break
the fetters by which I am restrained? Are they indissoluble?
Alas! I have no hope of being gratified—every
day brings new torments. No sooner is one duty
performed than another succeeds. The chains of
business become every hour more weighty and extensive.”
The mind of Petrarch was always gloomy and dejected,
except when he was reading, writing, or resigned
to the agreeable illusions of poetry, upon the banks
of some inspiring stream, among the romantic rocks
and mountains, or the flower-enamelled vallies of the
Alps. To avoid the loss of time during his travels, he
constantly wrote at every inn where he stopped for refreshment.
One of his friends, the bishop of Cavaillon,
being alarmed lest the intense application with which
he studied at Vaucluse might totally ruin a constitution[36]
already much impaired, requested of him one day the
key of his library. Petrarch immediately gave it him
without asking the reason of his request; when the
good bishop, instantly locking up his books and writing-desk,
said, “Petrarch, I hereby interdict you from
the use of pen, ink, and paper, for the space of ten
days.” The sentence was severe; but the offender suppressed
his feelings, and submitted to his fate. The
first day of his exile from his favorite pursuits was tedious,
the second accompanied with incessant headache,
and the third brought on symptoms of an approaching
fever. The bishop, observing his indisposition,
kindly returned him the key, and restored him to his
health.
The late earl of Chatham, on his entering into the
world, was a cornet in a troop of horse dragoons. The
regiment was quartered in a small village in England.
The duties of his station were the first objects of his
attention; but the moment these were discharged, he
retired into solitude during the remainder of the day,
and devoted his mind to the study of history. Subject
from his infancy to an hereditary gout, he endeavored
to eradicate it by regularity and abstinence; and perhaps
it was the feeble state of his health which first led
him into retirement; but, however that may be, it was
certainly in retirement that he had laid the foundation
of that glory which he afterwards acquired. Characters
of this description, it may be said, are no longer to
be found; but in my opinion both the idea and assertion
would be erroneous. Was the earl of Chatham
inferior in greatness to a Roman? And will his son,
who already, in the earliest stage of manhood, thunders
forth his eloquence in the senate, like Demosthenes,
and captivates like Pericles the hearts of all who hear
him: who is now, even in the five-and-twentieth year
of his age, dreaded abroad, and beloved at home, as
prime minister of the British empire; ever think, or
act under any circumstances with less greatness, than
his illustrious father? What men have been, man may
always be. Europe now produces characters as great
as ever adorned a throne or commanded a field. Wisdom
and virtue may exist, by proper cultivation,
as well in public as in private life; and become as perfect
in a crowded palace as in a solitary cottage.
Solitude will ultimately render the mind superior to
all the vicissitudes and miseries of life. The man[37]
whose bosom neither riches, nor luxury, nor grandeur
can render happy, may, with a book in his hand, forget
all his torments under the friendly shade of every tree,
and experience pleasures as infinite as they are varied,
as pure as they are lasting, as lively as they are unfading,
and as compatible with every public duty as they
are contributary to private happiness. The highest
public duty, indeed, is that of employing our faculties
for the benefit of mankind, and can no where be so advantageously
discharged as in solitude. To acquire a
true notion of men and things, and boldly to announce
our opinions to the world, is an indispensible obligation
on every individual. The press is the channel through
which writers diffuse the light of truth among the people,
and display its radiance to the eyes of the great.
Good writers inspire the mind with courage to think
for itself; and the free communication of sentiments
contributes to the improvement and imperfection of
human reason. It is this love of liberty that leads men
into solitude, where they may throw off the chains by
which they are fettered in the world. It is this disposition
to be free, that makes the man who thinks in solitude,
boldly speak a language which, in the corrupted
intercourse of society, he would not have dared openly
to hazard. Courage is the companion of solitude. The
man who does not fear to seek his comforts in the
peaceful shades of retirement, looks with firmness on
the pride and insolence of the great, and tears from the
face of despotism the mask by which it is concealed.
His mind, enriched by knowledge, may defy the
frowns of fortune, and see unmoved the various vicissitudes
of life. When Demetrius had captured the city
of Megara, and the property of the inhabitants had
been entirely pillaged by the soldiers, he recollected
that Stilpo, a philosopher of great reputation, who
sought only the retirement and tranquility of a studious
life, was among the number. Having sent for him,
Demetrius asked him if he had lost any thing during
the pillage? “No,” replied the philosopher, “my property
is safe, for it exists only in my mind.”
Solitude encourages the disclosure of those sentiments
and feelings which the manners of the world
compel us to conceal. The mind there unburthens itself
with ease and freedom. The pen, indeed, is not
always taken up because we are alone; but if we are
inclined to write, we ought to be alone. To cultivate[38]
philosophy, or court the muse with effect, the mind
must be free from all embarrassment. The incessant
cries of children, or the frequent intrusion of servants
with messages of ceremony and cards of compliment,
distract attention. An author, whether walking in the
open air, seated in his closet, reclined under the shade
of a spreading tree, or stretched upon a sofa, must be
free to follow all the impulses of his mind, and indulge
every bent and turn of his genius. To compose with
success, he must feel an irresistible inclination, and
be able to indulge his sentiments and emotions without
obstacle or restraint. There are, indeed, minds
possessed of a divine inspiration, which is capable of
subduing every difficulty, and bearing down all opposition:
and an author should suspend his work until
he feels this secret call within his bosom, and watch
for those propitious moments when the mind pours
forth its ideas with energy, and the heart feels the subject
with increasing warmth; for
Petrarch felt this sacred impulse when he tore himself
from Avignon, the most vicious and corrupted
city of the age, to which the pope had recently transferred
the papal chair; and although still young, noble,
ardent, honored by his holiness, respected by princes,
courted by cardinals, he voluntarily quitted the splendid
tumults of this brilliant court, and retired to the
celebrated solitude of Vaucluse, at the distance of six
leagues from Avignon, with only one servant to attend
him, and no other possession than an humble cottage
and its surrounding garden. Charmed with the natural
beauties of this rural retreat, he adorned it with an
excellent library, and dwelt, for many years, in wise
tranquillity and rational repose, employing his leisure
in completing and polishing his works: and producing
more original compositions during this period than at
any other of his life. But, although he here devoted
much time and attention to his writings, it was long
before he could be persuaded to make them public.[39]
Virgil calls the leisure he enjoyed at Naples, ignoble
and obscure; but it was during this leisure that he
wrote the Georgics, the most perfect of all his works,
and which evince, in almost every line, that he wrote
for immortality.
The suffrage of posterity, indeed, is a noble expectation,
which every excellent and great writer cherishes
with enthusiasm. An inferior mind contents
itself with a more humble recompense, and sometimes
obtains its due reward. But writers both great and
good, must withdraw from the interruptions of society,
and seeking the silence of the groves, and the shades,
retire into their own minds: for every thing they perform,
all that they produce, is the effect of solitude.
To accomplish a work capable of existing through future
ages, or deserving the approbation of contemporary
sages, the love of solitude must entirely occupy
their souls; for there the mind reviews and arranges,
with the happiest effect, all the ideas and impressions
it has gained in its observations in the world: it is
there alone that the dart of satire can be truly sharpened
against inveterate prejudices and infatuated opinions;
it is there alone that the vices and follies of mankind
present themselves accurately to the view of the
moralist, and excite his ardent endeavors to correct
and reform them. The hope of immortality is certainly
the highest with which a great writer can possibly
flatter his mind; but he must possess the comprehensive
genius of a Bacon: think with the acuteness of
Voltaire: compose with the ease and elegance of Rousseau;
and, like them, produce master-pieces worthy
of posterity in order to obtain it.
The love of fame, as well in the cottage as on the
throne, or in the camp, stimulates the mind to the performance
of those actions which are most likely to
survive mortality and live beyond the grave, and which
when achieved, render the evening of life as brilliant
as its morning. “The praises (says Plutarch,) bestowed
upon great and exalted minds, only spur on and
rouse their emulation: like a rapid torrent, the glory
which they have already acquired, hurries them irresistibly
on to every thing that is great and noble.—They
never consider themselves sufficiently rewarded.
Their present actions are only pledges of what
may be expected from them; and they would blush
not to live faithful to their glory, and to render it still
more illustrious by the noblest actions.”
[40]
The ear which would be deaf to servile adulation
and insipid compliment, will listen with pleasure to the
enthusiasm with which Cicero exclaims, “Why should
we dissemble what it is impossible for us to conceal?
Why should we not be proud of confessing candidly
that we all aspire to fame? The love of praise influences
all mankind, and the greatest minds are the
most susceptible of it. The philosophers who most
preach up a contempt for fame, prefix their names to
their works: and the very performances in which
they deny ostentation, are evident proofs of their vanity
and love of praise. Virtue requires no other reward
for all the toils and dangers to which she exposes herself
than that of fame and glory. Take away this flattering
reward, and what would remain in the narrow
career of life to prompt her exertions? If the mind
could not launch into the prospect of futurity, or the
operations of the soul were to be limited to the space
that bounds those of the body, she would not weaken
herself by constant fatigues, nor weary herself with
continual watchings and anxieties; she would not
think even life itself worthy of a struggle: but there
lives in the breast of every good man a principle which
unceasingly prompts and inspirits him to the pursuit
of a fame beyond the present hour; a fame not commensurate
to our mortal existence, but co-extensive
with the latest posterity. Can we, who every day
expose ourselves to dangers for our country, and have
never passed one moment of our lives without anxiety
or trouble, meanly think that all consciousness shall
be buried with us in the grave? If the greatest men
have been careful to preserve their busts and their
statues, those images, not of their minds, but of their
bodies, ought we not rather to transmit to posterity the
resemblance of our wisdom and virtue? For my part,
at least, I acknowledge, that in all my actions I conceived
that I was disseminating and transmitting my
fame to the remotest corners and the latest ages of the
world. Whether, therefore, my consciousness of this
shall cease in the grave, or, as some have thought,
shall survive as a property of the soul, is of little importance.
Of one thing I am certain, that at this instant
I feel from the reflection a flattering hope and
a delightful sensation.”
This is the true enthusiasm with which preceptors
should inspire the bosoms of their young pupils. Whoever[41]
shall be happy enough to light up this generous
flame, and increase it by constant application, will
see the object of his care voluntarily relinquish the pernicious
pleasures of youth, enter with virtuous dignity
on the stage of life, and add, by the performance of
the noblest actions, new lustre to science, and brighter
rays to glory. The desire of extending our fame by
noble deeds, and of increasing the good opinion of
mankind by a dignified conduct and real greatness of
soul, confers advantages which neither illustrious birth,
elevated rank, nor great fortune can bestow; and which,
even on the throne, are only to be acquired by a life of
exemplary virtue, and an anxious attention to the suffrages
of posterity.
There is no character, indeed, more likely to acquire
future fame than the satirist, who dares to point out
and condemn the follies, the prejudices, and the growing
vices of the age, in strong and nervous language.
Works of this description, however they may fail to
reform the prevailing manners of the times, will operate
on succeeding generations, and extend their influence
and reputation to the latest posterity. True greatness
operates long after envy and malice have pursued
the modest merit which produced it to the grave.
O, Lavater! those base corrupted souls who only shine
a moment, and are forever extinguished, will be forgotten,
while the memory of thy name is carefully cherished,
and thy virtues fondly beloved: thy foibles will
be no longer remembered; and the qualities which distinguished
and adorned thy character will alone be reviewed.
The rich variety of thy language, the judgment
with which thou hast boldly intended and created
new expressions, the nervous brevity of thy style,
and thy striking picture of human manners, will, as
the author of “The Characters of German Poets and
Prose writers” has predicted, extend the fame of thy
“Fragments upon Physiognomy” to the remotest posterity.
The accusation that Lavater, who was capable
of developing such sublime truths, and of creating
almost a new language, gave credit to the juggles of
Gesner, will then be forgot; and he will enjoy the life
after death, which Cicero seemed to hope for with so
much enthusiasm.
Solitude, indeed, affords a pleasure to an author of
which no one can deprive him, and which far exceeds
all the honors of the world. He not only anticipates[42]
the effect his work will produce, but while it advances
towards completion, feels the delicious enjoyment of
those hours of serenity and composure which his labors
procure. What continued and tranquil delight
flows from this successive composition! Sorrows fly
from this elegant occupation. O! I would not exchange
one single hour of such tranquillity and content,
for all those flattering illusions of public fame
with which the mind of Tully was so incessantly intoxicated.
A difficulty surmounted, a happy moment
seized, a proposition elucidated, a sentence neatly and
elegantly turned, or a thought happily expressed, are
salutary and healing balms, counter-poisons to melancholy,
and belong exclusively to a wise and well-formed
solitude.
To enjoy himself without being dependant on the
aid of others, to devote to employments not perhaps entirely
useless, those hours which sorrow and chagrin
would otherwise steal from the sum of life is the great
advantage of an author; and with this advantage alone
I am perfectly contented.
Solitude not only elevates the mind, but adds new
strength to its powers. The man who has not courage
to conquer the prejudices and despise the manners
of the world, whose greatest dread is the imputation
of singularity, who forms his opinion and regulates
his conduct upon the judgment and actions of others,
will certainly never possess sufficient strength of mind
to devote himself to voluntary solitude; which, it has
been well observed, is as necessary to give a just, solid,
firm, and forcible tone to our thoughts, as an intercourse
with the world is to give them richness, brilliancy,
and just appropriation.
The mind, employed on noble and interesting subjects,
disdains the indolence that stains the vacant
breast. Enjoying freedom and tranquillity, the soul
feels the extent of its energies with greater sensibility,
and displays powers which it was before unconscious
of possessing: the faculties sharpen; the mind becomes
more clear, luminous, and extensive; the perception
more distinct; the whole intellectual system, in short,
exacts more from itself in the leisure of solitude than
in the bustle of the world. But to produce these happy
effects, solitude must not be reduced to a state of tranquil
idleness and inactive ease, of mental numbness, or
sensual stupor; it is not sufficient to be continually gazing[43]
out of a window with a vacant mind, or gravely
walking up and down the study in a ragged robe-de-chambre
and worn-out slippers; for the mere exterior
of tranquillity cannot elevate or increase the activity of
the soul, which must feel an eager desire to roam at
large, before it can gain that delightful liberty and leisure,
which at the same instant improves the understanding
and corrects the imagination. The mind, indeed,
is enabled, by the strength it acquires under the shades
of retirement, to attack prejudices, and combat errors,
with the unfailing prowess of the most athletic champion;
for the more it examines into the nature of things,
the closer it brings them to its view, and exposes, with
unerring clearness, all the latent properties they possess.
An intrepid and reflecting mind, when retired
within itself, seizes with rapture on truth the moment
it is discovered; looks round with a smile of pity and
contempt on those who despise its charms; hears
without dismay the invectives which envy and malice
let loose against him; and nobly disdains the hue and
cry which the ignorant multitude raise against him,
the moment he elevates his hand to dart against them
one of the strongest and invincible truths he has discovered
in his retreat.
Solitude diminishes the variety of those troublesome
passions which disturb the tranquillity of the human
mind, by combining and forming a number of them into
one great desire; for although it may certainly become
dangerous to the passions, it may also, thanks to
the dispensations of Providence! produce very salutary
effects. If it disorder the mind, it is capable of effecting
its cure. It extracts the various propensities
of the human heart, and unites them into one. By
this process we feel and learn not only the nature, but
the extent, of all the passions which rise up against us
like the angry waves of a disordered ocean, to overwhelm
us in the abyss; but philosophy flies to our aid,
divides their force, and, if we do not yield to them an
easy victory, by neglecting all opposition to their attacks,
virtue and self-denial bring gigantic reinforcements
to our assistance, and ensure success. Virtue
and resolution, in short, are equal to every conflict, the
instant we learn that one passion is to be conquered by
another.
prejudice, and deaf to the arguments of sense and reason:
let him rather, by a mild and forbearing temper,
endeavor to make some impression on their hearts; and
if he should find their bosoms susceptible, he may hope
in time to convince them of their errors, and, without
violence or compulsion, bring back their deluded understandings
to a sense of truth, and the practice of
virtue; but, if experience convince him that every endeavor
to reform them is fruitless and vain, let him—
Slander, however, by fixing her talons on the most
virtuous characters, generally defeats her own malice,
and proclaims their merit. It may, indeed, tend to diminish
their inclination for general society, and to render
them, in some degree, apprehensive of the danger
of even well deserved fame. “Durable fame,” says
Petrarch, “is only to be derived from the practice of
virtue, and from such works as are worthy of descending
from generation to generation. As to praters,
gowned gentlemen, that walk in their silks, glitter in
their jewels, and are pointed at by the people, all their
bravery and pomp, their show of knowledge, and their
thundering speeches, last only with their lungs, and
then vanish into thin smoke; for the acquisition of
wealth, and the desires of ambition, are no witnesses
of true desert. I think I shall have fame after my
death; and that is a fame from which no profit is derived;
but, on the contrary, frequently injures, while
alive, the person who is to enjoy it when dead. What[173]
procured the destruction of Cicero, Demosthenes, and
Zeno, but foul and haggard envy of their fame? What
brought the chosen men of the great ship Argos to
Colchis, but the fame of that king’s riches? For what
else was signified by the Golden Fleece, but the riches
seized by these marauders, destitute of true riches,
and who were clad with fleeces not their own?” Many,
indeed, whose merits have cast a radiance around their
characters, have hidden its splendors with the shades
of retirement to avoid giving uneasiness to envy; and,
by being deprived of that warm and aspiring tribute of
applause which they had gloriously and justly earned,
have, in some instances at least, indulged too keen a
sense of the depravity of mankind. Solon, after having
in vain exhorted the Athenians to resist the tyranny
of Pisistratus, and save the liberties of that country, on
which he had conferred such distinguished services,
returned to his own house, and placing his weapons at
the street door, exclaimed, as a last effort, “I have done
all in my power to save my country and defend its
laws!” and then retired from the tumults of public life,
to weep in silence over the servility of the Athenians,
and the fate of Athens. History affords many illustrious
instances, both ancient and modern, of the like
kind: for there never was a statesman, who possessed
a great mind and manly feelings, that did not, even
during the plentitude of his power, occasionally wish
to escape from the incorrigible vices which prevail in
courts, to the enjoyment of the more innocent pleasures
and humble virtues which surround the cottage.
Such exalted characters cannot observe, without the
highest disgust, and keenest indignation, the virtues of
the best, and the services of the bravest men of the
nation, blasted by the envious breath of brainless placemen,
or the insidious insinuations of female favorites,
whose whole time is employed in caressing their monkies
and paroquets, or in aspersing the merits of those
who boldly seek their fortune by the open and manly
road of true desert, and not by the deep, dark, and
crooked paths of flattery and intrigue. Can such a
man behold the double dealing and deceitful artifices
by which the excellency of princes is corrupted, their
imaginations dazzled, their discernment blinded, and
their minds led astray without feeling uncommon indignation?
Certainly not. But however acutely his
bosom may feel, or tongue express his sense of such
prevailing practices, he must still be forced to see,[174]
with even a more contemptuous and painful sensation,
that envious rage and jealous asperity, which burst from
the cringing crowd of mean and abject courtiers, on
hearing the monarch, in the grateful feelings of his
heart, applaud the eminent and faithful services of
some gallant officer. Dion was the principal statesman
at the court of Dionysius, and the deliverer of
Sicily. When the younger Dionysius succeeded to the
throne of his father, Dion, in the first council that he
held, spoke with so much propriety on the existing
state of affairs, and on the measures which ought to
be taken, that the surrounding courtiers appeared to be
mere children in comparison. By the freedom of his
counsels he exposed, in a strong light, the slavish
principles of those who, through a timorous disingenuity,
advised such measures as they thought would
please their prince, rather than such as might advance
his interest. But what alarmed them most, were the
steps he proposed to take with regard to the impending
war with Carthage; for he offered either to go in person
to Carthage, and settle an honorable peace with
the Carthagenians, or, if war should be inevitable, to
fit out and maintain fifty gallies at his own expense.
Dionysius was pleased with the magnificence of his
spirit; but his courtiers felt that it made them appear
little; and agreeing that, at all events, Dion was to be
crushed, they spared for that purpose no calumny that
malice could suggest. They represented to the king
that this favorite certainly meant to make himself master
by sea, and by that means to obtain the kingdom
for his sister’s children. There was, moreover, another
and obvious cause of their hatred to him, in the reserve
of his manners, and the sobriety of his life. They led
the young and ill-educated king through every species
of debauchery, and were the shameless panders of his
wrong directed passions. Their enmity to Dion, who
had no taste for luxurious enjoyments, was a thing of
course; and as he refused to partake with them in
their vices, they resolved to strip him of his virtues; to
which they gave the name of such vices as are supposed
to resemble them. His gravity of manners they
called pride; his freedom of speech, insolence; his declining
to join in their licentiousness, contempt. It is
true, there was a natural haughtiness in his deportment
and an asperity that was unsociable, and difficult of access;
so that it was not to be wondered at if he found
no ready admission to the ears of a young king, already[175]
spoiled by flattery. Willing to impute the irregularities
of Dionysius to ignorance and bad education,
Dion endeavored to engage him in a course of liberal
studies, and to give him a taste for those sciences which
have a tendency to moral improvement. But in this
wise and virtuous resolution he was opposed by all the
artifices of court intrigue.
Men, in proportion as their minds are dignified with
noble sentiments, and their hearts susceptible of refined
sensibility, feel a justifiable aversion to the society of
such characters, and shrink from the scenes they frequent;
but they should cautiously guard against the
intrusions of that austerity and moroseness with which
such a conduct is but too apt to inspire the most benevolent
minds. Disgusted by the vices and follies of
the age, the mind becomes insensibly impressed with
a hatred toward the species, and loses, by degrees, that
mild and humane temper which is so indispensably necessary
to the enjoyment of social happiness. Even he
who merely observes the weak or vicious frailties of
his fellow creatures with an intention to study philosophically
the nature and disposition of man, cannot
avoid remembering their defects with severity, and
viewing the character he contemplates with contempt,
especially if he happens to be the object of their artifices,
and the dupe of their villanies. Contempt is closely
allied with hatred; and hatred of mankind will corrupt,
in time, the fairest mind: it tinges, by degrees,
every object with the bile of misanthropy; perverts the
judgment; and at length looks indiscriminately with
an evil eye on the good and bad, engenders suspicion,
fear, jealousy, revenge, and all the black catalogue of
unworthy and malignant passions: and when these
dreadful enemies have extirpated every generous sentiment
from the breast, the unhappy victim abhors society,
disclaims his species, sighs, like St. Hyacinth, for
some distant and secluded island, and with savage barbarity,
defends the inviolability of its boundaries by
the cruel repulsion, and, perhaps, the death of those
unhappy mortals whom misfortune may drive, hapless
and unpitied, to its inhospitable shores.
But if misanthropy be capable of producing such
direful effects on well disposed minds, how shocking
must be the character whose disposition, naturally rancorous,
is heightened and inflamed by an habitual hatred
and malignancy toward his fellow creatures! In
Swisserland, I once beheld a monster of this description;[176]
I was compelled to visit him by the duties of my
profession; but I shudder while I recollect the enormity
of his character. His body was almost as deformed
as his mind. Enmity was seated on his distorted brow.
Scales of livid incrustation, the joint produce of his
corrupted body and distempered mind, covered his
face. His horrid figure made me fancy that I saw
Medusa’s serpents wreathing their baleful folds among
the black and matted locks of his dishevelled hair;
while his red and fiery eyes glared like malignant meteors
through the obscurity of his impending eyebrows.
Mischief was his sole delight, his greatest luxury, and
his highest joy. To sow discord among his neighbors,
and to tear open the closing wounds of misery, was
his only occupation. His residence was the resort of
the disorderly, the receptacle of the vicious, and the
asylum of the guilty. Collecting around him the turbulent
and discontented of every description, he became
the patron of injustice, the protector of villany,
the perpetrator of malice, the inventer of fraud, the
propagator of calumny, and the zealous champion of
cruelty and revenge; directing, with malignant aim,
the barbed shafts of his adherents equally against the
comforts of private peace and the blessings of public
tranquillity. The bent and inclination of his nature
had been so aggravated and confirmed by the “multiplying
villanies of his life,” that it was impossible for
him to refrain one moment from the practice of them,
without feeling uneasiness and discontent; and he
never appeared perfectly happy, but when new opportunities
occurred to glut his infernal soul with the
spectacle of human miseries.
The Timon of Lucian was in some measure excusable
for his excessive hatred to mankind, by the unparallelled
wrongs they had heaped upon him. The inexorable
antipathy he entertained against the species had
been provoked by injuries almost too great for the
common fortitude of humanity to endure. His probity
humanity, and charity to the poor, had been the ruin
of him; or rather his own folly, easiness of disposition,
and want of judgment in his choice of friends. He
never discovered that he was giving away his all to
wolves and ravens. Whilst these vultures were preying
on his liver, he thought them his best friends, and
that they fed upon him out of pure love and affection.
After they had gnawed him all round, ate his bones
bare, and whilst there was any marrow in them, sucked[177]
it carefully out, they left him cut down to the roots
and withered; and so far from relieving him, or assisting
him in their turns, would not so much as know or
look upon him. This made him turn a common laborer;
and, dressed in his skin garment, he tilled the earth
for hire; ashamed to show himself in the city, and
venting his rage against the ingratitude of those who,
enriched, as they had been by him now proudly passed
along without noticing him. But although such a
character is not to be despised or neglected, no provocation,
however great can justify the violent and excessive
invectives which he profanely bellowed forth from
the bottom of Hymettus; “this spot of earth shall be
my only habitation while I live; and when I am dead,
my sepulchre. From this time forth, it is my fixed resolution
to have no commerce or connexion with mankind;
but to despise them, and avoid it. I will pay no
regard to acquaintance, friendship, pity or compassion.
To pity the distressed, or to relieve the indigent, I
shall consider as a weakness, nay, as a crime; my life,
like that of the beasts of the field, shall be spent in solitude;
and Timon alone shall be Timon’s friend. I
will treat all beside as enemies and betrayers. To converse
with them were profanation! to herd with them
impiety. Accursed be the day that brings them to my
sight! I will look upon men, in short, as no more
than so many statues of brass or stone; will make no
truce, have no connexion with them. My retreat shall
be the boundary to separate us for ever. Relations,
friends, and country, are empty names, respected by
fools alone. Let Timon only be rich and despise all
the world beside. Abhorring idle praise, and odious
flattery, he shall be delighted with himself alone.
Alone shall he sacrifice to the gods, feast alone, be
his own neighbor, and his own companion. I am determined
to be alone for life; and when I die, to place
the crown upon my own head. The fairest name I
would be distinguished by is that of a misanthrope.
I would be known and marked out by my asperity of
manners; by moroseness, cruelty, anger, and inhumanity.
Were I to see a man perishing in the flames,
and imploring me to extinguish them, I would throw
pitch or oil into the fire to increase it; or, if the winter
flood should overwhelm another, who, with out-stretched
hands should beg me to assist him, I would plunge
him still deeper in the stream, that he might never rise
again. Thus shall I be revenged of mankind. This[178]
is Timon’s law, and this hath Timon ratified. I should
be glad, however, that all might know how I abound
in riches, because that I know will make them miserable.”
The moral to be drawn from this dialogue of the celebrated
Grecian philosopher, is the extreme danger to
which the best and most benevolent characters may be
exposed, by an indiscreet and unchecked indulgence of
those painful feelings with which the baseness and ingratitude
of the world are apt to wound the heart.
There are, however, those who, without having received
ill treatment from the world, foster in their bosoms
a splenetic animosity against society, and secretly
exult in the miseries and misfortunes of their fellow
creatures. Indulging themselves in the indolent habits
of vice and vanity, and feeling a mortification in being
disappointed of those rewards which virtuous industry
can alone bestow, they seek a gloomy solitude to hide
them from those lights which equally discover the
errors of vice and the rectitude of virtue. Unable to
attain glory for themselves, and incapable of enduring
the lustre of it in others, they creep into discontented
retirement, from which they only emerge to envy the
satisfaction which accompanies real merit, to calumniate
the character to which it belongs; and, like satan,
on the view of paradise, to “see undelighted all delight.”
There are, however, a class of a very different description,
who, unoppressed by moody melancholy, untinctured
by petulance or spleen, free from resentment,
and replete with every generous thought and manly
sentiment, calmly and contentedly retire from society,
to enjoy, uninterruptedly, a happy communion with
those high and enlightened minds, who have adorned
by their actions the page of history, enlarged by their
talents the powers of the human mind, and increased
by their virtues the happiness of mankind.
Retirement, however solitary it may be, when entered
into with such a temper of mind, instead of creating
or encouraging any hatred toward the species, raises our
ideas of the possible dignity of human nature; disposes
our hearts to feel, and our hands to relieve, the misfortunes
and necessities of our fellow creatures; calls to
our minds what high capacious powers lie folded up in
man; and giving to every part of creation its finest
forms, and richest colors, exhibits to our admiration
its brightest glories and highest perfections, and induces[179]
us to transplant the charm which exists in our
own bosoms into the bosoms of others.
A rational solitude, while it corrects the passions, improves
the benevolent dispositions of the heart, increases
the energies of the mind, and draws forth its latent
powers. The Athenian orator, Callistratus, was to
plead in the cause which the city of Oropus had depending;
and the expectation of the public was greatly
raised, both by the powers of the orator, which were
then in the highest repute, and the importance of the
trial. Demosthenes, hearing the governors and tutors
agree among themselves to attend the trial, with much
importunity prevailed on his master to take him to hear
the pleaders. The master having some acquaintance
with the officer who opened the court, got his young
pupil a seat where he could hear the orators without
being seen. Callistratus had great success, and his
abilities were extremely admired. Demosthenes was
fired with the spirit of emulation. When he saw with
what distinction the orator was conducted home, and
complimented by the people, he was struck still more
with the power of that commanding eloquence which
would carry all before it. From this time, therefore,
he bade adieu to the other studies and exercises in
which boys are engaged, and applied himself with great
assiduity to declaiming, in hope of being one day numbered
among the orators. Satyrus, the player who was
an acquaintance of his, and to whom he lamented,
after having been for some time called to the bar, “that
though he had almost sacrificed his health to his studies,
he could gain no favor with the people,” promised[180]
to provide him with a remedy, if he would repeat some
speech in Euripides or Sophocles. When Demosthenes
had finished his recitation, Satyrus pronounced the
same speech; and he did it with such propriety of action,
and so much in character, that it appeared to the
orator quite a different passage; and Demosthenes now
understanding how much grace and dignity of action
adds to the best oration, quitted the practice of composition,
and, building a subterraneous study repaired
thither, for two or three months together, to form his
action, and exercise his voice; and, by this means
formed that strong, impassioned, and irresistible eloquence,
which rendered him the glory of Athens, and
the admiration of the world. Most of the exalted heroes,
both of Greece and Rome, who devoted their attention
to arts and to arms, acquired their chief excellency
in their respective pursuits, by retiring from
public observation, and cultivating their talents in the
silence of solitude. St. Jerome, the most learned of
all the Latin fathers, and son of the celebrated Eusebius,
retired from the persecution of religious fury into
an obscure and dreary desert in Syria, where he attained
that rich, animated, and sublime style of eloquence,
which afterward so essentially contributed to support
the rising church, and to enlighten while it dazzled the
Christian world. The Druids, or ministers of religion
among the ancient Gauls, Britons, and Germans, retired,
in the intervals of their sacred functions, into
awful forests and consecrated groves, where they passed
their time in useful study and pious prayers; and
while they acquired a complete knowledge of astrology,
geometry, natural philosophy, politics, geography,
morals, and religion, rendered themselves happy and
revered, and produced, by the wise instruction they
were capable of affording to others, but particularly to
youth, whose education they superintended, a bright
succession of priests, legislators, counsellors, judges,
physicians, philosophers, and tutors, to the respective
nations in which they resided.
The modern Julian, the justly celebrated Frederic,
king of Prussia, derives the highest advantages from
his disguised retirement at Sans Souci, where he contrives
the means of hurling inevitable destruction
against the enemies of his country; listens to and relieves
with all the anxiety of a tender parent, the complaints
and injuries of his meanest subjects; and recreates his
excursive mind, by revising and correcting his immortal[181]
works for the admiration of posterity. Philosophy,
poetry, and politics, are the successive objects of his
attention; and while he extends his views, and
strengthens his understanding, by the study of ancient
wisdom, he meliorates his heart by the delightful offerings
of the muses, and increases the public strength by
the wise and economical management of his resources.
An awful silence, interrupted only by gentle airs with
which it is refreshed, pervades this delightful retreat.
It was during the twilight of an autumnal evening that
I visited this solemn scene. As I approached the
apartment of this philosophic hero, I discovered him
sitting, “nobly pensive,” near a small table, from which
shone the feeble rays of a common taper. No jealous
sentinels, or ceremonious chamberlain, impeded my
progress by scrutinizing inquiries of suspicion and
mistrust; and I walked free and unchecked, except by
respect and veneration, through the humble unostentatious
retreat of this extraordinary man. All characters,
however high and illustrious they may be, who
wish to attain a comprehensive view of things, and to
shine in the highest spheres of virtue, must learn the
rudiments of glory under the discipline of occasional
retirement.
Solitude is frequently sought from an inclination to
extend the knowledge of our talents and characters to
those with whom we have no opportunity of being immediately
acquainted; by preparing with greater care,
and closer application, for the inspection of our contemporaries,
works worthy of the fame we are so anxious
to acquire: but it seldom happens, alas! that those
whose labors are most pregnant with instruction and
delight, have received, from the age or country in
which they lived, or even from the companions with
whom they associated, the tribute of kindness or applause
that is justly due to their merits. The work
which is stigmatized and traduced by the envy, ignorance,
or local prejudices of a country, for whose delight
and instruction it was particularly intended, frequently
receives from the generous suffrages of impartial
and unprejudiced strangers, the highest tribute of
applause. Even those pretended friends, under whose
auspices it was at first undertaken, upon whose advice
it proceeded, and upon whose judgment it was at
length published, no sooner hear its praises resounded
from distant quarters, than they permit the poisoned
shafts of calumny to fly unaverted around the unsuspecting[182]
author, and warrant, by their silence, or assist,
by their sneers, every insidious insinuation against his
motives or his principles. This species of malevolence
has been feelingly painted by the celebrated Petrarch.
“No sooner had my fame,” says he, “risen above the
level of that which my contemporaries had acquired,
than every tongue babbled, and every pen was brandished
against me: those who had before appeared to
be my dearest friends, instantly became my deadliest
enemies: the shafts of envy were industriously directed
against me from every quarter: the critics, to whom
my poetry had before been much more familiar than
their psalms or their prayers, seized, with malignant
delight, every opportunity of traducing my morals;
and those with whom I had been most intimate, were
the most eager to injure my character, and destroy my
fame.” The student, however, ought not to be discouraged
by this instance of envy and ingratitude.
He who, conscious of his merit, learns to depend only
on himself for support, will forget the injustice of the
world, and draw his comfort and satisfaction from
more infallible sources: like the truly benevolent and
great, he will confer his favors on the public without
the expectation of a return; and look with perfect indifference
upon all the efforts his treacherous friends,
or open enemies, are capable of using. He will, like
Petrarch, appeal to posterity for his reward; and the
justice and generosity of future ages will preserve his
fame to succeeding generations, heightened and adorned
in proportion as it has been contemporaneously mutilated
and depressed.
The genius of many noble minded authors, particularly
in Germany, are obscured and blighted by the
thick and baneful fogs with which ignorance and envy
overwhelm their works. Unable to withstand the incessant
opposition they meet with, the powers of the
mind grow feeble and relaxed; and many a fair design
and virtuous pursuit is quitted in despair. How frequently
does the desponding mind exclaim, “I feel my
powers influenced by the affections of the heart. I am
certainly incapable of doing to any individual an intentional
injury, and I seek with anxiety every opportunity
of doing good; but, alas! my motives are perverted,
my designs misrepresented, my endeavors counteracted,
my very person ridiculed, and my character
defamed.” There are, indeed, those whose courage
and fortitude no opposition can damp, and no adversity[183]
subdue; whose firm and steady minds proceed with
determined resolution to accomplish their designs in
defiance of all resistance; and whose bright talents
drive away the clouds of surrounding dulness, like fogs
before the sun. Wieland, the happy Wieland, the
adopted child of every muse, the favorite pupil of the
graces, formed the powers of his extraordinary mind
in a lonely and obscure retreat, the little village of
Biberach, in the circle of Suabia, and thereby laid the
foundation for that indisputable glory he has since attained.
In solitude and silence he enriched his mind
with all the stores that art and science could produce,
and enabled himself to delight and instruct mankind,
by adorning the sober mien of philosophy, and the lively
smiles of wit, with the true spirit and irresistible
charms of poetry. Retirement is the true parent of
the great and good, and the kind nurse of nature’s
powers. It is to occasional retirement that politics
owe the ablest statesmen, and philosophy the most celebrated
sages. Did Aristotle, the peripatetic chief,
compose his profound systems in the tumultuous court
of Philip, or were the sublime theories of his master
conceived among the noisy feasts of the tyrant Dionysius?
No. The celebrated groves of the Academy,
and the shades of Atarnya, bear witness of the important
advantages which, in the opinion of both Plato and
Aristotle, learning may derive from a rational retirement.
These great men, like all others who preceded
or have followed them, found in the ease and quietude
of retirement the best means of forming their minds
and extending their discoveries. The celebrated Leibnitz,
to whom the world is deeply indebted, passed a
great part of every year at an humble, quiet, retired,
and beautiful villa which he possessed in the vicinity
of Hanover.
To this catalogue of causes, conducing to a love of
solitude, or hatred of society, we may add religion and
fanaticism. The benign genius of religion leads the
mind to a love of retirement from motives the highest,
the most noble, and most really interesting, that can
possibly be conceived, and produces the most perfect
state of human happiness, by instilling into the heart
the most virtuous propensities, and inspiring the mind
with its finest energies: but fanaticism must ever be
unhappy: for it proceeds from a subversion of nature
itself, is formed on a perversion of reason, and a violation
of truth; it is the vice of low and little understandings,[184]
is produced by an ignorance of human nature,
a misapprehension of the Deity, and cannot be
practised without renunciation of real virtue. The
passion of retirement, which a sense of religion enforces,
rises in proportion as the heart is pure, and the
mind correct; but the disposition to solitude, which fanaticism
creates, arises from a wild enthusiastic notion
of inspiration, and increases in proportion as the heart
is corrupt, and the mind deranged. Religion is the
offspring of truth and love, and the parent of benevolence,
hope, and joy: but the monster fanaticism is the
child of discontent, and her followers are fear and sorrow.
Religion is not confined to cells and closets, nor
restrained to sullen retirement; these are the gloomy
retreats of fanaticism, by which she endeavors to break
those chains of benevolence and social affection that
link the welfare of every individual with that of the
whole. The greatest honor we can pay to the Author of
our being, is such a cheerful behavior as discovers a
mind satisfied with his dispensations. But this temper
of mind is most likely to be attained by a rational retirement
from the cares and pleasures of the world.
The disposition to solitude, however, of whatever
kind or complexion it may be, is greatly influenced by
the temper and constitution of the body, as well as by
the frame and turn of the mind. The action of those
causes proceeds, perhaps, by slow and insensible degrees,
and varies in its form and manner in each individual;
but though gradual or multiform, it at length
reaches its point, and confirms the subject of it in habits
of rational retreat, or unnatural solitude.
The motives which conduce to a love of solitude
might, without doubt, be assigned to other causes; but
a discussion of all the refined operations to which the
mind may be exposed, and its bent and inclination determined,
by the two great powers of sensation and reflection,
would be more curious than useful. Relinquishing
all inquiry into the primary or remote causes
of human action, to those who are fond of the useless
subtilties of metaphysics, and confining our researches
to those final or immediate causes which produce this
disposition to enjoy the benefits of rational retirement,
or encounter the mischiefs of irrational solitude, we
shall proceed to show the mischiefs which may result
from the one, in order that they may be contrasted
with the advantages which, in the first part, we have
already shown may be derived from the other.
[185]
The retirement which is not the result of cool and
deliberate reason, so far from improving the feelings of
the heart, or strengthening the powers of the mind,
generally renders men less able to discharge the duties
and endure the burdens of life. The wisest and best
formed system of retirement is, indeed, surrounded
with a variety of dangers, which are not, without the
greatest care and caution, easily avoided. But in every
species of total solitude, the perils are not only innumerable,
but almost irresistible. It would, however,
be erroneous to impute all the defects which may
characterize such a recluse merely to the loneliness of
his situation. There are original defects implanted by
the hand of nature in every constitution, which no species
of retirement and discipline can totally eradicate:
there are certain vices, the seeds of which are so inherent,
that no care, however great, can totally destroy.
The advantages or disadvantages arising from retirement,
will always be proportionate to the degrees of
virtue and vice which prevail in the character of the
recluse. It is certain that an occasional retreat from
the business of the world will greatly improve the virtues,
and increase the happiness, of him on whom
nature has bestowed a sound understanding and a sensible
heart; but when the heart is corrupt, the understanding
weak, the imagination flighty, and the disposition
depraved, solitude only tends to increase the evil
and to render the character more rank and vicious;
for whatever be the culture, the produce will unavoidably
partake of the quality of the seeds and the nature
of the soil; and solitude, by allowing a weak and wicked
mind leisure to brood over its own suggestions, recreates
and rears the mischief it was intended to prevent.
To enable the mind, however, to form an accurate
judgment of the probable consequences of solitude, it
is, perhaps, necessary to have seen instances both of
its advantageous and detrimental effects. The consequences
vary with the subject on which it operates;
and the same species of solitude which to one character
would be injurious, will prove to another of the
highest benefit and advantage. The same person, indeed,
may at different periods, as his disposition changes,
experience, under similar circumstances of retirement,
very different effects. Certain, however, it is, that an
occasional retreat from the tumultuous intercourses
of society, or a judicious and well arranged retirement,
cannot be prejudicial. To have pointed out the train
of virtues it is capable of producing, and to have been
silent upon the black catalogue of vices that may result
from extreme seclusion, would have been the more
pleasing task; but I have undertaken to draw the
character of solitude impartially, and must therefore
point out its possible defects.
Man in a sate of solitary indolence and inactivity,
sinks by degrees like stagnant water into impurity
and corruption. The body suffers with the mind’s decay.
It is more fatal than excess of action. It is a
malady that renders every hope of recovery vain and
visionary. To sink from action into rest, is only indulging
the common course of nature; but to rise from long
continued indolence to voluntary activity, is extremely
difficult, and almost impracticable. A celebrated
poet has finely described this class of unhappy beings
in the following lines:
[187]
To preserve the proper strength, both of the body
and the mind, labor must be regularly and seasonably
mingled with rest. Each of them require their
suited exercise and relaxations. Philosophers, who
aim at the attainment of every superior excellency, do
not indulge themselves in ease, and securely and indolently
wait for the cruelties of fortune to attack them
in their retirement; but, for fear she should surprise
them in the state of inexperienced and raw soldiers,
undisciplined for the battle they sally out to meet her,
and put themselves into regular training, and even
upon the proof of hardships. Those only who observe
a proper interchange of exercise and rest, can expect
to enjoy health of body, or cheerfulness of mind. It
is the only means by which the economy of the human
frame can be regularly preserved.
He, therefore, who does not possess sufficient activity
to keep the body and mind in proper exercise; he
who is unacquainted with the art of varying his amusements,
of changing the subjects of his contemplation,
and of finding within himself all the materials of enjoyment,
will soon feel solitude not only burdensome,
but insupportable. To such a character, solitude will
not only be disagreeable, but dangerous; for the moment
the temporary passion which draws him from
society has subsided, he will sink into languor and indifference;
and this temper is always unfavorable to
moral sentiment. The world, perhaps, with all its disadvantages,
is less likely to be injurious to such a man,
than the calm and silent shades of unenjoyed retirement.
Solitude also, particularly when carried to an extreme,
is apt to render the character of the recluse rigid,
austere, and inflexible, and of course, unsuited to the
enjoyments of society. The notions he contracts are
as singular and abstracted as his situation: he adheres
to them with inflexible pertinacity: his mind moves
only in the accustomed track: he cherishes his preconceived
errors and prejudices with fond attachment, and
despises those whose sentiments are contrary to his
own. A promiscuous intercourse with society has the
effect of rendering the mind docile, and his judgment of
men and things correct: for in the world every subject
is closely examined, every question critically discussed;
and, while the spirit of controversy and opposition elicits
truth, the mind is led into a train of rational investigation,
and its powers strengthened and enlarged; but the[188]
mind of the recluse being uninterruptedly confined to
its own course of reasoning, and to the habit of viewing
objects on one side, it is unable to appreciate the
respective weights which different arguments may deserve,
or to judge in doubtful cases, on which side,
truth is most likely to be found. A commixture of
different opinions, on any particular subject, provokes
a free and liberal discussion of it, an advantage which
the prepossession engendered by solitude uniformly
prevents.
Solitude, while it establishes a dangerous confidence
in the powers and opinions of its votaries, not only
fastens on the characters the errors and imperfections
it has produced and fostered, but recommends them
strongly to their esteem. How frequently do we observe,
even in persons of rank and fortune, who reside
continually on their own estates, a haughty manner
and arbitrary disposition, totally incompatible with that
candid conduct, that open minded behavior, that condescending
urbanity, that free spirit, which mark the
character of the polite and liberal minded gentleman,
and render him the veneration and delight of all
around him! “Obstinacy and pride,” says Plato, “are
the inevitable consequences of a solitary life;” and the
frequency of the fact certainly justifies the observation.
Retired, secluded characters, having no opportunity of
encountering the opinions of others, or of listening to
any other judgment than their own, establish a species
of tyranny over their understandings, and check that
free excursion of the intellect which the discovery of
truth requires. They reject, with disdain, the close investigations
of logic, and repel all attempts to examine
their arguments, and expose their fallacies. Their preconceived
opinions, which they dignify with the appellation
of settled truths, and mistake for indisputable
axioms, have infixed themselves so deeply in their
minds that they cannot endure the idea of their being
rooted out or removed: and they are fearful of submitting
them to the test of controversy, only because they
were originally received without due examination,
and have been confirmed by the implicit consent and
approbation of their inferiors and dependants.
Solitude also, even the solitude which poets and philosophers
have so feelingly described as blissful and
beneficial, has frequently proved injurious to its delighted
votaries. Men of letters are, in general, too inattentive
to those easy and captivating manners which[189]
give such high spirit to the address, and splendid decoration
to the characters, of well bred men. They seldom
qualify the awkwardness of scholastic habits by a
free and intimate intercourse either with the world or
with each other; but being secluded from society, and
engaged in abstracted pursuits, adopt a pedantic phraseology,
an unaccommodating address, formal notions,
and a partial attachment to their recondite pursuits.
The common topics of conversation, and usual entertainment
of company, they treat with high, but unjustifiable
disdain; and, blinded by fogs of pride, and ideal
superiority, are rendered incapable of discerning their
errors.
The correction of this disposition in authors has been
thought of so much importance to the interests of morals,
and to the manners of the rising generation, that
scholars in general have been exhorted, in the highest
strains of eloquence, by one of the most powerful
preachers of Germany, from the pulpit of the politest
city in the empire, to guard with unceasing vigilance
against those defects which are so apt to mingle with
the habits of the profession, and which tend to sully
the brightness of their characters. The orator invokes
them to shake off that distant demeanor, that unsocial
reserve, that supercilious behavior and almost
express contempt, from which few of them are
free, and which most of them practise when in
unlettered company; and to treat their fellow citizens,
however inferior they may be in erudition and
scholastic knowledge, with affability and attention; to
listen to their conversation with politeness; to regard
their errors with lenity; to view their failings with
compassion, and their defects with liberality; to lead
them into the paths of truth and science by mild persuasion,
to lure them to knowledge by gentle means,
and, by reducing their conversation and subjects of discourse
to a level with the unlettered understandings of
their auditors, to please the heart while they instruct the
mind.
[190]
Learning and good sense, indeed, to whatever degree
they may be possessed, can only render the possessor
happy in proportion as he employs them to increase
the happiness of others. To effect this, he must
occasionally endure the jokes of dullness without petulance,
and listen with complacency to the observations
of ignorance, but, above all, he must carefully avoid
all inclination to exhibit his own superiority, and to
shine at the expense of others.
Learning and wisdom, indeed, however they may be
confounded by arrogant and self-conceited scholars,
are in no respects synonymous terms; but, on the contrary,
are not unfrequently quite at variance with each
other. The high admiration which scholars are too
apt to entertain of the excellency of their own talents,
and the vast importance they generally ascribe to their
own characters and merit, instead of producing that
sound judgment upon men and things which constitutes
true wisdom, only engenders an effervescence in
the imagination, the effect of which is in general, the
most frothy folly. Many of those who thus pride
themselves on the pursuits of literature, having nothing
to boast of but an indefatigable attention to some idle
and unprofitable study; a study which, perhaps only
tends to contract the feelings of the heart, and impoverish
the powers of the mind. True wisdom and
genuine virtue are the produce of those enlarged views
which arise from a general and comprehensive knowledge
both of books and men: but scholars, who confine
their attention entirely to books, and feel no interest
or concern for the world, despise every object
that does not lie within the range of their respective
studies. By poring over obsolete works, they acquire
sentiments quite foreign to the manners of the
age in which we live; form opinions as ridiculous as
they are unfashionable; fabricate systems incomprehensible
to the rest of mankind; and maintain arguments
so offensive and absurd, that whenever they venture
to display their acquirements in society, they are,
like the bird of night, hooted back with derision into
their daily obscurity. Many studious characters are so
puffed up by arrogance, presumption, self-conceit, and
vanity, that they can scarcely speak upon any subject
without hurting the feelings of their friends and giving
cause of triumph to their enemies. The counsel and
instruction they affect to give is so mixed with ostentatious
pedantry, that they destroy the very end they[191]
wish to promote: and, instead of acquiring honorable
approbation, cover themselves with merited disgrace.
Plato, the illustrious chief of the academic set of Athenian
philosophers was so totally free from this vice of
inferior minds, that it was impossible to discover in him
by ordinary and casual conversation, that sublime imagination
and almost divine intellect, which rendered
him the idol of his age, and the admiration of succeeding
generations. On his return from Syracuse, to
which place he had been invited by Dionysius the
younger, he visited Olympia, to be present at the performance
of the Olympic games; and he was placed
on the seat appropriated to foreigners of the highest
distinction, but to whom he was not personally known.
Some of them were so pleased with the ease, politeness,
wisdom, and vivacity of his conversation, that
they accompanied him to Athens, and, on their arrival
in that city, requested him to procure them an interview
with Plato. But how pleasing and satisfactory
was their surprise, when, on his replying with a smile,
“I am the person whom you wish to see,” they discovered
that this affable and entertaining companion, with
whom they had travelled without discerning his excellency,
was the most learned and profound philosopher
at that time existing in the world! The studious and
retired life of this extraordinary character had not decreased
his urbanity and politeness, nor deprived him
of the exercise of those easy and seducing manners
which so entirely engage the affection and win the
heart. He wisely prevented seclusion from robbing
him of that amenity and unassuming ease so necessary
to the enjoyment of society. Like those two eminent
philosophers of the present day, the wise Mendelsohm,
and the amiable Garve, he derived from solitude all
the benefits it is capable of conferring, without suffering
any of those injuries which it too frequently inflicts
on less powerful minds.
Culpable, however, as studious characters in general
are, by neglecting to cultivate that social address, and
to observe that civility of manners, and urbane attention,
which an intercourse not only with the world, but
even with private society, so indispensably requires,
certain it is, that men of fashion expect from them a
more refined good breeding, and a nicer attention to
the forms of politeness, than all their endeavors can
produce. The fashionable world, indeed, are blamable
for their constant attempts to deride the awkwardness[192]
of their more erudite and abstracted companions. The
severity with which they treat the defective manners
of a scholastic visitor, is a violation of the first rules of
true politeness, which consists entirely of a happy combination
of good sense and good nature, both of which
dictate a different conduct, and induce rather a friendly
concealment than a triumphant exposure of such venial
failings. The inexperienced scholastic is entitled
to indulgence, for he cannot be expected nicely to practice
customs which he has had no opportunity to learn.
To the eye of polished life, his austerity, his reserve, his
mistakes, his indecorums, may, perhaps, appear ridiculous;
but to expose him to derision on this subject is
destructive to the general interests of society, inasmuch
as it tends to repress and damp endeavors to
please. How is it possible that men who devote the
greater portion of their time to the solitary and abstracted
pursuits of literature, can possess that promptitude
of thought, that variety of expression, those easy manners,
and that varying humor, which prevail so agreeably
in mixed society, and which can only be acquired
by a constant intercourse with the world? It was not
only cruel, but unjust, of the Swedish courtiers to divert
themselves with the confusion and embarrassments
into which Miebom and Naude, two celebrated
writers on the music and dances of the ancients were
thrown, when the celebrated Christina desired the one
to sing and the other to dance in public, for the entertainment
of the court. Still less excusable were those
imps of fashion in France, who exposed the celebrated
mathematician, Nicole, to the derision of a large company,
for the misapplication of a word. A fashionable
female at Paris, having heard that Nicole, who had
then lately written a profound and highly approved
treatise on the doctrine of curves, was greatly celebrated
in all the circles of science, and affecting to be thought
the patroness and intimate of all persons of distinguished
merit, sent him such an invitation to one of her parties
that he could not refuse to accept of. The abstracted
geometrician, who had never before been present
at an assembly of the kind, received the civilities of
his fair hostess, and her illustrious friends, with all the
awkwardness and confusion which such a scene must
naturally create. After passing an uncomfortable evening,
in answering the observations of those who addressed
him, in which he experienced much greater
difficulties than he would have found in solving the[193]
most intricate problem, he prepared to take his leave,
and pouring out a profusion of declarations to the lady
of the house, of the grateful sense he entertained of
the high honor she had conferred on him, by her generous
invitation, distinguishing attention, polite regard,
and extraordinary civility, rose to the climax of his
compliments, by assuring her, that the lovely little eyes
of his fair entertainer had made an impression which
never could be erased from his breast, and immediately
departed. But a kind friend, who was accompanying
him home, whispering in his ear, as they were passing
the stairs, that he had paid the lady a very ill compliment,
by telling her that her eyes were little, for that
little eyes were universally understood by the whole
sex to be a great defect. Nicole, mortified to an extreme
by the mistake he had thus innocently made,
and resolving to apologize to the lady whom he conceived
he had offended, returned abruptly to the company,
and entreated her with great humility, to pardon
the error into which his confusion had betrayed him
of imputing any thing like littleness to so high, so elegant,
so distinguished a character, declaring that he
had never beheld such fine large eyes, such fine large
lips, such fine large hands, or so fine and large a person
altogether, in the whole course of his life!
The professional pursuits of students confine them,
during the early periods of life, to retirement and seclusion,
and prevent them in general, from attempting
to mix in the society of the world until age, or professional
habits, have rendered them unfit for this scene.
Discouraged by the neglect they experience, and by
the ridicule to which they are exposed, on their first
introduction into active life, from persevering in their
attempts to shake off the uncouth manner they have acquired,
they immediately shrink from the displeasing
prospect into their original obscurity, in despair of
ever attaining the talents necessary to render them
agreeable to the elegant and gay. There are, indeed,
some men, who, on attempting to change the calm
and rational enjoyments of a retired and studious life,
for the more lively and loquacious pleasures of public
society, perceive the manners and maxims of the world
so repugnant to their principles, and so disagreeable to
their taste and inclinations, that they instantly abandon
society, and, renouncing all future attempts to enter into
its vortex, calmly and contentedly return to their beloved
retreat under an idea that it is wrong for persons[194]
of such different dispositions to intermix or invade the
provinces of each other. There are also many studious
characters who avoid society, under an idea that
they have transferred their whole minds into their own
compositions; that they have exhausted all that they
possessed of either instruction or entertainment;
and that they would, like empty bottles, or squeezed
oranges, be thrown aside with disregard, and, perhaps,
with contempt, as persons no longer capable of contributing
to companionable pleasures. But there are
others of sounder sense and better judgment, who
gladly relinquish the noisy assemblies of public life,
and joyfully retire to the sweet and tranquil scenes of
rural solitude, because they seldom meet among the candidates
for public approbation, a single individual capable
of enjoying a just thought, or making a rational reflection;
but, on the contrary, have to encounter a host
of vain, frivolous pretenders to wit and learning, who
herd together, like the anarchs of insurrection, to oppose
with noise and violence, the progress of truth and
the exertions of reason.
Sentiments like these too frequently banish from the
circles of society characters of useful knowledge and
of distinguished genius, and from whose endowments
mankind might receive both instruction and delight.
The loss, in such a case, to the individual is, perhaps,
trifling; his comforts may possibly be increased by his
seclusion; but the interests of truth and good sense
are thereby considerably injured: for the mind of man,
however powerful and informed it may be in itself, cannot
employ its energies and acquisitions with the same
advantage and effect, as when it is whetted by a collision
with other minds, and polished by the manners of
the world. An acquaintance with the living characters
and manners of the world, teaches the mind to direct
its powers to their proper and most useful points:
exhibits the means and furnishes the instruments, by
which the best exertions of virtue can attain her ends;
gives morals their brightest color, taste its highest refinement,
and truth its fairest objects. The wisest and
best philosophers have acknowledged the obligations
they were under to society for the knowledge they acquired
in its extensive, though dangerous school, and
have strongly recommended the study of mankind,
by viewing all the various classes with a discriminating
eye, as the best means of becoming acquainted with the
beauties of virtue, and the deformities of vice, and, of[195]
course, as the best means of discovering the true road
to earthly happiness; for—
A free, open, unconstrained intercourse with mankind,
has also the advantage of reconciling us to the
peculiarities of others, and of teaching us the important
lesson how to accommodate our minds and manners
to such principles, opinions, and dispositions, as
may differ from our own. The learned and enlightened
cannot maintain an intercourse with the illiterate,
without exercising an extraordinary degree of patience,
conceding many points which appear unnatural, and
forbearing to feel those little vexations so adherent to
characters who have lived in retirement. The philosopher,
in order to teach virtue to the world with any
hope of success, must humor its vices to a certain degree,
and sometimes even adopt the follies he intends to
destroy. To inculcate wisdom, it is necessary to follow
the examples of Socrates and Wieland, and, separating
from morals all that is harsh, repulsive, and anti-social,
adopt only the kind and complacent tenets of the science.
A German author of the present day, whom I glory
to call both my countryman and my friend, observes,
with the sagacity and discrimination of a critic, in his
“Remarks on the Writings and Genius of Franklin,”
that the compositions of that great and extraordinary
character are totally free from that pomp of style and
parade of erudition, which so frequently disfigure the
writings of other authors, and defeat their intended effect.
The pen of Franklin renders the most abstract
principles easy and familiar. He conveys his instructions
in pleasing narrations, lively adventures, or humorous
observations; and while his manner wins upon
the heart, by the friendly interest he appears to take in
the concerns of mankind, his matter instils into the
mind the soundest principles of morals and good policy.[196]
He makes fancy the handmaid to reason in her researches
into science, and penetrates the understanding
through the medium of the affections. A secret charm
pervades every part of his works. He rivets the attention
by the strength of his observations, and relieves it
by the variety of pleasing images with which he embellishes
his subject. The perspicuity of his style, and
the equally easy and eloquent turn of his periods,
give life and energy to his thoughts; and, while the
reader feels his heart bounding with delight, he finds
his mind impregnated with instruction. These high
advantages resulted entirely from his having studied
the world, and gained an accurate knowledge of mankind.
An author, indeed, may acquire an extraordinary
fund of knowledge in solitude; but it is in society
alone that he can learn how to render it useful. Before
he can instruct the world, he must be enabled to view
its fooleries and vices with calm inspection; to contemplate
them without anger, as the unavoidable consequences
of human infirmity; to treat them with tenderness;
and to avoid exasperating the feelings of
those whose depravity he is attempting to correct. A moral
censor whose disposition is kind and benevolent, never
suffers his superior virtue, knowledge, or talents, however
great they may be, to offend the feelings of others;
but, like Socrates, he will appear as if he were receiving
himself the instruction he is imparting. It is a fine
observation of the celebrated Goethe, that kindness is
the golden chain by which society is bound together:
those who have had the happiness to converse with
that extraordinary man, must have perceived the anxiety
with which he endeavors to temper the strength
of his genius by the mildness and amenity of his conversation.
Men of letters, however awkward the habits of seclusion
may have rendered them, would, I am convinced,
be, in general, if not always, treated with great
politeness and attention, if they would be careful to
treat others with the common candor which humanity
requires, and with that indulgence and affability which
true liberality of sentiment will ever dictate; but how
few, alas! are there who, by complacency and condescension,
entitle themselves to the kindness and civility
of which they stand so much in need, and so arrogantly
expect! How is it possible for those who are
vigilantly anxious to depress the rising merit of others,
ever to gain their friendship or esteem? Friendship
can only be acquired by an open, sincere, liberal, and[197]
manly conduct; but he whose breast is filled with envy
and jealousy, who cautiously examines, before he
speaks, every sentiment and feeling, lest his tongue
should betray the meanness of his heart, and the poverty
of his mind; who seizes every light indiscretion,
or trifling error, that many inadvertently escape from
his companions; who silently repines at every excellency,
both moral and intellectual, which they may discover;
who, even when surrounded by those who wish
him well, continues with guarded circumspection, and
suspicious caution, to weigh the motives of their actions
and conversation, as if he were surrounded by
the bitterest enemies, must be utterly incapable of esteeming
others, or being esteemed himself; and to suppose
that the generous flame of friendship, that holy
fire which, under the deepest adversity, so comfortably
warms and cheers the heart, can ever spring up from
such cold materials, and ashy embers, would be extravagant
and ridiculous.
The delight which the heart experiences in pouring
forth the fulness of its feelings, with honest confidence,
into the bosom of a faithful friend, is permanent and
unbounded. The pleasures which spring from the acquisition
of fame, whether resulting from the generous
voice of an approving public, or extorted from the reluctant
tongues of envious rivals and contemporaries,
will bear no comparison with those which thrill through
the exulting bosom of him who can justly exclaim,
“To the heart of this unhappy man I have given returning
hopes, and made him look forward with confidence
to the enjoyment of peace; to his wounded spirit
I have imparted the balm of comfort and tranquillity;
and from the bleeding bosom of my friend have driven
despair!” But to perform such offices as these, it is indispensably
necessary that we should have recommended
ourselves to the confidence, and have gained the
affections of those we intend to serve. This great and
necessary property, however, those who live secluded
lives very seldom possess: but, much as they may in
general disdain to practise this high virtue, it is necessary
that they should know that it tends more to
ennoble the sentiments of the mind, and to raise the
feelings of the heart, than their most successful researches
to discover something before unheard of in the
regions of science, and which they pursue with as much
avidity as if truth were liable to decay, unless sustained
by the aid of novelty.
[198]
It is justly and beautifully said by one of the apocryphal
writers, that a faithful friend is the medicine of
life. A variety of occasions happen, when to pour
forth the heart to one whom we love and trust, is the
chief comfort, perhaps the only relief we can enjoy.
Miserable is he who, shut up within the narrow inclosure
of selfish interest, has no person to whom he can
at all times, with full confidence, expand his soul. But
he who can only feel an affection for such as listen continually
to the suggestions of vanity, as applaud indiscriminately
the imaginary prodigies of his wit, or never
contradict the egotism of his opinions, is totally unfit
for friendship, and utterly unworthy of respect. It is
men of learning and of retired habits, who are most
likely to adopt this disengaging disposition. There are,
I am sorry to say it, many men, distinguished in the
paths of science, who affect to possess the most refined
sensibility, and whose tongues are continually proclaiming
the virtues of benevolence, but who, when they are
called upon to practise those virtues in behalf of some
distressed companion, turn a deaf ear to the appeal,
form some poor excuse for not interfering, and, if pressed
to come forward with some promised assistance,
deny to afford it, because the unhappy sufferer has neglected
to approve of some extravagant conjecture, or to
adopt all the visionary notions and Utopian systems
they may have framed. He who neglects to perform
the common charities of life, because his idle vanity
may have been offended by the neglect or indifference
of his companions, will never find, and cannot become,
a real friend. There is also an inferior order of fops
in literature, (if any order can be inferior to that which
I have last described,) who carry with them, wherever
they go, a collection of their latest compositions, and
by importunately reading them to every one they meet,
and expecting an unreserved approbation of their merits,
render themselves so unpleasantly troublesome on all
occasions that, instead of conciliating the least regard
or esteem, their very approach is dreaded as much as a
pestilence or a famine. Every man of real genius will
shun this false ambition of gratifying vanity by forced
applause; because he will immediately perceive, that
instead of gaining the hearts of his auditors, he only
exposes himself to the ridicule, and loses all chance of
their esteem.
The disadvantages, however, which studious characters
have been described to experience from habits of[199]
solitary seclusion, and by neglecting the manners of
society, must not be indiscriminately applied. It is the
morose and surly pedant, who sits silently in his solitary
study, and endeavors to enforce a character
for genius in opposition to nature, who adopts the
mean and unworthy arts of jealousy, suspicion, and
dishonest praise. Far different the calm, happy, and
honorable life of him who, devoted to the cultivation
of a strong understanding, and the improvement of a
feeling heart, is enabled, by his application and genius,
to direct the taste of the age by his liberality of spirit,
to look on his equals without jealousy, and his superiors
with admiration; and, by his benevolence, to feel for
the multitude he instructs, indulgence and affection;
who, relying on the real greatness of his temper, makes
no attempt to increase his importance by low raillery or
unfounded satire; whose firm temper never sinks into
supine indolence, or grovelling melancholy; who only
considers his profession as the means of meliorating
mankind; who perseveres in the cause of truth with
cheerful rectitude, and virtuous dignity; whose intellectual
resources satisfactorily supply the absence of
society; whose capacious mind enables him to increase
his stores of useful knowledge; whose discriminating
powers enable him to elucidate the subject he explores;
who feels as great a delight in promoting the beneficial
discoveries of others, as in executing his own; and
who regards his professional contemporaries, not as
jealous rivals, but as generous friends, striving to emulate
each other in the noble pursuits of science, and in
the laudable task of endeavoring to improve the morals
of mankind.
Characters of this description, equally venerable and
happy, are numerous in Europe, both within and without
the shades of academic bowers, and afford examples
which, notwithstanding the tribe of errors and absurdities
solitude occasionally engenders, should induce
men of worldly pleasures to repress the antipathies
they are in general inclined to feel against persons of
studious and retired lives.
[200]
The powers of imagination are great; and the effects
produced by them, under certain circumstances, upon
the minds of men of warm and sensible tempers, extraordinary
and surprising. Multitudes have been induced
by perturbed imaginations, to abandon the gay and
cheerful haunts of men, and to seek, in dreary desolation,
comfort and repose. To such extremes has this
faculty, when distorted, hurried its unhappy subjects,
that they have endured the severest mortification, denied
themselves the common benefits of nature, exposed
themselves to the keenest edge of winter’s cold,
and the most scorching rays of summer’s heat, and indulged
their distempered fancies in the wildest chimeras.
These dreadful effects appear, on a first view, to
be owing to some supernatural cause, and they agitate
our senses, and confuse the understanding, as phenomena
beyond the comprehension of reason; but the
wonder vanishes when the cause is coolly and carefully
explored; and the extravagances are traced up to
their real source, and natural organization of man.
The wild ideas of the hermit Anthony, who, in his
gloomy retreat, fancied that Beelzebub appeared to him
in the form of a beautiful female to torture his senses,
and disturb his repose, originated in his natural character
and disposition. His distempered fancy conjured
up a fiend, which, in fact, existed in his unsubdued passions
and incontinent desires.
Solitude excites and strengthens the powers of the
imagination to an uncommon degree, and thereby enfeebles
the effect of the controlling powers of reason.
The office of the latter faculty of the mind is, to examine
with nice discernment and scrupulous attention, to
compare the several properties of thoughts and things[201]
with each other, and to acquire, by cool and deliberate
investigation, correct ideas of their combinations and
effects. The exercise of their power suspends the vehemence
of action, and abates the ardor of desire; but
fancy performs her airy excursions upon light and vagrant
wings, and flying around her objects without examination,
embraces every pleasing image with increasing
delight. Judgment separates and associates
the ideas the mind has gained by sensation and reflection,
and by determining their agreement or disagreement,
searches after truth through the medium of probability;
but the imagination employs itself in raising
unsubstantial images, and portraying the form of
things unknown in nature, and foreign to truth. It has,
indeed, like memory, the power of reviving in the mind
the ideas which, after having been imprinted there, have
disappeared; but it differs from that faculty by altering,
enlarging, diversifying, and frequently distorting, the
subjects of its power.
But the irregular and wild desires which seize upon
the mind through the avenues of an untamed fancy
and disordered imagination, are not exclusively the
produce of solitude. The choice of wisdom or folly is
offered to us in all places, and under every circumstance;
but the mind of man is unhappily prone to that
which is least worthy of it. I shall therefore endeavor
to show, by some general observations, in what instances
solitude is most likely to create those flights of
imagination which mislead the mind, and corrupt the
heart.
Imagination is said to be the simple apprehension of
corporeal objects when they are absent; which absence
of the object it contemplates, distinguishes this faculty
from sensation, and has occasioned some metaphysicians
to call it recorded sensation. Upon the due regulation,
and proper management, of this great and
extraordinary power of the mind, depends, in a great
measure, the happiness or misery of life. It ought to
consist of a happy combination of those ideas we receive
through the organs of bodily sense, and those
which we derive from the faculties of moral perception;
but it too frequently consists of a capricious and ill-formed[202]
mixture of heterogeneous images, which
though true in themselves, are false in the way they
are applied. Thus a person, the circulation of whose
blood in any particular member is suddenly stopped,
imagines that needles are pricking the disordered part.
The sensation in this case is real, but the conclusion
from it is fallacious. So in every mental illusion, imagination,
when she first begins to exercise her powers,
seizes on some fact, of the real nature of which the
mind has but an obscure idea, and, for want of tracing
it through all its connexions and dependences, misleads
reason into the darkest paths of error. The wild conjectures,
and extravagant opinions which have issued
from this source are innumerable. The imagination
receives every impulse with eagerness, while the passions
crowd around her splendid throne, obedient to
her dictates. They act, indeed, reciprocally on each
other. The imagination pours a concourse of contrary
ideas into the mind, and easily disregards, or reconciles
their incongruities. The voice of the calm inquirer,
reason, is incapable of being heard amidst the tumult;
and the favorite image is animated and enlarged by the
glowing fire of the passions. No power remains to
control or regulate, much less to subdue, this mental
ray, which inflames the whole soul, and exalts it into
the fervor of enthusiasm, hurries it into the extravagance
of superstition: or precipitates it into the furious
frenzies of fanaticism.
Enthusiasm is that ecstacy of the mind, that lively
transport of the soul, which is excited by the pursuit
or contemplation of some great and noble object, the
novelty of which awakens attention, the truth of which
fixes the understanding, and the grandeur of which, by
firing the fancy, engages the aid of every passion, and
prompts the mind to the highest undertakings. A just
and rightly formed enthusiasm is founded in reason,
and supported by nature, and carries the mind above
its ordinary level, into the unexplored regions of art
and science. The rational enthusiast, indeed, rises to
an elevation so far above the distinct view of vulgar
eyes, that common understandings are apt to treat him
either with blind admiration, or cool contempt, only because
they are incapable of comprehending his real[203]
character; and while some bow to him as an extraordinary
genius, others rail at him as an unhappy lunatic.
The powers of enthusiasm, however, when founded
upon proper principles, so strengthen and invigorate
the faculties of the mind, as to enable it to resist danger
undismayed, and to surmount difficulties that appear
irresistible. Those, indeed, who have possessed themselves
of this power to any extraordinary degree, have
been considered as inspired, and their great achievements
conceived to have been directed by councils,
and sustained by energies of a divine or super-mundane
nature. Certain it is, that we owe to the spirit of enthusiasm
whatever is great in art, sublime in science,
or noble in the human character: and the elegant and
philosophic Lord Shaftsbury, while he ridicules the
absurdities of this wonderfully powerful and extensive
quality, admits that it is impossible to forbear ascribing
to it whatever is greatly performed by heroes, statesmen,
poets, orators, and even philosophers themselves:
and who that is not contented to wallow in the mire
of gross sensuality, would not quit the noisy scenes of
tumultuous dissipation, and repair with joy and gladness
to solitary shades, to the bower of tranquillity, and
the fountain of peace, to majestic forests, and to verdant
groves, to acquire this necessary ingredient to
perfect excellence? Who would not willingly pierce
the pensive gloom, or dwell among the brighter glories
of the golden age, to acquire by a warm and glowing,
but correct and chaste contemplation of the beautiful
and sublime works of nature, these ravishing sensations,
and gain this noble fervor of the imagination?
A proper study of the works of nature amidst the romantic
scenery of sylvan solitude, is certainly the most
likely means of inspiring the mind with true enthusiasm,
and leading genius to her most exalted heights;
but the attempt is dangerous. There are few men in
whose minds airy notions do not sometimes tyrannize.
“To indulge the power of fiction,” says a celebrated
writer, “and send imagination out upon the wing, is
often the sport of those who delight too much in silent
speculation. When we are alone, we are not always
busy; the labor of excogitation is too violent to last
long; the ardor of inquiry will sometimes give way to
idleness or satiety. He who has nothing external that
can divert him, must find pleasure in his own thoughts,
and must conceive himself what he is not; for who is
pleased with what he is? He then expatiates in boundless[204]
futurity, and culls from all imaginable conditions
that which for the present moment he should most desire,
amuses his desires with impossible enjoyments,
and confers upon his pride unattainable dominion.
The mind dances from scene to scene, unites all pleasures
in all combinations, riots in delights which nature
and fortune, with all their bounty, cannot bestow. In
time some particular train of ideas fixes the attention;
all other intellectual gratifications are rejected; the
mind in weariness or leisure, recurs constantly to the
favorite conception, and feasts on the luscious falsehood
whenever she is offended with the bitterness of truth.
By degrees the reign of fancy is confirmed; she grows
first imperious, and in time despotic: then fictions begin
to operate as realities, false opinions fasten on the
mind, and life passes in dreams of rapture or of anguish.
This is one of the dangers of solitude.”
These observations lead us to consider the character
of the fanatical visionary, who feels, like the happy enthusiast,
the same agitation of passion, and the same
inflammation of mind; but as the feelings of one are
founded upon knowledge, truth, and nature, so the feelings
of the other are the result of ignorance and error,
and all the glittering meteors of his brain the effects of
imposture and deception. Of this species of enthusiasm
Mr. Locke gives the following description: “In all ages
men in whom melancholy has mixed with devotion, or
whose conceit of themselves has raised them into an
opinion of a greater familiarity with God, and a nearer
admittance to his favors, than is afforded to others,
have often flattered themselves with a persuasion of an
immediate intercourse with the Deity, and frequent
communication with his divine spirit. Their minds
being thus prepared, whatever groundless opinion
comes to settle itself strongly upon their fancies, is an
illumination from the Spirit of God, and whatever odd
action they find in themselves a strong inclination to
do, that impulse is concluded to be a call or direction
from heaven, and must be obeyed; it is a commission
from above, and they cannot err in executing it. This
species of enthusiasm, though arising from the conceit
of a warm and overweening brain, works, when it once
gets footing, more powerfully on the persuasions and
actions of men than either reason, revelation, or both
together; men being forwardly obedient to all the impulses
they receive from themselves.” The fantastic
images, indeed, which the wildness of his imagination[205]
creates, subdues his reason, and destroys the best affections
of his heart, while his passions take the part of
their furious assailants, and render him the victim of
his visionary conceptions. It is not, however, from
sources of fanatical devotion, or irrational solitude, that
this vicious species of enthusiasm alone arises. The follies
of faquiers, the extravagance of orgaists, the absurdities
of hermits, and the mummery of monks, are
not more enthusiastically injurious to the true interests
of mankind, or more pregnant with all the calamitous
effects of this baleful vice, than those unprincipled systems
of politics and morals which have been of late
years obtruded on the world, and in which good sense
is sacrificed, and true science disgraced.
The growth of fanaticism, whether moral, political,
religious, or scientific, is not confined exclusively to
any age or country; the seeds of it have been but
too plentifully sown in all the regions of the earth; and
it is almost equally baneful and injurious in whatever
soil they spring. Every bold, turbulent, and intriguing
spirit, who has sufficient artifice to inflame the passions
of the inconstant multitude, the moment he calls the
demon of fanatacism to his aid, becomes troublesome,
and frequently dangerous, to the government under
which he lives. Even the affectation of this powerful
but pernicious quality, is able to produce fermentations,
highly detrimental to the peace of society. In the very
metropolis of Great Britain, and among the enlightened
inhabitants of that kingdom, Lord George Gordon, in
the present age, was enabled, by assuming the hypocritical
appearance of piety, and standing forth as a champion
of a religious sect, to convulse the nation, and endanger
its safety. In the twenty-first year of the reign
of his Britannic Majesty, the present powerful and illustrious
King George III. an act of parliament was passed
to relieve the Roman Catholics residing in England
from the penalties and disabilities which had been imposed
on them at the revolution. An extension of the
same relief to the Catholics of Scotland was also said
to be intended by parliament. The report spread an
immediate alarm throughout the country; societies
were formed for the defence of the Protestant faith;
committees appointed, books dispersed, and, in short,
every method taken to inflame the zeal of the people.
These attempts being totally neglected by government,
and but feebly resisted by the more liberal minded in
the country, produced all their effects. A furious spirit[206]
of bigotry and persecution soon showed itself, and
broke out into the most outrageous acts of violence
against the Papists at Edinburgh, Glasgow, and elsewhere;
but as government did not think it advisable to
repress this spirit by force, the just and benevolent intentions
of the legislature were laid aside. The successful
resistance of the zealots in Scotland to any relaxation
of the penal laws against the Papists, seems
to have given the first rise to the Protestant Association
in England; for about the same time bills
were dispersed, and advertisements inserted in the
newspapers, inviting those who wished well to the
cause to unite under that title; and Lord George Gordon,
who had been active at the head of the malcontents
in Scotland, was chosen their President. The
ferment was suffered to increase during a course of several
years. His lordship was a member of the senate,
and his extraordinary conduct in the house, and frequent
interruption he gave to the business of parliament,
as well as the unaccountable manner in which
he continually brought in and treated matters relative
to religion and the danger of popery, and the caprice
with which he divided the house upon questions wherein
he stood nearly or entirely alone, were passed over,
along with other singularities in his dress and manners,
rather as subjects of pleasantry than of serious notice
or reprehension. On Monday, the 29th of May, 1780,
a meeting was held at Coachmaker’s Hall, pursuant to
a public advertisement, in order to consider of the
mode of presenting a petition to the House of Commons.
Lord George Gordon took the chair; and, after
a long inflammatory harangue, in which he endeavoured
to persuade his hearers of the rapid and alarming
progress that popery was making in the kingdom, he
proceeded to observe, that the only way to stop it, was
going in a firm, manly, and resolute manner to the
house and showing their representatives that they
were determined to preserve their religious freedom
with their lives; that, for his part, he would run all
hazards with the people; and if the people were too
lukewarm to run all hazards with him, when their conscience
and their country called them forth, they might
get another president, for that he would tell them candidly,
he was not a lukewarm man himself; and that,
if they meant to spend their time in mock debate, and
idle opposition, they might get another leader. This
speech was received with the loudest applause, and his[207]
lordship then moved the following resolution: “That
the whole body of the Protestant Association do attend
in St. George’s Fields, on Friday next, at ten o’clock
in the morning, to accompany their president to the
House of Commons at the delivery of the Protestant
petition;” which was carried unanimously. His Lordship
then informed them, that if less than twenty
thousand of his fellow citizens attended him on that
day, he would not present their petition. Accordingly,
on Friday, the 2d day of June, 1780, at ten in the forenoon,
several thousands assembled at the place appointed,
marshalling themselves in ranks, and waiting for
their leader, who arrived about an hour afterward,
and they all proceeded to the houses of parliament.
Here they began to exercise the most arbitrary power
over both lords and commons, by obliging almost all
the members to put blue cockades on their hats, and
call out “no popery!” Some they compelled to take
oaths to vote for the repeal of this obnoxious act;
others they insulted in the most indecent and insolent
manner. They took possession of all the avenues up
to the very door of both houses of parliament, which
they twice attempted to force open, and committed
many outrages on the persons of the members. Nor
were they dispersed, or the remaining members able to
leave their seats, until a military force arrived. The
houses were adjourned to the 19th of June. But so
dreadful a spectacle of calamity and horror was never
known in any age or country, as that which the metropolis
of England exhibited on the evening and the
day which succeeded this seditious congregation.
These astonishing effects produced by the real or pretended
fanaticism of a simple individual, sufficiently
display the power of this dangerous quality, when artfully
employed to inflame the passions of the unthinking
multitude. But it is worthy of observation, that
while this incendiary sustained among his followers
the character of a pious patriot, of a man without the
smallest spot or blemish, of being, in short, the most
virtuous guardian of the established religion of the
country, he regularly indulged his holy fervors, and
sanctified appearances, every evening, in the company
of common prostitutes, or professed wantons.
The fire of fanaticism is, indeed, so subtilely powerful,
that it is capable of inflaming the coldest mind.
The mildest and the most rational dispositions have been
occasionally injured by its heat. The rapidity of its[208]
progress certainly depends, in a great degree, on the
nature of the materials on which it acts; but, like every
dangerous conflagration, its first appearances should be
watched, and every means taken to extinguish its
flames. The extinction is, perhaps, most happily and
readily effected by those counteractions which the common
occupations, and daily duties of life produce on
the mind, when judiciously opposed to this flagrant
evil. Of the advantages, at least, of this resource, a
circumstance in the history of the late Dr. Fothergill
affords a remarkable example. This celebrated physician
possessed the greatest tranquillity of mind, and
had obtained so complete a dominion over his passions,
that he declared to a friend, recently before his death,
that he could not recollect a single instance, during
the whole course of his life, in which they had been
improperly disturbed. This temper, which perfectly
suited to the character of the religion he professed, the
tenets of which he strictly practised, he maintained on
all occasions; nor was there any thing in his general
conduct or manner that betrayed to his most familiar
friends the least propensity toward enthusiasm; and
yet, distant as the suspicion must be, under these circumstances,
that he should ever be under the influence
of superstition, it is well known, that while he was a
student at Edinburgh, where he was distinguished for
the mildness of his manners and the regularity of his
conduct, he one day, in an eccentric sally of fanaticism
ran, almost entirely naked through the streets of that
city, warning all its inhabitants of the impending wrath
of heaven; and exhorting them in the most solemn
manner, to avert the approaching danger, by humbly
imploring the mercy of the offended Deity; but this religious
paroxysm was of short duration. He was at
this time in habits of intimacy with the great characters
who then filled the professional chairs of the university,
and ardently engaged in the pursuits of study;
and the exercises which his daily tasks required, together
with the company and conversation of these
rational, well-informed, and thinking men, preserved
his reason, and soon restored him to the full and free
enjoyment of those faculties, from which both science
and humanity afterward derived so many benefits.
The conduct of St. Francis, commonly called the
holy Francis of Assisi, was in some degree similar;
excepting that the madness of this fanatic continued
throughout his life, while the delirium of Fothergill[209]
lasted but a day. This saint was born at Assisi, in the
province of Umbria, in the year 1182. His real name
of baptism was John; but, on account of the facility
with which he acquired the French language, so necessary
at that time in Italy, especially for the business for
which he was intended, he was called Francis. He is
said to have been born with the figure of a cross on his
right shoulder, and to have dreamt that he was designed
by heaven to promote the interests of that holy sign.
His disposition was naturally mild, his comprehension
quick, his feelings acute, his manners easy, his imagination
vivid, and his passions inordinately warm. A
careless and unrestrained indulgence of the propensities
of youth had led him into a variety of vicious habits
and libertine extravagances, until the solitude to which
a fit of sickness confined him, brought him to a recollection,
and forced him to reflect upon the dangerous
tendency of his past misconduct. His mind started
with horror at the dreadful scene his retrospection presented
to his view; and he resolved to quit the company
of his former associates, to reform the profligacy of
his life, to restore his character, and to save, by penitence
and prayer, his guilty soul. These serious reflections
wrought so powerfully on his dejected mind, that
he fell into an extravagant kind of devotion, more resembling
madness than religion. Fixing on a passage
in St. Matthew, in which our Saviour desires his apostles
to provide neither gold nor silver, nor brass in their
purses; nor scrip for their journey; neither two coats,
neither shoes, nor yet staves, he was led to consider a
voluntary and absolute poverty as the essence of the
gospel, and to prescribe this poverty as a sacred rule,
both to himself and to the few who followed him. He
accordingly wandered through the streets of Assisi, in
garments that scarcely concealed his nakedness, in order,
as he said, to inure himself to the taunts and ridicule
of his former companions, whom he now called
the children of sin, and followers of satan. The father
of the young saint, supposing, from these extravagances,
that the sickness under which he had so long labored
had disordered his intellects, prepared to provide
him with some proper place of confinement, until time
or medical regimen should restore him to his right
senses; but the saint, having been informed of his father’s
friendly intention, declined his parental care, and
quitting his house, sought a sanctuary in the palace of
the bishop of Assisi. The diocesan immediately sent[210]
to the father of the fugitive, and, after hearing him
upon the subject of his right to provide for the safety of
his son, he turned calmly to the son and desired him to
reply. The son immediately tore off the tattered garments
which he then wore, and casting them with
scorn and indignation at the feet of his astonished parent
exclaimed, “there, take back all your property.
You were, indeed, my earthly father; but henceforth I
disclaim you; for I own no father but him who is in
heaven.” The bishop, either really or affectedly delighted
with this unnatural rant of the young enthusiast,
threw his own mantle over the saint, and exhorted him
to persevere in his holy resolution, and to cherish with
increasing ardor, the divine inspiration of his pious
mind. The frantic youth, animated by the warm approbation
of the bishop proceeded in his religious
course, and abandoning the city, retired into the deepest
gloom of an adjacent forest, to indulge the fervors of
that false enthusiasm which had overpowered his brain.
In this retreat a second vision confirmed him in his
holy office; and being encouraged by pope Innocent
III, and Honorius, he established, in the year 1209, the
Order of Saint Francis. If this ridiculous enthusiast
had corrected the extravagances of his overheated
imagination, by a cool and temperate exercise of his
reason, by studying, like the celebrated physician we
have just mentioned, some liberal science, he might,
with the talents he possessed, have become a really
useful member of society. But these wild shoots, if
suffered to grow to any height, cannot afterward be
easily eradicated: and even Fothergill, if he had lived
like Francis, in an age of superstitious delusion, and had
been encouraged to believe the truth of his fanatic conceptions,
his temporary frenzy might have continued
through life; and his character, instead of being revered
as a promoter of an useful science, have been
held up by an ignorant multitude to the contempt and
ridicule of posterity.
The vacancy of solitude, by leaving the mind to its
own ideas, encourages to a great excess these wild and
eccentric sallies of the imagination. He who has an
opportunity to indulge, without interruption or restraint
the delightful musings of an excursive fancy, will soon
lose all relish for every other pleasure, and neglect
every employment which tends to interrupt the gratification
of such an enchanting though dangerous propensity.
During the quietude of a sequestered life,[211]
imagination usurps the throne of reason, and all the
feeble faculties of the mind obey her dictates, until her
voice becomes despotic. If the high powers be exercised
on the agreeable appearances of nature, and the
various entertainments, poetry, painting, music, or any
of the elegant arts, are capable of affording,
But if the mind, as in the solitude of monastic seclusion,
fixes its attention on ascetic subjects, and fires
the fancy with unnatural legends, the soul, instead of
sinking to divine repose, feels a morbid melancholy
and discontented torpor, which extinguishes all rational
reflection, and engenders the most fantastic
visions.
Men even of strong natural understandings, highly
improved by education, have, in some instances, not
been able to resist the fatal effects of intense application,
and long continued solitude. The learned Molanus,
having, during a course of many years, detached
his mind from all objects of sense, neglected all seasonable
and salutary devotion, and giving an uncontrolled
license to his imagination fancied, in the latter part of
his life, that he was a barley corn; and although he
received his friends with great courtesy and politeness,
and conversed upon subjects both of science and devotion
with great ease and ingenuity, he could never afterward
be persuaded to stir from home, lest, as he expressed
his apprehension, he should be picked up in the
street, and swallowed by a fowl.
The female mind is still more subject to these delusions
of disordered fancy; for, as their feelings are
more exquisite, their passions warmer, and their imaginations
more active than those of the other sex, solitude,
when carried to excess, affects them in a much
greater degree. Their bosoms are much more susceptible
to the injurious influence of seclusion, to the contagion
of example, and to the dangers of illusion.
This may, perhaps, in some degree, account for the similarity
of disposition which prevails in cloisters, and[212]
other institutions which confine women entirely to the
company of each other. The force of example and
habit is, indeed, in such retreats, surprisingly powerful.
A French medical writer, of great merit, and undoubted
veracity, relates, that in a convent of nuns, where
the sisterhood was unusually numerous, one of those
secluded fair ones was seized with a strange impulse
to mew like a cat; that several others of the nuns in a
short time followed her example; and that at length
this unaccountable propensity became general throughout
the convent; the whole sisterhood joined, at stated
periods, in the practice of mewing, and continued it
for several hours. But of all the extraordinary fancies
recorded of the sex, none can exceed that which Cardan
relates to have happened in one of the convents of
Germany, during the fifteenth century. One of the
nuns, who had long been secluded from the sight of
man, was seized with the strange propensity to bite all
her companions; and extraordinary as it may seem,
this disposition spread until the whole house was infected
with the same fury. The account, indeed, states,
that this mania extended even beyond the walls of the
convent, and that the disease was conveyed to such a
degree from cloister to cloister, throughout Germany,
Holland, and Italy, that the practice at length prevailed
in every female convent in Europe.
The instances of the pernicious influence of a total
dereliction of society, may possibly appear to the understandings
of the present generation extravagant and
incredible; but they are certainly true; and many
others of a similar nature might be adduced from the
most authentic histories of the times. The species,
when prevented from enjoying a free intercourse and
rational society with each other, almost change their
nature; and the mind, feeding continually on the melancholy
musings of the imagination, in the cold and
cheerless regions of solitude, engenders humors of the
most eccentric cast. Excluded from those social communications
which nature enjoins, with the means of
gratifying the understanding, amusing the senses, or interesting
the affections, fancy roves at large into unknown
spheres, and endeavors to find in ideal forms entertainment
and delight. Angelic visions, infernal phantoms,
amazing prodigies, the delusions of alchemy, the frenzies
of philosophy, and the madness of metaphysics,
fill the disordered brain. The intellect fastens upon[213]
some absurd idea, and fosters it with the fondest affection,
until its increasing magnitude subdues the remaining
powers of sense and reason. The slightest
retrospect into the conduct of the solitary professors
of every religious system, proves the lamentable dangers
to which they expose their mental faculties, by excluding
themselves from the intercourse of rational society.
From the prolific womb of solitude sprung all
the mysterious ravings and senseless doctrines of the
New Platonists. The same cause devoted the monks
and anchorites of the Christian church to folly and fanaticism.
Fakirs, Bramins, and every other tribe of
religious enthusiasts, originated from the same source.
By abandoning the pleasures of society, and renouncing
the feelings of nature, they sacrificed reason upon the
altar of superstition, and supplied its place with ecstatic
fancies, and melancholy musings. There is nothing
more evident, than that our holy religion, in its original
constitution, was set so far apart from all refined
speculations, that it seemed in a manner diametrically
opposite to them. The great founder of Christianity
gave one simple rule of life to all men; but his disciples,
anxious to indulge the natural vanity of the human
mind, and misled, in some degree, by the false
philosophy which at that period overspread the heathen
world, introduced various doctrines of salvation, and
new schemes of faith. Bigotry, a species of superstition
never known before, took place in men’s affections,
and armed them with new jealousies against each
other: barbarous terms and idioms were every day invented;
monstrous definitions imposed, and hostilities,
the fiercest imaginable, exercised on each other by the
contending parties. Fanaticism, with all the train of
visions, prophecies, dreams, charms, miracles, and exorcises,
succeeded; and spiritual feats, of the most absurd
and ridiculous nature, were performed in monasteries,
or up and down, by their mendicant or itinerant
priests and ghostly missionaries. Solitude impressed
the principles upon which these extravagances were
founded, with uncommon force on the imagination;
and the mind, working itself into holy fervors and inspirations,
give birth to new extravagances. The
causes which operated on the minds of men to produce
such ridiculous effects, acted with double force on the
ardent temper, warm imagination, and excessive sensibility
of the female world. That which was mere
fantasy with the one sex, became frenzy with the[214]
other. Women, indeed, are, according to the opinion
of Plato, the nurses of fanaticism; and their favorite
theme is that which has been dignified by the appellation
of a sublime passion for poetry: an ardent, refined
love of heaven; but which, in fact, is only the natural
effects of the heart, swollen intumescently by an unreined,
prolific, and too ardent imagination. Instances
of this kind are discoverable in all the accounts that
have been published of the holy fervors of these
penitents, particularly in those of Catherine of Sienna,
of Joan of Cambray, of Angelina of Foligny, of
Matilda of Saxony, of Maria of the Incarnation, of
Mary Magdalen of Pazzio, of Gertrude of Saxony, and
many others. The celebrated Armelle, who was born
in the year 1606, at Campenac, in the diocese of St.
Malo, and who died at Vannes in the year 1671, possessed
great personal beauty, a quick and lively mind, and
an uncommon tenderness of heart. Her parents, who
were honest and industrious villagers, placed her as a
menial servant in the house of a neighboring gentleman,
with whom she lived for five and thirty years in the
practice of the most exemplary piety and extraordinary
virtue, at least, according to the accounts which he gave
from time to time of her conduct. During the time
she resided with this gentleman, his groom, finding the
kitchen door fastened, had the curiosity to peep through
the key-hole, where he discovered the pious maid, in a
paroxysm of divine ecstacy, performing the humble
office of spitting a capon. The agitation of this holy
spirit so affected the mind of the astonished youth,
that, it is said by the Ursuline sister who has written
the life of this great luminary of French sanctity, under
the title of The school for the love of God, he became
immediately enamored with the beauties of religion,
and renouncing the pomps and vanities of the
world, entered into a monastery, at the same time that
his holy companion thought proper to withdraw from
future observation into the convent of Vannes, where
she devoted the remainder of her life, and died, as it is
reported, in an excess of divine love. The youthful
days of Armelle had been passed in almost total solitude;
for her occupation at the house in which she was placed
by her parents, was confined entirely to the kitchen, and
she had scarcely any other intercourse than with its furniture.
It appears, however, from the history of her life,
that she was from her childhood excessively fond of
reciting an ave or paternoster; and while occupied in[215]
tending the flocks, her original employment, amused
herself in telling her rosary; “by which means,” says
the Ursuline sister, “she made, even in her pastoral
state of simplicity and ignorance, such great advances
in divine love that, the first moment she was allowed
to pay her adoration to the crucifix the fervency of
her pious passion burst forth with such ecstacy, that
she eagerly snatched the holy object to her arms, and
embraced it with a transport so warmly affectionate,
that streams of tenderness rushed from her eyes.”
It is truly said by a celebrated English writer, to be
“of the utmost importance to guard against extremes
of every kind in religion. We must beware lest by
seeking to avoid one rock we split upon another. It
has been long the subject of remark, that superstition
and enthusiasm are two capital sources of delusion:
superstition, on the one hand, attaching men with immoderate
zeal to the ritual and external points of religion;
and enthusiasm, on the other, directing their
whole attention to internal emotions and mystical communications
with the spiritual world; while neither
the one nor the other had paid sufficient regard to the
great moral duties of the Christian life. But running
with intemperate eagerness from these two great
abuses of religion, men have neglected to observe that
there are extremes opposite to each of them, into which
they are in hazard of precipitating themselves. Thus
the horror of superstition has sometimes reached so
far as to produce contempt for all external institutions;
as if it were possible for religion to subsist in the world
without forms of worship, or public acknowledgment
of God. It has also happened, that some, who, in the
main are well affected to the cause of goodness, observing
that persons of a devout turn have at times been
carried away by warm affections into unjustifiable excesses,
have thence hastily concluded that all devotion
was akin to enthusiasm; and separating religion totally
from the heart and affections, have reduced it to a frigid
observance of what they call the rules of virtue.”
These extremes are to be carefully avoided. True devotion
is rational and well founded; and consists in
the lively exercise of that affection which we owe to
the Supreme Being, comprehending several emotions
of the heart, which all terminate in the same great
object.
These are among the evils which an irrational solitude
is capable of producing upon an unrestrained and[216]
misdirected imagination; but I do not mean to contend
indiscriminately, that solitude is generally to be considered
as dangerous to the free indulgence of this delightful
faculty of the mind. Solitude, well chosen,
and rationally pursued, is so far from being either the
open enemy, or the treacherous friend of a firm and
fine imagination, that it ripens its earliest shoots,
strengthens their growth, and contributes to the production
of its richest and most valuable fruits. To him
who has acquired the happy art of enjoying in solitude
the charms of nature, and of indulging the powers of
fancy without impairing the faculty of reason
A disposition to enjoy the silence of sequestered solitude,
and a glowing distaste of the noisy tumults of
public life, are the earliest and most general symptoms
of approaching melancholy. The heart, on which felicity
was used to sit enthroned, becomes senseless to
the touch of pleasure; the airy wing of high delight
sinks prostrate to the earth on broken pinions: and
care and anxiety, chagrin, and regret, load the mind
with distempering ideas, and render it cheerless and
forlorn. The dawning sun, and heaven lighted day,
give no pleasure to the sickened senses of the unhappy[217]
sufferer. His only pleasure is to “commune with his
own griefs;” and for this purpose he seeks some gloomy
glen,
But a mind thus disposed, however it may for a time
console its sorrows, by retiring from the world, thereby
becomes more weak and helpless. Solitude in such
cases, increases the disorder, while it softens its effects.
To eradicate the seeds of this dreadful malady, the
imagination should be impressed with some new, contrary,
and more powerful bias than that which sways
the mind, which can only be turned from its course of
thought by shifting the object of its reflection, and giving
entrance to new desires. A melancholy mind
therefore, should be weaned by degrees from its disposition
to solitude, should be agreeably interrupted in
its musings, and be induced to relish the varying pleasures
of the world. But, above all, those scenes and
subjects which have any connexion, however remotely,
with the cause of the complaint, must be cautiously
avoided. The seeds of this dreadful malady are, in
general, very deeply planted in the constitution of the
patient, however accidental the circumstances may be
when relieved from its oppression, is, if left to itself,
always in danger of relapsing into its former habit.
This circumstance alone is sufficient to show how unfriendly
solitude must be to the cure of this complaint.
If, indeed, the patient be so far gone as to leave no hope
of recovery; if his desponding heart be incapable of
any new impression; if his mind forgoes all custom of
mirth; if he refuse to partake of any healthful exercise
or agreeable recreation: and the soul sinks day after
day into deeper dejection, and threatens nature with
madness or with death, solitude is the only resource.
When melancholy seizes, to a certain degree, the mind
of an Englishman, it almost uniformly leads him to put
a period to his existence; while the worst effect it produces
on a Frenchman, is to induce him to turn Carthusian.
Such dissimilar effects, proceeding from the
operation of the same cause, in different persons, can
only be accounted for from the greater opportunities
which there is in France than in England to hide the
sorrows of the mind from the inspection of the world.
An English hypochondriac would, perhaps, seldom destroy[218]
himself, if there were in England any monastic
institution to which he could fly from the eye of public
observation.
The mind, in proportion as it loses its proper tone,
and natural elasticity, decreases in its attachments to
society, and wishes to recede from the world and its
concerns. There is no disorder of the mind, among
all the various causes by which it may be affected, that
destroys its force and activity so entirely as melancholy.
It unties, as it were, all the relations, both physical
and moral, of which society, in its most perfect
state, consists, and sets the soul free from all sense of
obligation. The private link which unites the species
is destroyed; all inclination to the common intercourse
of life is lost; and the only remaining disposition is for
solitude. It is for this reason that melancholy persons
are continually advised to frequent the theatres, masquerades,
operas, balls, and other places of public diversion;
to amuse themselves at home with cards, dice,
or other games; or to infuse from the eyes of female
beauty new life into their drooping souls. Certain it
is, that great advantages may be derived by detaching
the mind from those objects by which it is tortured
and consumed; but to run indiscriminately, and with
injudicious eagerness, into the pursuit of pleasures,
without any predisposition to enjoy them, may rather
tend to augment than diminish the disease.
The eye of melancholy views every object on its
darkest and most unfavorable side, and apprehends
disastrous consequences from every occurrence. These
gloomy perceptions, which increase as the feelings become
more indolent, and the constitution more morbid,
bring on habitual uneasiness and chagrin upon the
mind, and render every injury, however small and trifling
it may be, irksome and insupportable. A settled
dejection ensues; and the miserable patient avoids
every scene in which his musings may be liable to interruption;
the few enjoyments he is yet capable of
feeling in any degree impeded; or which may call
upon him to make the slightest exertion; and by withdrawing
himself from society into solitude, neglects
the exercises and recreations by which his disease
might be relieved. Instead of endeavoring to enlighten
the dark gloom which involves his mind, and subdues
his soul, by regarding with a favorable eye all
that gives a true value and high relish to men of sound
minds and lively dispositions, he fondly follows the[219]
phantom which misleads him, and thereby sinks himself
more deeply into the moody fanes of irremediable
melancholy: and if the bright rays of life and happiness
penetrate by chance into the obscurity of his retreat
instead of feeling any satisfaction from the perception
of cheerfulness and content, he quarrels with
the possessor of them, and converts their enjoyments
into subjects of grievance, in order to torment himself.
Unfavorable, however, as a dreary and disconsolate
solitude certainly is to the recovery of a mind labouring
under this grievous affliction, it is far preferable to
the society of licentious companions, and to wild scenes
of inebriating dissipation. Worldly pleasures, and sensual
gratifications of every description, when intemperately
pursued, only drive a melancholy mind into a
more abject state of dejection. It is from rational recreation,
and temperate pleasures alone, that an afflicted
mind can receive amusement and delight. The only
scenes by which the mudded current of his mind can
be cleared, or his stagnated system of pleasure refreshed,
must be calm, cheerful, and temperate, not gay.
Melancholy is of a sedate and pensive character, and
flies from whatever is hurrying and tumultuous. How
frequently do men of contemplative dispositions conceive
a distaste for the world, only because they have
unthinkingly engaged so ardently in the pursuits of
pleasure, or of business, that they have been prevented
for a length of time, from collecting their scattered
ideas, and indulging their natural habits of reflection!
But in striving to reclaim a melancholy mind, it is necessary
to attend to the feelings of the heart, as well as
the peculiar temper of the mind. A gloomy, disturbed,
unquiet mind, is highly irritated, and its disease of
course increased, by the company and conversation of
those whose senseless bosoms are incapable of feeling
the griefs it endures, or the complaints it utters. This,
indeed, is another cause which drives melancholy persons
from society into solitude; for how few are there
whose tenderness leads them to sympathize with a
brother in distress, or to contribute a kind aid to eradicate
the thorns which rankle in his heart! Robust
characters, in whose bosoms nature has planted the impenetrable
shield of unvarying health, as well as those
whose minds are engrossed by the charms of uninterrupted
prosperity, can form no idea of the secret but severe
agonies which shake the system of valetudinary men:
nor feel any compassion for the tortures which accompany[220]
a wounded and afflicted spirit, until the convulsive
frame proclaims the dreadful malady, or increasing
melancholy sacrifices its victim on the altar of self-destruction.
The gay associates of the unfeeling world
view a companion suffering under the worst of nature’s
evils, with cold indifference, or affected concern; or,
in the career of pleasure, overlook the miseries he feels
until they hear that exhausted wo has induced him to
brave the anger of the Almighty, and to rush from
mortal misery, uncalled, into the awful presence of his
Creator. Dreadful state! The secrecy and silence, indeed,
with which persons of this description conceal
the pangs that torture their minds, is among the most
dangerous symptoms of the disease. It is not, indeed,
easy to hide from the anxious and attentive eye of real
friendship the feelings of the heart; but to the careless
and indifferent multitude of common acquaintances,
the countenance may wear the appearance not only of
composure, but even of gayety, while the soul is inwardly
suffering the keenest anguish of unutterable wo.
The celebrated Carlini, a French actor of great merit,
and in high reputation with the public, for the life,
whim, frolic, and vivacity with which he nightly entertained
the Parisian audiences, applied to a physician
to whom he was not personally known, for advice, and
represented to him that he was subject to attacks of the
deepest melancholy. The physician advised him to
amuse his mind by scenes of pleasure, and particularly
directed him to frequent the Italian Comedy; “for,”
continued he, “your distemper must be rooted, indeed,
if the acting of the lively Carlini does not remove it.”
“Alas!” exclaimed the unhappy patient, “I am the
very Carlini whom you recommend me to see; and
while I am capable of filling Paris with mirth and
laughter, I am myself the dejected victim of melancholy
and chagrin.”
Painful as it may be to a person who is laboring under
the oppression of melancholy, to associate with
those who are incapable of sympathizing with his feelings,
or who neglect to compassionate his sufferings,
yet he should not fly from the presence of men into
solitude; for solitude will unavoidably aggravate and
augment his distress inasmuch as it tends to encourage
that musing and soliloquy to which melancholy is invariably
prone. It is the most dangerous resource to
which he can fly; for, while it seems to promise the
fairest hope of relief, it betrays the confidence reposed[221]
in it; and instead of shielding its votary from that conflict
which disturbs his repose, it renders him defenceless,
and delivers him unarmed to his bitterest enemy.
The boldest spirits and firmest nerves cannot withstand
the inroads of melancholy merely by their own
strength. It damps the courage of the most enterprising
mind, and makes him who was before upon all occasions,
fearless and unawed, shrink even from the presence
of his fellow creatures. Company of every description
becomes displeasing to him; he dreads the
idea of visiting; and if he is induced to quit the domestic
solitude into which he retires, it is only when the
glorious, but to him offensive, light of heaven is concealed
in congenial darkness; and the shades of night
hide him from the observation of man. An invitation
to social entertainment alarms his mind; the visit even
of a friend becomes painful to his feelings; and he detests
every thing which lightens the gloom in which
he wishes to live, or which tends to disturb his privacy,
or remove him from his retreat.
Rousseau, toward the latter part of his life, abandoned
all intercourse with society under a notion, which was the
effect of his melancholy disposition, that the world had
conceived an unconquerable antipathy against him;
and that his former friends, particularly Hume, and
some philosophers in France, not only had entered into
confederacy to destroy his glory and repose, but to take
away his life. On departing from England, he passed
through Amiens, where he met with Gresset, who interrogated
him about his misfortunes, and the controversies
in which he had been engaged; but Rousseau
only answered, “You have got the art of making a
parrot speak, but you are not yet possessed of the secret
of giving language to a bear:” and when the magistrates
of the city wished to confer on him some marks
of their esteem, he refused all their offers, and considered
these flattering civilities like the insults which
were lavished in the same form on the celebrated Sancho
in the island of Barataria. To such extent, indeed,
did his disordered imagination carry him, that he
thought one part of the people looked upon him like
Lazarillo de Tormes, who being fixed to the bottom of
a tub, with only his head out of water, was carried
from one town to another to amuse the vulgar. His
bad health, a strong and melancholy imagination, a
too nice sensibility, a jealous disposition, joined with
philosophic vanity, and his uncommon devotion to solitude,[222]
tended to prepossess him with those wrong and
whimsical ideas. But it must be confessed that the opposition
he met with from different ranks of persons,
at several periods of his life, was extremely severe.
He was driven at one time from France, in which he
had before been distinguished by his writings, and
highly honored. At another time he was chased from
Geneva, the place of his nativity, and of his warmest
affection. He was exiled from Berne with disgrace;
expelled, with some appearance of injustice, from
Neufchatel; and even banished from his tranquil solitude
on the borders of the lake of Bienne. His disposition
therefore to avoid society, must not be entirely
attributed to his melancholy disposition; nor his love
of solitude to a misanthropic mind. Every acute and
scientific observer of the life and character of this extraordinary
man will immediately perceive that the
seeds of that melancholy disposition, and fretful temper,
which through life destroyed his repose, were sown
by nature in his constitution. He confesses indeed, to
use his own words, that “a proud misanthropy, and peculiar
contempt for the riches and pleasures of the
world, constituted the chief traits of his character.”
This proud spirit and contemptuous mind were mixed
with an extreme sensibility of heart, and an excessive
indolence of disposition; and his body, which was naturally
feeble, suffered, from ill health, the keenest agonies,
and most excruciating disorders, to which the human
frame is incident. Persecution also had levelled
the most pointed and severely barbed shafts against
him; and he was forced to endure, amidst the pangs
of poverty, and the sorrows of sickness, all that envy,
hatred, and malice, could inflict. It has been said, that
the persecutions he experienced were not so much
excited by the new dogmas, or eccentric paradoxes,
which, both on politics and religion, pervade all his
writings, as by the refinement of his extraordinary
talents, the wonderful splendor of his eloquence, and
the increasing extent of his fame. His adversaries certainly
pursued him, not only with bigotry and intolerance,
but with an inconsistency which revealed, in a
great degree, the secret motives by which they were
actuated; for they condemned, with the sharpest virulence,
the freedom of his religious tenets, even in places
where the religious creed of Voltaire was held in the
highest admiration, and where atheism had collected
the most learned advocates, and displayed the very[223]
standard of infidelity and disbelief. Harassed by the
frowns of fortune, and pursued with unrelenting enmity
by men whose sympathy and kindness he had anxiously
endeavored to obtain, it is scarcely surprising
that the cheerfulness of his disposition, and the kindness
of his heart, should be subdued by those sentiments
of aversion and antipathy which he fancied
most of his intimates entertained against him: and
the invectives from the pen of his former friend and
confidant, Voltaire, together with many others that
might be adduced, particularly the letter which was
fabricated in the name of the king of Prussia, for the
purpose of exposing him to ridicule, prove that his suspicions
on the subject were not unfounded. The voice,
indeed of mankind, seems ready to exclaim that this
eccentric philosopher was not only a misanthrope, but
a madman; but those who are charitably disposed,
will recollect that he was a martyr to ill health; that
nature had bestowed upon him a discontented mind;
that his nerves were in a continued state of irritation;
and that to preserve equanimity of temper when goaded
by the shafts of calumny and malice, requires such
an extraordinary degree of fortitude and passive courage
as few individuals are found to possess. His faults
are remembered, while the wonderful bloom and uncommon
vigor of his genius, are forgotten or concealed.
The production from which his merits are in general
estimated, is that which is called “The Confessions:”
a work written under the pressure of calamity, in sickness
and in sorrow; amidst fears, distresses, and sufferings;
when the infirmities which accompany old age,
and the debility which attends continued ill health, had
injured the tone of his mind, overpowered his reason,
and perverted his feelings to such a degree, as to create
an almost total transformation of the character of the
man, and deprive him of his identity: but this degrading
work ought, in candor, to be considered as a deplorable
instance of the weakness of human nature, and
how unable it is to support its own dignity when attacked
by the adversities of fortune, and the malice of
mankind. The greatness of Rousseau ought to be
erected on a different basis: for his earliest works are
certainly sufficient to support the extent of his fame as
an author, however they may, on particular subjects, expose
his integrity as a man.
The anxieties which a vehemence of imagination,
and a tender texture of the nervous system at all times[224]
produce, are highly injurious to the faculties of the
mind; and, when accompanied by sickness or by sorrow,
wear out the intellect in proportion to its vigor
and activity. To use the popular metaphor upon this
subject, “The sword becomes too sharp for the scabbard;”
and the body and the mind are thereby exposed
to mutual destruction.
Religious melancholy is, of all other descriptions of
this dreadful disease, most heightened and aggravated
by solitude. The dreadful idea of having irretrievably
lost the divine favor, and of being an object unworthy
of the intercession of our Saviour, incessantly haunts
the mind, laboring under religious despondency; and
the imagination being left, in solitude, entirely to its
own workings, increases the horrors which such
thoughts must unavoidably inspire.
These mutual tortures, even when heightened by
the gloominess of solitude, are frequently still further
increased by the mischievous doctrines of bigoted
priests, who by mistaking the effects of nervous derangement,
or theological errors, for the compunctious
visitings of a guilty mind, establish and mature, by the
injudicious application of scriptural texts, and precepts
of casuistry, the very disease which they thus ignorantly
and presumptuously endeavor to remove. The
wound, thus tainted by the most virulent and corrosive
of the intellectual poisons, becomes extremely difficult
to cure. The pure and uncontaminated tenets of the
Christian faith furnishes, perhaps, the surest antidotes;
and when these balms of true comfort are infused by
such enlightened and discerning minds as Luther, Tillotson,
and Clark, the most rational hope may be entertained
of a speedy recovery. The writings of those
holy teachers confirm the truth of the observation,
that the deleterious gloom of superstition assumes a
darker aspect in the shades of retirement, and they
uniformly exhort the unhappy victims of this religious
error to avoid solitude as the most certain enemy of
this dreadful infirmity.
Solitude, however, is not the only soil in which this
noxious weed springs up, spreading around its baleful
glooms; it sometimes appears with deeply rooted violence[225]
in minds unused to retirement of every kind. In
the course of my practice as a physician, I was called
upon to attend a young lady, whose natural disposition
had been extremely cheerful, until a severe fit of sickness
damped her spirits, and rendered her averse to all
those lively pleasures which fascinate the youthful
mind. The debility of her frame, and the change of
her temper were not sufficiently attended to in the early
stages of her convalescence. The anxiety of her mind
was visible in the altered features of her face; and she
was frequently heard to express a melancholy regret
that she had consumed so many hours in the frivolous,
though innocent, amusements of the age. Time increased,
by almost imperceptible degrees, these symptoms
of approaching melancholy; and at length exhibited
themselves by penitential lamentations of the sin
she had committed with respect to the most trifling
actions of her life, and in which no shadow of offence
could possibly be found. At the time I was called
in, this superstitious melancholy was attended with
certain indications of mental derangement. The distemper
clearly originated in the indisposition of the
body, and the gloomy apprehensions which disease and
pain, had introduced into the mind, during a period of
many months. This once lively, handsome, but now
almost insane female, was daily attacked with such violent
paroxysms of her complaint, that she lost all sense
of her situation, and exclaimed, in horrid distraction
and deep despair, that her perdition was already accomplished,
and that the fiends were waiting to receive her
soul, and plunge it into the bitterest torments of hell.
Her constitution, however, still fortunately retained sufficient
strength to enable me, by the power of medicine,
gradually to change its temperament, and to reduce
the violence of the fever which had been long preying
upon her life. Her mind became more calm in proportion
as her nerves recovered their former tone; and
when her intellectual powers were in a condition to
be acted on with effect, I successfully counteracted the
baleful effects of superstition by the wholesome infusion
of real religion, and restored by degrees, a lovely,
young, and virtuous woman, to her family and herself.
Another instance of a similar nature occurred very
recently, in which the patient experienced all those
symptoms, which prognosticate the approach of religious
melancholy, and the completion of whose sorrow
and despondency would quickly have been effected, if[226]
good fortune had not deprived her of the advice of an
ignorant and bigoted priest, to whom her friends, when
I was called in, had resolved to apply. This young
lady, whose mind remained pure and uncorrupted
amidst all the luxuries and dissipations which usually
accompany illustrious birth and elevated station, possessed
by nature great tranquillity of disposition, and
lived with quietude and content, far retired from the
pleasures of the world. I had been long acquainted
with her family, and entertained for them the warmest
esteem. The dangerous condition of her health gave
me great anxiety and concern; for whenever she was
left one moment to herself, and even in company,
whenever she closed her eyes, a thousand horrid spectres
presented themselves to her disordered mind, and
seemed ready to devour her from every corner of the
apartment. I inquired whether these imaginary spectres
made any impression upon the affections of her
heart: but she answered in the negative, and described
the horrors which she felt from the supposed fierceness
of their eyes, and the threatening gesticulations of
their bodies. I endeavored to compose her by assuring
her that they were the creatures of fancy, the wild chimeras
of a weakened brain; that her long course of
ill health had affected her mind; and that when a proper
course of medicine, dietic regimen, and gentle exercise,
had restored her strength, these dreadful appearances
would give way to the most delightful visions.
The course I pursued succeeded in a short time beyond
my most sanguinary expectations, and I raised
her languid powers to health and happiness. But if she
had confided the anxieties of her mind to her confessor,
instead of her physician, the holy father would, in
all probability, have ascribed her gloomy apprehensions
to the machinations of the devil, and have used nothing
but pure spiritual antidotes to destroy them, which
would have increased the melancholy, and possibly
have thrown her into the darkest abyss of madness and
despair.
This grievous malady, indeed, is not the exclusive
offspring of mistaken piety and religious zeal; for it
frequently invades minds powerful by nature, improved
by science, and assisted by rational society. Health,
learning, conversation, highly advantageous as they unquestionably
are to the powers both of the body and
the mind, have, in particular instances, been found incapable
of resisting the influence of intense speculation,[227]
an atrabilarius constitution, and a superstitious habit.
I have already mentioned the thick cloud of melancholy
which obscured the latter days of the great and justly
celebrated Haller, which were passed under the oppression
of a religious despondency, that robbed him
not only of all enjoyment, but almost of life itself.
During the long period of four years, immediately antecedent
to his death, he lived (if such a state could be
called existence) in continual misery; except, indeed,
at those short intervals when the returning powers of
his mind enabled him, by the employment of his pen, to
experience a temporary relief. A long course of ill
health had forced him into an excessive use of opium,
and by taking gradually increased quantities of that
inspissated juice, he kept himself continually fluctuating
between a state of mind naturally elevated and deeply
dejected; for the first effects of this powerful drug are
like those of a strong stimulating cordial, but they are
soon succeeded by universal langour, or irresistable propensity
to sleep, attended with dreams of the most agitated
and enthusiastic nature. I was myself an eyewitness
of the dreary melancholy into which this great
and good man was plunged about two years before the
kind, but cold, and though friendly, yet unwelcome
hand of death, released him from his pains. The society,
which, during that time, he was most solicitous
to obtain, was that of priests and ecclesiastics of
every description: he was uneasy when they
were not with him: nor was he always happy in his
choice of these spiritual comforters; for though, at
times, he was attended by some of the most enlightened
and orthodox divines of the age and country in which
he lived, he was at others surrounded by those whom
nothing but the reduced and abject state of his faculties
would have suffered him to endure. But during
even this terrible subversion of his intellectual powers,
his love of glory still survived in its original radiance,
and defied all the terrors both of hell and earth to
destroy or diminish their force. Haller had embraced
very deep and serious notions of the importance of
Christianity to the salvation of the soul, and the redemption
of mankind, which, by the ardency of his temper,
and the saturnine disposition of his mind, were
carried into a mistaken zeal and apprehension; and,
instead of affording the comfort and consolation its tenets
and principles are so eminently calculated to inspire,
aggravated his feelings and destroyed his repose.[228]
In a letter which he wrote a few days before his death,
to his great and good friend, the celebrated Heyne, of
Gottingen, in which he announces the deep sense he
entertained from his great age and multiplied infirmities,
of his impending dissolution, he expressed his firm
belief of revelation, and his faith in the mercy of God,
and the intercession of Jesus Christ; but hints his
fears lest the manifold sins, and the various errors and
transgressions which the natural frailty of man must
have accumulated during a course of seventy years,
should have rendered his soul too guilty to expect the
promised mercy to repentant sinners, and earnestly requests
of him to inquire of his acquaintance Less, the
virtuous divine of that place, whether he could not furnish
him with some pious work that might tend to decrease
the terrors he felt from the idea of approaching
death, and relieve his tortured spirit from the apprehension
of eternal punishment. The sentiments
which occupied the mind of this pious philosopher
when the dreaded hour actually arrived, whether it
was comforted by the bright rays of hope, or dismayed
into total eclipse by the dark clouds of despair, those
who surrounded his dying couch have not communicated
to the world. Death, while it released both his
body and his mind from the painful infirmities and delusions
under which they had so long and so severely
suffered, left his fame, which, while living, he had
valued much dearer than his life, exposed to the cruel
shafts of slander and malevolence. A young nobleman
of the canton of Berne, either moved by his own
malice, or made an instrument of the malice of others,
asserted in a letter, which was for a long time publicly
exhibited in the university of Gottingen, that Haller
had in his last moments denied his belief of the truth
of Christianity. But those by whom he was then surrounded,
betray, by the propagation of this falsehood,
the fears they entertain of the firm support which his
approbation would have given to that pure and pious
system of religion, which they, it is well known,
are so disposed to destroy. For certain it is, that Haller
never doubted any of the attributes of the Deity,
except his mercy; and this doubt was not the offspring
of infidelity, but a crude abortion of that morbid melancholy
which, during his latter days, settled so severely
on his distempered mind. The same dread which he
entertained of death, has been felt with equal if not
greater horror, by minds as powerful and less superstitious.[229]
He candidly confessed the important and abstruse
point upon which he had not been able to satisfy
himself. His high sense of virtue made even his own
almost exemplary and unblemished life appear, in his
too refined speculations, grossly vicious. Mercy, he
knew, must unavoidably, be correlative with justice;
and he unfortunately conceived that no repentance,
however sincere, could so purify the sinful, and, as he
imagined, deplorable corruption of his soul, as to render
it worthy of divine grace. So utterly had the
melancholy dejection of his mind deprived him of a
just sense of his character, and perfect knowledge of
the nature of the Almighty. The mournful propensity
of this great man must, if he had passed his days either
in pious abstinence, or irrational solitude, have hurried
him rapidly into irrecoverable frenzy; but Haller enjoyed
the patronage of the great, the conversation of
the learned, the company of the polite; and he not only
suspended the effects of his malady, and of the medicines
by which he attempted to relieve it, by these advantages,
but by the sciences, which he so dearly loved
and so successfully cultivated. The horrible evil, however,
bowed him down in spite of all his efforts, and
particularly oppressed him whenever he relaxed from
his literary pursuits, or consulted his ghostly comforters
on the lost condition of his soul.
Solitude, to a mind laboring under these erroneous
notions of religion, operates like a rack, by which the
imagination inflicts the severest tortures on the soul.
A native of Geneva, a young man of very elegant manners,
and a highly cultivated mind, some time since
consulted me upon the subject of a nervous complaint,
which I immediately discovered to be the consequence
of a mistaken zeal for religion, a disposition naturally
sedentary, and a habit which is too frequently indulged
in solitude by unthinking youth. These circumstances
had already made the most dreadful inroads both on
his body and his mind. His emaciated frame was daily
enfeebled by his paralyzed intellects, and he at length
fell into a settled melancholy, which continued four
years to defy the power of medicine, and finally destroyed
his nervous system. A strong conviction of
the heinous sin into which the blindness of his passion
and evil example, had led him, at length flashed suddenly
on his mind, and he felt, with the keenest
compunctions of a wounded conscience, how impious
he must appear to the all-seeing eye of the great[230]
Creator. Consternation and dismay seized his guilty
mind; and the sense of virtue and religion, which he
was naturally disposed to entertain, served only to increase
his horror and distraction. He would have
sought a refuge from the arrows of remorse under the
protecting shields of penitence and prayer, but a scrupulous
apprehension interposed the idea that it would
be profanation in so guilty a sinner to exercise the offices
of a pure and holy religion. He at length, however,
proceeded to confession; but recollecting, after every
disclosure, that he had still omitted many of his transgressions,
additional horror seized upon his mind and
tortured his feelings on the irrecoverable condition of
his guilty soul. At intervals, indeed, he was able to
perceive that the perturbations of his mind were the
produce of his disorganized frame and disordered
spirit; and he endeavored to recruit the one by air and
exercise, and to dissipate the other by scenes of festivity
and mirth: but his disorder had fixed his fibres too
deeply in his constitution to be eradicated by such slight
and temporary remedies. From the inefficacious antidotes
of social pleasure and worldly dissipation, he
was induced to try the calm and sedentary effects of
solitary study; but his faculties were incapable of tasting
the refined and elegant occupations of learning and
the muse; his powers of reasoning were destroyed;
his sensibilities, excepting on the subject of his complaint,
were dried up; and neither the sober investigations
of science, nor the more lively charms of poetry,
were capable of affording him the least consolation.
Into so abject a state, indeed, did his intellectual faculties
at length fall, that he had not, during one period,
sufficient ability to compute the change due to him
from any piece of coin in the common transactions of
life; and he confessed that he had been frequently
tempted, by the deepness of his distress, to release both
his body and his mind from their cruel sufferings, and
“to shake impatiently his great affliction off” by self
destruction; but the idea of heaping new punishment
on his soul, by the perpetration of this additional crime,
continually interposed, and saved him from the guilty
deed. During this state of mental derangement, he
fortunately met with a liberal minded and rational divine,
who, free from the errors of priestcraft, and possessed
of a profound knowledge of the virtues of religion
and the structure of the human mind, undertook
the arduous but humane and truly philosophic task, of[231]