# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Emile Zola, Doctor Pascal
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/10720/10720-h/10720-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

It was true; Clotilde was there, undressed like himself, her bare feet
 covered by canvas slippers, her legs bare, her arms bare, her shoulders
 bare, clad only in her chemise and a short skirt. Through caution, she had
 not brought a candle. She had contented herself with opening one of the
 window shutters, and the continual lightning flashes of the storm which
 was passing southward in the dark sky, sufficed her, bathing everything in
 a livid phosphorescence. The old press, with its broad sides, was wide
 open. Already she had emptied the top shelf, taking down the papers in
 armfuls, and throwing them on the long table in the middle of the room,
 where they lay in a confused heap. And with feverish haste, fearing lest
 she should not have the time to burn them, she was making them up into
 bundles, intending to hide them, and send them afterward to her
 grandmother, when the sudden flare of the candle, lighting up the room,
 caused her to stop short in an attitude of surprise and resistance.
 

 “You rob me; you assassinate me!” repeated Pascal furiously.
 

 She still held one of the bundles in her bare arms. He wished to take it
 away from her, but she pressed it to her with all her strength,
 obstinately resolved upon her work of destruction, without showing
 confusion or repentance, like a combatant who has right upon his side.
 Then, madly, blindly, he threw himself upon her, and they struggled
 together. He clutched her bare flesh so that he hurt her.
 

 “Kill me!” she gasped. “Kill me, or I shall destroy everything!”
 

 He held her close to him, with so rough a grasp that she could scarcely
 breathe, crying:
 

 “When a child steals, it is punished!”
 

 A few drops of blood appeared and trickled down her rounded shoulder,
 where an abrasion had cut the delicate satin skin. And, on the instant,
 seeing her so breathless, so divine, in her virginal slender height, with
 her tapering limbs, her supple arms, her slim body with its slender, firm
 throat, he released her. By a last effort he tore the package from her.
 

 “And you shall help me to put them all up there again, by Heaven! Come
 here: begin by arranging them on the table. Obey me, do you hear?”
 

 “Yes, master!”
 

 She approached, and helped him to arrange the papers, subjugated, crushed
 by this masculine grasp, which had entered into her flesh, as it were. The
 candle which flared up in the heavy night air, lighted them; and the
 distant rolling of the thunder still continued, the window facing the
 storm seeming on fire.
 

 
 
 

 For an instant Pascal looked at the papers, the heap of which seemed
 enormous, lying thus in disorder on the long table that stood in the
 middle of the room. In the confusion several of the blue paper envelopes
 had burst open, and their contents had fallen out—letters, newspaper
 clippings, documents on stamped paper, and manuscript notes.
 

 He was already mechanically beginning to seek out the names written on the
 envelopes in large characters, to classify the packages again, when, with
 an abrupt gesture, he emerged from the somber meditation into which he had
 fallen. And turning to Clotilde who stood waiting, pale, silent, and
 erect, he said:
 

 “Listen to me; I have always forbidden you to read these papers, and I
 know that you have obeyed me. Yes, I had scruples of delicacy. It is not
 that you are an ignorant girl, like so many others, for I have allowed you
 to learn everything concerning man and woman, which is assuredly bad only
 for bad natures. But to what end disclose to you too early these terrible
 truths of human life? I have therefore spared you the history of our
 family, which is the history of every family, of all humanity; a great
 deal of evil and a great deal of good.”
 

 He paused as if to confirm himself in his resolution and then resumed
 quite calmly and with supreme energy:
 

 “You are twenty-five years old; you ought to know. And then the life we
 are leading is no longer possible. You live and you make me live in a
 constant nightmare, with your ecstatic dreams. I prefer to show you the
 reality, however execrable it may be. Perhaps the blow which it will
 inflict upon you will make of you the woman you ought to be. We will
 classify these papers again together, and read them, and learn from them a
 terrible lesson of life!”
 

 Then, as she still continued motionless, he resumed:
 

 “Come, we must be able to see well. Light those other two candles there.”
 

 He was seized by a desire for light, a flood of light; he would have
 desired the blinding light of the sun; and thinking that the light of the
 three candles was not sufficient, he went into his room for a pair of
 three-branched candelabra which were there. The nine candles were blazing,
 yet neither of them, in their disorder—he with his chest bare, she
 with her left shoulder stained with blood, her throat and arms bare—saw
 the other. It was past two o’clock, but neither of them had any
 consciousness of the hour; they were going to spend the night in this
 eager desire for knowledge, without feeling the need of sleep, outside
 time and space. The mutterings of the storm, which, through the open
 window, they could see gathering, grew louder and louder.
 

 Clotilde had never before seen in Pascal’s eyes the feverish light which
 burned in them now. He had been overworking himself for some time past,
 and his mental sufferings made him at times abrupt, in spite of his
 good-natured complacency. But it seemed as if an infinite tenderness,
 trembling with fraternal pity, awoke within him, now that he was about to
 plunge into the painful truths of existence; and it was something
 emanating from himself, something very great and very good which was to
 render innocuous the terrible avalanche of facts which was impending. He
 was determined that he would reveal everything, since it was necessary
 that he should do so in order to remedy everything. Was not this an
 unanswerable, a final argument for evolution, the story of these beings
 who were so near to them? Such was life, and it must be lived. Doubtless
 she would emerge from it like the steel tempered by the fire, full of
 tolerance and courage.
 

 “They are setting you against me,” he resumed; “they are making you commit
 abominable acts, and I wish to restore your conscience to you. When you
 know, you will judge and you will act. Come here, and read with me.”
 

 She obeyed. But these papers, about which her grandmother had spoken so
 angrily, frightened her a little; while a curiosity that grew with every
 moment awoke within her. And then, dominated though she was by the virile
 authority which had just constrained and subjugated her, she did not yet
 yield. But might she not listen to him, read with him? Did she not retain
 the right to refuse or to give herself afterward? He spoke at last.
 

 “Will you come?”
 

 “Yes, master, I will.”
 

 He showed her first the genealogical tree of the Rougon-Macquarts. He did
 not usually lock it in the press, but kept it in the desk in his room,
 from which he had taken it when he went there for the candelabra. For more
 than twenty years past he had kept it up to date, inscribing the births,
 deaths, marriages, and other important events that had taken place in the
 family, making brief notes in each case, in accordance with his theory of
 heredity.
 

 It was a large sheet of paper, yellow with age, with folds cut by wear, on
 which was drawn boldly a symbolical tree, whose branches spread and
 subdivided into five rows of broad leaves; and each leaf bore a name, and
 contained, in minute handwriting, a biography, a hereditary case.
 

 A scientist’s joy took possession of the doctor at sight of this labor of
 twenty years, in which the laws of heredity established by him were so
 clearly and so completely applied.
 

 “Look, child! You know enough about the matter, you have copied enough of
 my notes to understand. Is it not beautiful? A document so complete, so
 conclusive, in which there is not a gap? It is like an experiment made in
 the laboratory, a problem stated and solved on the blackboard. You see
 below, the trunk, the common stock, Aunt Dide; then the three branches
 issuing from it, the legitimate branch, Pierre Rougon, and the two
 illegitimate branches, Ursule Macquart and Antoine Macquart; then, new
 branches arise, and ramify, on one side, Maxime, Clotilde, and Victor, the
 three children of Saccard, and Angelique, the daughter of Sidonie Rougon;
 on the other, Pauline, the daughter of Lisa Macquart, and Claude, Jacques,
 Etienne, and Anna, the four children of Gervaise, her sister; there, at
 the extremity, is Jean, their brother, and here in the middle, you see
 what I call the knot, the legitimate issue and the illegitimate issue,
 uniting in Marthe Rougon and her cousin Francois Mouret, to give rise to
 three new branches, Octave, Serge, and Desiree Mouret; while there is also
 the issue of Ursule and the hatter Mouret; Silvere, whose tragic death you
 know; Helene and her daughter Jean; finally, at the top are the latest
 offshoots, our poor Charles, your brother Maxime’s son, and two other
 children, who are dead, Jacques Louis, the son of Claude Lantier, and
 Louiset, the son of Anna Coupeau. In all five generations, a human tree
 which, for five springs already, five springtides of humanity, has sent
 forth shoots, at the impulse of the sap of eternal life.”
 

 He became more and more animated, pointing out each case on the sheet of
 old yellow paper, as if it were an anatomical chart.
 

 “And as I have already said, everything is here. You see in direct
 heredity, the differentiations, that of the mother, Silvere, Lisa,
 Desiree, Jacques, Louiset, yourself; that of the father, Sidonie,
 Francois, Gervaise, Octave, Jacques, Louis. Then there are the three cases
 of crossing: by conjugation, Ursule, Aristide, Anna, Victor; by
 dissemination, Maxime, Serge, Etienne; by fusion, Antoine, Eugene, Claude.
 I even noted a fourth case, a very remarkable one, an even cross, Pierre
 and Pauline; and varieties are established, the differentiation of the
 mother, for example, often accords with the physical resemblance of the
 father; or, it is the contrary which takes place, so that, in the
 crossing, the physical and mental predominance remains with one parent or
 the other, according to circumstances. Then here is indirect heredity,
 that of the collateral branches. I have but one well established example
 of this, the striking personal resemblance of Octave Mouret to his uncle
 Eugene Rougon. I have also but one example of transmission by influence,
 Anna, the daughter of Gervaise and Coupeau, who bore a striking
 resemblance, especially in her childhood, to Lantier, her mother’s first
 lover. But what I am very rich in is in examples of reversion to the
 original stock—the three finest cases, Marthe, Jeanne, and Charles,
 resembling Aunt Dide; the resemblance thus passing over one, two, and
 three generations. This is certainly exceptional, for I scarcely believe
 in atavism; it seems to me that the new elements brought by the partners,
 accidents, and the infinite variety of crossings must rapidly efface
 particular characteristics, so as to bring back the individual to the
 general type. And there remains variation—Helene, Jean, Angelique.
 This is the combination, the chemical mixture in which the physical and
 mental characteristics of the parents are blended, without any of their
 traits seeming to reappear in the new being.”
 

 There was silence for a moment. Clotilde had listened to him with profound
 attention, wishing to understand. And he remained absorbed in thought, his
 eyes still fixed on the tree, in the desire to judge his work impartially.
 He then continued in a low tone, as if speaking to himself:
 

 “Yes, that is as scientific as possible. I have placed there only the
 members of the family, and I had to give an equal part to the partners, to
 the fathers and mothers come from outside, whose blood has mingled with
 ours, and therefore modified it. I had indeed made a mathematically exact
 tree, the father and the mother bequeathing themselves, by halves, to the
 child, from generation to generation, so that in Charles, for example,
 Aunt Dide’s part would have been only a twelfth—which would be
 absurd, since the physical resemblance is there complete. I have therefore
 thought it sufficient to indicate the elements come from elsewhere, taking
 into account marriages and the new factor which each introduced. Ah! these
 sciences that are yet in their infancy, in which hypothesis speaks
 stammeringly, and imagination rules, these are the domain of the poet as
 much as of the scientist. Poets go as pioneers in the advance guard, and
 they often discover new countries, suggesting solutions. There is there a
 borderland which belongs to them, between the conquered, the definitive
 truth, and the unknown, whence the truth of to-morrow will be torn. What
 an immense fresco there is to be painted, what a stupendous human tragedy,
 what a comedy there is to be written with heredity, which is the very
 genesis of families, of societies, and of the world!”
 

 His eyes fixed on vacancy, he remained for a time lost in thought. Then,
 with an abrupt movement, he came back to the envelopes and, pushing the
 tree aside, said:
 

 “We will take it up again presently; for, in order that you may understand
 now, it is necessary that events should pass in review before you, and
 that you should see in action all these actors ticketed here, each one
 summed up in a brief note. I will call for the envelopes, you will hand
 them to me one by one, and I will show you the papers in each, and tell
 you their contents, before putting it away again up there on the shelf. I
 will not follow the alphabetical order, but the order of events
 themselves. I have long wished to make this classification. Come, look for
 the names on the envelopes; Aunt Dide first.”
 

 At this moment the edge of the storm which lighted up the sky caught La
 Souleiade slantingly, and burst over the house in a deluge of rain. But
 they did not even close the window. They heard neither the peals of
 thunder nor the ceaseless beating of the rain upon the roof. She handed
 him the envelope bearing the name of Aunt Dide in large characters; and he
 took from it papers of all sorts, notes taken by him long ago, which he
 proceeded to read.
 

 “Hand me Pierre Rougon. Hand me Ursule Macquart. Hand me Antoine
 Macquart.”
 

 Silently she obeyed him, her heart oppressed by a dreadful anguish at all
 she was hearing. And the envelopes were passed on, displayed their
 contents, and were piled up again in the press.
 

 First was the foundress of the family, Adelaide Fouque, the tall, crazy
 girl, the first nervous lesion giving rise to the legitimate branch,
 Pierre Rougon, and to the two illegitimate branches, Ursule and Antoine
 Macquart, all that bourgeois and sanguinary tragedy, with the coup
 d’etat of December, 1854, for a background, the Rougons, Pierre and
 Felicite, preserving order at Plassans, bespattering with the blood of
 Silvere their rising fortunes, while Adelaide, grown old, the miserable
 Aunt Dide, was shut up in the Tulettes, like a specter of expiation and of
 waiting.
 

 Then like a pack of hounds, the appetites were let loose. The supreme
 appetite of power in Eugene Rougon, the great man, the disdainful genius
 of the family, free from base interests, loving power for its own sake,
 conquering Paris in old boots with the adventurers of the coming Empire,
 rising from the legislative body to the senate, passing from the
 presidency of the council of state to the portfolio of minister; made by
 his party, a hungry crowd of followers, who at the same time supported and
 devoured him; conquered for an instant by a woman, the beautiful Clorinde,
 with whom he had been imbecile enough to fall in love, but having so
 strong a will, and burning with so vehement a desire to rule, that he won
 back power by giving the lie to his whole life, marching to his triumphal
 sovereignty of vice emperor.
 

 With Aristide Saccard, appetite ran to low pleasures, the whole hot quarry
 of money, luxury, women—a devouring hunger which left him homeless,
 at the time when millions were changing hands, when the whirlwind of wild
 speculation was blowing through the city, tearing down everywhere to
 construct anew, when princely fortunes were made, squandered, and remade
 in six months; a greed of gold whose ever increasing fury carried him
 away, causing him, almost before the body of his wife Angele was cold in
 death, to sell his name, in order to have the first indispensable thousand
 francs, by marrying Renee. And it was Saccard, too, who, a few years
 later, put in motion the immense money-press of the Banque Universelle.
 Saccard, the never vanquished; Saccard, grown more powerful, risen to be
 the clever and daring grand financier, comprehending the fierce and
 civilizing role that money plays, fighting, winning, and losing battles on
 the Bourse, like Napoleon at Austerlitz and Waterloo; engulfing in
 disaster a world of miserable people; sending forth into the unknown
 realms of crime his natural son Victor, who disappeared, fleeing through
 the dark night, while he himself, under the impassable protection of
 unjust nature, was loved by the adorable Mme. Caroline, no doubt in
 recompense of all the evil he had done.
 

 Here a tall, spotless lily had bloomed in this compost, Sidonie Rougon,
 the sycophant of her brother, the go-between in a hundred suspicious
 affairs, giving birth to the pure and divine Angelique, the little
 embroiderer with fairylike fingers who worked into the gold of the
 chasubles the dream of her Prince Charming, so happy among her companions
 the saints, so little made for the hard realities of life, that she
 obtained the grace of dying of love, on the day of her marriage, at the
 first kiss of Felicien de Hautecoeur, in the triumphant peal of bells
 ringing for her splendid nuptials.
 

 The union of the two branches, the legitimate and the illegitimate, took
 place then, Marthe Rougon espousing her cousin Francois Mouret, a peaceful
 household slowly disunited, ending in the direst catastrophes—a sad
 and gentle woman taken, made use of, and crushed in the vast machine of
 war erected for the conquest of a city; her three children torn from her,
 she herself leaving her heart in the rude grasp of the Abbe Faujas. And
 the Rougons saved Plassans a second time, while she was dying in the glare
 of the conflagration in which her husband was being consumed, mad with
 long pent-up rage and the desire for revenge.
 

 Of the three children, Octave Mouret was the audacious conqueror, the
 clear intellect, resolved to demand from the women the sovereignty of
 Paris, fallen at his debut into the midst of a corrupt bourgeois
 society, acquiring there a terrible sentimental education, passing from
 the capricious refusal of one woman to the unresisting abandonment of
 another, remaining, fortunately, active, laborious, and combative,
 gradually emerging, and improved even, from the low plotting, the
 ceaseless ferment of a rotten society that could be heard already cracking
 to its foundations. And Octave Mouret, victorious, revolutionized
 commerce; swallowed up the cautious little shops that carried on business
 in the old-fashioned way; established in the midst of feverish Paris the
 colossal palace of temptation, blazing with lights, overflowing with
 velvets, silks, and laces; won fortunes exploiting woman; lived in smiling
 scorn of woman until the day when a little girl, the avenger of her sex,
 the innocent and wise Denise, vanquished him and held him captive at her
 feet, groaning with anguish, until she did him the favor, she who was so
 poor, to marry him in the midst of the apotheosis of his Louvre, under the
 golden shower of his receipts.
 

 There remained the two other children, Serge Mouret and Desiree Mouret,
 the latter innocent and healthy, like some happy young animal; the former
 refined and mystical, who was thrown into the priesthood by a nervous
 malady hereditary in his family, and who lived again the story of Adam, in
 the Eden of Le Paradou. He was born again to love Albine, and to lose her,
 in the bosom of sublime nature, their accomplice; to be recovered,
 afterward by the Church, to war eternally with life, striving to kill his
 manhood, throwing on the body of the dead Albine the handful of earth, as
 officiating priest, at the very time when Desiree, the sister and friend
 of animals, was rejoicing in the midst of the swarming life of her poultry
 yard.
 

 Further on there opened a calm glimpse of gentle and tragic life, Helene
 Mouret living peacefully with her little girl, Jeanne, on the heights of
 Passy, overlooking Paris, the bottomless, boundless human sea, in face of
 which was unrolled this page of love: the sudden passion of Helene for a
 stranger, a physician, brought one night by chance to the bedside of her
 daughter; the morbid jealousy of Jeanne—the instinctive jealousy of
 a loving girl—disputing her mother with love, her mother already so
 wasted by her unhappy passion that the daughter died because of her fault;
 terrible price of one hour of desire in the entire cold and discreet life
 of a woman, poor dead child, lying alone in the silent cemetery, in face
 of eternal Paris.
 

 With Lisa Macquart began the illegitimate branch; appearing fresh and
 strong in her, as she displayed her portly, prosperous figure, sitting at
 the door of her pork shop in a light colored apron, watching the central
 market, where the hunger of a people muttered, the age-long battle of the
 Fat and the Lean, the lean Florent, her brother-in-law, execrated, and set
 upon by the fat fishwomen and the fat shopwomen, and whom even the fat
 pork-seller herself, honest, but unforgiving, caused to be arrested as a
 republican who had broken his ban, convinced that she was laboring for the
 good digestion of all honest people.
 

 From this mother sprang the sanest, the most human of girls, Pauline
 Quenu, the well-balanced, the reasonable, the virgin; who, knowing
 everything, accepted the joy of living in so ardent a love for others
 that, in spite of the revolt of her youthful heart, she resigned to her
 friend her cousin and betrothed, Lazare, and afterward saved the child of
 the disunited household, becoming its true mother; always triumphant,
 always gay, notwithstanding her sacrificed and ruined life, in her
 monotonous solitude, facing the great sea, in the midst of a little world
 of sufferers groaning with pain, but who did not wish to die.
 

 Then came Gervaise Macquart with her four children: bandy-legged, pretty,
 and industrious Gervaise, whom her lover Lantier turned into the street in
 the faubourg, where she met the zinc worker Coupeau, the skilful, steady
 workman whom she married, and with whom she lived so happily at first,
 having three women working in her laundry, but afterward sinking with her
 husband, as was inevitable, to the degradation of her surroundings. He,
 gradually conquered by alcohol, brought by it to madness and death; she
 herself perverted, become a slattern, her moral ruin completed by the
 return of Lantier, living in the tranquil ignominy of a household of
 three, thenceforward the wretched victim of want, her accomplice, to which
 she at last succumbed, dying one night of starvation.
 

 Her eldest son, Claude, had the unhappy genius of a great painter struck
 with madness, the impotent madness of feeling within him the masterpiece
 to which his fingers refused to give shape; a giant wrestler always
 defeated, a crucified martyr to his work, adoring woman, sacrificing his
 wife Christine, so loving and for a time so beloved, to the increate,
 divine woman of his visions, but whom his pencil was unable to delineate
 in her nude perfection, possessed by a devouring passion for producing, an
 insatiable longing to create, a longing so torturing when it could not be
 satisfied, that he ended it by hanging himself.
 

 Jacques brought crime, the hereditary taint being transmuted in him into
 an instinctive appetite for blood, the young and fresh blood from the
 gashed throat of a woman, the first comer, the passer-by in the street: a
 horrible malady against which he struggled, but which took possession of
 him again in the course of his amour with the submissive and
 sensual Severine, whom a tragic story of assassination caused to live in
 constant terror, and whom he stabbed one evening in an excess of frenzy,
 maddened by the sight of her white throat. Then this savage human beast
 rushed among the trains filing past swiftly, and mounted the snorting
 engine of which he was the engineer, the beloved engine which was one day
 to crush him to atoms, and then, left without a guide, to rush furiously
 off into space braving unknown disasters.
 

 Etienne, in his turn driven out, arrived in the black country on a
 freezing night in March, descended into the voracious pit, fell in love
 with the melancholy Catherine, of whom a ruffian robbed him; lived with
 the miners their gloomy life of misery and base promiscuousness, until one
 day when hunger, prompting rebellion, sent across the barren plain a
 howling mob of wretches who demanded bread, tearing down and burning as
 they went, under the menace of the guns of the band that went off of
 themselves, a terrible convulsion announcing the end of the world. The
 avenging blood of the Maheus was to rise up later; of Alzire dead of
 starvation, Maheu killed by a bullet, Zacharie killed by an explosion of
 fire-damp, Catherine under the ground. La Maheude alone survived to weep
 her dead, descending again into the mine to earn her thirty sons, while
 Etienne, the beaten chief of the band, haunted by the dread of future
 demands, went away on a warm April morning, listening to the secret growth
 of the new world whose germination was soon to dazzle the earth.
 

 Nana then became the avenger; the girl born among the social filth of the
 faubourgs; the golden fly sprung from the rottenness below, that was
 tolerated and concealed, carrying in the fluttering of its wings the
 ferment of destruction, rising and contaminating the aristocracy,
 poisoning men only by alighting upon them, in the palaces through whose
 windows it entered; the unconscious instrument of ruin and death—fierce
 flame of Vandeuvres, the melancholy fate of Foucarmont, lost in the
 Chinese waters, the disaster of Steiner, reduced to live as an honest man,
 the imbecility of La Faloise and the tragic ruin of the Muffats, and the
 white corpse of Georges, watched by Philippe, come out of prison the day
 before, when the air of the epoch was so contaminated that she herself was
 infected, and died of malignant smallpox, caught at the death-bed of her
 son Louiset, while Paris passed beneath her windows, intoxicated,
 possessed by the frenzy of war, rushing to general ruin.
 

 Lastly comes Jean Macquart, the workman and soldier become again a
 peasant, fighting with the hard earth, which exacts that every grain of
 corn shall be purchased with a drop of sweat, fighting, above all, with
 the country people, whom covetousness and the long and difficult battle
 with the soil cause to burn with the desire, incessantly stimulated, of
 possession. Witness the Fouans, grown old, parting with their fields as if
 they were parting with their flesh; the Buteaus in their eager greed
 committing parricide, to hasten the inheritance of a field of lucern; the
 stubborn Francoise dying from the stroke of a scythe, without speaking,
 rather than that a sod should go out of the family—all this drama of
 simple natures governed by instinct, scarcely emerged from primitive
 barbarism—all this human filth on the great earth, which alone
 remains immortal, the mother from whom they issue and to whom they return
 again, she whom they love even to crime, who continually remakes life, for
 its unknown end, even with the misery and the abomination of the beings
 she nourishes. And it was Jean, too, who, become a widower and having
 enlisted again at the first rumor of war, brought the inexhaustible
 reserve, the stock of eternal rejuvenation which the earth keeps; Jean,
 the humblest, the staunchest soldier at the final downfall, swept along in
 the terrible and fatal storm which, from the frontier to Sedan, in
 sweeping away the Empire, threatened to sweep away the country; always
 wise, circumspect, firm in his hope, loving with fraternal affection his
 comrade Maurice, the demented child of the people, the holocaust doomed to
 expiation, weeping tears of blood when inexorable destiny chose himself to
 hew off this rotten limb, and after all had ended—the continual
 defeats, the frightful civil war, the lost provinces, the thousands of
 millions of francs to pay—taking up the march again,
 notwithstanding, returning to the land which awaited him, to the great and
 difficult task of making a new France.
 

 Pascal paused; Clotilde had handed him all the packages, one by one, and
 he had gone over them all, laid bare the contents of all, classified them
 anew, and placed them again on the top shelf of the press. He was out of
 breath, exhausted by his swift course through all this humanity, while,
 without voice, without movement, the young girl, stunned by this
 overflowing torrent of life, waited still, incapable of thought or
 judgment. The rain still beat furiously upon the dark fields. The
 lightning had just struck a tree in the neighborhood, that had split with
 a terrible crash. The candles flared up in the wind that came in from the
 open window.
 

 “Ah!” he resumed, pointing to the papers again, “there is a world in
 itself, a society, a civilization, the whole of life is there, with its
 manifestations, good and bad, in the heat and labor of the forge which
 shapes everything. Yes, our family of itself would suffice as an example
 to science, which will perhaps one day establish with mathematical
 exactness the laws governing the diseases of the blood and nerves that
 show themselves in a race, after a first organic lesion, and that
 determine, according to environment, the sentiments, desires, and passions
 of each individual of that race, all the human, natural and instinctive
 manifestations which take the names of virtues and vices. And it is also a
 historical document, it relates the story of the Second Empire, from the
 coup d’etat to Sedan; for our family spring from the people, they
 spread themselves through the whole of contemporary society, invaded every
 place, impelled by their unbridled appetites, by that impulse, essentially
 modern, that eager desire that urges the lower classes to enjoyment, in
 their ascent through the social strata. We started, as I have said, from
 Plassans, and here we are now arrived once more at Plassans.”
 

 He paused again, and then resumed in a low, dreamy voice:
 

 “What an appalling mass stirred up! how many passions, how many joys, how
 many sufferings crammed into this colossal heap of facts! There is pure
 history: the Empire founded in blood, at first pleasure-loving and
 despotic, conquering rebellious cities, then gliding to a slow
 disintegration, dissolving in blood—in such a sea of blood that the
 entire nation came near being swamped in it. There are social studies:
 wholesale and retail trade, prostitution, crime, land, money, the bourgeoisie,
 the people—that people who rot in the sewer of the faubourgs, who
 rebel in the great industrial centers, all that ever-increasing growth of
 mighty socialism, big with the new century. There are simple human
 studies: domestic pages, love stories, the struggle of minds and hearts
 against unjust nature, the destruction of those who cry out under their
 too difficult task, the cry of virtue immolating itself, victorious over
 pain, There are fancies, flights of the imagination beyond the real: vast
 gardens always in bloom, cathedrals with slender, exquisitely wrought
 spires, marvelous tales come down from paradise, ideal affections
 remounting to heaven in a kiss. There is everything: the good and the bad,
 the vulgar and the sublime, flowers, mud, blood, laughter, the torrent of
 life itself, bearing humanity endlessly on!”
 

 He took up again the genealogical tree which had remained neglected on the
 table, spread it out and began to go over it once more with his finger,
 enumerating now the members of the family who were still living: Eugene
 Rougon, a fallen majesty, who remained in the Chamber, the witness, the
 impassible defender of the old world swept away at the downfall of the
 Empire. Aristide Saccard, who, after having changed his principles, had
 fallen upon his feet a republican, the editor of a great journal, on the
 way to make new millions, while his natural son Victor, who had never
 reappeared, was living still in the shade, since he was not in the
 galleys, cast forth by the world into the future, into the unknown, like a
 human beast foaming with the hereditary virus, who must communicate his
 malady with every bite he gives. Sidonie Rougon, who had for a time
 disappeared, weary of disreputable affairs, had lately retired to a sort
 of religious house, where she was living in monastic austerity, the
 treasurer of the Marriage Fund, for aiding in the marriage of girls who
 were mothers. Octave Mouret, proprietor of the great establishment Au
 Bonheur des Dames, whose colossal fortune still continued increasing,
 had had, toward the end of the winter, a third child by his wife Denise
 Baudu, whom he adored, although his mind was beginning to be deranged
 again. The Abbe Mouret, cure at St. Eutrope, in the heart of a marshy
 gorge, lived there in great retirement, and very modestly, with his sister
 Desiree, refusing all advancement from his bishop, and waiting for death
 like a holy man, rejecting all medicines, although he was already
 suffering from consumption in its first stage. Helene Mouret was living
 very happily in seclusion with her second husband, M. Rambaud, on the
 little estate which they owned near Marseilles, on the seashore; she had
 had no child by her second husband. Pauline Quenu was still at Bonneville
 at the other extremity of France, in face of the vast ocean, alone with
 little Paul, since the death of Uncle Chanteau, having resolved never to
 marry, in order to devote herself entirely to the son of her cousin
 Lazare, who had become a widower and had gone to America to make a
 fortune. Etienne Lantier, returning to Paris after the strike at Montsou,
 had compromised himself later in the insurrection of the Commune, whose
 principles he had defended with ardor; he had been condemned to death, but
 his sentence being commuted was transported and was now at Noumea. It was
 even said that he had married immediately on his arrival there, and that
 he had had a child, the sex of which, however, was not known with
 certainty. Finally, Jean Macquart, who had received his discharge after
 the Bloody Week, had settled at Valqueyras, near Plassans, where he had
 had the good fortune to marry a healthy girl, Melanie Vial, the daughter
 of a well-to-do peasant, whose lands he farmed, and his wife had borne him
 a son in May.
 

 “Yes, it is true,” he resumed, in a low voice; “races degenerate. There is
 here a veritable exhaustion, rapid deterioration, as if our family, in
 their fury of enjoyment, in the gluttonous satisfaction of their
 appetites, had consumed themselves too quickly. Louiset, dead in infancy;
 Jacques Louis, a half imbecile, carried off by a nervous disease; Victor
 returned to the savage state, wandering about in who knows what dark
 places; our poor Charles, so beautiful and so frail; these are the latest
 branches of the tree, the last pale offshoots into which the puissant sap
 of the larger branches seems to have been unable to mount. The worm was in
 the trunk, it has ascended into the fruit, and is devouring it. But one
 must never despair; families are a continual growth. They go back beyond
 the common ancestor, into the unfathomable strata of the races that have
 lived, to the first being; and they will put forth new shoots without end,
 they will spread and ramify to infinity, through future ages. Look at our
 tree; it counts only five generations. It has not so much importance as a
 blade of grass, even, in the human forest, vast and dark, of which the
 peoples are the great secular oaks. Think only of the immense roots which
 spread through the soil; think of the continual putting forth of new
 leaves above, which mingle with other leaves of the ever-rolling sea of
 treetops, at the fructifying, eternal breath of life. Well, hope lies
 there, in the daily reconstruction of the race by the new blood which
 comes from without. Each marriage brings other elements, good or bad, of
 which the effect is, however, to prevent certain and progressive
 regeneration. Breaches are repaired, faults effaced, an equilibrium is
 inevitably re-established at the end of a few generations, and it is the
 average man that always results; vague humanity, obstinately pursuing its
 mysterious labor, marching toward its unknown end.”
 

 He paused, and heaved a deep sigh.
 

 “Ah! our family, what is it going to become; in what being will it finally
 end?”
 

 He continued, not now taking into account the survivors whom he had just
 named; having classified these, he knew what they were capable of, but he
 was full of keen curiosity regarding the children who were still infants.
 He had written to a confrere in Noumea for precise information
 regarding the wife whom Etienne had lately married there, and the child
 which she had had, but he had heard nothing, and he feared greatly that on
 that side the tree would remain incomplete. He was more fully furnished
 with documents regarding the two children of Octave Mouret, with whom he
 continued to correspond; the little girl was growing up puny and delicate,
 while the little boy, who strongly resembled his mother, had developed
 superbly, and was perfectly healthy. His strongest hope, besides these,
 was in Jean’s children, the eldest of whom was a magnificent boy, full of
 the youthful vigor of the races that go back to the soil to regenerate
 themselves. Pascal occasionally went to Valqueyras, and he returned happy
 from that fertile spot, where the father, quiet and rational, was always
 at his plow, the mother cheerful and simple, with her vigorous frame,
 capable of bearing a world. Who knew what sound branch was to spring from
 that side? Perhaps the wise and puissant of the future were to germinate
 there. The worst of it, for the beauty of his tree, was that all these
 little boys and girls were still so young that he could not classify them.
 And his voice grew tender as he spoke of this hope of the future, these
 fair-haired children, in the unavowed regret for his celibacy.
 

 Still contemplating the tree spread out before him, he cried:
 

 “And yet it is complete, it is decisive. Look! I repeat to you that all
 hereditary cases are to be found there. To establish my theory, I had only
 to base it on the collection of these facts. And indeed, the marvelous
 thing is that there you can put your finger on the cause why creatures
 born of the same stock can appear radically different, although they are
 only logical modifications of common ancestors. The trunk explains the
 branches, and these explain the leaves. In your father Saccard and your
 Uncle Eugene Rougon, so different in their temperaments and their lives,
 it is the same impulse which made the inordinate appetites of the one and
 the towering ambition of the other. Angelique, that pure lily, is born
 from the disreputable Sidonie, in the rapture which makes mystics or
 lovers, according to the environment. The three children of the Mourets
 are born of the same breath which makes of the clever Octave the dry goods
 merchant, a millionaire; of the devout Serge, a poor country priest; of
 the imbecile Desiree, a beautiful and happy girl. But the example is still
 more striking in the children of Gervaise; the neurosis passes down, and
 Nana sells herself; Etienne is a rebel; Jacques, a murderer; Claude, a
 genius; while Pauline, their cousin german, near by, is victorious virtue—virtue
 which struggles and immolates itself. It is heredity, life itself which
 makes imbeciles, madmen, criminals and great men. Cells abort, others take
 their place, and we have a scoundrel or a madman instead of a man of
 genius, or simply an honest man. And humanity rolls on, bearing everything
 on its tide.”
 

 Then in a new shifting of his thought, growing still more animated, he
 continued:
 

 “And animals—the beast that suffers and that loves, which is the
 rough sketch, as it were, of man—all the animals our brothers, that
 live our life, yes, I would have put them in the ark, I would give them a
 place among our family, show them continually mingling with us, completing
 our existence. I have known cats whose presence was the mysterious charm
 of the household; dogs that were adored, whose death was mourned, and left
 in the heart an inconsolable grief. I have known goats, cows, and asses of
 very great importance, and whose personality played such a part that their
 history ought to be written. And there is our Bonhomme, our poor old
 horse, that has served us for a quarter of a century. Do you not think
 that he has mingled his life with ours, and that henceforth he is one of
 the family? We have modified him, as he has influenced us a little; we
 shall end by being made in the same image, and this is so true that now,
 when I see him, half blind, with wandering gaze, his legs stiff with
 rheumatism, I kiss him on both cheeks as if he were a poor old relation
 who had fallen to my charge. Ah, animals, all creeping and crawling
 things, all creatures that lament, below man, how large a place in our
 sympathies it would be necessary to give them in a history of life!”
 

 This was a last cry in which Pascal gave utterance to his passionate
 tenderness for all created beings. He had gradually become more and more
 excited, and had so come to make this confession of his faith in the
 continuous and victorious work of animated nature. And Clotilde, who thus
 far had not spoken, pale from the catastrophe in which her plans had
 ended, at last opened her lips to ask:
 

 “Well, master, and what am I here?”
 

 She placed one of her slender fingers on the leaf of the tree on which she
 saw her name written. He had always passed this leaf by. She insisted.
 

 “Yes, I; what am I? Why have you not read me my envelope?”
 

 For a moment he remained silent, as if surprised at the question.
 

 “Why? For no reason. It is true, I have nothing to conceal from you. You
 see what is written here? ‘Clotilde, born in 1847. Selection of the
 mother. Reversional heredity, with moral and physical predominance of the
 maternal grandfather.’ Nothing can be clearer. Your mother has
 predominated in you; you have her fine intelligence, and you have also
 something of her coquetry, at times of her indolence and of her
 submissiveness. Yes, you are very feminine, like her. Without your being
 aware of it, I would say that you love to be loved. Besides, your mother
 was a great novel reader, an imaginative being who loved to spend whole
 days dreaming over a book; she doted on nursery tales, had her fortune
 told by cards, consulted clairvoyants; and I have always thought that your
 concern about spiritual matters, your anxiety about the unknown, came from
 that source. But what completed your character by giving you a dual
 nature, was the influence of your grandfather, Commandant Sicardot. I knew
 him; he was not a genius, but he had at least a great deal of uprightness
 and energy. Frankly, if it were not for him, I do not believe that you
 would be worth much, for the other influences are hardly good. He has
 given you the best part of your nature, combativeness, pride, and
 frankness.”
 

 She had listened to him with attention. She nodded slightly, to signify
 that it was indeed so, that she was not offended, although her lips
 trembled visibly at these new details regarding her people and her mother.
 

 “Well,” she resumed, “and you, master?”
 

 This time he did not hesitate.
 

 “Oh, I!” he cried, “what is the use of speaking of me? I do not belong to
 the family. You see what is written here. ‘Pascal, born in 1813.
 Individual variation. Combination in which the physical and moral
 characters of the parents are blended, without any of their traits seeming
 to appear in the new being.’ My mother has told me often enough that I did
 not belong to it, that in truth she did not know where I could have come
 from.”
 

 Those words came from him like a cry of relief, of involuntary joy.
 

 “And the people make no mistake in the matter. Have you ever heard me
 called Pascal Rougon in the town? No; people always say simply Dr. Pascal.
 It is because I stand apart. And it may not be very affectionate to feel
 so, but I am delighted at it, for there are in truth inheritances too
 heavy to bear. It is of no use that I love them all. My heart beats none
 the less joyously when I feel myself another being, different from them,
 without any community with them. Not to be of them, my God! not to be of
 them! It is a breath of pure air; it is what gives me the courage to have
 them all here, to put them, in all their nakedness, in their envelopes,
 and still to find the courage to live!”
 

 He stopped, and there was silence for a time. The rain had ceased, the
 storm was passing away, the thunderclaps sounded more and more distant,
 while from the refreshed fields, still dark, there came in through the
 open window a delicious odor of moist earth. In the calm air the candles
 were burning out with a tall, tranquil flame.
 

 “Ah!” said Clotilde simply, with a gesture of discouragement, “what are we
 to become finally?”
 

 She had declared it to herself one night, in the threshing yard; life was
 horrible, how could one live peaceful and happy? It was a terrible light
 that science threw on the world. Analysis searched every wound of
 humanity, in order to expose its horror. And now he had spoken still more
 bluntly; he had increased the disgust which she had for persons and
 things, pitilessly dissecting her family. The muddy torrent had rolled on
 before her for nearly three hours, and she had heard the most dreadful
 revelations, the harsh and terrible truth about her people, her people who
 were so dear to her, whom it was her duty to love; her father grown
 powerful through pecuniary crimes; her brother dissolute; her grandmother
 unscrupulous, covered with the blood of the just; the others almost all
 tainted, drunkards, ruffians, murderers, the monstrous blossoming of the
 human tree.
 

 The blow had been so rude that she could not yet recover from it, stunned
 as she was by the revelation of her whole family history, made to her in
 this way at a stroke. And yet the lesson was rendered innocuous, so to
 say, by something great and good, a breath of profound humanity which had
 borne her through it. Nothing bad had come to her from it. She felt
 herself beaten by a sharp sea wind, the storm wind which strengthens and
 expands the lungs. He had revealed everything, speaking freely even of his
 mother, without judging her, continuing to preserve toward her his
 deferential attitude, as a scientist who does not judge events. To tell
 everything in order to know everything, in order to remedy everything, was
 not this the cry which he had uttered on that beautiful summer night?
 

 And by the very excess of what he had just revealed to her, she remained
 shaken, blinded by this too strong light, but understanding him at last,
 and confessing to herself that he was attempting in this an immense work.
 In spite of everything, it was a cry of health, of hope in the future. He
 spoke as a benefactor who, since heredity made the world, wished to fix
 its laws, in order to control it, and to make a new and happy world. Was
 there then only mud in this overflowing stream, whose sluices he had
 opened? How much gold had passed, mingled with the grass and the flowers
 on its borders? Hundreds of beings were still flying swiftly before her,
 and she was haunted by good and charming faces, delicate girlish profiles,
 by the serene beauty of women. All passion bled there, hearts swelled with
 every tender rapture. They were numerous, the Jeannes, the Angeliques, the
 Paulines, the Marthes, the Gervaises, the Helenes. They and others, even
 those who were least good, even terrible men, the worst of the band,
 showed a brotherhood with humanity.
 

 And it was precisely this breath which she had felt pass, this broad
 current of sympathy, that he had introduced naturally into his exact
 scientific lesson. He did not seem to be moved; he preserved the
 impersonal and correct attitude of the demonstrator, but within him what
 tender suffering, what a fever of devotion, what a giving up of his whole
 being to the happiness of others? His entire work, constructed with such
 mathematical precision, was steeped in this fraternal suffering, even in
 its most cruel ironies. Had he not just spoken of the animals, like an
 elder brother of the wretched living beings that suffer? Suffering
 exasperated him; his wrath was because of his too lofty dream, and he had
 become harsh only in his hatred of the factitious and the transitory;
 dreaming of working, not for the polite society of a time, but for all
 humanity in the gravest hours of its history. Perhaps, even, it was this
 revolt against the vulgarity of the time which had made him throw himself,
 in bold defiance, into theories and their application. And the work
 remained human, overflowing as it was with an infinite pity for beings and
 things.
 

 Besides, was it not life? There is no absolute evil. Most often a virtue
 presents itself side by side with a defect. No man is bad to every one,
 each man makes the happiness of some one; so that, when one does not view
 things from a single standpoint only, one recognizes in the end the
 utility of every human being. Those who believe in God should say to
 themselves that if their God does not strike the wicked dead, it is
 because he sees his work in its totality, and that he cannot descend to
 the individual. Labor ends to begin anew; the living, as a whole,
 continue, in spite of everything, admirable in their courage and their
 industry; and love of life prevails over all.
 

 This giant labor of men, this obstinacy in living, is their excuse, is
 redemption. And then, from a great height the eye saw only this continual
 struggle, and a great deal of good, in spite of everything, even though
 there might be a great deal of evil. One shared the general indulgence,
 one pardoned, one had only an infinite pity and an ardent charity. The
 haven was surely there, waiting those who have lost faith in dogmas, who
 wish to understand the meaning of their lives, in the midst of the
 apparent iniquity of the world. One must live for the effort of living,
 for the stone to be carried to the distant and unknown work, and the only
 possible peace in the world is in the joy of making this effort.
 

 Another hour passed; the entire night had flown by in this terrible lesson
 of life, without either Pascal or Clotilde being conscious of where they
 were, or of the flight of time. And he, overworked for some time past, and
 worn out by the life of suspicion and sadness which he had been leading,
 started nervously, as if he had suddenly awakened.
 

 “Come, you know all; do you feel your heart strong, tempered by the truth,
 full of pardon and of hope? Are you with me?”
 

 But, still stunned by the frightful moral shock which she had received,
 she too, started, bewildered. Her old beliefs had been so completely
 overthrown, so many new ideas were awakening within her, that she did not
 dare to question herself, in order to find an answer. She felt herself
 seized and carried away by the omnipotence of truth. She endured it
 without being convinced.
 

 “Master,” she stammered, “master—”
 

 And they remained for a moment face to face, looking at each other. Day
 was breaking, a dawn of exquisite purity, far off in the vast, clear sky,
 washed by the storm. Not a cloud now stained the pale azure tinged with
 rose color. All the cheerful sounds of awakening life in the rain-drenched
 fields came in through the window, while the candles, burned down to the
 socket, paled in the growing light.
 

 “Answer; are you with me, altogether with me?”
 

 For a moment he thought she was going to throw herself on his neck and
 burst into tears. A sudden impulse seemed to impel her. But they saw each
 other in their semi-nudity. She, who had not noticed it before, was now
 conscious that she was only half dressed, that her arms were bare, her
 shoulders bare, covered only by the scattered locks of her unbound hair,
 and on her right shoulder, near the armpit, on lowering her eyes, she
 perceived again the few drops of blood of the bruise which he had given
 her, when he had grasped her roughly, in struggling to master her. Then an
 extraordinary confusion took possession of her, a certainty that she was
 going to be vanquished, as if by this grasp he had become her master, and
 forever. This sensation was prolonged; she was seized and drawn on,
 without the consent of her will, by an irresistible impulse to submit.
 

 Abruptly Clotilde straightened herself, struggling with herself, wishing
 to reflect and to recover herself. She pressed her bare arms against her
 naked throat. All the blood in her body rushed to her skin in a rosy blush
 of shame. Then, in her divine and slender grace, she turned to flee.
 

 “Master, master, let me go—I will see—”
 

 With the swiftness of alarmed maidenhood, she took refuge in her chamber,
 as she had done once before. He heard her lock the door hastily, with a
 double turn of the key. He remained alone, and he asked himself suddenly,
 seized by infinite discouragement and sadness, if he had done right in
 speaking, if the truth would germinate in this dear and adored creature,
 and bear one day a harvest of happiness.
 

 
 
 

 The days wore on. October began with magnificent weather—a sultry
 autumn in which the fervid heat of summer was prolonged, with a cloudless
 sky. Then the weather changed, fierce winds began to blow, and a last
 storm channeled gullies in the hillsides. And to the melancholy household
 at La Souleiade the approach of winter seemed to have brought an infinite
 sadness.
 

 It was a new hell. There were no more violent quarrels between Pascal and
 Clotilde. The doors were no longer slammed. Voices raised in dispute no
 longer obliged Martine to go continually upstairs to listen outside the
 door. They scarcely spoke to each other now; and not a single word had
 been exchanged between them regarding the midnight scene, although weeks
 had passed since it had taken place. He, through an inexplicable scruple,
 a strange delicacy of which he was not himself conscious, did not wish to
 renew the conversation, and to demand the answer which he expected—a
 promise of faith in him and of submission. She, after the great moral
 shock which had completely transformed her, still reflected, hesitated,
 struggled, fighting against herself, putting off her decision in order not
 to surrender, in her instinctive rebelliousness. And the misunderstanding
 continued, in the midst of the mournful silence of the miserable house,
 where there was no longer any happiness.
 

 During all this time Pascal suffered terribly, without making any
 complaint. He had sunk into a dull distrust, imagining that he was still
 being watched, and that if they seemed to leave him at peace it was only
 in order to concoct in secret the darkest plots. His uneasiness increased,
 even, and he expected every day some catastrophe to happen—the earth
 suddenly to open and swallow up his papers, La Souleiade itself to be
 razed to the ground, carried away bodily, scattered to the winds.
 

 The persecution against his thought, against his moral and intellectual
 life, in thus hiding itself, and so rendering him helpless to defend
 himself, became so intolerable to him that he went to bed every night in a
 fever. He would often start and turn round suddenly, thinking he was going
 to surprise the enemy behind him engaged in some piece of treachery, to
 find nothing there but the shadow of his own fears. At other times, seized
 by some suspicion, he would remain on the watch for hours together,
 hidden, behind his blinds, or lying in wait in a passage; but not a soul
 stirred, he heard nothing but the violent beating of his heart. His fears
 kept him in a state of constant agitation; he never went to bed at night
 without visiting every room; he no longer slept, or, if he did, he would
 waken with a start at the slightest noise, ready to defend himself.
 

 And what still further aggravated Pascal’s sufferings was the constant,
 the ever more bitter thought that the wound was inflicted upon him by the
 only creature he loved in the world, the adored Clotilde, whom for twenty
 years he had seen grow in beauty and in grace, whose life had hitherto
 bloomed like a beautiful flower, perfuming his. She, great God! for whom
 his heart was full of affection, whom he had never analyzed, she, who had
 become his joy, his courage, his hope, in whose young life he lived over
 again. When she passed by, with her delicate neck, so round, so fresh, he
 was invigorated, bathed in health and joy, as at the coming of spring.
 

 His whole life, besides, explained this invasion, this subjugation of his
 being by the young girl who had entered into his heart while she was still
 a little child, and who, as she grew up, had gradually taken possession of
 the whole place. Since he had settled at Plassans, he had led a blest
 existence, wrapped up in his books, far from women. The only passion he
 was ever known to have had, was his love for the lady who had died, whose
 finger tips he had never kissed. He had not lived; he had within him a
 reserve of youthfulness, of vigor, whose surging flood now clamored
 rebelliously at the menace of approaching age. He would have become
 attached to an animal, a stray dog that he had chanced to pick up in the
 street, and that had licked his hand. And it was this child whom he loved,
 all at once become an adorable woman, who now distracted him, who tortured
 him by her hostility.
 

 Pascal, so gay, so kind, now became insupportably gloomy and harsh. He
 grew angry at the slightest word; he would push aside the astonished
 Martine, who would look up at him with the submissive eyes of a beaten
 animal. From morning till night he went about the gloomy house, carrying
 his misery about with him, with so forbidding a countenance that no one
 ventured to speak to him.
 

 He never took Clotilde with him now on his visits, but went alone. And
 thus it was that he returned home one afternoon, his mind distracted
 because of an accident which had happened; having on his conscience, as a
 physician, the death of a man.
 

 He had gone to give a hypodermic injection to Lafouasse, the tavern
 keeper, whose ataxia had within a short time made such rapid progress that
 he regarded him as doomed. But, notwithstanding, Pascal still fought
 obstinately against the disease, continuing the treatment, and as ill luck
 would have it, on this day the little syringe had caught up at the bottom
 of the vial an impure particle, which had escaped the filter. Immediately
 a drop of blood appeared; to complete his misfortune, he had punctured a
 vein. He was at once alarmed, seeing the tavern keeper turn pale and gasp
 for breath, while large drops of cold perspiration broke out upon his
 face. Then he understood; death came as if by a stroke of lightning, the
 lips turning blue, the face black. It was an embolism; he had nothing to
 blame but the insufficiency of his preparations, his still rude method. No
 doubt Lafouasse had been doomed. He could not, perhaps, have lived six
 months longer, and that in the midst of atrocious sufferings, but the
 brutal fact of this terrible death was none the less there, and what
 despairing regret, what rage against impotent and murderous science, and
 what a shock to his faith! He returned home, livid, and did not make his
 appearance again until the following day, after having remained sixteen
 hours shut up in his room, lying in a semi-stupor on the bed, across which
 he had thrown himself, dressed as he was.
 

 On the afternoon of this day Clotilde, who was sitting beside him in the
 study, sewing, ventured to break the oppressive silence. She looked up,
 and saw him turning over the leaves of a book wearily, searching for some
 information which he was unable to find.
 

 “Master, are you ill? Why do you not tell me, if you are. I would take
 care of you.”
 

 He kept his eyes bent upon the book, and muttered:
 

 “What does it matter to you whether I am ill or not? I need no one to take
 care of me.”
 

 She resumed, in a conciliating voice:
 

 “If you have troubles, and can tell them to me, it would perhaps be a
 relief to you to do so. Yesterday you came in looking so sad. You must not
 allow yourself to be cast down in that way. I have spent a very anxious
 night. I came to your door three times to listen, tormented by the idea
 that you were suffering.”
 

 Gently as she spoke, her words were like the cut of a whip. In his weak
 and nervous condition a sudden access of rage made him push away the book
 and rise up trembling.
 

 “So you spy upon me, then. I cannot even retire to my room without people
 coming to glue their ears to the walls. Yes, you listen even to the
 beatings of my heart. You watch for my death, to pillage and burn
 everything here.”
 

 His voice rose and all his unjust suffering vented itself in complaints
 and threats.
 

 “I forbid you to occupy yourself about me. Is there nothing else that you
 have to say to me? Have you reflected? Can you put your hand in mine
 loyally, and say to me that we are in accord?”
 

 She did not answer. She only continued to look at him with her large clear
 eyes, frankly declaring that she would not surrender yet, while he,
 exasperated more and more by this attitude, lost all self-control.
 

 “Go away, go away,” he stammered, pointing to the door. “I do not wish you
 to remain near me. I do not wish to have enemies near me. I do not wish
 you to remain near me to drive me mad!”
 

 She rose, very pale, and went at once out of the room, without looking
 behind, carrying her work with her.
 

 During the month which followed, Pascal took refuge in furious and
 incessant work. He now remained obstinately, for whole days at a time,
 alone in the study, sometimes passing even the nights there, going over
 old documents, to revise all his works on heredity. It seemed as if a sort
 of frenzy had seized him to assure himself of the legitimacy of his hopes,
 to force science to give him the certainty that humanity could be remade—made
 a higher, a healthy humanity. He no longer left the house, he abandoned
 his patients even, and lived among his papers, without air or exercise.
 And after a month of this overwork, which exhausted him without appeasing
 his domestic torments, he fell into such a state of nervous exhaustion
 that illness, for some time latent, declared itself at last with alarming
 violence.
 

 Pascal, when he rose in the morning, felt worn out with fatigue, wearier
 and less refreshed than he had been on going to bed the night before. He
 constantly had pains all over his body; his limbs failed him, after five
 minutes’ walk; the slightest exertion tired him; the least movement caused
 him intense pain. At times the floor seemed suddenly to sway beneath his
 feet. He had a constant buzzing in his ears, flashes of light dazzled his
 eyes. He took a loathing for wine, he had no longer any appetite, and his
 digestion was seriously impaired. Then, in the midst of the apathy of his
 constantly increasing idleness he would have sudden fits of aimless
 activity. The equilibrium was destroyed, he had at times outbreaks of
 nervous irritability, without any cause. The slightest emotion brought
 tears to his eyes. Finally, he would shut himself up in his room, and give
 way to paroxysms of despair so violent that he would sob for hours at a
 time, without any immediate cause of grief, overwhelmed simply by the
 immense sadness of things.
 

 In the early part of December Pascal had a severe attack of neuralgia.
 Violent pains in the bones of the skull made him feel at times as if his
 head must split. Old Mme. Rougon, who had been informed of his illness,
 came to inquire after her son. But she went straight to the kitchen,
 wishing to have a talk with Martine first. The latter, with a heart-broken
 and terrified air, said to her that monsieur must certainly be going mad;
 and she told her of his singular behavior, the continual tramping about in
 his room, the locking of all the drawers, the rounds which he made from
 the top to the bottom of the house, until two o’clock in the morning.
 Tears filled her eyes and she at last hazarded the opinion that monsieur
 must be possessed with a devil, and that it would be well to notify the
 cure of St. Saturnin.
 

 “So good a man,” she said, “a man for whom one would let one’s self be cut
 in pieces! How unfortunate it is that one cannot get him to go to church,
 for that would certainly cure him at once.”
 

 Clotilde, who had heard her grandmother’s voice, entered at this moment.
 She, too, wandered through the empty rooms, spending most of her time in
 the deserted apartment on the ground floor. She did not speak, however,
 but only listened with her thoughtful and expectant air.
 

 “Ah, goodday! It is you, my dear. Martine tells me that Pascal is
 possessed with a devil. That is indeed my opinion also; only the devil is
 called pride. He thinks that he knows everything. He is Pope and Emperor
 in one, and naturally it exasperates him when people don’t agree with
 him.”
 

 She shrugged her shoulders with supreme disdain.
 

 “As for me, all that would only make me laugh if it were not so sad. A
 fellow who knows nothing about anything; who has always been wrapped up in
 his books; who has not lived. Put him in a drawing-room, and he would know
 as little how to act as a new-born babe. And as for women, he does not
 even know what they are.”
 

 Forgetting to whom she was speaking, a young girl and a servant, she
 lowered her voice, and said confidentially:
 

 “Well, one pays for being too sensible, too. Neither a wife nor a
 sweetheart nor anything. That is what has finally turned his brain.”
 

 Clotilde did not move. She only lowered her eyelids slowly over her large
 thoughtful eyes; then she raised them again, maintaining her impenetrable
 countenance, unwilling, unable, perhaps, to give expression to what was
 passing within her. This was no doubt all still confused, a complete
 evolution, a great change which was taking place, and which she herself
 did not clearly understand.
 

 “He is upstairs, is he not?” resumed Felicite. “I have come to see him,
 for this must end; it is too stupid.”
 

 And she went upstairs, while Martine returned to her saucepans, and
 Clotilde went to wander again through the empty house.
 

 Upstairs in the study Pascal sat seemingly in a stupor, his face bent over
 a large open book. He could no longer read, the words danced before his
 eyes, conveying no meaning to his mind. But he persisted, for it was death
 to him to lose his faculty for work, hitherto so powerful. His mother at
 once began to scold him, snatching the book from him, and flinging it upon
 a distant table, crying that when one was sick one should take care of
 one’s self. He rose with a quick, angry movement, about to order her away
 as he had ordered Clotilde. Then, by a last effort of the will, he became
 again deferential.
 

 “Mother, you know that I have never wished to dispute with you. Leave me,
 I beg of you.”
 

 She did not heed him, but began instead to take him to task about his
 continual distrust. It was he himself who had given himself a fever,
 always fancying that he was surrounded by enemies who were setting traps
 for him, and watching him to rob him. Was there any common sense in
 imagining that people were persecuting him in that way? And then she
 accused him of allowing his head to be turned by his discovery, his famous
 remedy for curing every disease. That was as much as to think himself
 equal to the good God; which only made it all the more cruel when he found
 out how mistaken he was. And she mentioned Lafouasse, the man whom he had
 killed—naturally, she could understand that that had not been very
 pleasant for him; indeed there was cause enough in it to make him take to
 his bed.
 

 Pascal, still controlling himself, very pale and with eyes cast on the
 ground, contented himself with repeating:
 

 “Mother, leave me, I beg of you.”
 

 “No, I won’t leave you,” she cried with the impetuosity which was natural
 to her, and which her great age had in no wise diminished. “I have come
 precisely to stir you up a little, to rid you of this fever which is
 consuming you. No, this cannot continue. I don’t wish that we should again
 become the talk of the whole town on your account. I wish you to take care
 of yourself.”
 

 He shrugged his shoulders, and said in a low voice, as if speaking to
 himself, with an uneasy look, half of conviction, half of doubt:
 

 “I am not ill.”
 

 But Felicite, beside herself, burst out, gesticulating violently:
 

 “Not ill! not ill! Truly, there is no one like a physician for not being
 able to see himself. Why, my poor boy, every one that comes near you is
 shocked by your appearance. You are becoming insane through pride and
 fear!”
 

 This time Pascal raised his head quickly, and looked her straight in the
 eyes, while she continued:
 

 “This is what I had to tell you, since it seems that no one else would
 undertake the task. You are old enough to know what you ought to do. You
 should make an effort to shake off all this; you should think of something
 else; you should not let a fixed idea take possession of you, especially
 when you belong to a family like ours. You know it; have sense, and take
 care of yourself.”
 

 He grew paler than before, looking fixedly at her still, as if he were
 sounding her, to know what there was of her in him. And he contented
 himself with answering:
 

 “You are right, mother. I thank you.”
 

 When he was again alone, he dropped into his seat before the table, and
 tried once more to read his book. But he could not succeed, any more than
 before, in fixing his attention sufficiently to understand the words,
 whose letters mingled confusedly together before his eyes. And his
 mother’s words buzzed in his ears; a vague terror, which had some time
 before sprung up within him, grew and took shape, haunting him now as an
 immediate and clearly defined danger. He who two months before had boasted
 triumphantly of not belonging to the family, was he about to receive the
 most terrible of contradictions? Ah, this egotistic joy, this intense joy
 of not belonging to it, was it to give place to the terrible anguish of
 being struck in his turn? Was he to have the humiliation of seeing the
 taint revive in him? Was he to be dragged down to the horror of feeling
 himself in the clutches of the monster of heredity? The sublime idea, the
 lofty certitude which he had of abolishing suffering, of strengthening
 man’s will, of making a new and a higher humanity, a healthy humanity, was
 assuredly only the beginning of the monomania of vanity. And in his bitter
 complaint of being watched, in his desire to watch the enemies who, he
 thought, were obstinately bent on his destruction, were easily to be
 recognized the symptoms of the monomania of suspicion. So then all the
 diseases of the race were to end in this terrible case—madness
 within a brief space, then general paralysis, and a dreadful death.
 

 From this day forth Pascal was as if possessed. The state of nervous
 exhaustion into which overwork and anxiety had thrown him left him an
 unresisting prey to this haunting fear of madness and death. All the
 morbid sensations which he felt, his excessive fatigue on rising, the
 buzzing in his ears, the flashes of light before his eyes, even his
 attacks of indigestion and his paroxysms of tears, were so many infallible
 symptoms of the near insanity with which he believed himself threatened.
 He had completely lost, in his own case, the keen power of diagnosis of
 the observant physician, and if he still continued to reason about it, it
 was only to confound and pervert symptoms, under the influence of the
 moral and physical depression into which he had fallen. He was no longer
 master of himself; he was mad, so to say, to convince himself hour by hour
 that he must become so.
 

 All the days of this pale December were spent by him in going deeper and
 deeper into his malady. Every morning he tried to escape from the haunting
 subject, but he invariably ended by shutting himself in the study to take
 up again, in spite of himself, the tangled skein of the day before.
 

 The long study which he had made of heredity, his important researches,
 his works, completed the poisoning of his peace, furnishing him with ever
 renewed causes of disquietude. To the question which he put to himself
 continually as to his own hereditary case, the documents were there to
 answer it by all possible combinations. They were so numerous that he lost
 himself among them now. If he had deceived himself, if he could not set
 himself apart, as a remarkable case of variation, should he place himself
 under the head of reversional heredity, passing over one, two, or even
 three generations? Or was his case rather a manifestation of larvated
 heredity, which would bring anew proof to the support of his theory of the
 germ plasm, or was it simply a singular case of hereditary resemblance,
 the sudden apparition of some unknown ancestor at the very decline of
 life?
 

 From this moment he never rested, giving himself up completely to the
 investigation of his case, searching his notes, rereading his books. And
 he studied himself, watching the least of his sensations, to deduce from
 them the facts on which he might judge himself. On the days when his mind
 was most sluggish, or when he thought he experienced particular phenomena
 of vision, he inclined to a predominance of the original nervous lesion;
 while, if he felt that his limbs were affected, his feet heavy and
 painful, he imagined he was suffering the indirect influence of some
 ancestor come from outside. Everything became confused, until at last he
 could recognize himself no longer, in the midst of the imaginary troubles
 which agitated his disturbed organism. And every evening the conclusion
 was the same, the same knell sounded in his brain—heredity,
 appalling heredity, the fear of becoming mad.
 

 In the early part of January Clotilde was an involuntary spectator of a
 scene which wrung her heart. She was sitting before one of the windows of
 the study, reading, concealed by the high back of her chair, when she saw
 Pascal, who had been shut up in his room since the day before, entering.
 He held open before his eyes with both hands a sheet of yellow paper, in
 which she recognized the genealogical tree. He was so completely absorbed,
 his gaze was so fixed, that she might have come forward without his
 observing her. He spread the tree upon the table, continuing to look at it
 for a long time, with the terrified expression of interrogation which had
 become habitual to him, which gradually changed to one of supplication,
 the tears coursing down his cheeks.
 

 Why, great God! would not the tree answer him, and tell him what ancestor
 he resembled, in order that he might inscribe his case on his own leaf,
 beside the others? If he was to become mad, why did not the tree tell him
 so clearly, which would have calmed him, for he believed that his
 suffering came only from his uncertainty? Tears clouded his vision, yet
 still he looked, he exhausted himself in this longing to know, in which
 his reason must finally give way.
 

 Clotilde hastily concealed herself as she saw him walk over to the press,
 which he opened wide. He seized the envelopes, threw them on the table,
 and searched among them feverishly. It was the scene of the terrible night
 of the storm that was beginning over again, the gallop of nightmares, the
 procession of phantoms, rising at his call from this heap of old papers.
 As they passed by, he addressed to each of them a question, an ardent
 prayer, demanding the origin of his malady, hoping for a word, a whisper
 which should set his doubts at rest. First, it was only an indistinct
 murmur, then came words and fragments of phrases.
 

 “Is it you—is it you—is it you—oh, old mother, the
 mother of us all—who are to give me your madness? Is it you,
 inebriate uncle, old scoundrel of an uncle, whose drunkenness I am to pay
 for? Is it you, ataxic nephew, or you, mystic nephew, or yet you, idiot
 niece, who are to reveal to me the truth, showing me one of the forms of
 the lesion from which I suffer? Or is it rather you, second cousin, who
 hanged yourself; or you, second cousin, who committed murder; or you,
 second cousin, who died of rottenness, whose tragic ends announce to me
 mine—death in a cell, the horrible decomposition of being?”
 

 And the gallop continued, they rose and passed by with the speed of the
 wind. The papers became animate, incarnate, they jostled one another, they
 trampled on one another, in a wild rush of suffering humanity.
 

 “Ah, who will tell me, who will tell me, who will tell me?—Is it he
 who died mad? he who was carried off by phthisis? he who was killed by
 paralysis? she whose constitutional feebleness caused her to die in early
 youth?—Whose is the poison of which I am to die? What is it,
 hysteria, alcoholism, tuberculosis, scrofula? And what is it going to make
 of me, an ataxic or a madman? A madman. Who was it said a madman? They all
 say it—a madman, a madman, a madman!”
 

 Sobs choked Pascal. He let his dejected head fall among the papers, he
 wept endlessly, shaken by shuddering sobs. And Clotilde, seized by a sort
 of awe, feeling the presence of the fate which rules over races, left the
 room softly, holding her breath; for she knew that it would mortify him
 exceedingly if he knew that she had been present.
 

 Long periods of prostration followed. January was very cold. But the sky
 remained wonderfully clear, a brilliant sun shone in the limpid blue; and
 at La Souleiade, the windows of the study facing south formed a sort of
 hothouse, preserving there a delightfully mild temperature. They did not
 even light a fire, for the room was always filled with a flood of
 sunshine, in which the flies that had survived the winter flew about
 lazily. The only sound to be heard was the buzzing of their wings. It was
 a close and drowsy warmth, like a breath of spring that had lingered in
 the old house baked by the heat of summer.
 

 Pascal, still gloomy, dragged through the days there, and it was there,
 too, that he overheard one day the closing words of a conversation which
 aggravated his suffering. As he never left his room now before breakfast,
 Clotilde had received Dr. Ramond this morning in the study, and they were
 talking there together in an undertone, sitting beside each other in the
 bright sunshine.
 

 It was the third visit which Ramond had made during the last week.
 Personal reasons, the necessity, especially, of establishing definitely
 his position as a physician at Plassans, made it expedient for him not to
 defer his marriage much longer: and he wished to obtain from Clotilde a
 decisive answer. On each of his former visits the presence of a third
 person had prevented him from speaking. As he desired to receive her
 answer from herself directly he had resolved to declare himself to her in
 a frank conversation. Their intimate friendship, and the discretion and
 good sense of both, justified him in taking this step. And he ended,
 smiling, looking into her eyes:
 

 “I assure you, Clotilde, that it is the most reasonable of denouements.
 You know that I have loved you for a long time. I have a profound
 affection and esteem for you. That alone might perhaps not be sufficient,
 but, in addition, we understand each other perfectly, and we should be
 very happy together, I am convinced of it.”
 

 She did not cast down her eyes; she, too, looked at him frankly, with a
 friendly smile. He was, in truth, very handsome, in his vigorous young
 manhood.
 

 “Why do you not marry Mlle. Leveque, the lawyer’s daughter?” she asked.
 “She is prettier and richer than I am, and I know that she would gladly
 accept you. My dear friend, I fear that you are committing a folly in
 choosing me.”
 

 He did not grow impatient, seeming still convinced of the wisdom of his
 determination.
 

 “But I do not love Mlle. Leveque, and I do love you. Besides, I have
 considered everything, and I repeat that I know very well what I am about.
 Say yes; you can take no better course.”
 

 Then she grew very serious, and a shadow passed over her face, the shadow
 of those reflections, of those almost unconscious inward struggles, which
 kept her silent for days at a time. She did not see clearly yet, she still
 struggled against herself, and she wished to wait.
 

 “Well, my friend, since you are really serious, do not ask me to give you
 an answer to-day; grant me a few weeks longer. Master is indeed very ill.
 I am greatly troubled about him; and you would not like to owe my consent
 to a hasty impulse. I assure you, for my part, that I have a great deal of
 affection for you, but it would be wrong to decide at this moment; the
 house is too unhappy. It is agreed, is it not? I will not make you wait
 long.”
 

 And to change the conversation she added:
 

 “Yes, I am uneasy about master. I wished to see you, in order to tell you
 so. The other day I surprised him weeping violently, and I am certain the
 fear of becoming mad haunts him. The day before yesterday, when you were
 talking to him, I saw that you were examining him. Tell me frankly, what
 do you think of his condition? Is he in any danger?”
 

 “Not the slightest!” exclaimed Dr. Ramond. “His system is a little out of
 order, that is all. How can a man of his ability, who has made so close a
 study of nervous diseases, deceive himself to such an extent? It is
 discouraging, indeed, if the clearest and most vigorous minds can go so
 far astray. In his case his own discovery of hypodermic injections would
 be excellent. Why does he not use them with himself?”
 

 And as the young girl replied, with a despairing gesture, that he would
 not listen to her, that he would not even allow her to speak to him now,
 Ramond said:
 

 “Well, then, I will speak to him.”
 

 It was at this moment that Pascal came out of his room, attracted by the
 sound of voices. But on seeing them both so close to each other, so
 animated, so youthful, and so handsome in the sunshine—clothed with
 sunshine, as it were—he stood still in the doorway. He looked
 fixedly at them, and his pale face altered.
 

 Ramond had a moment before taken Clotilde’s hand, and he was holding it in
 his.
 

 “It is a promise, is it not? I should like the marriage to take place this
 summer. You know how much I love you, and I shall eagerly await your
 answer.”
 

 “Very well,” she answered. “Before a month all will be settled.”
 

 A sudden giddiness made Pascal stagger. Here now was this boy, his friend,
 his pupil, who had introduced himself into his house to rob him of his
 treasure! He ought to have expected this denouement, yet the sudden
 news of a possible marriage surprised him, overwhelmed him like an
 unforeseen catastrophe that had forever ruined his life. This girl whom he
 had fashioned, whom he had believed his own, she would leave him, then,
 without regret, she would leave him to die alone in his solitude. Only the
 day before she had made him suffer so intensely that he had asked himself
 whether he should not part from her and send her to her brother, who was
 always writing for her. For an instant he had even decided on this
 separation, for the good of both. Yet to find her here suddenly, with this
 man, to hear her promise to give him an answer, to think that she would
 marry, that she would soon leave him, this stabbed him to the heart.
 

 At the sound of his heavy step as he came forward, the two young people
 turned round in some embarrassment.
 

 “Why, master, we were just talking about you,” said Ramond gaily. “Yes, to
 be frank with you, we were conspiring. Come, why do you not take care of
 yourself? There is nothing serious the matter with you; you would be on
 your feet again in a fortnight if you did.”
 

 Pascal, who had dropped into a chair, continued to look at them. He had
 still the power to control himself, and his countenance gave no evidence
 of the wound which he had just received. He would assuredly die of it, and
 no one would suspect the malady which had carried him off. But it was a
 relief to him to be able to give vent to his feelings, and he declared
 violently that he would not take even so much as a glass of tisane.
 

 “Take care of myself!” he cried; “what for? Is it not all over with my old
 carcass?”
 

 Ramond insisted, with a good-tempered smile.
 

 “You are sounder than any of us. This is a trifling disturbance, and you
 know that you have the remedy in your own hands. Use your hypodermic
 injection.”
 

 Pascal did not allow him to finish. This filled the measure of his rage.
 He angrily asked if they wished him to kill himself, as he had killed
 Lafouasse. His injections! A pretty invention, of which he had good reason
 to be proud. He abjured medicine, and he swore that he would never again
 go near a patient. When people were no longer good for anything they ought
 to die; that would be the best thing for everybody. And that was what he
 was going to try to do, so as to have done with it all.
 

 “Bah! bah!” said Ramond at last, resolving to take his leave, through fear
 of exciting him still further; “I will leave you with Clotilde; I am not
 at all uneasy, Clotilde will take care of you.”
 

 But Pascal had on this morning received the final blow. He took to his bed
 toward evening, and remained for two whole days without opening the door
 of his room. It was in vain that Clotilde, at last becoming alarmed,
 knocked loudly at the door. There was no answer. Martine went in her turn
 and begged monsieur, through the keyhole, at least to tell her if he
 needed anything. A deathlike silence reigned; the room seemed to be empty.
 

 Then, on the morning of the third day, as the young girl by chance turned
 the knob, the door yielded; perhaps it had been unlocked for hours. And
 she might enter freely this room in which she had never set foot: a large
 room, rendered cold by its northern exposure, in which she saw a small
 iron bed without curtains, a shower bath in a corner, a long black wooden
 table, a few chairs, and on the table, on the floor, along the walls, an
 array of chemical apparatus, mortars, furnaces, machines, instrument
 cases. Pascal, up and dressed, was sitting on the edge of his bed, in
 trying to arrange which he had exhausted himself.
 

 “Don’t you want me to nurse you, then?” she asked with anxious tenderness,
 without venturing to advance into the room.
 

 “Oh, you can come in,” he said with a dejected gesture. “I won’t beat you.
 I have not the strength to do that now.”
 

 And from this day on he tolerated her about him, and allowed her to wait
 on him. But he had caprices still. He would not let her enter the room
 when he was in bed, possessed by a sort of morbid shame; then he made her
 send him Martine. But he seldom remained in bed, dragging himself about
 from chair to chair, in his utter inability to do any kind of work. His
 malady continued to grow worse, until at last he was reduced to utter
 despair, tortured by sick headaches, and without the strength, as he said,
 to put one foot before the other, convinced every morning that he would
 spend the night at the Tulettes, a raving maniac. He grew thin; his face,
 under its crown of white hair—which he still cared for through a
 last remnant of vanity—acquired a look of suffering, of tragic
 beauty. And although he allowed himself to be waited on, he refused
 roughly all remedies, in the distrust of medicine into which he had
 fallen.
 

 Clotilde now devoted herself to him entirely. She gave up everything else;
 at first she attended low mass, then she left off going to church
 altogether. In her impatience for some certain happiness, she felt as if
 she were taking a step toward that end by thus devoting all her moments to
 the service of a beloved being whom she wished to see once more well and
 happy. She made a complete sacrifice of herself, she sought to find
 happiness in the happiness of another; and all this unconsciously, solely
 at the impulse of her woman’s heart, in the midst of the crisis through
 which she was still passing, and which was modifying her character
 profoundly, without her knowledge. She remained silent regarding the
 disagreement which separated them. The idea did not again occur to her to
 throw herself on his neck, crying that she was his, that he might return
 to life, since she gave herself to him. In her thoughts she grieved to see
 him suffer; she was only an affectionate girl, who took care of him, as
 any female relative would have done. And her attentions were very pure,
 very delicate, occupying her life so completely that her days now passed
 swiftly, exempt from tormenting thoughts of the Beyond, filled with the
 one wish of curing him.
 

 But where she had a hard battle to fight was in prevailing upon him to use
 his hypodermic injections upon himself. He flew into a passion, disowned
 his discovery, and called himself an imbecile. She too cried out. It was
 she now who had faith in science, who grew indignant at seeing him doubt
 his own genius. He resisted for a long time; then yielding to the empire
 which she had acquired over him, he consented, simply to avoid the
 affectionate dispute which she renewed with him every morning. From the
 very first he experienced great relief from the injections, although he
 refused to acknowledge it. His mind became clearer, and he gradually
 gained strength. Then she was exultant, filled with enthusiastic pride in
 him. She vaunted his treatment, and became indignant because he did not
 admire himself, as an example of the miracles which he was able to work.
 He smiled; he was now beginning to see clearly into his own condition.
 Ramond had spoken truly, his illness had been nothing but nervous
 exhaustion. Perhaps he would get over it after all.
 

 “Ah, it is you who are curing me, little girl,” he would say, not wishing
 to confess his hopes. “Medicines, you see, act according to the hand that
 gives them.”
 

 The convalescence was slow, lasting through the whole of February. The
 weather remained clear and cold; there was not a single day in which the
 study was not flooded with warm, pale sunshine. There were hours of
 relapse, however, hours of the blackest melancholy, in which all the
 patient’s terrors returned; when his guardian, disconsolate, was obliged
 to sit at the other end of the room, in order not to irritate him still
 more. He despaired anew of his recovery. He became again bitter and
 aggressively ironical.
 

 It was on one of those bad days that Pascal, approaching a window, saw his
 neighbor, M. Bellombre, the retired professor, making the round of his
 garden to see if his fruit trees were well covered with blossoms. The
 sight of the old man, so neat and so erect, with the fine placidity of the
 egoist, on whom illness had apparently never laid hold, suddenly put
 Pascal beside himself.
 

 “Ah!” he growled, “there is one who will never overwork himself, who will
 never endanger his health by worrying!”
 

 And he launched forth into an ironical eulogy on selfishness. To be alone
 in the world, not to have a friend, to have neither wife nor child, what
 happiness! That hard-hearted miser, who for forty years had had only other
 people’s children to cuff, who lived aloof from the world, without even a
 dog, with a deaf and dumb gardener older than himself, was he not an
 example of the greatest happiness possible on earth? Without a
 responsibility, without a duty, without an anxiety, other than that of
 taking care of his dear health! He was a wise man, he would live a hundred
 years.
 

 “Ah, the fear of life! that is cowardice which is truly the best wisdom.
 To think that I should ever have regretted not having a child of my own!
 Has any one a right to bring miserable creatures into the world? Bad
 heredity should be ended, life should be ended. The only honest man is
 that old coward there!”
 

 M. Bellombre continued peacefully making the round of his pear trees in
 the March sunshine. He did not risk a too hasty movement; he economized
 his fresh old age. If he met a stone in his path, he pushed it aside with
 the end of his cane, and then walked tranquilly on.
 

 “Look at him! Is he not well preserved; is he not handsome? Have not all
 the blessings of heaven been showered down upon him? He is the happiest
 man I know.”
 

 Clotilde, who had listened in silence, suffered from the irony of Pascal,
 the full bitterness of which she divined. She, who usually took M.
 Bellombre’s part, felt a protest rise up within her. Tears came to her
 eyes, and she answered simply in a low voice:
 

 “Yes; but he is not loved.”
 

 These words put a sudden end to the painful scene. Pascal, as if he had
 received an electric shock, turned and looked at her. A sudden rush of
 tenderness brought tears to his eyes also, and he left the room to keep
 from weeping.
 

 The days wore on in the midst of these alternations of good and bad hours.
 He recovered his strength but slowly, and what put him in despair was that
 whenever he attempted to work he was seized by a profuse perspiration. If
 he had persisted, he would assuredly have fainted. So long as he did not
 work he felt that his convalescence was making little progress. He began
 to take an interest again, however, in his accustomed investigations. He
 read over again the last pages that he had written, and, with this
 reawakening of the scientist in him, his former anxieties returned. At one
 time he fell into a state of such depression, that the house and all it
 contained ceased to exist for him. He might have been robbed, everything
 he possessed might have been taken and destroyed, without his even being
 conscious of the disaster. Now he became again watchful, from time to time
 he would feel his pocket, to assure himself that the key of the press was
 there.
 

 But one morning when he had overslept himself, and did not leave his room
 until eleven o’clock, he saw Clotilde in the study, quietly occupied in
 copying with great exactness in pastel a branch of flowering almond. She
 looked up, smiling; and taking a key that was lying beside her on the
 desk, she offered it to him, saying:
 

 “Here, master.”
 

 Surprised, not yet comprehending, he looked at the object which she held
 toward him.
 

 “What is that?” he asked.
 

 “It is the key of the press, which you must have dropped from your pocket
 yesterday, and which I picked up here this morning.”
 

 Pascal took it with extraordinary emotion. He looked at it, and then at
 Clotilde. Was it ended, then? She would persecute him no more. She was no
 longer eager to rob everything, to burn everything. And seeing her still
 smiling, she also looking moved, an immense joy filled his heart.
 

 He caught her in his arms, crying:
 

 “Ah, little girl, if we might only not be too unhappy!”
 
 brightening dawn, doubtless that of his last day of life. It had rained
 the night before, and the mild sun was still veiled by clouds. From the
 plane trees came the morning carols of the birds, while far away in the
 sleeping country a locomotive whistled with a prolonged moan. And he was
 alone; alone in the great melancholy house, whose emptiness he felt around
 him, whose silence he heard. The light slowly increased, and he watched
 the patches it made on the window-panes broadening and brightening. Then
 the candle paled in the growing light, and the whole room became visible.
 And with the dawn, as he had anticipated, came relief. The sight of the
 familiar objects around him brought him consolation.
 

 But Pascal, although the attack had passed away, still suffered horribly.
 A sharp pain remained in the hollow of his chest, and his left arm,
 benumbed, hung from his shoulder like lead. In his long waiting for the
 help that Martine had gone to bring, he had reflected on the suffering
 which made the flesh cry out. And he found that he was resigned; he no
 longer felt the rebelliousness which the mere sight of physical pain had
 formerly awakened in him. It had exasperated him, as if it had been a
 monstrous and useless cruelty of nature. In his doubts as a physician, he
 had attended his patients only to combat it, and to relieve it. If he
 ended by accepting it, now that he himself suffered its horrible torture,
 was it that he had risen one degree higher in his faith of life, to that
 serene height whence life appeared altogether good, even with the fatal
 condition of suffering attached to it; suffering which is perhaps its
 spring? Yes, to live all of life, to live it and to suffer it all without
 rebellion, without believing that it is made better by being made
 painless, this presented itself clearly to his dying eyes, as the greatest
 courage and the greatest wisdom. And to cheat pain while he waited, he
 reviewed his latest theories; he dreamed of a means of utilizing suffering
 by transforming it into action, into work. If it be true that man feels
 pain more acutely according as he rises in the scale of civilization, it
 is also certain that he becomes stronger through it, better armed against
 it, more capable of resisting it. The organ, the brain which works,
 develops and grows stronger, provided the equilibrium between the
 sensations which it receives and the work which it gives back be not
 broken. Might not one hope, then, for a humanity in which the amount of
 work accomplished would so exactly equal the sum of sensations received,
 that suffering would be utilized and, as it were, abolished?
 

 The sun had risen, and Pascal was confusedly revolving these distant hopes
 in his mind, in the drowsiness produced by his disease, when he felt a new
 attack coming on. He had a moment of cruel anxiety—was this the end?
 Was he going to die alone? But at this instant hurried footsteps mounted
 the stairs, and a moment later Ramond entered, followed by Martine. And
 the patient had time to say before the attack began:
 

 “Quick! quick! a hypodermic injection of pure water.”
 

 Unfortunately the doctor had to look for the little syringe and then to
 prepare everything. This occupied some minutes, and the attack was
 terrible. He followed its progress with anxiety—the face becoming
 distorted, the lips growing livid. Then when he had given the injection,
 he observed that the phenomena, for a moment stationary, slowly diminished
 in intensity. Once more the catastrophe was averted.
 

 As soon as he recovered his breath Pascal, glancing at the clock, said in
 his calm, faint voice:
 

 “My friend, it is seven o’clock—in twelve hours, at seven o’clock
 to-night, I shall be dead.”
 

 And as the young man was about to protest, to argue the question, “No,” he
 resumed, “do not try to deceive me. You have witnessed the attack. You
 know what it means as well as I do. Everything will now proceed with
 mathematical exactness; and, hour by hour, I could describe to you the
 phases of the disease.”
 

 He stopped, gasped for breath, and then added:
 

 “And then, all is well; I am content. Clotilde will be here at five; all I
 ask is to see her and to die in her arms.”
 

 A few moments later, however, he experienced a sensible improvement. The
 effect of the injection seemed truly miraculous; and he was able to sit up
 in bed, his back resting against the pillows. He spoke clearly, and with
 more ease, and never had the lucidity of his mind appeared greater.
 

 “You know, master,” said, Ramond, “that I will not leave you. I have told
 my wife, and we will spend the day together; and, whatever you may say to
 the contrary, I am very confident that it will not be the last. You will
 let me make myself at home, here, will you not?”
 

 Pascal smiled, and gave orders to Martine to go and prepare breakfast for
 Ramond, saying that if they needed her they would call her. And the two
 men remained alone, conversing with friendly intimacy; the one with his
 white hair and long white beard, lying down, discoursing like a sage, the
 other sitting at his bedside, listening with the respect of a disciple.
 

 “In truth,” murmured the master, as if he were speaking to himself, “the
 effect of those injections is extraordinary.”
 

 Then in a stronger voice, he said almost gaily:
 

 “My friend Ramond, it may not be a very great present that I am giving
 you, but I am going to leave you my manuscripts. Yes, Clotilde has orders
 to send them to you when I shall be no more. Look through them, and you
 will perhaps find among them things that are not so very bad. If you get a
 good idea from them some day—well, that will be so much the better
 for the world.”
 

 And then he made his scientific testament. He was clearly conscious that
 he had been himself only a solitary pioneer, a precursor, planning
 theories which he tried to put in practise, but which failed because of
 the imperfection of his method. He recalled his enthusiasm when he
 believed he had discovered, in his injections of nerve substance, the
 universal panacea, then his disappointments, his fits of despair, the
 shocking death of Lafouasse, consumption carrying off Valentin in spite of
 all his efforts, madness again conquering Sarteur and causing him to hang
 himself. So that he would depart full of doubt, having no longer the
 confidence necessary to the physician, and so enamored of life that he had
 ended by putting all his faith in it, certain that it must draw from
 itself alone its health and strength. But he did not wish to close up the
 future; he was glad, on the contrary, to bequeath his hypotheses to the
 younger generation. Every twenty years theories changed; established
 truths only, on which science continued to build, remained unshaken. Even
 if he had only the merit of giving to science a momentary hypothesis, his
 work would not be lost, for progress consisted assuredly in the effort, in
 the onward march of the intellect.
 

 And then who could say that he had died in vain, troubled and weary, his
 hopes concerning the injections unrealized—other workers would come,
 young, ardent, confident, who would take up the idea, elucidate it, expand
 it. And perhaps a new epoch, a new world would date from this.
 

 “Ah, my dear Ramond,” he continued, “if one could only live life over
 again. Yes, I would take up my idea again, for I have been struck lately
 by the singular efficacy of injections even of pure water. It is not the
 liquid, then, that matters, but simply the mechanical action. During the
 last month I have written a great deal on that subject. You will find some
 curious notes and observations there. In short, I should be inclined to
 put all my faith in work, to place health in the harmonious working of all
 the organs, a sort of dynamic therapeutics, if I may venture to use the
 expression.”
 

 He had gradually grown excited, forgetting his approaching death in his
 ardent curiosity about life. And he sketched, with broad strokes, his last
 theory. Man was surrounded by a medium—nature—which irritated
 by perpetual contact the sensitive extremities of the nerves. Hence the
 action, not only of the senses, but of the entire surface of the body,
 external and internal. For it was these sensations which, reverberating in
 the brain, in the marrow, and in the nervous centers, were there converted
 into tonicity, movements, and thoughts; and he was convinced that health
 consisted in the natural progress of this work, in receiving sensations,
 and in giving them back in thoughts and in actions, the human machine
 being thus fed by the regular play of the organs. Work thus became the
 great law, the regulator of the living universe. Hence it became necessary
 if the equilibrium were broken, if the external excitations ceased to be
 sufficient, for therapeutics to create artificial excitations, in order to
 reestablish the tonicity which is the state of perfect health. And he
 dreamed of a whole new system of treatment—suggestion, the
 all-powerful authority of the physician, for the senses; electricity,
 friction, massage for the skin and for the tendons; diet for the stomach;
 air cures on high plateaus for the lungs, and, finally, transfusion,
 injections of distilled water, for the circulatory system. It was the
 undeniable and purely mechanical action of these latter that had put him
 on the track; all he did now was to extend the hypothesis, impelled by his
 generalizing spirit; he saw the world saved anew in this perfect
 equilibrium, as much work given as sensation received, the balance of the
 world restored by unceasing labor.
 

 Here he burst into a frank laugh.
 

 “There! I have started off again. I, who was firmly convinced that the
 only wisdom was not to interfere, to let nature take its course. Ah, what
 an incorrigible old fool I am!”
 

 Ramond caught his hands in an outburst of admiration and affection.
 

 “Master, master! it is of enthusiasm, of folly like yours that genius is
 made. Have no fear, I have listened to you, I will endeavor to be worthy
 of the heritage you leave; and I think, with you, that perhaps the great
 future lies entirely there.”
 

 In the sad and quiet room Pascal began to speak again, with the courageous
 tranquillity of a dying philosopher giving his last lesson. He now
 reviewed his personal observations; he said that he had often cured
 himself by work, regular and methodical work, not carried to excess.
 Eleven o’clock struck; he urged Ramond to take his breakfast, and he
 continued the conversation, soaring to lofty and distant heights, while
 Martine served the meal. The sun had at last burst through the morning
 mists, a sun still half-veiled in clouds, and mild, whose golden light
 warmed the room. Presently, after taking a few sips of milk, Pascal
 remained silent.
 

 At this moment the young physician was eating a pear.
 

 “Are you in pain again?” he asked.
 

 “No, no; finish.”
 

 But he could not deceive Ramond. It was an attack, and a terrible one. The
 suffocation came with the swiftness of a thunderbolt, and he fell back on
 the pillow, his face already blue. He clutched at the bedclothes to
 support himself, to raise the dreadful weight which oppressed his chest.
 Terrified, livid, he kept his wide open eyes fixed upon the clock, with a
 dreadful expression of despair and grief; and for ten minutes it seemed as
 if every moment must be his last.
 

 Ramond had immediately given him a hypodermic injection. The relief was
 slow to come, the efficacy less than before.
 

 When Pascal revived, large tears stood in his eyes. He did not speak now,
 he wept. Presently, looking at the clock with his darkening vision, he
 said:
 

 “My friend, I shall die at four o’clock; I shall not see her.”
 

 And as his young colleague, in order to divert his thoughts, declared, in
 spite of appearances, that the end was not so near, Pascal, again becoming
 enthusiastic, wished to give him a last lesson, based on direct
 observation. He had, as it happened, attended several cases similar to his
 own, and he remembered especially to have dissected at the hospital the
 heart of a poor old man affected with sclerosis.
 

 “I can see it—my heart. It is the color of a dead leaf; its fibers
 are brittle, wasted, one would say, although it has augmented slightly in
 volume. The inflammatory process has hardened it; it would be difficult to
 cut—”
 

 He continued in a lower voice. A little before, he had felt his heart
 growing weaker, its contractions becoming feebler and slower. Instead of
 the normal jet of blood there now issued from the aorta only a red froth.
 Back of it all the veins were engorged with black blood; the suffocation
 increased, according as the lift and force pump, the regulator of the
 whole machine, moved more slowly. And after the injection he had been able
 to follow in spite of his suffering the gradual reviving of the organ as
 the stimulus set it beating again, removing the black venous blood, and
 sending life into it anew, with the red arterial blood. But the attack
 would return as soon as the mechanical effect of the injection should
 cease. He could predict it almost within a few minutes. Thanks to the
 injections he would have three attacks more. The third would carry him
 off; he would die at four o’clock.
 

 Then, while his voice grew gradually weaker, in a last outburst of
 enthusiasm, he apostrophized the courage of the heart, that persistent
 life maker, working ceaselessly, even during sleep, when the other organs
 rested.
 

 “Ah, brave heart! how heroically you struggle! What faithful, what
 generous muscles, never wearied! You have loved too much, you have beat
 too fast in the past months, and that is why you are breaking now, brave
 heart, who do not wish to die, and who strive rebelliously to beat still!”
 

 But now the first of the attacks which had been announced came on. Pascal
 came out of this panting, haggard, his speech sibilant and painful. Low
 moans escaped him, in spite of his courage. Good God! would this torture
 never end? And yet his most ardent desire was to prolong his agony, to
 live long enough to embrace Clotilde a last time. If he might only be
 deceiving himself, as Ramond persisted in declaring. If he might only live
 until five o’clock. His eyes again turned to the clock, they never now
 left the hands, every minute seeming an eternity. They marked three
 o’clock. Then half-past three. Ah, God! only two hours of life, two hours
 more of life. The sun was already sinking toward the horizon; a great calm
 descended from the pale winter sky, and he heard at intervals the whistles
 of the distant locomotives crossing the bare plain. The train that was
 passing now was the one going to the Tulettes; the other, the one coming
 from Marseilles, would it never arrive, then!
 

 At twenty minutes to four Pascal signed to Ramond to approach. He could no
 longer speak loud enough to be heard.
 

 “You see, in order that I might live until six o’clock, the pulse should
 be stronger. I have still some hope, however, but the second movement is
 almost imperceptible, the heart will soon cease to beat.”
 

 And in faint, despairing accents he called on Clotilde again and again.
 The immeasurable grief which he felt at not being able to see her again
 broke forth in this faltering and agonized appeal. Then his anxiety about
 his manuscripts returned, an ardent entreaty shone in his eyes, until at
 last he found the strength to falter again:
 

 “Do not leave me; the key is under my pillow; tell Clotilde to take it;
 she has my directions.”
 

 At ten minutes to four another hypodermic injection was given, but without
 effect. And just as four o’clock was striking, the second attack declared
 itself. Suddenly, after a fit of suffocation, he threw himself out of bed;
 he desired to rise, to walk, in a last revival of his strength. A need of
 space, of light, of air, urged him toward the skies. Then there came to
 him an irresistible appeal from life, his whole life, from the adjoining
 workroom, where he had spent his days. And he went there, staggering,
 suffocating, bending to the left side, supporting himself by the
 furniture.
 

 Dr. Ramond precipitated himself quickly toward him to stop him, crying:
 

 “Master, master! lie down again, I entreat you!”
 

 But Pascal paid no heed to him, obstinately determined to die on his feet.
 The desire to live, the heroic idea of work, alone survived in him,
 carrying him onward bodily. He faltered hoarsely:
 

 “No, no—out there, out there—”
 

 His friend was obliged to support him, and he walked thus, stumbling and
 haggard, to the end of the workroom, and dropped into his chair beside his
 table, on which an unfinished page still lay among a confusion of papers
 and books.
 

 Here he gasped for breath and his eyes closed. After a moment he opened
 them again, while his hands groped about, seeking his work, no doubt. They
 encountered the genealogical tree in the midst of other papers scattered
 about. Only two days before he had corrected some dates in it. He
 recognized it, and drawing it toward him, spread it out.
 

 “Master, master! you will kill yourself!” cried Ramond, overcome with pity
 and admiration at this extraordinary spectacle.
 

 Pascal did not listen, did not hear. He felt a pencil under his fingers.
 He took it and bent over the tree, as if his dying eyes no longer saw. The
 name of Maxime arrested his attention, and he wrote: “Died of ataxia in
 1873,” in the certainty that his nephew would not live through the year.
 Then Clotilde’s name, beside it, struck him and he completed the note
 thus: “Has a son, by her Uncle Pascal, in 1874.” But it was his own name
 that he sought wearily and confusedly. When he at last found it his hand
 grew firmer, and he finished his note, in upright and bold characters:
 “Died of heart disease, November 7, 1873.” This was the supreme effort,
 the rattle in his throat increased, everything was fading into
 nothingness, when he perceived the blank leaf above Clotilde’s name. His
 vision grew dark, his fingers could no longer hold the pencil, but he was
 still able to add, in unsteady letters, into which passed the tortured
 tenderness, the wild disorder of his poor heart: “The unknown child, to be
 born in 1874. What will it be?” Then he swooned, and Martine and Ramond
 with difficulty carried him back to bed.
 

 The third attack came on about four o’clock. In this last access of
 suffocation Pascal’s countenance expressed excruciating suffering. Death
 was to be very painful; he must endure to the end his martyrdom, as a man
 and a scientist. His wandering gaze still seemed to seek the clock, to
 ascertain the hour. And Ramond, seeing his lips move, bent down and placed
 his ear to the mouth of the dying man. The latter, in effect, was
 stammering some vague words, so faint that they scarcely rose above a
 breath:
 

 “Four o’clock—the heart is stopping; no more red blood in the aorta—the
 valve relaxes and bursts.”
 

 A dreadful spasm shook him; his breathing grew fainter.
 

 “Its progress is too rapid. Do not leave me; the key is under the pillow—Clotilde,
 Clotilde—”
 

 At the foot of the bed Martine was kneeling, choked with sobs. She saw
 well that monsieur was dying. She had not dared to go for a priest
 notwithstanding her great desire to do so; and she was herself reciting
 the prayers for the dying; she prayed ardently that God would pardon
 monsieur, and that monsieur might go straight to Paradise.
 

 Pascal was dying. His face was quite blue. After a few seconds of
 immobility, he tried to breathe: he put out his lips, opened his poor
 mouth, like a little bird opening its beak to get a last mouthful of air.
 And he was dead.
 

 
 
 

 It was not until after breakfast, at about one o’clock, that Clotilde
 received the despatch. On this day it had chanced that she had quarreled
 with her brother Maxime, who, taking advantage of his privileges as an
 invalid, had tormented her more and more every day by his unreasonable
 caprices and his outbursts of ill temper. In short, her visit to him had
 not proved a success. He found that she was too simple and too serious to
 cheer him; and he had preferred, of late, the society of Rose, the
 fair-haired young girl, with the innocent look, who amused him. So that
 when his sister told him that their uncle had sent for her, and that she
 was going away, he gave his approval at once, and although he asked her to
 return as soon as she should have settled her affairs at home, he did so
 only with the desire of showing himself amiable, and he did not press the
 invitation.
 

 Clotilde spent the afternoon in packing her trunks. In the feverish
 excitement of so sudden a decision she had thought of nothing but the joy
 of her return. But after the hurry of dinner was over, after she had said
 good-by to her brother, after the interminable drive in a hackney coach
 along the avenue of the Bois de Boulogne to the Lyons railway station,
 when she found herself in the ladies’ compartment, starting on the long
 journey on a cold and rainy November night, already rolling away from
 Paris, her excitement began to abate, and reflections forced their way
 into her mind and began to trouble her. Why this brief and urgent
 despatch: “I await you; start this evening.” Doubtless it was the answer
 to her letter; but she knew how greatly Pascal had desired that she should
 remain in Paris, where he thought she was happy, and she was astonished at
 his hasty summons. She had not expected a despatch, but a letter,
 arranging for her return a few weeks later. There must be something else,
 then; perhaps he was ill and felt a desire, a longing to see her again at
 once. And from this time forward this fear seized her with the force of a
 presentiment, and grew stronger and stronger, until it soon took complete
 possession of her.
 

 All night long the rain beat furiously against the windows of the train
 while they were crossing the plains of Burgundy, and did not cease until
 they reached Macon. When they had passed Lyons the day broke. Clotilde had
 Pascal’s letters with her, and she had waited impatiently for the daylight
 that she might read again carefully these letters, the writing of which
 had seemed changed to her. And noticing the unsteady characters, the
 breaks in the words, she felt a chill at her heart. He was ill, very ill—she
 had become certain of this now, by a divination in which there was less of
 reasoning than of subtle prescience. And the rest of the journey seemed
 terribly long, for her anguish increased in proportion as she approached
 its termination. And worse than all, arriving at Marseilles at half-past
 twelve, there was no train for Plassans until twenty minutes past three.
 Three long hours of waiting! She breakfasted at the buffet in the railway
 station, eating hurriedly, as if she was afraid of missing this train;
 then she dragged herself into the dusty garden, going from bench to bench
 in the pale, mild sunshine, among omnibuses and hackney coaches. At last
 she was once more in the train, which stopped at every little way station.
 When they were approaching Plassans she put her head out of the window
 eagerly, longing to see the town again after her short absence of two
 months. It seemed to her as if she had been away for twenty years, and
 that everything must be changed. When the train was leaving the little
 station of Sainte-Marthe her emotion reached its height when, leaning out,
 she saw in the distance La Souleiade with the two secular cypresses on the
 terrace, which could be seen three leagues off.
 

 It was five o’clock, and twilight was already falling. The train stopped,
 and Clotilde descended. But it was a surprise and a keen grief to her not
 to see Pascal waiting for her on the platform. She had been saying to
 herself since they had left Lyons: “If I do not see him at once, on the
 arrival of the train, it will be because he is ill.” He might be in the
 waiting-room, however, or with a carriage outside. She hurried forward,
 but she saw no one but Father Durieu, a driver whom the doctor was in the
 habit of employing. She questioned him eagerly. The old man, a taciturn
 Provencal, was in no haste to answer. His wagon was there, and he asked
 her for the checks for her luggage, wishing to see about the trunks before
 anything else. In a trembling voice she repeated her question:
 

 “Is everybody well, Father Durieu?”
 

 “Yes, mademoiselle.”
 

 And she was obliged to put question after question to him before she
 succeeded in eliciting the information that it was Martine who had told
 him, at about six o’clock the day before, to be at the station with his
 wagon, in time to meet the train. He had not seen the doctor, no one had
 seen him, for two months past. It might very well be since he was not here
 that he had been obliged to take to his bed, for there was a report in the
 town that he was not very well.
 

 “Wait until I get the luggage, mademoiselle,” he ended, “there is room for
 you on the seat.”
 

 “No, Father Durieu, it would be too long to wait. I will walk.”
 

 She ascended the slope rapidly. Her heart was so tightened that she could
 scarcely breathe. The sun had sunk behind the hills of Sainte-Marthe, and
 a fine mist was falling from the chill gray November sky, and as she took
 the road to Les Fenouilleres she caught another glimpse of La Souleiade,
 which struck a chill to her heart—the front of the house, with all
 its shutters closed, and wearing a look of abandonment and desolation in
 the melancholy twilight.
 

 But Clotilde received the final and terrible blow when she saw Ramond
 standing at the hall door, apparently waiting for her. He had indeed been
 watching for her, and had come downstairs to break the dreadful news
 gently to her. She arrived out of breath; she had crossed the quincunx of
 plane trees near the fountain to shorten the way, and on seeing the young
 man there instead of Pascal, whom she had in spite of everything expected
 to see, she had a presentiment of overwhelming ruin, of irreparable
 misfortune. Ramond was pale and agitated, notwithstanding the effort he
 made to control his feelings. At the first moment he could not find a word
 to say, but waited to be questioned. Clotilde, who was herself
 suffocating, said nothing. And they entered the house thus; he led her to
 the dining-room, where they remained for a few seconds, face to face, in
 mute anguish.
 

 “He is ill, is he not?” she at last faltered.
 

 “Yes,” he said, “he is ill.”
 

 “I knew it at once when I saw you,” she replied. “I knew when he was not
 here that he must be ill. He is very ill, is he not?” she persisted.
 

 As he did not answer but grew still paler, she looked at him fixedly. And
 on the instant she saw the shadow of death upon him; on his hands that
 still trembled, that had assisted the dying man; on his sad face; in his
 troubled eyes, which still retained the reflection of the death agony; in
 the neglected and disordered appearance of the physician who, for twelve
 hours, had maintained an unavailing struggle against death.
 

 She gave a loud cry:
 

 “He is dead!”
 

 She tottered, and fell fainting into the arms of Ramond, who with a great
 sob pressed her in a brotherly embrace. And thus they wept on each other’s
 neck.
 

 When he had seated her in a chair, and she was able to speak, he said:
 

 “It was I who took the despatch you received to the telegraph office
 yesterday, at half-past ten o’clock. He was so happy, so full of hope! He
 was forming plans for the future—a year, two years of life. And this
 morning, at four o’clock, he had the first attack, and he sent for me. He
 saw at once that he was doomed, but he expected to last until six o’clock,
 to live long enough to see you again. But the disease progressed too
 rapidly. He described its progress to me, minute by minute, like a
 professor in the dissecting room. He died with your name upon his lips,
 calm, but full of anguish, like a hero.”
 

 Clotilde listened, her eyes drowned in tears which flowed endlessly. Every
 word of the relation of this piteous and stoical death penetrated her
 heart and stamped itself there. She reconstructed every hour of the
 dreadful day. She followed to its close its grand and mournful drama. She
 would live it over in her thoughts forever.
 

 But her despairing grief overflowed when Martine, who had entered the room
 a moment before, said in a harsh voice:
 

 “Ah, mademoiselle has good reason to cry! for if monsieur is dead,
 mademoiselle is to blame for it.”
 

 The old servant stood apart, near the door of her kitchen, in such a
 passion of angry grief, because they had taken her master from her,
 because they had killed him, that she did not even try to find a word of
 welcome or consolation for this child whom she had brought up. And without
 calculating the consequences of her indiscretion, the grief or the joy
 which she might cause, she relieved herself by telling all she knew.
 

 “Yes, if monsieur has died, it is because mademoiselle went away.”
 

 From the depths of her overpowering grief Clotilde protested. She had
 expected to see Martine weeping with her, like Ramond, and she was
 surprised to feel that she was an enemy.
 

 “Why, it was he who would not let me stay, who insisted upon my going
 away,” she said.
 

 “Oh, well! mademoiselle must have been willing to go or she would have
 been more clear-sighted. The night before your departure I found monsieur
 half-suffocated with grief; and when I wished to inform mademoiselle, he
 himself prevented me; he had such courage. Then I could see it all, after
 mademoiselle had gone. Every night it was the same thing over again, and
 he could hardly keep from writing to you to come back. In short, he died
 of it, that is the pure truth.”
 

 A great light broke in on Clotilde’s mind, making her at the same time
 very happy and very wretched. Good God! what she had suspected for a
 moment, was then true. Afterward she had been convinced, seeing Pascal’s
 angry persistence, that he was speaking the truth; that between her and
 work he had chosen work sincerely, like a man of science with whom love of
 work has gained the victory over the love of woman. And yet he had not
 spoken the truth; he had carried his devotion, his self-forgetfulness to
 the point of immolating himself to what he believed to be her happiness.
 And the misery of things willed that he should have been mistaken, that he
 should have thus consummated the unhappiness of both.
 

 Clotilde again protested wildly:
 

 “But how could I have known? I obeyed; I put all my love in my obedience.”
 

 “Ah,” cried Martine again, “it seems to me that I should have guessed.”
 

 Ramond interposed gently. He took Clotilde’s hands once more in his, and
 explained to her that grief might indeed have hastened the fatal issue,
 but that the master had unhappily been doomed for some time past. The
 affection of the heart from which he had suffered must have been of long
 standing—a great deal of overwork, a certain part of heredity, and,
 finally, his late absorbing love, and the poor heart had broken.
 

 “Let us go upstairs,” said Clotilde simply. “I wish to see him.”
 

 Upstairs in the death-chamber the blinds were closed, shutting out even
 the melancholy twilight. On a little table at the foot of the bed burned
 two tapers in two candlesticks. And they cast a pale yellow light on
 Pascal’s form extended on the bed, the feet close together, the hands
 folded on the breast. The eyes had been piously closed. The face, of a
 bluish hue still, but already looking calm and peaceful, framed by the
 flowing white hair and beard, seemed asleep. He had been dead scarcely an
 hour and a half, yet already infinite serenity, eternal silence, eternal
 repose, had begun.
 

 Seeing him thus, at the thought that he no longer heard her, that he no
 longer saw her, that she was alone now, that she was to kiss him for the
 last time, and then lose him forever, Clotilde, in an outburst of grief,
 threw herself upon the bed, and in broken accents of passionate tenderness
 cried:
 

 “Oh, master, master, master—”
 

 She pressed her lips to the dead man’s forehead, and, feeling it still
 warm with life, she had a momentary illusion: she fancied that he felt
 this last caress, so cruelly awaited. Did he not smile in his immobility,
 happy at last, and able to die, now that he felt her here beside him?
 Then, overcome by the dreadful reality, she burst again into wild sobs.
 

 Martine entered, bringing a lamp, which she placed on a corner of the
 chimney-piece, and she heard Ramond, who was watching Clotilde, disquieted
 at seeing her passionate grief, say:
 

 “I shall take you away from the room if you give way like this. Consider
 that you have some one else to think of now.”
 

 The servant had been surprised at certain words which she had overheard by
 chance during the day. Suddenly she understood, and she turned paler even
 than before, and on her way out of the room, she stopped at the door to
 hear more.
 

 “The key of the press is under his pillow,” said Ramond, lowering his
 voice; “he told me repeatedly to tell you so. You know what you have to
 do?”
 

 Clotilde made an effort to remember and to answer.
 

 “What I have to do? About the papers, is it not? Yes, yes, I remember; I
 am to keep the envelopes and to give you the other manuscripts. Have no
 fear, I am quite calm, I will be very reasonable. But I will not leave
 him; I will spend the night here very quietly, I promise you.”
 

 She was so unhappy, she seemed so resolved to watch by him, to remain with
 him, until he should be taken away, that the young physician allowed her
 to have her way.
 

 “Well, I will leave you now. They will be expecting me at home. Then there
 are all sorts of formalities to be gone through—to give notice at
 the mayor’s office, the funeral, of which I wish to spare you the details.
 Trouble yourself about nothing. Everything will be arranged to-morrow when
 I return.”
 

 He embraced her once more and then went away. And it was only then that
 Martine left the room, behind him, and locking the hall door she ran out
 into the darkness.
 

 Clotilde was now alone in the chamber; and all around and about her, in
 the unbroken silence, she felt the emptiness of the house. Clotilde was
 alone with the dead Pascal. She placed a chair at the head of the bed and
 sat there motionless, alone. On arriving, she had merely removed her hat:
 now, perceiving that she still had on her gloves, she took them off also.
 But she kept on her traveling dress, crumpled and dusty, after twenty
 hours of railway travel. No doubt Father Durieu had brought the trunks
 long ago, and left them downstairs. But it did not occur to her, nor had
 she the strength to wash herself and change her clothes, but remained
 sitting, overwhelmed with grief, on the chair into which she had dropped.
 One regret, a great remorse, filled her to the exclusion of all else. Why
 had she obeyed him? Why had she consented to leave him? If she had
 remained she had the ardent conviction that he would not have died. She
 would have lavished so much love, so many caresses upon him, that she
 would have cured him. If one was anxious to keep a beloved being from
 dying one should remain with him and, if necessary, give one’s heart’s
 blood to keep him alive. It was her own fault if she had lost him, if she
 could not now with a caress awaken him from his eternal sleep. And she
 thought herself imbecile not to have understood; cowardly, not to have
 devoted herself to him; culpable, and to be forever punished for having
 gone away when plain common sense, in default of feeling, ought to have
 kept her here, bound, as a submissive and affectionate subject, to the
 task of watching over her king.
 

 The silence had become so complete, so profound, that Clotilde lifted her
 eyes for a moment from Pascal’s face to look around the room. She saw only
 vague shadows—the two tapers threw two yellow patches on the high
 ceiling. At this moment she remembered the letters he had written to her,
 so short, so cold; and she comprehended his heroic sacrifice, the torture
 it had been to him to silence his heart, desiring to immolate himself to
 the end. What strength must he not have required for the accomplishment of
 the plan of happiness, sublime and disastrous, which he had formed for
 her. He had resolved to pass out of her life in order to save her from his
 old age and his poverty; he wished her to be rich and free, to enjoy her
 youth, far away from him; this indeed was utter self-effacement, complete
 absorption in the love of another. And she felt a profound gratitude, a
 sweet solace in the thought, mingled with a sort of angry bitterness
 against evil fortune. Then, suddenly, the happy years of her childhood and
 her long youth spent beside him who had always been so kind and so
 good-humored, rose before her—how he had gradually won her
 affection, how she had felt that she was his, after the quarrels which had
 separated them for a time, and with what a transport of joy she had at
 last given herself to him.
 

 Seven o’clock struck. Clotilde started as the clear tones broke the
 profound silence. Who was it that had spoken? Then she remembered, and she
 looked at the clock. And when the last sound of the seven strokes, each of
 which had fallen like a knell upon her heart, had died away, she turned
 her eyes again on the motionless face of Pascal, and once more she
 abandoned herself to her grief.
 

 It was in the midst of this ever-increasing prostration that Clotilde, a
 few minutes later, heard a sudden sound of sobbing. Some one had rushed
 into the room; she looked round and saw her Grandmother Felicite. But she
 did not stir, she did not speak, so benumbed was she with grief. Martine,
 anticipating the orders which Clotilde would undoubtedly have given her,
 had hurried to old Mme. Rougon’s, to give her the dreadful news; and the
 latter, dazed at first by the suddenness of the catastrophe, and afterward
 greatly agitated, had hurried to the house, overflowing with noisy grief.
 She burst into tears at sight of her son, and then embraced Clotilde, who
 returned her kiss, as in a dream. And from this instant the latter,
 without emerging from the overwhelming grief in which she isolated
 herself, felt that she was no longer alone, hearing a continual stir and
 bustle going on around her. It was Felicite crying, coming in and going
 out on tiptoe, setting things in order, spying about, whispering, dropping
 into a chair, to get up again a moment afterward, after saying that she
 was going to die in it. At nine o’clock she made a last effort to persuade
 her granddaughter to eat something. Twice already she had lectured her in
 a low voice; she came now again to whisper to her:
 

 “Clotilde, my dear, I assure you you are wrong. You must keep up your
 strength or you will never be able to hold out.”
 

 But the young woman, with a shake of her head, again refused.
 

 “Come, you breakfasted at the buffet at Marseilles, I suppose, but you
 have eaten nothing since. Is that reasonable? I do not wish you to fall
 ill also. Martine has some broth. I have told her to make a light soup and
 to roast a chicken. Go down and eat a mouthful, only a mouthful, and I
 will remain here.”
 

 With the same patient gesture Clotilde again refused. At last she
 faltered:
 

 “Do not ask me, grandmother, I entreat you. I could not; it would choke
 me.”
 

 She did not speak again, falling back into her former state of apathy. She
 did not sleep, however, her wide open eyes were fixed persistently on
 Pascal’s face. For hours she sat there, motionless, erect, rigid, as if
 her spirit were far away with the dead. At ten o’clock she heard a noise;
 it was Martine bringing up the lamp. Toward eleven Felicite, who was
 sitting watching in an armchair, seemed to grow restless, got up and went
 out of the room, and came back again. From this forth there was a
 continual coming and going as of impatient footsteps prowling around the
 young woman, who was still awake, her large eyes fixed motionless on
 Pascal. Twelve o’clock struck, and one persistent thought alone pierced
 her weary brain, like a nail, and prevented sleep—why had she obeyed
 him? If she had remained she would have revived him with her youth, and he
 would not have died. And it was not until a little before one that she
 felt this thought, too, grow confused and lose itself in a nightmare. And
 she fell into a heavy sleep, worn out with grief and fatigue.
 

 When Martine had announced to Mme. Rougon the unexpected death of her son
 Pascal, in the shock which she received there was as much of anger as of
 grief. What! her dying son had not wished to see her; he had made this
 servant swear not to inform her of his illness! This thought sent the
 blood coursing swiftly through her veins, as if the struggle between them,
 which had lasted during his whole life, was to be continued beyond the
 grave. Then, when after hastily dressing herself she had hurried to La
 Souleiade, the thought of the terrible envelopes, of all the manuscripts
 piled up in the press, had filled her with trembling rage. Now that Uncle
 Macquart and Aunt Dide were dead, she no longer feared what she called the
 abomination of the Tulettes; and even poor little Charles, in dying, had
 carried with him one of the most humiliating of the blots on the family.
 There remained only the envelopes, the abominable envelopes, to menace the
 glorious Rougon legend which she had spent her whole life in creating,
 which was the sole thought of her old age, the work to the triumph of
 which she had persistently devoted the last efforts of her wily and active
 brain. For long years she had watched these envelopes, never wearying,
 beginning the struggle over again, when he had thought her beaten, always
 alert and persistent. Ah! if she could only succeed in obtaining
 possession of them and destroying them! It would be the execrable past
 destroyed, effaced; it would be the glory of her family, so hardly won, at
 last freed from all fear, at last shining untarnished, imposing its lie
 upon history. And she saw herself traversing the three quarters of
 Plassans, saluted by every one, bearing herself as proudly as a queen,
 mourning nobly for the fallen Empire. So that when Martine informed her
 that Clotilde had come, she quickened her steps as she approached La
 Souleiade, spurred by the fear of arriving too late.
 

 But as soon as she was installed in the house, Felicite at once regained
 her composure. There was no hurry, they had the whole night before them.
 She wished, however, to win over Martine without delay, and she knew well
 how to influence this simple creature, bound up in the doctrines of a
 narrow religion. Going down to the kitchen, then, to see the chicken
 roasting, she began by affecting to be heartbroken at the thought of her
 son dying without having made his peace with the Church. She questioned
 the servant, pressing her for particulars. But the latter shook her head
 disconsolately—no, no priest had come, monsieur had not even made
 the sign of the cross. She, only, had knelt down to say the prayers for
 the dying, which certainly could not be enough for the salvation of a
 soul. And yet with what fervor she had prayed to the good God that
 monsieur might go straight to Paradise!
 

 With her eyes fixed on the chicken turning on the spit, before a bright
 fire, Felicite resumed in a lower voice, with an absorbed air:
 

 “Ah, my poor girl, what will most prevent him from going to Paradise are
 the abominable papers which the unhappy man has left behind him up there
 in the press. I cannot understand why it is that lightning from heaven has
 not struck those papers before this and reduced them to ashes. If they are
 allowed to leave this house it will be ruin and disgrace and eternal
 perdition!”
 

 Martine listened, very pale.
 

 “Then madame thinks it would be a good work to destroy them, a work that
 would assure the repose of monsieur’s soul?”
 

 “Great God! Do I believe it! Why, if I had those dreadful papers in my
 hands, I would throw every one of them into the fire. Oh, you would not
 need then to put on any more sticks; with the manuscripts upstairs alone
 you would have fuel enough to roast three chickens like that.”
 

 The servant took a long spoon and began to baste the fowl. She, too,
 seemed now to reflect.
 

 “Only we haven’t got them. I even overheard some words on the subject,
 which I may repeat to madame. It was when mademoiselle went upstairs. Dr.
 Raymond spoke to her about the papers, asking her if she remembered some
 orders which she had received, before she went away, no doubt; and she
 answered that she remembered, that she was to keep the envelopes and to
 give him all the other manuscripts.”
 

 Felicite trembled; she could not restrain a terrified movement. Already
 she saw the papers slipping out of her reach; and it was not the envelopes
 only which she desired, but all the manuscripts, all that unknown,
 suspicious, and secret work, from which nothing but scandal could come,
 according to the obtuse and excitable mind of the proud old bourgeoise.
 

 “But we must act!” she cried, “act immediately, this very night! To-morrow
 it may be too late.”
 

 “I know where the key of the press is,” answered Martine in a low voice.
 “The doctor told mademoiselle.”
 

 Felicite immediately pricked up her ears.
 

 “The key; where is it?”
 

 “Under the pillow, under monsieur’s head.”
 

 In spite of the bright blaze of the fire of vine branches the air seemed
 to grow suddenly chill, and the two old women were silent. The only sound
 to be heard was the drip of the chicken juice falling into the pan.
 

 But after Mme. Rougon had eaten a hasty and solitary dinner she went
 upstairs again with Martine. Without another word being spoken they
 understood each other, it was decided that they would use all possible
 means to obtain possession of the papers before daybreak. The simplest was
 to take the key from under the pillow. Clotilde would no doubt at last
 fall asleep—she seemed too exhausted not to succumb to fatigue. All
 they had to do was to wait. They set themselves to watch, then, going back
 and forth on tiptoe between the study and the bedroom, waiting for the
 moment when the young woman’s large motionless eyes should close in sleep.
 One of them would go to see, while the other waited impatiently in the
 study, where a lamp burned dully on the table. This was repeated every
 fifteen minutes until midnight. The fathomless eyes, full of gloom and of
 an immense despair, did not close. A little before midnight Felicite
 installed herself in an armchair at the foot of the bed, resolved not to
 leave the spot until her granddaughter should have fallen asleep. From
 this forth she did not take her eyes off Clotilde, and it filled her with
 a sort of fear to remark that the girl scarcely moved her eyelids, looking
 with that inconsolable fixity which defies sleep. Then she herself began
 to feel sleep stealing over her. Exasperated, trembling with nervous
 impatience, she could remain where she was no longer. And she went to
 rejoin the servant, who was watching in the study.
 

 “It is useless; she will not sleep,” she said in a stifled and trembling
 voice. “We must find some other way.”
 

 It had indeed occurred to her to break open the press.
 

 But the old oaken boards were strong, the old iron held firmly. How could
 they break the lock—not to speak of the noise they would make and
 which would certainly be heard in the adjoining room?
 

 She stood before the thick doors, however, and felt them with her fingers,
 seeking some weak spot.
 

 “If I only had an instrument,” she said.
 

 Martine, less eager, interrupted her, objecting: “Oh, no, no, madame! We
 might be surprised! Wait, I will go again and see if mademoiselle is
 asleep now.”
 

 She went to the bedroom on tiptoe and returned immediately, saying:
 

 “Yes, she is asleep. Her eyes are closed, and she does not stir.”
 

 Then both went to look at her, holding their breath and walking with the
 utmost caution, so that the boards might not creak. Clotilde had indeed
 just fallen asleep: and her stupor seemed so profound that the two old
 women grew bold. They feared, however, that they might touch and waken
 her, for her chair stood close beside the bed. And then, to put one’s hand
 under a dead man’s pillow to rob him was a terrible and sacrilegious act,
 the thought of which filled them with terror. Might it not disturb his
 repose? Might he not move at the shock? The thought made them turn pale.
 

 Felicite had advanced with outstretched hand, but she drew back,
 stammering:
 

 “I am too short. You try, Martine.”
 

 The servant in her turn approached the bed. But she was seized with such a
 fit of trembling that she was obliged to retreat lest she should fall.
 

 “No, no, I cannot!” she said. “It seems to me that monsieur is going to
 open his eyes.”
 

 And trembling and awe-struck they remained an instant longer in the
 lugubrious chamber full of the silence and the majesty of death, facing
 Pascal, motionless forever, and Clotilde, overwhelmed by the grief of her
 widowhood. Perhaps they saw, glorifying that mute head, guarding its work
 with all its weight, the nobility of a life spent in honorable labor. The
 flame of the tapers burned palely. A sacred awe filled the air, driving
 them from the chamber.
 

 Felicite, who was so brave, who had never in her life flinched from
 anything, not even from bloodshed, fled as if she was pursued, saying:
 

 “Come, come, Martine, we will find some other way; we will go look for an
 instrument.”
 

 In the study they drew a breath of relief. Felicite looked in vain among
 the papers on Pascal’s work-table for the genealogical tree, which she
 knew was usually there. She would so gladly have begun her work of
 destruction with this. It was there, but in her feverish excitement she
 did not perceive it.
 

 Her desire drew her back again to the press, and she stood before it,
 measuring it and examining it with eager and covetous look. In spite of
 her short stature, in spite of her eighty-odd years, she displayed an
 activity and an energy that were truly extraordinary.
 

 “Ah!” she repeated, “if I only had an instrument!”
 

 And she again sought the crevice in the colossus, the crack into which she
 might introduce her fingers, to break it open. She imagined plans of
 assault, she thought of using force, and then she fell back on stratagem,
 on some piece of treachery which would open to her the doors, merely by
 breathing upon them.
 

 Suddenly her glance kindled; she had discovered the means.
 

 “Tell me, Martine; there is a hook fastening one of the doors, is there
 not?”
 

 “Yes, madame; it catches in a ring above the middle shelf. See, it is
 about the height of this molding.”
 

 Felicite made a triumphant gesture.
 

 “Have you a gimlet—a large gimlet? Give me a gimlet!”
 

 Martine went down into her kitchen and brought back the tool that had been
 asked.
 

 “In that way, you see, we shall make no noise,” resumed the old woman,
 setting herself to her task.
 

 With a strength which one would not have suspected in her little hands,
 withered by age, she inserted the gimlet, and made a hole at the height
 indicated by the servant. But it was too low; she felt the point, after a
 time, entering the shelf. A second attempt brought the instrument in
 direct contact with the iron hook. This time the hole was too near. And
 she multiplied the holes to right and left, until finally she succeeded in
 pushing the hook out of the ring. The bolt of the lock slipped, and both
 doors opened.
 

 “At last!” cried Felicite, beside herself.
 

 Then she remained motionless for a moment, her ear turned uneasily toward
 the bedroom, fearing that she had wakened Clotilde. But silence reigned
 throughout the dark and sleeping house. There came from the bedroom only
 the august peace of death; she heard nothing but the clear vibration of
 the clock; Clotilde fell asleep near one. And the press yawned wide open,
 displaying the papers with which it overflowed, heaped up on its three
 shelves. Then she threw herself upon it, and the work of destruction
 began, in the midst of the sacred obscurity of the infinite repose of this
 funereal vigil.
 

 “At last!” she repeated, in a low voice, “after thirty years of waiting.
 Let us hurry—let us hurry. Martine, help me!”
 

 She had already drawn forward the high chair of the desk, and mounted on
 it at a bound, to take down, first of all, the papers on the top shelf,
 for she remembered that the envelopes were there. But she was surprised
 not to see the thick blue paper wrappers; there was nothing there but
 bulky manuscripts, the doctor’s completed but unpublished works, works of
 inestimable value, all his researches, all his discoveries, the monument
 of his future fame, which he had left in Ramond’s charge. Doubtless, some
 days before his death, thinking that only the envelopes were in danger,
 and that no one in the world would be so daring as to destroy his other
 works, he had begun to classify and arrange the papers anew, and removed
 the envelopes out of sight.
 

 “Ah, so much the worse!” murmured Felicite; “let us begin anywhere; there
 are so many of them that if we wish to get through we must hurry. While I
 am up here, let us clear these away forever. Here, catch Martine!”
 

 And she emptied the shelf, throwing the manuscripts, one by one, into the
 arms of the servant, who laid them on the table with as little noise as
 possible. Soon the whole heap was on it, and Felicite sprang down from the
 chair.
 

 “To the fire! to the fire! We shall lay our hands on the others, and too,
 by and by, on those I am looking for. These can go into it, meantime. It
 will be a good riddance, at any rate, a fine clearance, yes, indeed! To
 the fire, to the fire with them all, even to the smallest scrap of paper,
 even to the most illegible scrawl, if we wish to be certain of destroying
 the contamination of evil.”
 

 She herself, fanatical and fierce, in her hatred of the truth, in her
 eagerness to destroy the testimony of science, tore off the first page of
 one of the manuscripts, lighted it at the lamp, and then threw this
 burning brand into the great fireplace, in which there had not been a fire
 for perhaps twenty years, and she fed the fire, continuing to throw on it
 the rest of the manuscript, piece by piece. The servant, as determined as
 herself, came to her assistance, taking another enormous notebook, which
 she tore up leaf by leaf. From this forth the fire did not cease to burn,
 filling the wide fireplace with a bright blaze, with tongues of flame that
 seemed to die away from time to time, only to burn up more brightly than
 ever when fresh fuel fed them. The fire grew larger, the heap of ashes
 rose higher and higher—a thick bed of blackened leaves among which
 ran millions of sparks. But it was a long, a never-ending task; for when
 several pages were thrown on at a time, they would not burn; it was
 necessary to move them and turn them over with the tongs; the best way was
 to stir them up and then wait until they were in a blaze, before adding
 more. The women soon grew skilful at their task, and the work progressed
 at a rapid rate.
 

 In her haste to get a fresh armful of papers Felicite stumbled against a
 chair.
 

 “Oh, madame, take care,” said Martine. “Some one might come!”
 

 “Come? who should come? Clotilde? She is too sound asleep, poor girl. And
 even if any one should come, once it is finished, I don’t care; I won’t
 hide myself, you may be sure; I shall leave the empty press standing wide
 open; I shall say aloud that it is I who have purified the house. When
 there is not a line of writing left, ah, good heavens! I shall laugh at
 everything else!”
 

 For almost two hours the fireplace blazed. They went back to the press and
 emptied the two other shelves, and now there remained only the bottom,
 which was heaped with a confusion of papers. Little by little, intoxicated
 by the heat of the bonfire, out of breath and perspiring, they gave
 themselves up to the savage joy of destruction. They stooped down, they
 blackened their hands, pushing in the partially consumed fragments, with
 gestures so violent, so feverishly excited, that their gray locks fell in
 disorder over their shoulders. It was like a dance of witches, feeding a
 hellish fire for some abominable act—the martyrdom of a saint, the
 burning of written thought in the public square; a whole world of truth
 and hope destroyed. And the blaze of this fire, which at moments made the
 flame of the lamp grow pale, lighted up the vast apartment, and made the
 gigantic shadows of the two women dance upon the ceiling.
 

 But as she was emptying the bottom of the press, after having burned,
 handful by handful, the papers with which it had been filled, Felicite
 uttered a stifled cry of triumph.
 

 “Ah, here they are! To the fire! to the fire!”
 

 She had at last come upon the envelopes. Far back, behind the rampart
 formed by the notes, the doctor had hidden the blue paper wrappers. And
 then began a mad work of havoc, a fury of destruction; the envelopes were
 gathered up in handfuls and thrown into the flames, filling the fireplace
 with a roar like that of a conflagration.
 

 “They are burning, they are burning! They are burning at last! Here is
 another, Martine, here is another. Ah, what a fire, what a glorious fire!”
 

 But the servant was becoming uneasy.
 

 “Take care, madame, you are going to set the house on fire. Don’t you hear
 that roar?”
 

 “Ah! what does that matter? Let it all burn. They are burning, they are
 burning; what a fine sight! Three more, two more, and, see, now the last
 is burning!”
 

 She laughed with delight, beside herself, terrible to see, when some
 fragment of lighted soot fell down. The roar was becoming more and more
 fierce; the chimney, which was never swept, had caught fire. This seemed
 to excite her still more, while the servant, losing her head, began to
 scream and run about the room.
 

 Clotilde slept beside the dead Pascal, in the supreme calm of the bedroom,
 unbroken save by the light vibration of the clock striking the hours. The
 tapers burned with a tall, still flame, the air was motionless. And yet,
 in the midst of her heavy, dreamless sleep, she heard, as in a nightmare,
 a tumult, an ever-increasing rush and roar. And when she opened her eyes
 she could not at first understand. Where was she? Why this enormous weight
 that crushed her heart? She came back to reality with a start of terror—she
 saw Pascal, she heard Martine’s cries in the adjoining room, and she
 rushed out, in alarm, to learn their cause.
 

 But at the threshold Clotilde took in the whole scene with cruel
 distinctness—the press wide open and completely empty; Martine
 maddened by her fear of fire; Felicite radiant, pushing into the flames
 with her foot the last fragments of the envelopes. Smoke and flying soot
 filled the study, where the roaring of the fire sounded like the hoarse
 gasping of a murdered man—the fierce roar which she had just heard
 in her sleep.
 

 And the cry which sprang from her lips was the same cry that Pascal
 himself had uttered on the night of the storm, when he surprised her in
 the act of stealing his papers.
 

 “Thieves! assassins!”
 

 She precipitated herself toward the fireplace, and, in spite of the
 dreadful roaring of the flames, in spite of the falling pieces of soot, at
 the risk of setting her hair on fire, and of burning her hands, she
 gathered up the leaves which remained yet unconsumed and bravely
 extinguished them, pressing them against her. But all this was very
 little, only some debris; not a complete page remained, not even a
 few fragments of the colossal labor, of the vast and patient work of a
 lifetime, which the fire had destroyed there in two hours. And with
 growing anger, in a burst of furious indignation, she cried:
 

 “You are thieves, assassins! It is a wicked murder which you have just
 committed. You have profaned death, you have slain the mind, you have
 slain genius.”
 

 Old Mme. Rougon did not quail. She advanced, on the contrary, feeling no
 remorse, her head erect, defending the sentence of destruction pronounced
 and executed by her.
 

 “It is to me you are speaking, to your grandmother. Is there nothing,
 then, that you respect? I have done what I ought to have done, what you
 yourself wished to do with us before.”
 

 “Before, you had made me mad; but since then I have lived, I have loved, I
 have understood, and it is life that I defend. Even if it be terrible and
 cruel, the truth ought to be respected. Besides, it was a sacred legacy
 bequeathed to my protection, the last thoughts of a dead man, all that
 remained of a great mind, and which I should have obliged every one to
 respect. Yes, you are my grandmother; I am well aware of it, and it is as
 if you had just burned your son!”
 

 “Burn Pascal because I have burned his papers!” cried Felicite. “Do you
 not know that I would have burned the town to save the honor of our
 family!”
 

 She continued to advance, belligerent and victorious; and Clotilde, who
 had laid on the table the blackened fragments rescued by her from the
 burning flames, protected them with her body, fearing that her grandmother
 would throw them back again into the fire. She regarded the two women
 scornfully; she did not even trouble herself about the fire in the
 fireplace, which fortunately went out of itself, while Martine
 extinguished with the shovel the burning soot and the last flames of the
 smoldering ashes.
 

 “You know very well, however,” continued the old woman, whose little
 figure seemed to grow taller, “that I have had only one ambition, one
 passion in life—to see our family rich and powerful. I have fought,
 I have watched all my life, I have lived as long as I have done, only to
 put down ugly stories and to leave our name a glorious one. Yes, I have
 never despaired; I have never laid down my arms; I have been continually
 on the alert, ready to profit by the slightest circumstance. And all I
 desired to do I have done, because I have known how to wait.”
 

 And she waved her hand toward the empty press and the fireplace, where the
 last sparks were dying out.
 

 “Now it is ended, our honor is safe; those abominable papers will no
 longer accuse us, and I shall leave behind me nothing to be feared. The
 Rougons have triumphed.”
 

 Clotilde, in a frenzy of grief, raised her arm, as if to drive her out of
 the room. But she left it of her own accord, and went down to the kitchen
 to wash her blackened hands and to fasten up her hair. The servant was
 about to follow her when, turning her head, she saw her young mistress’ 
 gesture, and she returned.
 

 “Oh! as for me, mademoiselle, I will go away the day after to-morrow, when
 monsieur shall be in the cemetery.”
 

 There was a moment’s silence.
 

 “But I am not sending you away, Martine. I know well that it is not you
 who are most to blame. You have lived in this house for thirty years.
 Remain, remain with me.”
 

 The old maid shook her gray head, looking very pale and tired.
 

 “No, I have served monsieur; I will serve no one after monsieur.”
 

 “But I!”
 

 “You, no!”
 

 Clotilde looked embarrassed, hesitated a moment, and remained silent. But
 Martine understood; she too seemed to reflect for an instant, and then she
 said distinctly:
 

 “I know what you would say, but—no!”
 

 And she went on to settle her account, arranging the affair like a
 practical woman who knew the value of money.
 

 “Since I have the means, I will go and live quietly on my income
 somewhere. As for you, mademoiselle, I can leave you, for you are not
 poor. M. Ramond will explain to you to-morrow how an income of four
 thousand francs was saved for you out of the money at the notary’s.
 Meantime, here is the key of the desk, where you will find the five
 thousand francs which monsieur left there. Oh? I know that there will be
 no trouble between us. Monsieur did not pay me for the last three months;
 I have papers from him which prove it. In addition, I advanced lately
 almost two hundred francs out of my own pocket, without his knowing where
 the money came from. It is all written down; I am not at all uneasy;
 mademoiselle will not wrong me by a centime. The day after to-morrow, when
 monsieur is no longer here, I will go away.”
 

 Then she went down to the kitchen, and Clotilde, in spite of the
 fanaticism of this woman, which had made her take part in a crime, felt
 inexpressibly sad at this desertion. When she was gathering up the
 fragments of the papers, however, before returning to the bedroom, she had
 a thrill of joy, on suddenly seeing the genealogical tree, which the two
 women had not perceived, lying unharmed on the table. It was the only
 entire document saved from the wreck. She took it and locked it, with the
 half-consumed fragments, in the bureau in the bedroom.
 

 But when she found herself again in this august chamber a great emotion
 took possession of her. What supreme calm, what immortal peace, reigned
 here, beside the savage destruction that had filled the adjoining room
 with smoke and ashes. A sacred serenity pervaded the obscurity; the two
 tapers burned with a pure, still, unwavering flame. Then she saw that
 Pascal’s face, framed in his flowing white hair and beard, had become very
 white. He slept with the light falling upon him, surrounded by a halo,
 supremely beautiful. She bent down, kissed him again, felt on her lips the
 cold of the marble face, with its closed eyelids, dreaming its dream of
 eternity. Her grief at not being able to save the work which he had left
 to her care was so overpowering that she fell on her knees and burst into
 a passion of sobs. Genius had been violated; it seemed to her as if the
 world was about to be destroyed in this savage destruction of a whole life
 of labor.
 

 
 
 

 In the study Clotilde was buttoning her dress, holding her child, whom she
 had been nursing, still in her lap. It was after lunch, about three
 o’clock on a hot sunny day at the end of August, and through the crevices
 of the carefully closed shutters only a few scattered sunbeams entered,
 piercing the drowsy and warm obscurity of the vast apartment. The rest and
 peace of the Sunday seemed to enter and diffuse itself in the room with
 the last sounds of the distant vesper bell. Profound silence reigned in
 the empty house in which the mother and child were to remain alone until
 dinner time, the servant having asked permission to go see a cousin in the
 faubourg.
 

 For an instant Clotilde looked at her child, now a big boy of three
 months. She had been wearing mourning for Pascal for almost ten months—a
 long and simple black gown, in which she looked divinely beautiful, with
 her tall, slender figure and her sad, youthful face surrounded by its
 aureole of fair hair. And although she could not smile, it filled her with
 sweet emotion to see the beautiful child, so plump and rosy, with his
 mouth still wet with milk, whose gaze had been arrested by the sunbeam
 full of dancing motes. His eyes were fixed wonderingly on the golden
 brightness, the dazzling miracle of light. Then sleep came over him, and
 he let his little, round, bare head, covered thinly with fair hair, fall
 back on his mother’s arm.
 

 Clotilde rose softly and laid him in the cradle, which stood beside the
 table. She remained leaning over him for an instant to assure herself that
 he was asleep; then she let down the curtain in the already darkened room.
 Then she busied herself with supple and noiseless movements, walking with
 so light a step that she scarcely touched the floor, in putting away some
 linen which was on the table. Twice she crossed the room in search of a
 little missing sock. She was very silent, very gentle, and very active.
 And now, in the solitude of the house, she fell into a reverie and all the
 past year arose before her.
 

 First, after the dreadful shock of the funeral, came the departure of
 Martine, who had obstinately kept to her determination of going away at
 once, not even remaining for the customary week, bringing to replace her
 the young cousin of a baker in the neighborhood—a stout brunette,
 who fortunately proved very neat and faithful. Martine herself lived at
 Sainte-Marthe, in a retired corner, so penuriously that she must be still
 saving even out of her small income. She was not known to have any heir.
 Who, then, would profit by this miserliness? In ten months she had not
 once set foot in La Souleiade—monsieur was not there, and she had
 not even the desire to see monsieur’s son.
 

 Then in Clotilde’s reverie rose the figure of her grandmother Felicite.
 The latter came to see her from time to time with the condescension of a
 powerful relation who is liberal-minded enough to pardon all faults when
 they have been cruelly expiated. She would come unexpectedly, kiss the
 child, moralize, and give advice, and the young mother had adopted toward
 her the respectful attitude which Pascal had always maintained. Felicite
 was now wholly absorbed in her triumph. She was at last about to realize a
 plan that she had long cherished and maturely deliberated, which would
 perpetuate by an imperishable monument the untarnished glory of the
 family. The plan was to devote her fortune, which had become considerable,
 to the construction and endowment of an asylum for the aged, to be called
 Rougon Asylum. She had already bought the ground, a part of the old mall
 outside the town, near the railway station; and precisely on this Sunday,
 at five o’clock, when the heat should have abated a little, the first
 stone was to be laid, a really solemn ceremony, to be honored by the
 presence of all the authorities, and of which she was to be the
 acknowledged queen, before a vast concourse of people.
 

 Clotilde felt, besides, some gratitude toward her grandmother, who had
 shown perfect disinterestedness on the occasion of the opening of Pascal’s
 will. The latter had constituted the young woman his sole legatee; and the
 mother, who had a right to a fourth part, after declaring her intention to
 respect her son’s wishes, had simply renounced her right to the
 succession. She wished, indeed, to disinherit all her family, bequeathing
 to them glory only, by employing her large fortune in the erection of this
 asylum, which was to carry down to future ages the revered and glorious
 name of the Rougons; and after having, for more than half a century, so
 eagerly striven to acquire money, she now disdained it, moved by a higher
 and purer ambition. And Clotilde, thanks to this liberality, had no
 uneasiness regarding the future—the four thousand francs income
 would be sufficient for her and her child. She would bring him up to be a
 man. She had sunk the five thousand francs that she had found in the desk
 in an annuity for him; and she owned, besides, La Souleiade, which
 everybody advised her to sell. True, it cost but little to keep it up, but
 what a sad and solitary life she would lead in that great deserted house,
 much too large for her, where she would be lost. Thus far, however, she
 had not been able to make up her mind to leave it. Perhaps she would never
 be able to do so.
 

 Ah, this La Souleiade! all her love, all her life, all her memories were
 centered in it. It seemed to her at times as if Pascal were living here
 still, for she had changed nothing of their former manner of living. The
 furniture remained in the same places, the hours were the same, the habits
 the same. The only change she had made was to lock his room, into which
 only she went, as into a sanctuary, to weep when she felt her heart too
 heavy. And although indeed she felt very lonely, very lost, at each meal
 in the bright dining-room downstairs, in fancy she heard there the echoes
 of their laughter, she recalled the healthy appetite of her youth; when
 they two had eaten and drank so gaily, rejoicing in their existence. And
 the garden, too, the whole place was bound up with the most intimate
 fibers of her being, for she could not take a step in it that their united
 images did not appear before her—on the terrace; in the slender
 shadow of the great secular cypresses, where they had so often
 contemplated the valley of the Viorne, closed in by the ridges of the
 Seille and the parched hills of Sainte-Marthe; the stone steps among the
 puny olive and almond trees, which they had so often challenged each other
 to run up in a trial of speed, like boys just let loose from school; and
 there was the pine grove, too, the warm, embalsamed shade, where the
 needles crackled under their feet; the vast threshing yard, carpeted with
 soft grass, where they could see the whole sky at night, when the stars
 were coming out; and above all there were the giant plane trees, whose
 delightful shade they had enjoyed every day in summer, listening to the
 soothing song of the fountain, the crystal clear song which it had sung
 for centuries. Even to the old stones of the house, even to the earth of
 the grounds, there was not an atom at La Souleiade in which she did not
 feel a little of their blood warmly throbbing, with which she did not feel
 a little of their life diffused and mingled.
 

 But she preferred to spend her days in the workroom, and here it was that
 she lived over again her best hours. There was nothing new in it but the
 cradle. The doctor’s table was in its place before the window to the left—she
 could fancy him coming in and sitting down at it, for his chair had not
 even been moved. On the long table in the center, among the old heap of
 books and papers, there was nothing new but the cheerful note of the
 little baby linen, which she was looking over. The bookcases displayed the
 same rows of volumes; the large oaken press seemed to guard within its
 sides the same treasure, securely shut in. Under the smoky ceiling the
 room was still redolent of work, with its confusion of chairs, the
 pleasant disorder of this common workroom, filled with the caprices of the
 girl and the researches of the scientist. But what most moved her to-day
 was the sight of her old pastels hanging against the wall, the copies
 which she had made of living flowers, scrupulously exact copies, and of
 dream flowers of an imaginary world, whither her wild fancy sometimes
 carried her.
 

 Clotilde had just finished arranging the little garments on the table
 when, lifting her eyes, she perceived before her the pastel of old King
 David, with his hand resting on the shoulder of Abishag the young
 Shunammite. And she, who now never smiled, felt her face flush with a
 thrill of tender and pleasing emotion. How they had loved each other, how
 they had dreamed of an eternity of love the day on which she had amused
 herself painting this proud and loving allegory! The old king, sumptuously
 clad in a robe hanging in straight folds, heavy with precious stones, wore
 the royal bandeau on his snowy locks; but she was more sumptuous still,
 with only her tall slender figure, her delicate round throat, and her
 supple arms, divinely graceful. Now he was gone, he was sleeping under the
 ground, while she, her pure and triumphant beauty concealed by her black
 robes, had only her child to express the love she had given him before the
 assembled people, in the full light of day.
 

 Then Clotilde sat down beside the cradle. The slender sunbeams lengthened,
 crossing the room from end to end, the heat of the warm afternoon grew
 oppressive in the drowsy obscurity made by the closed shutters, and the
 silence of the house seemed more profound than before. She set apart some
 little waists, she sewed on some tapes with slow-moving needle, and
 gradually she fell into a reverie in the warm deep peacefulness of the
 room, in the midst of the glowing heat outside. Her thoughts first turned
 to her pastels, the exact copies and the fantastic dream flowers; she said
 to herself now that all her dual nature was to be found in that passion
 for truth, which had at times kept her a whole day before a flower in
 order to copy it with exactness, and in her need of the spiritual, which
 at other times took her outside the real, and carried her in wild dreams
 to the paradise of flowers such as had never grown on earth. She had
 always been thus. She felt that she was in reality the same to-day as she
 had been yesterday, in the midst of the flow of new life which ceaselessly
 transformed her. And then she thought of Pascal, full of gratitude that he
 had made her what she was. In days past when, a little girl, he had
 removed her from her execrable surroundings and taken her home with him,
 he had undoubtedly followed the impulses of his good heart, but he had
 also undoubtedly desired to try an experiment with her, to see how she
 would grow up in the different environment, in an atmosphere of
 truthfulness and affection. This had always been an idea of his. It was an
 old theory of his which he would have liked to test on a large scale:
 culture through environment, complete regeneration even, the improvement,
 the salvation of the individual, physically as well as morally. She owed
 to him undoubtedly the best part of her nature; she guessed how fanciful
 and violent she might have become, while he had made her only enthusiastic
 and courageous.
 

 In this retrospection she was clearly conscious of the gradual change that
 had taken place within her. Pascal had corrected her heredity, and she
 lived over again the slow evolution, the struggle between the fantastic
 and the real in her. It had begun with her outbursts of anger as a child,
 a ferment of rebellion, a want of mental balance that had caused her to
 indulge in most hurtful reveries. Then came her fits of extreme devotion,
 the need of illusion and falsehood, of immediate happiness in the thought
 that the inequalities and injustices of this wicked world would he
 compensated by the eternal joys of a future paradise. This was the epoch
 of her struggles with Pascal, of the torture which she had caused him,
 planning to destroy the work of his genius. And at this point her nature
 had changed; she had acknowledged him for her master. He had conquered her
 by the terrible lesson of life which he had given her on the night of the
 storm. Then, environment had acted upon her, evolution had proceeded
 rapidly, and she had ended by becoming a well-balanced and rational woman,
 willing to live life as it ought to be lived, satisfied with doing her
 work in the hope that the sum of the common labor would one day free the
 world from evil and pain. She had loved, she was a mother now, and she
 understood.
 

 Suddenly she remembered the night which they had spent in the threshing
 yard. She could still hear her lamentation under the stars—the
 cruelty of nature, the inefficacy of science, the wickedness of humanity,
 and the need she felt of losing herself in God, in the Unknown. Happiness
 consisted in self-renunciation. Then she heard him repeat his creed—the
 progress of reason through science, truths acquired slowly and forever the
 only possible good, the belief that the sum of these truths, always
 augmenting, would finally confer upon man incalculable power and peace, if
 not happiness. All was summed up in his ardent faith in life. As he
 expressed it, it was necessary to march with life, which marched always.
 No halt was to be expected, no peace in immobility and renunciation, no
 consolation in turning back. One must keep a steadfast soul, the only
 ambition to perform one’s work, modestly looking for no other reward of
 life than to have lived it bravely, accomplishing the task which it
 imposes. Evil was only an accident not yet explained, humanity appearing
 from a great height like an immense wheel in action, working ceaselessly
 for the future. Why should the workman who disappeared, having finished
 his day’s work, abuse the work because he could neither see nor know its
 end? Even if it were to have no end why should he not enjoy the delight of
 action, the exhilarating air of the march, the sweetness of sleep after
 the fatigue of a long and busy day? The children would carry on the task
 of the parents; they were born and cherished only for this, for the task
 of life which is transmitted to them, which they in their turn will
 transmit to others. All that remained, then, was to be courageously
 resigned to the grand common labor, without the rebellion of the ego,
 which demands personal happiness, perfect and complete.
 

 She questioned herself, and she found that she did not experience that
 anguish which had filled her formerly at the thought of what was to follow
 death. This anxiety about the Beyond no longer haunted her until it became
 a torture. Formerly she would have liked to wrest by force from heaven the
 secrets of destiny. It had been a source of infinite grief to her not to
 know why she existed. Why are we born? What do we come on earth to do?
 What is the meaning of this execrable existence, without equality, without
 justice, which seemed to her like a fevered dream? Now her terror was
 calmed; she could think of these things courageously. Perhaps it was her
 child, the continuation of herself, which now concealed from her the
 horror of her end. But her regular life contributed also to this, the
 thought that it was necessary to live for the effort of living, and that
 the only peace possible in this world was in the joy of the accomplishment
 of this effort. She repeated to herself a remark of the doctor, who would
 often say when he saw a peasant returning home with a contented look after
 his day’s work: “There is a man whom anxiety about the Beyond will not
 prevent from sleeping.” He meant to say that this anxiety troubles and
 perverts only excitable and idle brains. If all performed their healthful
 task, all would sleep peacefully at night. She herself had felt the
 beneficent power of work in the midst of her sufferings and her grief.
 Since he had taught her to employ every one of her hours; since she had
 been a mother, especially, occupied constantly with her child, she no
 longer felt a chill of horror when she thought of the Unknown. She put
 aside without an effort disquieting reveries; and if she still felt an
 occasional fear, if some of her daily griefs made her sick at heart, she
 found comfort and unfailing strength in the thought that her child was
 this day a day older, that he would be another day older on the morrow,
 that day by day, page by page, his work of life was being accomplished.
 This consoled her delightfully for all her miseries. She had a duty, an
 object, and she felt in her happy serenity that she was doing surely what
 she had been sent here to do.
 

 Yet, even at this very moment she knew that the mystic was not entirely
 dead within her. In the midst of the profound silence she heard a slight
 noise, and she raised her head. Who was the divine mediator that had
 passed? Perhaps the beloved dead for whom she mourned, and whose presence
 near her she fancied she could divine. There must always be in her
 something of the childlike believer she had always been, curious about the
 Unknown, having an instinctive longing for the mysterious. She accounted
 to herself for this longing, she even explained it scientifically. However
 far science may extend the limits of human knowledge, there is undoubtedly
 a point which it cannot pass; and it was here precisely that Pascal placed
 the only interest in life—in the effort which we ceaselessly make to
 know more—there was only one reasonable meaning in life, this
 continual conquest of the unknown. Therefore, she admitted the existence
 of undiscovered forces surrounding the world, an immense and obscure
 domain, ten times larger than the domain already won, an infinite and
 unexplored realm through which future humanity would endlessly ascend.
 Here, indeed, was a field vast enough for the imagination to lose itself
 in. In her hours of reverie she satisfied in it the imperious need which
 man seems to have for the spiritual, a need of escaping from the visible
 world, of interrogating the Unknown, of satisfying in it the dream of
 absolute justice and of future happiness. All that remained of her former
 torture, her last mystic transports, were there appeased. She satisfied
 there that hunger for consoling illusions which suffering humanity must
 satisfy in order to live. But in her all was happily balanced. At this
 crisis, in an epoch overburdened with science, disquieted at the ruins it
 has made, and seized with fright in the face of the new century, wildly
 desiring to stop and to return to the past, Clotilde kept the happy mean;
 in her the passion for truth was broadened by her eagerness to penetrate
 the Unknown. If sectarian scientists shut out the horizon to keep strictly
 to the phenomenon, it was permitted to her, a good, simple creature, to
 reserve the part that she did not know, that she would never know. And if
 Pascal’s creed was the logical deduction from the whole work, the eternal
 question of the Beyond, which she still continued to put to heaven,
 reopened the door of the infinite to humanity marching ever onward. Since
 we must always learn, while resigning ourselves never to know all, was it
 not to will action, life itself, to reserve the Unknown—an eternal
 doubt and an eternal hope?
 

 Another sound, as of a wing passing, the light touch of a kiss upon her
 hair, this time made her smile. He was surely here; and her whole being
 went out toward him, in the great flood of tenderness with which her heart
 overflowed. How kind and cheerful he was, and what a love for others
 underlay his passionate love of life! Perhaps he, too, had been only a
 dreamer, for he had dreamed the most beautiful of dreams, the final belief
 in a better world, when science should have bestowed incalculable power
 upon man—to accept everything, to turn everything to our happiness,
 to know everything and to foresee everything, to make nature our servant,
 to live in the tranquillity of intelligence satisfied. Meantime faith in
 life, voluntary and regular labor, would suffice for health. Evil was only
 the unexplained side of things; suffering would one day be assuredly
 utilized. And regarding from above the enormous labor of the world, seeing
 the sum total of humanity, good and bad—admirable, in spite of
 everything, for their courage and their industry—she now regarded
 all mankind as united in a common brotherhood, she now felt only boundless
 indulgence, an infinite pity, and an ardent charity. Love, like the sun,
 bathes the earth, and goodness is the great river at which all hearts
 drink.
 

 Clotilde had been plying her needle for two hours, with the same regular
 movement, while her thoughts wandered away in the profound silence. But
 the tapes were sewed on the little waists, she had even marked some new
 wrappers, which she had bought the day before. And, her sewing finished,
 she rose to put the linen away. Outside the sun was declining, and only
 slender and oblique sunbeams entered through the crevices of the shutters.
 She could not see clearly, and she opened one of the shutters, then she
 forgot herself for a moment, at the sight of the vast horizon suddenly
 unrolled before her. The intense heat had abated, a delicious breeze was
 blowing, and the sky was of a cloudless blue. To the left could be
 distinguished even the smallest clumps of pines, among the blood-colored
 ravines of the rocks of the Seille, while to the right, beyond the hills
 of Sainte-Marthe, the valley of the Viorne stretched away in the golden
 dust of the setting sun. She looked for a moment at the tower of St.
 Saturnin, all golden also, dominating the rose-colored town; and she was
 about to leave the window when she saw a sight that drew her back and kept
 her there, leaning on her elbow for a long time still.
 

 Beyond the railroad a multitude of people were crowded together on the old
 mall. Clotilde at once remembered the ceremony. She knew that her
 Grandmother Felicite was going to lay the first stone of the Rougon
 Asylum, the triumphant monument destined to carry down to future ages the
 glory of the family. Vast preparations had been going on for a week past.
 There was talk of a silver hod and trowel, which the old lady was to use
 herself, determined to figure to triumph, with her eighty-two years. What
 swelled her heart with regal pride was that on this occasion she made the
 conquest of Plassans for the third time, for she compelled the whole town,
 all the three quarters, to range themselves around her, to form an escort
 for her, and to applaud her as a benefactress. For, of course, there had
 to be present lady patronesses, chosen from among the noblest ladies of
 the Quartier St. Marc; a delegation from the societies of working-women of
 the old quarter, and, finally, the most distinguished residents of the new
 town, advocates, notaries, physicians, without counting the common people,
 a stream of people dressed in their Sunday clothes, crowding there
 eagerly, as to a festival. And in the midst of this supreme triumph she
 was perhaps most proud—she, one of the queens of the Second Empire,
 the widow who mourned with so much dignity the fallen government—in
 having conquered the young republic itself, obliging it, in the person of
 the sub-prefect, to come and salute her and thank her. At first there had
 been question only of a discourse of the mayor; but it was known with
 certainty, since the previous day, that the sub-prefect also would speak.
 From so great a distance Clotilde could distinguish only a moving crowd of
 black coats and light dresses, under the scorching sun. Then there was a
 distant sound of music, the music of the amateur band of the town, the
 sonorous strains of whose brass instruments were borne to her at intervals
 on the breeze.
 

 She left the window and went and opened the large oaken press to put away
 in it the linen that had remained on the table. It was in this press,
 formerly so full of the doctor’s manuscripts, and now empty, that she kept
 the baby’s wardrobe. It yawned open, vast, seemingly bottomless, and on
 the large bare shelves there was nothing but the baby linen, the little
 waists, the little caps, the little socks, all the fine clothing, the down
 of the bird still in the nest. Where so many thoughts had been stored up,
 where a man’s unremitting labor for thirty years had accumulated in an
 overflowing heap of papers, there was now only a baby’s clothing, only the
 first garments which would protect it for an hour, as it were, and which
 very soon it could no longer use. The vastness of the antique press seemed
 brightened and all refreshed by them.
 

 When Clotilde had arranged the wrappers and the waists upon a shelf, she
 perceived a large envelope containing the fragments of the documents which
 she had placed there after she had rescued them from the fire. And she
 remembered a request which Dr. Ramond had come only the day before to make
 her—that she would see if there remained among this debris
 any fragment of importance having a scientific interest. He was
 inconsolable for the loss of the precious manuscripts which the master had
 bequeathed to him. Immediately after the doctor’s death he had made an
 attempt to write from memory his last talk, that summary of vast theories
 expounded by the dying man with so heroic a serenity; but he could recall
 only parts of it. He would have needed complete notes, observations made
 from day to day, the results obtained, and the laws formulated. The loss
 was irreparable, the task was to be begun over again, and he lamented
 having only indications; he said that it would be at least twenty years
 before science could make up the loss, and take up and utilize the ideas
 of the solitary pioneer whose labors a wicked and imbecile catastrophe had
 destroyed.
 

 The genealogical tree, the only document that had remained intact, was
 attached to the envelope, and Clotilde carried the whole to the table
 beside the cradle. After she had taken out the fragments, one by one, she
 found, what she had been already almost certain of, that not a single
 entire page of manuscript remained, not a single complete note having any
 meaning. There were only fragments of documents, scraps of half-burned and
 blackened paper, without sequence or connection. But as she examined them,
 these incomplete phrases, these words half consumed by fire, assumed for
 her an interest which no one else could have understood. She remembered
 the night of the storm, and the phrases completed themselves, the
 beginning of a word evoked before her persons and histories. Thus her eye
 fell on Maxime’s name, and she reviewed the life of this brother who had
 remained a stranger to her, and whose death, two months before, had left
 her almost indifferent. Then, a half-burned scrap containing her father’s
 name gave her an uneasy feeling, for she believed that her father had
 obtained possession of the fortune and the house on the avenue of Bois de
 Boulogne through the good offices of his hairdresser’s niece, the innocent
 Rose, repaid, no doubt, by a generous percentage. Then she met with other
 names, that of her uncle Eugene, the former vice emperor, now dead, the
 cure of Saint-Eutrope, who, she had been told yesterday, was dying of
 consumption. And each fragment became animated in this way; the execrable
 family lived again in these scraps, these black ashes, where were now only
 disconnected words.
 

 Then Clotilde had the curiosity to unfold the genealogical tree and spread
 it out upon the table. A strong emotion gained on her; she was deeply
 affected by these relics; and when she read once more the notes added in
 pencil by Pascal, a few moments before his death, tears rose to her eyes.
 With what courage he had written down the date of his death! And what
 despairing regret for life one divined in the trembling words announcing
 the birth of the child! The tree ascended, spread out its branches,
 unfolded its leaves, and she remained for a long time contemplating it,
 saying to herself that all the work of the master was to be found here in
 the classified records of this family tree. She could still hear certain
 of his words commenting on each hereditary case, she recalled his lessons.
 But the children, above all, interested her; she read again and again the
 notes on the leaves which bore their names. The doctor’s colleague in
 Noumea, to whom he had written for information about the child born of the
 marriage of the convict Etienne, had at last made up his mind to answer;
 but the only information he gave was in regard to the sex—it was a
 girl, he said, and she seemed to be healthy. Octave Mouret had come near
 losing his daughter, who had always been very frail, while his little boy
 continued to enjoy superb health. But the chosen abode of vigorous health
 and of extraordinary fecundity was still the house of Jean, at Valqueyras,
 whose wife had had two children in three years and was about to have a
 third. The nestlings throve in the sunshine, in the heart of a fertile
 country, while the father sang as he guided his plow, and the mother at
 home cleverly made the soup and kept the children in order. There was
 enough new vitality and industry there to make another family, a whole
 race. Clotilde fancied at this moment that she could hear Pascal’s cry:
 “Ah, our family! what is it going to be, in what kind of being will it
 end?” And she fell again into a reverie, looking at the tree sending its
 latest branches into the future. Who could tell whence the healthy branch
 would spring? Perhaps the great and good man so long awaited was
 germinating there.
 

 A slight cry drew Clotilde from her reflections. The muslin curtain of the
 cradle seemed to become animate. It was the child who had wakened up and
 was moving about and calling to her. She at once took him out of the
 cradle and held him up gaily, that he might bathe in the golden light of
 the setting sun. But he was insensible to the beauty of the closing day;
 his little vacant eyes, still full of sleep, turned away from the vast
 sky, while he opened wide his rosy and ever hungry mouth, like a bird
 opening its beak. And he cried so loud, he had wakened up so ravenous,
 that she decided to nurse him again. Besides, it was his hour; it would
 soon be three hours since she had last nursed him.
 

 Clotilde sat down again beside the table. She took him on her lap, but he
 was not very good, crying louder and louder, growing more and more
 impatient; and she looked at him with a smile while she unfastened her
 dress, showing her round, slender throat. Already the child knew, and
 raising himself he felt with his lips for the breast. When she placed it
 in his mouth he gave a little grunt of satisfaction; he threw himself upon
 her with the fine, voracious appetite of a young gentleman who was
 determined to live. At first he had clutched the breast with his little
 free hand, as if to show that it was his, to defend it and to guard it.
 Then, in the joy of the warm stream that filled his throat he raised his
 little arm straight up, like a flag. And Clotilde kept her unconscious
 smile, seeing him so healthy, so rosy, and so plump, thriving so well on
 the nourishment he drew from her. During the first few weeks she had
 suffered from a fissure, and even now her breast was sensitive; but she
 smiled, notwithstanding, with that peaceful look which mothers wear, happy
 in giving their milk as they would give their blood.
 

 When she had unfastened her dress, showing her bare throat and breast, in
 the solitude and silence of the study, another of her mysteries, one of
 her sweetest and most hidden secrets, was revealed at the same time—the
 slender necklace with the seven pearls, the seven fine, milky stars which
 the master had put around her neck on a day of misery, in his mania for
 giving. Since it had been there no one else had seen it. It seemed as if
 she guarded it with as much modesty as if it were a part of her flesh, so
 simple, so pure, so childlike. And all the time the child was nursing she
 alone looked at it in a dreamy reverie, moved by the tender memory of the
 kisses whose warm perfume it still seemed to keep.
 

 A burst of distant music seemed to surprise Clotilde. She turned her head
 and looked across the fields gilded by the oblique rays of the sun. Ah,
 yes! the ceremony, the laying of the corner stone yonder! Then she turned
 her eyes again on the child, and she gave herself up to the delight of
 seeing him with so fine an appetite. She had drawn forward a little bench,
 to raise one of her knees, resting her foot upon it, and she leaned one
 shoulder against the table, beside the tree and the blackened fragments of
 the envelopes. Her thoughts wandered away in an infinitely sweet reverie,
 while she felt the best part of herself, the pure milk, flowing softly,
 making more and more her own the dear being she had borne. The child had
 come, the redeemer, perhaps. The bells rang, the three wise men had set
 out, followed by the people, by rejoicing nature, smiling on the infant in
 its swaddling clothes. She, the mother, while he drank life in long
 draughts, was dreaming already of his future. What would he be when she
 should have made him tall and strong, giving herself to him entirely? A
 scientist, perhaps, who would reveal to the world something of the eternal
 truth; or a great captain, who would confer glory on his country; or,
 still better, one of those shepherds of the people who appease the
 passions and bring about the reign of justice. She saw him, in fancy,
 beautiful, good and powerful. Hers was the dream of every mother—the
 conviction that she had brought the expected Messiah into the world; and
 there was in this hope, in this obstinate belief, which every mother has
 in the certain triumph of her child, the hope which itself makes life, the
 belief which gives humanity the ever renewed strength to live still.
 

 What would the child be? She looked at him, trying to discover whom he
 resembled. He had certainly his father’s brow and eyes, there was
 something noble and strong in the breadth of the head. She saw a
 resemblance to herself, too, in his fine mouth and his delicate chin.
 Then, with secret uneasiness, she sought a resemblance to the others, the
 terrible ancestors, all those whose names were there inscribed on the
 tree, unfolding its growth of hereditary leaves. Was it this one, or this,
 or yet this other, whom he would resemble? She grew calm, however, she
 could not but hope, her heart swelled with eternal hope. The faith in life
 which the master had implanted in her kept her brave and steadfast. What
 did misery, suffering and wickedness matter! Health was in universal
 labor, in the effort made, in the power which fecundates and which
 produces. The work was good when the child blessed love. Then hope bloomed
 anew, in spite of the open wounds, the dark picture of human shame. It was
 life perpetuated, tried anew, life which we can never weary of believing
 good, since we live it so eagerly, with all its injustice and suffering.
 

 Clotilde had glanced involuntarily at the ancestral tree spread out beside
 her. Yes, the menace was there—so many crimes, so much filth, side
 by side with so many tears, and so much patient goodness; so extraordinary
 a mixture of the best and the most vile, a humanity in little, with all
 its defects and all its struggles. It was a question whether it would not
 be better that a thunderbolt should come and destroy all this corrupt and
 miserable ant-hill. And after so many terrible Rougons, so many vile
 Macquarts, still another had been born. Life did not fear to create
 another of them, in the brave defiance of its eternity. It continued its
 work, propagated itself according to its laws, indifferent to theories,
 marching on in its endless labor. Even at the risk of making monsters, it
 must of necessity create, since, in spite of all it creates, it never
 wearies of creating in the hope, no doubt, that the healthy and the good
 will one day come. Life, life, which flows like a torrent, which continues
 its work, beginning it over and over again, without pause, to the unknown
 end! life in which we bathe, life with its infinity of contrary currents,
 always in motion, and vast as a boundless sea!
 

 A transport of maternal fervor thrilled Clotilde’s heart, and she smiled,
 seeing the little voracious mouth drinking her life. It was a prayer, an
 invocation, to the unknown child, as to the unknown God! To the child of
 the future, to the genius, perhaps, that was to be, to the Messiah that
 the coming century awaited, who would deliver the people from their doubt
 and their suffering! Since the nation was to be regenerated, had he not
 come for this work? He would make the experiment anew, he would raise up
 walls, give certainty to those who were in doubt, he would build the city
 of justice, where the sole law of labor would insure happiness. In
 troublous times prophets were to be expected—at least let him not be
 the Antichrist, the destroyer, the beast foretold in the Apocalypse—who
 would purge the earth of its wickedness, when this should become too
 great. And life would go on in spite of everything, only it would be
 necessary to wait for other myriads of years before the other unknown
 child, the benefactor, should appear.
 

 But the child had drained her right breast, and, as he was growing angry,
 Clotilde turned him round and gave him the left. Then she began to smile,
 feeling the caress of his greedy little lips. At all events she herself
 was hope. A mother nursing, was she not the image of the world continued
 and saved? She bent over, she looked into his limpid eyes, which opened
 joyously, eager for the light. What did the child say to her that she felt
 her heart beat more quickly under the breast which he was draining? To
 what cause would he give his blood when he should be a man, strong with
 all the milk which he would have drunk? Perhaps he said nothing to her,
 perhaps he already deceived her, and yet she was so happy, so full of
 perfect confidence in him.
 

 Again there was a distant burst of music. This must be the apotheosis, the
 moment when Grandmother Felicite, with her silver trowel, laid the first
 stone of the monument to the glory of the Rougons. The vast blue sky,
 gladdened by the Sunday festivities, rejoiced. And in the warm silence, in
 the solitary peace of the workroom, Clotilde smiled at the child, who was
 still nursing, his little arm held straight up in the air, like a signal
 flag of life.
 

 



 
 
CONTENTS

 I. 
 II. 
 III. 
 IV. 
 V. 
 VI. 
 VII.     
 VIII. 
 IX. 
 X. 
 XI. 
 XII. 
 XIII. 
 XIV. 
 
 
 
 

 In the heat of the glowing July afternoon, the room, with blinds carefully
 closed, was full of a great calm. From the three windows, through the
 cracks of the old wooden shutters, came only a few scattered sunbeams
 which, in the midst of the obscurity, made a soft brightness that bathed
 surrounding objects in a diffused and tender light. It was cool here in
 comparison with the overpowering heat that was felt outside, under the
 fierce rays of the sun that blazed upon the front of the house.
 

 Standing before the press which faced the windows, Dr. Pascal was looking
 for a paper that he had come in search of. With doors wide open, this
 immense press of carved oak, adorned with strong and handsome mountings of
 metal, dating from the last century, displayed within its capacious depths
 an extraordinary collection of papers and manuscripts of all sorts, piled
 up in confusion and filling every shelf to overflowing. For more than
 thirty years the doctor had thrown into it every page he wrote, from brief
 notes to the complete texts of his great works on heredity. Thus it was
 that his searches here were not always easy. He rummaged patiently among
 the papers, and when he at last found the one he was looking for, he
 smiled.
 

 For an instant longer he remained near the bookcase, reading the note by a
 golden sunbeam that came to him from the middle window. He himself, in
 this dawnlike light, appeared, with his snow-white hair and beard, strong
 and vigorous; although he was near sixty, his color was so fresh, his
 features were so finely cut, his eyes were still so clear, and he had so
 youthful an air that one might have taken him, in his close-fitting,
 maroon velvet jacket, for a young man with powdered hair.
 

 “Here, Clotilde,” he said at last, “you will copy this note. Ramond would
 never be able to decipher my diabolical writing.”
 

 And he crossed the room and laid the paper beside the young girl, who
 stood working at a high desk in the embrasure of the window to the right.
 

 “Very well, master,” she answered.
 

 She did not even turn round, so engrossed was her attention with the
 pastel which she was at the moment rapidly sketching in with broad strokes
 of the crayon. Near her in a vase bloomed a stalk of hollyhocks of a
 singular shade of violet, striped with yellow. But the profile of her
 small round head, with its short, fair hair, was clearly distinguishable;
 an exquisite and serious profile, the straight forehead contracted in a
 frown of attention, the eyes of an azure blue, the nose delicately molded,
 the chin firm. Her bent neck, especially, of a milky whiteness, looked
 adorably youthful under the gold of the clustering curls. In her long
 black blouse she seemed very tall, with her slight figure, slender throat,
 and flexible form, the flexible slenderness of the divine figures of the
 Renaissance. In spite of her twenty-five years, she still retained a
 childlike air and looked hardly eighteen.
 

 “And,” resumed the doctor, “you will arrange the press a little. Nothing
 can be found there any longer.”
 

 “Very well, master,” she repeated, without raising her head; “presently.”
 

 Pascal had turned round to seat himself at his desk, at the other end of
 the room, before the window to the left. It was a plain black wooden
 table, and was littered also with papers and pamphlets of all sorts. And
 silence again reigned in the peaceful semi-obscurity, contrasting with the
 overpowering glare outside. The vast apartment, a dozen meters long and
 six wide, had, in addition to the press, only two bookcases, filled with
 books. Antique chairs of various kinds stood around in disorder, while for
 sole adornment, along the walls, hung with an old salon Empire
 paper of a rose pattern, were nailed pastels of flowers of strange
 coloring dimly visible. The woodwork of three folding-doors, the door
 opening on the hall and two others at opposite ends of the apartment, the
 one leading to the doctor’s room, the other to that of the young girl, as
 well as the cornice of the smoke-darkened ceiling, dated from the time of
 Louis XV.
 

 An hour passed without a sound, without a breath. Then Pascal, who, as a
 diversion from his work, had opened a newspaper—Le Temps—which
 had lain forgotten on the table, uttered a slight exclamation:
 

 “Why! your father has been appointed editor of the Epoque, the
 prosperous republican journal which has the publishing of the papers of
 the Tuileries.”
 

 This news must have been unexpected by him, for he laughed frankly, at
 once pleased and saddened, and in an undertone he continued:
 

 “My word! If things had been invented, they could not have been finer.
 Life is a strange thing. This is a very interesting article.”
 

 Clotilde made no answer, as if her thoughts were a hundred leagues away
 from what her uncle was saying. And he did not speak again, but taking his
 scissors after he had read the article, he cut it out and pasted it on a
 sheet of paper, on which he made some marginal notes in his large,
 irregular handwriting. Then he went back to the press to classify this new
 document in it. But he was obliged to take a chair, the shelf being so
 high that he could not reach it notwithstanding his tall stature.
 

 On this high shelf a whole series of enormous bundles of papers were
 arranged in order, methodically classified. Here were papers of all sorts:
 sheets of manuscript, documents on stamped paper, articles cut out of
 newspapers, arranged in envelopes of strong blue paper, each of which bore
 on the outside a name written in large characters. One felt that these
 documents were tenderly kept in view, taken out continually, and carefully
 replaced; for of the whole press, this corner was the only one kept in
 order.
 

 When Pascal, mounted on the chair, had found the package he was looking
 for, one of the bulkiest of the envelopes, on which was written the name
 “Saccard,” he added to it the new document, and then replaced the whole
 under its corresponding alphabetical letter. A moment later he had
 forgotten the subject, and was complacently straightening a pile of papers
 that were falling down. And when he at last jumped down off the chair, he
 said:
 

 “When you are arranging the press, Clotilde, don’t touch the packages at
 the top; do you hear?”
 

 “Very well, master,” she responded, for the third time, docilely.
 

 He laughed again, with the gaiety that was natural to him.
 

 “That is forbidden.”
 

 “I know it, master.”
 

 And he closed the press with a vigorous turn of the key, which he then
 threw into a drawer of his writing table. The young girl was sufficiently
 acquainted with his researches to keep his manuscripts in some degree of
 order; and he gladly employed her as his secretary; he made her copy his
 notes when some confrere and friend, like Dr. Ramond asked him to
 send him some document. But she was not a savante; he simply
 forbade her to read what he deemed it useless that she should know.
 

 At last, perceiving her so completely absorbed in her work, his attention
 was aroused.
 

 “What is the matter with you, that you don’t open your lips?” he said.
 “Are you so taken up with the copying of those flowers that you can’t
 speak?”
 

 This was another of the labors which he often intrusted to her—to
 make drawings, aquarelles, and pastels, which he afterward used in his
 works as plates. Thus, for the past five years he had been making some
 curious experiments on a collection of hollyhocks; he had obtained a whole
 series of new colorings by artificial fecundations. She made these sorts
 of copies with extraordinary minuteness, an exactitude of design and of
 coloring so extreme that he marveled unceasingly at the conscientiousness
 of her work, and he often told her that she had a “good, round, strong,
 clear little headpiece.”
 

 But, this time, when he approached her to look over her shoulder, he
 uttered a cry of comic fury.
 

 “There you are at your nonsense! Now you are off in the clouds again! Will
 you do me the favor to tear that up at once?”
 

 She straightened herself, her cheeks flushed, her eyes aglow with the
 delight she took in her work, her slender fingers stained with the red and
 blue crayon that she had crushed.
 

 “Oh, master!”
 

 And in this “master,” so tender, so caressingly submissive, this term of
 complete abandonment by which she called him, in order to avoid using the
 words godfather or uncle, which she thought silly, there was, for the
 first time, a passionate accent of revolt, the revindication of a being
 recovering possession of and asserting itself.
 

 For nearly two hours she had been zealously striving to produce an exact
 and faithful copy of the hollyhocks, and she had just thrown on another
 sheet a whole bunch of imaginary flowers, of dream-flowers, extravagant
 and superb. She had, at times, these abrupt shiftings, a need of breaking
 away in wild fancies in the midst of the most precise of reproductions.
 She satisfied it at once, falling always into this extraordinary
 efflorescence of such spirit and fancy that it never repeated itself;
 creating roses, with bleeding hearts, weeping tears of sulphur, lilies
 like crystal urns, flowers without any known form, even, spreading out
 starry rays, with corollas floating like clouds. To-day, on a groundwork
 dashed in with a few bold strokes of black crayon, it was a rain of pale
 stars, a whole shower of infinitely soft petals; while, in a corner, an
 unknown bloom, a bud, chastely veiled, was opening.
 

 “Another to nail there!” resumed the doctor, pointing to the wall, on
 which there was already a row of strangely curious pastels. “But what may
 that represent, I ask you?”
 

 She remained very grave, drawing back a step, the better to contemplate
 her work.
 

 “I know nothing about it; it is beautiful.”
 

 At this moment appeared Martine, the only servant, become the real
 mistress of the house, after nearly thirty years of service with the
 doctor. Although she had passed her sixtieth year, she, too, still
 retained a youthful air as she went about, silent and active, in her
 eternal black gown and white cap that gave her the look of a nun, with her
 small, white, calm face, and lusterless eyes, the light in which seemed to
 have been extinguished.
 

 Without speaking, she went and sat down on the floor before an easy-chair,
 through a rent in the old covering of which the hair was escaping, and
 drawing from her pocket a needle and a skein of worsted, she set to work
 to mend it. For three days past she had been waiting for an hour’s time to
 do this piece of mending, which haunted her.
 

 “While you are about it, Martine,” said Pascal jestingly, taking between
 both his hands the mutinous head of Clotilde, “sew me fast, too, this
 little noodle, which sometimes wanders off into the clouds.”
 

 Martine raised her pale eyes, and looked at her master with her habitual
 air of adoration?
 

 “Why does monsieur say that?”
 

 “Because, my good girl, in very truth, I believe it is you who have
 stuffed this good little round, clear, strong headpiece full of notions of
 the other world, with all your devoutness.”
 

 The two women exchanged a glance of intelligence.
 

 “Oh, monsieur! religion has never done any harm to any one. And when
 people have not the same ideas, it is certainly better not to talk about
 them.”
 

 An embarrassed silence followed; this was the one difference of opinion
 which, at times, brought about disagreements among these three united
 beings who led so restricted a life. Martine was only twenty-nine, a year
 older than the doctor, when she entered his house, at the time when he
 made his debut as a physician at Plassans, in a bright little house
 of the new town. And thirteen years later, when Saccard, a brother of
 Pascal, sent him his daughter Clotilde, aged seven, after his wife’s death
 and at the moment when he was about to marry again, it was she who brought
 up the child, taking it to church, and communicating to it a little of the
 devout flame with which she had always burned; while the doctor, who had a
 broad mind, left them to their joy of believing, for he did not feel that
 he had the right to interdict to any one the happiness of faith; he
 contented himself later on with watching over the young girl’s education
 and giving her clear and sound ideas about everything. For thirteen years,
 during which the three had lived this retired life at La Souleiade, a
 small property situated in the outskirts of the town, a quarter of an
 hour’s walk from St. Saturnin, the cathedral, his life had flowed happily
 along, occupied in secret great works, a little troubled, however, by an
 ever increasing uneasiness—the collision, more and more violent,
 every day, between their beliefs.
 

 Pascal took a few turns gloomily up and down the room. Then, like a man
 who did not mince his words, he said:
 

 “See, my dear, all this phantasmagoria of mystery has turned your pretty
 head. Your good God had no need of you; I should have kept you for myself
 alone; and you would have been all the better for it.”
 

 But Clotilde, trembling with excitement, her clear eyes fixed boldly upon
 his, held her ground.
 

 “It is you, master, who would be all the better, if you did not shut
 yourself up in your eyes of flesh. That is another thing, why do you not
 wish to see?”
 

 And Martine came to her assistance, in her own style.
 

 “Indeed, it is true, monsieur, that you, who are a saint, as I say
 everywhere, should accompany us to church. Assuredly, God will save you.
 But at the bare idea that you should not go straight to paradise, I
 tremble all over.”
 

 He paused, for he had before him, in open revolt, those two whom he had
 been accustomed to see submissive at his feet, with the tenderness of
 women won over by his gaiety and his goodness. Already he opened his
 mouth, and was going to answer roughly, when the uselessness of the
 discussion became apparent to him.
 

 “There! Let us have peace. I would do better to go and work. And above
 all, let no one interrupt me!”
 

 With hasty steps he gained his chamber, where he had installed a sort of
 laboratory, and shut himself up in it. The prohibition to enter it was
 formal. It was here that he gave himself up to special preparations, of
 which he spoke to no one. Almost immediately the slow and regular sound of
 a pestle grinding in a mortar was heard.
 

 “Come,” said Clotilde, smiling, “there he is, at his devil’s cookery, as
 grandmother says.”
 

 And she tranquilly resumed her copying of the hollyhocks. She completed
 the drawing with mathematical precision, she found the exact tone of the
 violet petals, striped with yellow, even to the most delicate
 discoloration of the shades.
 

 “Ah!” murmured Martine, after a moment, again seated on the ground, and
 occupied in mending the chair, “what a misfortune for a good man like that
 to lose his soul wilfully. For there is no denying it; I have known him
 now for thirty years, and in all that time he has never so much as spoken
 an unkind word to any one. A real heart of gold, who would take the bit
 from his own mouth. And handsome, too, and always well, and always gay, a
 real blessing! It is a murder that he does not wish to make his peace with
 the good God. We will force him to do it, mademoiselle, will we not?”
 

 Clotilde, surprised at hearing her speak so long at one time on the
 subject, gave her word with a grave air.
 

 “Certainly, Martine, it is a promise. We will force him.”
 

 Silence reigned again, broken a moment afterward by the ringing of the
 bell attached to the street door below. It had been attached to the door
 so that they might have notice when any one entered the house, too vast
 for the three persons who inhabited it. The servant appeared surprised,
 and grumbled a few words under her breath. Who could have come in such
 heat as this? She rose, opened the door, and went and leaned over the
 balustrade; then she returned, saying:
 

 “It is Mme. Felicite.”
 

 Old Mme. Rougon entered briskly. In spite of her eighty years, she had
 mounted the stairs with the activity of a young girl; she was still the
 brown, lean, shrill grasshopper of old. Dressed elegantly now in black
 silk, she might still be taken, seen from behind, thanks to the
 slenderness of her figure, for some coquette, or some ambitious woman
 following her favorite pursuit. Seen in front, her eyes still lighted up
 her withered visage with their fires, and she smiled with an engaging
 smile when she so desired.
 

 “What! is it you, grandmother?” cried Clotilde, going to meet her. “Why,
 this sun is enough to bake one.”
 

 Felicite, kissing her on the forehead, laughed, saying:
 

 “Oh, the sun is my friend!”
 

 Then, moving with short, quick steps, she crossed the room, and turned the
 fastening of one of the shutters.
 

 “Open the shutters a little! It is too gloomy to live in the dark in this
 way. At my house I let the sun come in.”
 

 Through the opening a jet of hot light, a flood of dancing sparks entered.
 And under the sky, of the violet blue of a conflagration, the parched
 plain could be seen, stretching away in the distance, as if asleep or dead
 in the overpowering, furnace-like heat, while to the right, above the pink
 roofs, rose the belfry of St. Saturnin, a gilded tower with arises that,
 in the blinding light, looked like whitened bones.
 

 “Yes,” continued Felicite, “I think of going shortly to the Tulettes, and
 I wished to know if Charles were here, to take him with me. He is not here—I
 see that—I will take him another day.”
 

 But while she gave this pretext for her visit, her ferret-like eyes were
 making the tour of the apartment. Besides, she did not insist, speaking
 immediately afterward of her son Pascal, on hearing the rhythmical noise
 of the pestle, which had not ceased in the adjoining chamber.
 

 “Ah! he is still at his devil’s cookery! Don’t disturb him, I have nothing
 to say to him.”
 

 Martine, who had resumed her work on the chair, shook her head, as if to
 say that she had no mind to disturb her master, and there was silence
 again, while Clotilde wiped her fingers, stained with crayon, on a cloth,
 and Felicite began to walk about the room with short steps, looking around
 inquisitively.
 

 Old Mme. Rougon would soon be two years a widow. Her husband who had grown
 so corpulent that he could no longer move, had succumbed to an attack of
 indigestion on the 3d of September, 1870, on the night of the day on which
 he had learned of the catastrophe of Sedan. The ruin of the government of
 which he flattered himself with being one of the founders, seemed to have
 crushed him. Thus, Felicite affected to occupy herself no longer with
 politics, living, thenceforward, like a dethroned queen, the only
 surviving power of a vanished world. No one was unaware that the Rougons,
 in 1851, had saved Plassans from anarchy, by causing the coup d’etat
 of the 2d of December to triumph there, and that, a few years later, they
 had won it again from the legitimist and republican candidates, to give it
 to a Bonapartist deputy. Up to the time of the war, the Empire had
 continued all-powerful in the town, so popular that it had obtained there
 at the plebiscite an overwhelming majority. But since the disasters the
 town had become republican, the quarter St. Marc had returned to its
 secret royalist intrigues, while the old quarter and the new town had sent
 to the chamber a liberal representative, slightly tinged with Orleanism,
 and ready to take sides with the republic, if it should triumph. And,
 therefore, it was that Felicite, like the intelligent woman she was, had
 withdrawn her attention from politics, and consented to be nothing more
 than the dethroned queen of a fallen government.
 

 But this was still an exalted position, surrounded by a melancholy poetry.
 For eighteen years she had reigned. The tradition of her two salons,
 the yellow salon, in which the coup d’etat had matured, and
 the green salon, later the neutral ground on which the conquest of
 Plassans was completed, embellished itself with the reflection of the
 vanished past, and was for her a glorious history. And besides, she was
 very rich. Then, too, she had shown herself dignified in her fall, never
 uttering a regret or a complaint, parading, with her eighty years, so long
 a succession of fierce appetites, of abominable maneuvers, of inordinate
 gratifications, that she became august through them. Her only happiness,
 now, was to enjoy in peace her large fortune and her past royalty, and she
 had but one passion left—to defend her past, to extend its fame,
 suppressing everything that might tarnish it later. Her pride, which lived
 on the double exploit of which the inhabitants still spoke, watched with
 jealous care, resolved to leave in existence only creditable documents,
 those traditions which caused her to be saluted like a fallen queen when
 she walked through the town.
 

 She went to the door of the chamber and listened to the persistent noise
 of the pestle, which did not cease. Then, with an anxious brow, she
 returned to Clotilde.
 

 “Good Heavens! What is he making? You know that he is doing himself the
 greatest harm with his new drug. I was told, the other day, that he came
 near killing one of his patients.”
 

 “Oh, grandmother!” cried the young girl.
 

 But she was now launched.
 

 “Yes, exactly. The good wives say many other things, besides! Why, go
 question them, in the faubourg! They will tell you that he grinds dead
 men’s bones in infants’ blood.”
 

 This time, while even Martine protested, Clotilde, wounded in her
 affection, grew angry.
 

 “Oh, grandmother, do not repeat such abominations! Master has so great a
 heart that he thinks only of making every one happy!”
 

 Then, when she saw that they were both angry, Felicite, comprehending that
 she had gone too far, resumed her coaxing manner.
 

 “But, my kitten, it is not I who say those frightful things. I repeat to
 you the stupid reports they spread, so that you may comprehend that Pascal
 is wrong to pay no heed to public opinion. He thinks he has found a new
 remedy—nothing could be better! and I will even admit that he will
 be able to cure everybody, as he hopes. Only, why affect these mysterious
 ways; why not speak of the matter openly; why, above all, try it only on
 the rabble of the old quarter and of the country, instead of, attempting
 among the well-to-do people of the town, striking cures which would do him
 honor? No, my child, you see your uncle has never been able to act like
 other people.”
 

 She had assumed a grieved tone, lowering her voice, to display the secret
 wound of her heart.
 

 “God be thanked! it is not men of worth who are wanting in our family; my
 other sons have given me satisfaction enough. Is it not so? Your Uncle
 Eugene rose high enough, minister for twelve years, almost emperor! And
 your father himself handled many a million, and had a part in many a one
 of the great works which have made Paris a new city. Not to speak at all
 of your brother, Maxime, so rich, so distinguished, nor of your cousin,
 Octave Mouret, one of the kings of the new commerce, nor of our dear Abbe
 Mouret, who is a saint! Well, then, why does Pascal, who might have
 followed in the footsteps of them all, persist in living in his hole, like
 an eccentric old fool?”
 

 And as the young girl was again going to protest, she closed her mouth,
 with a caressing gesture of her hand.
 

 “No, no, let me finish. I know very well that Pascal is not a fool, that
 he has written remarkable works, that his communications to the Academy of
 Medicine have even won for him a reputation among savants. But what
 does that count for, compared to what I have dreamed of for him? Yes, all
 the best practice of the town, a large fortune, the decoration—honors,
 in short, and a position worthy of the family. My word! I used to say to
 him when he was a child: ‘But where do you come from? You are not one of
 us!’ As for me, I have sacrificed everything for the family; I would let
 myself be hacked to pieces, that the family might always be great and
 glorious!”
 

 She straightened her small figure, she seemed to grow tall with the one
 passion that had formed the joy and pride of her life. But as she resumed
 her walk, she was startled by suddenly perceiving on the floor the copy of
 the Temps, which the doctor had thrown there, after cutting out the
 article, to add it to the Saccard papers, and the light from the open
 window, falling full upon the sheet, enlightened her, no doubt, for she
 suddenly stopped walking, and threw herself into a chair, as if she at
 last knew what she had come to learn.
 

 “Your father has been appointed editor of the Epoque,” she said
 abruptly.
 

 “Yes,” answered Clotilde tranquilly, “master told me so; it was in the
 paper.”
 

 With an anxious and attentive expression, Felicite looked at her, for this
 appointment of Saccard, this rallying to the republic, was something of
 vast significance. After the fall of the empire he had dared return to
 France, notwithstanding his condemnation as director of the Banque
 Universelle, the colossal fall of which had preceded that of the
 government. New influences, some incredible intrigue must have placed him
 on his feet again, for not only had he received his pardon, but he was
 once more in a position to undertake affairs of considerable importance,
 launched into journalism, having his share again of all the good things
 going. And the recollection came to her of the quarrels of other days
 between him and his brother Eugene Rougon, whom he had so often
 compromised, and whom, by an ironical turn of events, he was perhaps going
 to protect, now that the former minister of the Empire was only a simple
 deputy, resigned to the single role of standing by his fallen master with
 the obstinacy with which his mother stood by her family. She still obeyed
 docilely the orders of her eldest son, the genius, fallen though he was;
 but Saccard, whatever he might do, had also a part in her heart, from his
 indomitable determination to succeed, and she was also proud of Maxime,
 Clotilde’s brother, who had taken up his quarters again, after the war, in
 his mansion in the Avenue of the Bois de Boulogne, where he was consuming
 the fortune left him by his wife, Louise de Mareuil, become prudent, with
 the wisdom of a man struck in a vital part, and trying to cheat the
 paralysis which threatened him.
 

 “Editor of the Epoque,” she repeated; “it is really the position of
 a minister which your father has won. And I forgot to tell you, I have
 written again to your brother, to persuade him to come and see us. That
 would divert him, it would do him good. Then, there is that child, that
 poor Charles—”
 

 She did not continue. This was another of the wounds from which her pride
 bled; a son whom Maxime had had when seventeen by a servant, and who now,
 at the age of fifteen, weak of intellect, a half-idiot, lived at Plassans,
 going from the house of one to that of another, a burden to all.
 

 She remained silent a moment longer, waiting for some remark from
 Clotilde, some transition by which she might come to the subject she
 wished to touch upon. When she saw that the young girl, occupied in
 arranging the papers on her desk, was no longer listening, she came to a
 sudden decision, after casting a glance at Martine, who continued mending
 the chair, as if she were deaf and dumb.
 

 “Your uncle cut the article out of the Temps, then?”
 

 Clotilde smiled calmly.
 

 “Yes, master put it away among his papers. Ah! how many notes he buries in
 there! Births, deaths, the smallest event in life, everything goes in
 there. And the genealogical tree is there also, our famous genealogical
 tree, which he keeps up to date!”
 

 The eyes of old Mme. Rougon flamed. She looked fixedly at the young girl.
 

 “You know them, those papers?”
 

 “Oh, no, grandmother; master has never spoken to me of them; and he has
 forbidden me to touch them.”
 

 But she did not believe her.
 

 “Come! you have them under your hands, you must have read them.”
 

 Very simple, with her calm rectitude, Clotilde answered, smilingly again.
 

 “No, when master forbids me to do anything, it is because he has his
 reasons, and I do not do it.”
 

 “Well, my child,” cried Felicite vehemently, dominated by her passion,
 “you, whom Pascal loves tenderly, and whom he would listen to, perhaps,
 you ought to entreat him to burn all that, for if he should chance to die,
 and those frightful things which he has in there were to be found, we
 should all be dishonored!”
 

 Ah, those abominable papers! she saw them at night, in her nightmares,
 revealing in letters of fire, the true histories, the physiological
 blemishes of the family, all that wrong side of her glory which she would
 have wished to bury forever with the ancestors already dead! She knew how
 it was that the doctor had conceived the idea of collecting these
 documents at the beginning of his great studies on heredity; how he had
 found himself led to take his own family as an example, struck by the
 typical cases which he saw in it, and which helped to support laws
 discovered by him. Was it not a perfectly natural field of observation,
 close at hand and with which he was thoroughly familiar? And with the
 fine, careless justness of the scientist, he had been accumulating for the
 last thirty years the most private data, collecting and classifying
 everything, raising this genealogical tree of the Rougon-Macquarts, of
 which the voluminous papers, crammed full of proofs, were only the
 commentary.
 

 “Ah, yes,” continued Mme. Rougon hotly, “to the fire, to the fire with all
 those papers that would tarnish our name!”
 

 And as the servant rose to leave the room, seeing the turn the
 conversation was taking, she stopped her by a quick gesture.
 

 “No, no, Martine; stay! You are not in the way, since you are now one of
 the family.”
 

 Then, in a hissing voice:
 

 “A collection of falsehoods, of gossip, all the lies that our enemies,
 enraged by our triumph, hurled against us in former days! Think a little
 of that, my child. Against all of us, against your father, against your
 mother, against your brother, all those horrors!”
 

 “But how do you know they are horrors, grandmother?”
 

 She was disconcerted for a moment.
 

 “Oh, well; I suspect it! Where is the family that has not had misfortunes
 which might be injuriously interpreted? Thus, the mother of us all, that
 dear and venerable Aunt Dide, your great-grandmother, has she not been for
 the past twenty-one years in the madhouse at the Tulettes? If God has
 granted her the grace of allowing her to live to the age of one hundred
 and four years, he has also cruelly afflicted her in depriving her of her
 reason. Certainly, there is no shame in that; only, what exasperates me—what
 must not be—is that they should say afterward that we are all mad.
 And, then, regarding your grand-uncle Macquart, too, deplorable rumors
 have been spread. Macquart had his faults in past days, I do not seek to
 defend him. But to-day, is he not living very reputably on his little
 property at the Tulettes, two steps away from our unhappy mother, over
 whom he watches like a good son? And listen! one last example. Your
 brother, Maxime, committed a great fault when he had by a servant that
 poor little Charles, and it is certain, besides, that the unhappy child is
 of unsound mind. No matter. Will it please you if they tell you that your
 nephew is degenerate; that he reproduces from four generations back, his
 great-great-grandmother the dear woman to whom we sometimes take him, and
 with whom he likes so much to be? No! there is no longer any family
 possible, if people begin to lay bare everything—the nerves of this
 one, the muscles of that. It is enough to disgust one with living!”
 

 Clotilde, standing in her long black blouse, had listened to her
 grandmother attentively. She had grown very serious; her arms hung by her
 sides, her eyes were fixed upon the ground. There was silence for a
 moment; then she said slowly:
 

 “It is science, grandmother.”
 

 “Science!” cried Felicite, trotting about again. “A fine thing, their
 science, that goes against all that is most sacred in the world! When they
 shall have demolished everything they will have advanced greatly! They
 kill respect, they kill the family, they kill the good God!”
 

 “Oh! don’t say that, madame!” interrupted Martine, in a grieved voice, her
 narrow devoutness wounded. “Do not say that M. Pascal kills the good God!”
 

 “Yes, my poor girl, he kills him. And look you, it is a crime, from the
 religious point of view, to let one’s self be damned in that way. You do
 not love him, on my word of honor! No, you do not love him, you two who
 have the happiness of believing, since you do nothing to bring him back to
 the right path. Ah! if I were in your place, I would split that press open
 with a hatchet. I would make a famous bonfire with all the insults to the
 good God which it contains!”
 

 She had planted herself before the immense press and was measuring it with
 her fiery glance, as if to take it by assault, to sack it, to destroy it,
 in spite of the withered and fragile thinness of her eighty years. Then,
 with a gesture of ironical disdain:
 

 “If, even with his science, he could know everything!”
 

 Clotilde remained for a moment absorbed in thought, her gaze lost in
 vacancy. Then she said in an undertone, as if speaking to herself:
 

 “It is true, he cannot know everything. There is always something else
 below. That is what irritates me; that is what makes us quarrel: for I
 cannot, like him, put the mystery aside. I am troubled by it, so much so
 that I suffer cruelly. Below, what wills and acts in the shuddering
 darkness, all the unknown forces—”
 

 Her voice had gradually become lower and now dropped to an indistinct
 murmur.
 

 Then Martine, whose face for a moment past had worn a somber expression,
 interrupted in her turn:
 

 “If it was true, however, mademoiselle, that monsieur would be damned on
 account of those villainous papers, tell me, ought we to let it happen?
 For my part, look you, if he were to tell me to throw myself down from the
 terrace, I would shut my eyes and throw myself, because I know that he is
 always right. But for his salvation! Oh! if I could, I would work for
 that, in spite of him. In every way, yes! I would force him; it is too
 cruel to me to think that he will not be in heaven with us.”
 

 “You are quite right, my girl,” said Felicite approvingly. “You, at least,
 love your master in an intelligent fashion.”
 

 Between the two, Clotilde still seemed irresolute. In her, belief did not
 bend to the strict rule of dogma; the religious sentiment did not
 materialize in the hope of a paradise, of a place of delights, where she
 was to meet her own again. It was in her simply a need of a beyond, a
 certainty that the vast world does not stop short at sensation, that there
 is a whole unknown world, besides, which must be taken into account. But
 her grandmother, who was so old, this servant, who was so devoted, shook
 her in her uneasy affection for her uncle. Did they not love him better,
 in a more enlightened and more upright fashion, they who desired him to be
 without a stain, freed from his manias as a scientist, pure enough to be
 among the elect? Phrases of devotional books recurred to her; the
 continual battle waged against the spirit of evil; the glory of
 conversions effected after a violent struggle. What if she set herself to
 this holy task; what if, after all, in spite of himself, she should be
 able to save him! And an exaltation gradually gained her spirit, naturally
 inclined to adventurous enterprises.
 

 “Certainly,” she said at last, “I should be very happy if he would not
 persist in his notion of heaping up all those scraps of paper, and if he
 would come to church with us.”
 

 Seeing her about to yield, Mme. Rougon cried out that it was necessary to
 act, and Martine herself added the weight of all her real authority. They
 both approached the young girl, and began to instruct her, lowering their
 voices as if they were engaged in a conspiracy, whence was to result a
 miraculous benefit, a divine joy with which the whole house would be
 perfumed. What a triumph if they reconciled the doctor with God! and what
 sweetness, afterward, to live altogether in the celestial communion of the
 same faith!
 

 “Well, then, what must I do?” asked Clotilde, vanquished, won over.
 

 But at this moment the doctor’s pestle was heard in the silence, with its
 continued rhythm. And the victorious Felicite, who was about to speak,
 turned her head uneasily, and looked for a moment at the door of the
 adjoining chamber. Then, in an undertone, she said:
 

 “Do you know where the key of the press is?”
 

 Clotilde answered only with an artless gesture, that expressed all her
 repugnance to betray her master in this way.
 

 “What a child you are! I swear to you that I will take nothing; I will not
 even disturb anything. Only as we are alone and as Pascal never reappears
 before dinner, we might assure ourselves of what there is in there, might
 we not? Oh! nothing but a glance, on my word of honor.”
 

 The young girl stood motionless, unwilling, still, to give her consent.
 

 “And then, it may be that I am mistaken; no doubt there are none of those
 bad things there that I have told you of.”
 

 This was decisive; she ran to take the key from the drawer, and she
 herself opened wide the press.
 

 “There, grandmother, the papers are up there.”
 

 Martine had gone, without a word, to station herself at the door of the
 doctor’s chamber, her ear on the alert, listening to the pestle, while
 Felicite, as if riveted to the spot by emotion, regarded the papers. At
 last, there they were, those terrible documents, the nightmare that had
 poisoned her life! She saw them, she was going to touch them, to carry
 them away! And she reached up, straining her little legs, in the eagerness
 of her desire.
 

 “It is too high, my kitten,” she said. “Help me; give them to me!”
 

 “Oh! not that, grandmother! Take a chair!”
 

 Felicite took a chair, and mounted slowly upon it. But she was still too
 short. By an extraordinary effort she raised herself, lengthening her
 stature until she was able to touch the envelopes of strong blue paper
 with the tips of her fingers; and her fingers traveled over them,
 contracting nervously, scratching like claws. Suddenly there was a crash—it
 was a geological specimen, a fragment of marble that had been on a lower
 shelf, and that she had just thrown down.
 

 Instantly the pestle stopped, and Martine said in a stifled voice:
 

 “Take care; here he comes!”
 

 But Felicite, grown desperate, did not hear, did not let go her hold when
 Pascal entered hastily. He had supposed that some accident had happened,
 that some one had fallen, and he stood stupefied at what he saw—his
 mother on the chair, her arm still in the air, while Martine had withdrawn
 to one side, and Clotilde, very pale, stood waiting, without turning her
 head. When he comprehended the scene, he himself became as white as a
 sheet. A terrible anger arose within him.
 

 Old Mme. Rougon, however, troubled herself in no wise. When she saw that
 the opportunity was lost, she descended from the chair, without making any
 illusion whatever to the task at which he had surprised her.
 

 “Oh, it is you! I do not wish to disturb you. I came to embrace Clotilde.
 But here I have been talking for nearly two hours, and I must run away at
 once. They will be expecting me at home; they won’t know what has become
 of me at this hour. Good-by until Sunday.”
 

 She went away quite at her ease, after smiling at her son, who stood
 before her silent and respectful. It was an attitude that he had long
 since adopted, to avoid an explanation which he felt must be cruel, and
 which he had always feared. He knew her, he was willing to pardon her
 everything, in his broad tolerance as a scientist, who made allowance for
 heredity, environment, and circumstances. And, then, was she not his
 mother? That ought to have sufficed, for, in spite of the frightful blows
 which his researches inflicted upon the family, he preserved a great
 affection for those belonging to him.
 

 When his mother was no longer there, his anger burst forth, and fell upon
 Clotilde. He had turned his eyes away from Martine, and fixed them on the
 young girl, who did not turn hers away, however, with a courage which
 accepted the responsibility of her act.
 

 “You! you!” he said at last.
 

 He seized her arm, and pressed it until she cried. But she continued to
 look him full in the face, without quailing before him, with the
 indomitable will of her individuality, of her selfhood. She was beautiful
 and provoking, with her tall, slender figure, robed in its black blouse;
 and her exquisite, youthful fairness, her straight forehead, her finely
 cut nose, her firm chin, took on something of a warlike charm in her
 rebellion.
 

 “You, whom I have made, you who are my pupil, my friend, my other mind, to
 whom I have given a part of my heart and of my brain! Ah, yes! I should
 have kept you entirely for myself, and not have allowed your stupid good
 God to take the best part of you!”
 

 “Oh, monsieur, you blaspheme!” cried Martine, who had approached him, in
 order to draw upon herself a part of his anger.
 

 But he did not even see her. Only Clotilde existed for him. And he was as
 if transfigured, stirred up by so great a passion that his handsome face,
 crowned by his white hair, framed by his white beard, flamed with youthful
 passion, with an immense tenderness that had been wounded and exasperated.
 

 “You, you!” he repeated in a trembling voice.
 

 “Yes, I! Why then, master, should I not love you better than you love me?
 And why, if I believe you to be in peril, should I not try to save you?
 You are greatly concerned about what I think; you would like well to make
 me think as you do!”
 

 She had never before defied him in this way.
 

 “But you are a little girl; you know nothing!”
 

 “No, I am a soul, and you know no more about souls than I do!”
 

 He released her arm, and waved his hand vaguely toward heaven, and then a
 great silence fell—a silence full of grave meaning, of the
 uselessness of the discussion which he did not wish to enter upon.
 Thrusting her aside rudely, he crossed over to the middle window and
 opened the blinds, for the sun was declining, and the room was growing
 dark. Then he returned.
 

 But she, feeling a need of air and space, went to the open window. The
 burning rain of sparks had ceased, and there fell now, from on high, only
 the last shiver of the overheated and paling sky; and from the still
 burning earth ascended warm odors, with the freer respiration of evening.
 At the foot of the terrace was the railroad, with the outlying
 dependencies of the station, of which the buildings were to be seen in the
 distance; then, crossing the vast arid plain, a line of trees marked the
 course of the Viorne, beyond which rose the hills of Sainte-Marthe, red
 fields planted with olive trees, supported on terraces by walls of
 uncemented stones and crowned by somber pine woods—broad
 amphitheaters, bare and desolate, corroded by the heats of summer, of the
 color of old baked brick, which this fringe of dark verdure, standing out
 against the background of the sky, bordered above. To the left opened the
 gorges of the Seille, great yellow stones that had broken away from the
 soil, and lay in the midst of blood-colored fields, dominated by an
 immense band of rocks like the wall of a gigantic fortress; while to the
 right, at the very entrance to the valley through which flowed the Viorne,
 rose, one above another, the discolored pink-tiled roofs of the town of
 Plassans, the compact and confused mass of an old town, pierced by the
 tops of ancient elms, and dominated by the high tower of St. Saturnin,
 solitary and serene at this hour in the limpid gold of sunset.
 

 “Ah, my God!” said Clotilde slowly, “one must be arrogant, indeed, to
 imagine that one can take everything in one’s hand and know everything!”
 

 Pascal had just mounted on the chair to assure himself that not one of his
 packages was missing. Then he took up the fragment of marble, and replaced
 it on the shelf, and when he had again locked the press with a vigorous
 turn of the hand, he put the key into his pocket.
 

 “Yes,” he replied; “try not to know everything, and above all, try not to
 bewilder your brain about what we do not know, what we shall doubtless
 never know!”
 

 Martine again approached Clotilde, to lend her her support, to show her
 that they both had a common cause. And now the doctor perceived her, also,
 and felt that they were both united in the same desire for conquest. After
 years of secret attempts, it was at last open war; the savant saw
 his household turn against his opinions, and menace them with destruction.
 There is no worse torture than to have treason in one’s own home, around
 one; to be trapped, dispossessed, crushed, by those whom you love, and who
 love you!
 

 Suddenly this frightful idea presented itself to him.
 

 “And yet both of you love me!” he cried.
 

 He saw their eyes grow dim with tears; he was filled with an infinite
 sadness, on this tranquil close of a beautiful day. All his gaiety, all
 his kindness of heart, which came from his intense love of life, were
 shaken by it.
 

 “Ah, my dear! and you, my poor girl,” he said, “you are doing this for my
 happiness, are you not? But, alas, how unhappy we are going to be!”
 

 
 
 

 On the following morning Clotilde was awake at six o’clock. She had gone
 to bed angry with Pascal; they were at variance with each other. And her
 first feeling was one of uneasiness, of secret distress, an instant need
 of making her peace, so that she might no longer have upon her heart the
 heavy weight that lay there now.
 

 Springing quickly out of bed, she went and half opened the shutters of
 both windows. The sun, already high, sent his light across the chamber in
 two golden bars. Into this drowsy room that exhaled a sweet odor of youth,
 the bright morning brought with it fresh, cheerful air; but the young girl
 went back and sat down on the edge of the bed in a thoughtful attitude,
 clad only in her scant nightdress, which made her look still more slender,
 with her long tapering limbs, her strong, slender body, with its round
 throat, round neck, round and supple arms; and her adorable neck and
 throat, of a milky whiteness, had the exquisite softness and smoothness of
 white satin. For a long time, at the ungraceful age between twelve and
 eighteen, she had looked awkwardly tall, climbing trees like a boy. Then,
 from the ungainly hoyden had been evolved this charming, delicate and
 lovely creature.
 

 With absent gaze she sat looking at the walls of the chamber. Although La
 Souleiade dated from the last century, it must have been refurnished under
 the First Empire, for it was hung with an old-fashioned printed calico,
 with a pattern representing busts of the Sphinx, and garlands of oak
 leaves. Originally of a bright red, this calico had faded to a pink—an
 undecided pink, inclining to orange. The curtains of the two windows and
 of the bed were still in existence, but it had been necessary to clean
 them, and this had made them still paler. And this faded purple, this
 dawnlike tint, so delicately soft, was in truth exquisite. As for the bed,
 covered with the same stuff, it had come down from so remote an antiquity
 that it had been replaced by another bed found in an adjoining room;
 another Empire bed, low and very broad, of massive mahogany, ornamented
 with brasses, its four square pillars adorned also with busts of the
 Sphinx, like those on the wall. The rest of the furniture matched, however—a
 press, with whole doors and pillars; a chest of drawers with a marble top,
 surrounded by a railing; a tall and massive cheval-glass, a large lounge
 with straight feet, and seats with straight, lyre-shaped backs. But a
 coverlet made of an old Louis XV. silk skirt brightened the majestic bed,
 that occupied the middle of the wall fronting the windows; a heap of
 cushions made the lounge soft; and there were, besides, two etageres
 and a table also covered with old flowered silk, at the further end of the
 room.
 

 Clotilde at last put on her stockings and slipped on a morning gown of
 white pique, and thrusting the tips of her feet into her gray
 canvas slippers, she ran into her dressing-room, a back room looking out
 on the rear of the house. She had had it hung plainly with an ecru
 drill with blue stripes, and it contained only furniture of varnished pine—the
 toilette table, two presses, and two chairs. It revealed, however, a
 natural and delicate coquetry which was very feminine. This had grown with
 her at the same time with her beauty. Headstrong and boyish though she
 still was at times, she had become a submissive and affectionate woman,
 desiring to be loved, above everything. The truth was that she had grown
 up in freedom, without having learned anything more than to read and
 write, having acquired by herself, later, while assisting her uncle, a
 vast fund of information. But there had been no plan settled upon between
 them. He had not wished to make her a prodigy; she had merely conceived a
 passion for natural history, which revealed to her the mysteries of life.
 And she had kept her innocence unsullied like a fruit which no hand has
 touched, thanks, no doubt, to her unconscious and religious waiting for
 the coming of love—that profound feminine feeling which made her
 reserve the gift of her whole being for the man whom she should love.
 

 She pushed back her hair and bathed her face; then, yielding to her
 impatience, she again softly opened the door of her chamber and ventured
 to cross the vast workroom, noiselessly and on tiptoe. The shutters were
 still closed, but she could see clearly enough not to stumble against the
 furniture. When she was at the other end before the door of the doctor’s
 room, she bent forward, holding her breath. Was he already up? What could
 he be doing? She heard him plainly, walking about with short steps,
 dressing himself, no doubt. She never entered this chamber in which he
 chose to hide certain labors; and which thus remained closed, like a
 tabernacle. One fear had taken possession of her; that of being discovered
 here by him if he should open the door; and the agitation produced by the
 struggle between her rebellious pride and a desire to show her submission
 caused her to grow hot and cold by turns, with sensations until now
 unknown to her. For an instant her desire for reconciliation was so strong
 that she was on the point of knocking. Then, as footsteps approached, she
 ran precipitately away.
 

 Until eight o’clock Clotilde was agitated by an ever-increasing
 impatience. At every instant she looked at the clock on the mantelpiece of
 her room; an Empire clock of gilded bronze, representing Love leaning
 against a pillar, contemplating Time asleep.
 

 Eight was the hour at which she generally descended to the dining-room to
 breakfast with the doctor. And while waiting she made a careful toilette,
 arranged her hair, and put on another morning gown of white muslin with
 red spots. Then, having still a quarter of an hour on her hands, she
 satisfied an old desire and sat down to sew a piece of narrow lace, an
 imitation of Chantilly, on her working blouse, that black blouse which she
 had begun to find too boyish, not feminine enough. But on the stroke of
 eight she laid down her work, and went downstairs quickly.
 

 “You are going to breakfast entirely alone,” said Martine tranquilly to
 her, when she entered the dining-room.
 

 “How is that?”
 

 “Yes, the doctor called me, and I passed him in his egg through the
 half-open door. There he is again, at his mortar and his filter. We won’t
 see him now before noon.”
 

 Clotilde turned pale with disappointment. She drank her milk standing,
 took her roll in her hand, and followed the servant into the kitchen.
 There were on the ground floor, besides this kitchen and the dining-room,
 only an uninhabited room in which the potatoes were stored, and which had
 formerly been used as an office by the doctor, when he received his
 patients in his house—the desk and the armchair had years ago been
 taken up to his chamber—and another small room, which opened into
 the kitchen; the old servant’s room, scrupulously clean, and furnished
 with a walnut chest of drawers and a bed like a nun’s with white hangings.
 

 “Do you think he has begun to make his liquor again?” asked Clotilde.
 

 “Well, it can be only that. You know that he thinks of neither eating nor
 drinking when that takes possession of him!”
 

 Then all the young girl’s vexation was exhaled in a low plaint:
 

 “Ah, my God! my God!”
 

 And while Martine went to make up her room, she took an umbrella from the
 hall stand and went disconsolately to eat her roll in the garden, not
 knowing now how she should occupy her time until midday.
 

 It was now almost seventeen years since Dr. Pascal, having resolved to
 leave his little house in the new town, had bought La Souleiade for twenty
 thousand francs, in order to live there in seclusion, and also to give
 more space and more happiness to the little girl sent him by his brother
 Saccard from Paris. This Souleiade, situated outside the town gates on a
 plateau dominating the plain, was part of a large estate whose once vast
 grounds were reduced to less than two hectares in consequence of
 successive sales, without counting that the construction of the railroad
 had taken away the last arable fields. The house itself had been half
 destroyed by a conflagration and only one of the two buildings remained—a
 quadrangular wing “of four walls,” as they say in Provence, with five
 front windows and roofed with large pink tiles. And the doctor, who had
 bought it completely furnished, had contented himself with repairing it
 and finishing the boundary walls, so as to be undisturbed in his house.
 

 Generally Clotilde loved this solitude passionately; this narrow kingdom
 which she could go over in ten minutes, and which still retained remnants
 of its past grandeur. But this morning she brought there something like a
 nervous disquietude. She walked for a few moments along the terrace, at
 the two extremities of which stood two secular cypresses like two enormous
 funeral tapers, which could be seen three leagues off. The slope then
 descended to the railroad, walls of uncemented stones supporting the red
 earth, in which the last vines were dead; and on these giant steps grew
 only rows of olive and almond trees, with sickly foliage. The heat was
 already overpowering; she saw the little lizards running about on the
 disjointed flags, among the hairy tufts of caper bushes.
 

 Then, as if irritated by the vast horizon, she crossed the orchard and the
 kitchen garden, which Martine still persisted in cultivating in spite of
 her age, calling in a man only twice a week for the heavier labors; and
 she ascended to a little pine wood on the right, all that remained of the
 superb pines which had formerly covered the plateau; but, here, too, she
 was ill at ease; the pine needles crackled under her feet, a resinous,
 stifling odor descended from the branches. And walking along the boundary
 wall past the entrance gate, which opened on the road to Les Fenouilleres,
 three hundred meters from the first houses of Plassans, she emerged at
 last on the threshing-yard; an immense yard, fifteen meters in radius,
 which would of itself have sufficed to prove the former importance of the
 domain. Ah! this antique area, paved with small round stones, as in the
 days of the Romans; this species of vast esplanade, covered with short dry
 grass of the color of gold as with a thick woolen carpet; how joyously she
 had played there in other days, running about, rolling on the grass, lying
 for hours on her back, watching the stars coming out one by one in the
 depths of the illimitable sky!
 

 She opened her umbrella again, and crossed the yard with slower steps. Now
 she was on the left of the terrace. She had made the tour of the estate,
 so that she had returned by the back of the house, through the clump of
 enormous plane trees that on this side cast a thick shade. This was the
 side on which opened the two windows of the doctor’s room. And she raised
 her eyes to them, for she had approached only in the sudden hope of at
 last seeing him. But the windows remained closed, and she was wounded by
 this as by an unkindness to herself. Then only did she perceive that she
 still held in her hand her roll, which she had forgotten to eat; and she
 plunged among the trees, biting it impatiently with her fine young teeth.
 

 It was a delicious retreat, this old quincunx of plane trees, another
 remnant of the past splendor of La Souleiade. Under these giant trees,
 with their monstrous trunks, there was only a dim light, a greenish light,
 exquisitely cool, even on the hottest days of summer. Formerly a French
 garden had been laid out here, of which only the box borders remained;
 bushes which had habituated themselves to the shade, no doubt, for they
 grew vigorously, as tall as trees. And the charm of this shady nook was a
 fountain, a simple leaden pipe fixed in the shaft of a column; whence
 flowed perpetually, even in the greatest drought, a thread of water as
 thick as the little finger, which supplied a large mossy basin, the
 greenish stones of which were cleaned only once in three or four years.
 When all the wells of the neighborhood were dry, La Souleiade still kept
 its spring, of which the great plane trees were assuredly the secular
 children. Night and day for centuries past this slender thread of water,
 unvarying and continuous, had sung the same pure song with crystal sound.
 

 Clotilde, after wandering awhile among the bushes of box, which reached to
 her shoulder, went back to the house for a piece of embroidery, and
 returning with it, sat down at a stone table beside the fountain. Some
 garden chairs had been placed around it, and they often took coffee here.
 And after this she affected not to look up again from her work, as if she
 was completely absorbed in it. Now and then, while seeming to look between
 the trunks of trees toward the sultry distance, toward the yard, on which
 the sun blazed fiercely and which glowed like a brazier, she stole a
 glance from under her long lashes up to the doctor’s windows. Nothing
 appeared, not a shadow. And a feeling of sadness, of resentment, arose
 within her at this neglect, this contempt in which he seemed to hold her
 after their quarrel of the day before. She who had got up with so great a
 desire to make peace at once! He was in no hurry, however; he did not love
 her then, since he could be satisfied to live at variance with her. And
 gradually a feeling of gloom took possession of her, her rebellious
 thoughts returned, and she resolved anew to yield in nothing.
 

 At eleven o’clock, before setting her breakfast on the fire, Martine came
 to her for a moment, the eternal stocking in her hand which she was always
 knitting even while walking, when she was not occupied in the affairs of
 the house.
 

 “Do you know that he is still shut up there like a wolf in his hole, at
 his villainous cookery?”
 

 Clotilde shrugged her shoulders, without lifting her eyes from her
 embroidery.
 

 “And then, mademoiselle, if you only knew what they say! Mme. Felicite was
 right yesterday when she said that it was really enough to make one blush.
 They threw it in my face that he had killed old Boutin, that poor old man,
 you know, who had the falling sickness and who died on the road. To
 believe those women of the faubourg, every one into whom he injects his
 remedy gets the true cholera from it, without counting that they accuse
 him of having taken the devil into partnership.”
 

 A short silence followed. Then, as the young girl became more gloomy than
 before, the servant resumed, moving her fingers still more rapidly:
 

 “As for me, I know nothing about the matter, but what he is making there
 enrages me. And you, mademoiselle, do you approve of that cookery?”
 

 At last Clotilde raised her head quickly, yielding to the flood of passion
 that swept over her.
 

 “Listen; I wish to know no more about it than you do, but I think that he
 is on a very dangerous path. He no longer loves us.”
 

 “Oh, yes, mademoiselle; he loves us.”
 

 “No, no; not as we love him. If he loved us, he would be here with us,
 instead of endangering his soul and his happiness and ours, up there, in
 his desire to save everybody.”
 

 And the two women looked at each other for a moment with eyes burning with
 affection, in their jealous anger. Then they resumed their work in
 silence, enveloped in shadow.
 

 Above, in his room, Dr. Pascal was working with the serenity of perfect
 joy. He had practised his profession for only about a dozen years, from
 his return to Paris up to the time when he had retired to La Souleiade.
 Satisfied with the hundred and odd thousand francs which he had earned and
 which he had invested prudently, he devoted himself almost exclusively to
 his favorite studies, retaining only a practise among friends, never
 refusing to go to the bedside of a patient but never sending in his
 account. When he was paid he threw the money into a drawer in his writing
 desk, regarding this as pocket-money for his experiments and caprices,
 apart from his income which sufficed for his wants. And he laughed at the
 bad reputation for eccentricity which his way of life had gained him; he
 was happy only when in the midst of his researches on the subjects for
 which he had a passion. It was matter for surprise to many that this
 scientist, whose intellectual gifts had been spoiled by a too lively
 imagination, should have remained at Plassans, this out-of-the-way town
 where it seemed as if every requirement for his studies must be wanting.
 But he explained very well the advantages which he had discovered here; in
 the first place, an utterly peaceful retreat in which he might live the
 secluded life he desired; then, an unsuspected field for continuous
 research in the light of the facts of heredity, which was his passion, in
 this little town where he knew every family and where he could follow the
 phenomena kept most secret, through two or three generations. And then he
 was near the seashore; he went there almost every summer, to study the
 swarming life that is born and propagates itself in the depths of the vast
 waters. And there was finally, at the hospital in Plassans, a dissecting
 room to which he was almost the only visitor; a large, bright, quiet room,
 in which for more than twenty years every unclaimed body had passed under
 his scalpel. A modest man besides, of a timidity that had long since
 become shyness, it had been sufficient for him to maintain a
 correspondence with his old professors and his new friends, concerning the
 very remarkable papers which he from time to time sent to the Academy of
 Medicine. He was altogether wanting in militant ambition.
 

 Ah, this heredity! what a subject of endless meditation it was for him!
 The strangest, the most wonderful part of it all, was it not that the
 resemblance between parents and children should not be perfect,
 mathematically exact? He had in the beginning made a genealogical tree of
 his family, logically traced, in which the influences from generation to
 generation were distributed equally—the father’s part and the
 mother’s part. But the living reality contradicted the theory almost at
 every point. Heredity, instead of being resemblance, was an effort toward
 resemblance thwarted by circumstances and environment. And he had arrived
 at what he called the hypothesis of the abortion of cells. Life is only
 motion, and heredity being a communicated motion, it happened that the
 cells in their multiplication from one another jostled one another,
 pressed one another, made room for themselves, putting forth, each one,
 the hereditary effort; so that if during this struggle the weaker cells
 succumbed, considerable disturbances took place, with the final result of
 organs totally different. Did not variation, the constant invention of
 nature, which clashed with his theories, come from this? Did not he
 himself differ from his parents only in consequence of similar accidents,
 or even as the effect of larvated heredity, in which he had for a time
 believed? For every genealogical tree has roots which extend as far back
 into humanity as the first man; one cannot proceed from a single ancestor;
 one may always resemble a still older, unknown ancestor. He doubted
 atavism, however; it seemed to him, in spite of a remarkable example taken
 from his own family, that resemblance at the end of two or three
 generations must disappear by reason of accidents, of interferences, of a
 thousand possible combinations. There was then a perpetual becoming, a
 constant transformation in this communicated effort, this transmitted
 power, this shock which breathes into matter the breath of life, and which
 is life itself. And a multiplicity of questions presented themselves to
 him. Was there a physical and intellectual progress through the ages? Did
 the brain grow with the growth of the sciences with which it occupied
 itself? Might one hope, in time, for a larger sum of reason and of
 happiness? Then there were special problems; one among others, the mystery
 of which had for a long time irritated him, that of sex; would science
 never be able to predict, or at least to explain the sex of the embryo
 being? He had written a very curious paper crammed full of facts on this
 subject, but which left it in the end in the complete ignorance in which
 the most exhaustive researches had left it. Doubtless the question of
 heredity fascinated him as it did only because it remained obscure, vast,
 and unfathomable, like all the infant sciences where imagination holds
 sway. Finally, a long study which he had made on the heredity of phthisis
 revived in him the wavering faith of the healer, arousing in him the noble
 and wild hope of regenerating humanity.
 

 In short, Dr. Pascal had only one belief—the belief in life. Life
 was the only divine manifestation. Life was God, the grand motor, the soul
 of the universe. And life had no other instrument than heredity; heredity
 made the world; so that if its laws could be known and directed, the world
 could be made to one’s will. In him, to whom sickness, suffering, and
 death had been a familiar sight, the militant pity of the physician awoke.
 Ah! to have no more sickness, no more suffering, as little death as
 possible! His dream ended in this thought—that universal happiness,
 the future community of perfection and of felicity, could be hastened by
 intervention, by giving health to all. When all should be healthy, strong,
 and intelligent, there would be only a superior race, infinitely wise and
 happy. In India, was not a Brahmin developed from a Soudra in seven
 generations, thus raising, experimentally, the lowest of beings to the
 highest type of humanity? And as in his study of consumption he had
 arrived at the conclusion that it was not hereditary, but that every child
 of a consumptive carried within him a degenerate soil in which consumption
 developed with extraordinary facility at the slightest contagion, he had
 come to think only of invigorating this soil impoverished by heredity; to
 give it the strength to resist the parasites, or rather the destructive
 leaven, which he had suspected to exist in the organism, long before the
 microbe theory. To give strength—the whole problem was there; and to
 give strength was also to give will, to enlarge the brain by fortifying
 the other organs.
 

 About this time the doctor, reading an old medical book of the fifteenth
 century, was greatly struck by a method of treating disease called
 signature. To cure a diseased organ, it was only necessary to take from a
 sheep or an ox the corresponding organ in sound condition, boil it, and
 give the soup to the patient to drink. The theory was to cure like by
 like, and in diseases of the liver, especially, the old work stated that
 the cures were numberless. This set the doctor’s vivid imagination
 working. Why not make the trial? If he wished to regenerate those
 enfeebled by hereditary influences, he had only to give them the normal
 and healthy nerve substance. The method of the soup, however, seemed to
 him childish, and he invented in its stead that of grinding in a mortar
 the brain of a sheep, moistening it with distilled water, and then
 decanting and filtering the liquor thus obtained. He tried this liquor
 then mixed with Malaga wine, on his patients, without obtaining any
 appreciable result. Suddenly, as he was beginning to grow discouraged, he
 had an inspiration one day, when he was giving a lady suffering from
 hepatic colics an injection of morphine with the little syringe of Pravaz.
 What if he were to try hypodermic injections with his liquor? And as soon
 as he returned home he tried the experiment on himself, making an
 injection in his side, which he repeated night and morning. The first
 doses, of a gram only, were without effect. But having doubled, and then
 tripled the dose, he was enchanted, one morning on getting up, to find
 that his limbs had all the vigor of twenty. He went on increasing the dose
 up to five grams, and then his respiration became deeper, and above all he
 worked with a clearness of mind, an ease, which he had not known for
 years. A great flood of happiness, of joy in living, inundated his being.
 From this time, after he had had a syringe made at Paris capable of
 containing five grams, he was surprised at the happy results which he
 obtained with his patients, whom he had on their feet again in a few days,
 full of energy and activity, as if endowed with new life. His method was
 still tentative and rude, and he divined in it all sorts of dangers, and
 especially, that of inducing embolism, if the liquor was not perfectly
 pure. Then he suspected that the strength of his patients came in part
 from the fever his treatment produced in them. But he was only a pioneer;
 the method would improve later. Was it not already a miracle to make the
 ataxic walk, to bring consumptives back to life, as it were; even to give
 hours of lucidity to the insane? And at the thought of this discovery of
 the alchemy of the twentieth century, an immense hope opened up before
 him; he believed he had discovered the universal panacea, the elixir of
 life, which was to combat human debility, the one real cause of every ill;
 a veritable scientific Fountain of Youth, which, in giving vigor, health,
 and will would create an altogether new and superior humanity.
 

 This particular morning in his chamber, a room with a northern aspect and
 somewhat dark owing to the vicinity of the plane trees, furnished simply
 with an iron bedstead, a mahogany writing desk, and a large writing table,
 on which were a mortar and a microscope, he was completing with infinite
 care the preparation of a vial of his liquor. Since the day before, after
 pounding the nerve substance of a sheep in distilled water, he had been
 decanting and filtering it. And he had at last obtained a small bottle of
 a turbid, opaline liquid, irised by bluish gleams, which he regarded for a
 long time in the light as if he held in his hand the regenerating blood
 and symbol of the world.
 

 But a few light knocks at the door and an urgent voice drew him from his
 dream.
 

 “Why, what is the matter, monsieur? It is a quarter-past twelve; don’t you
 intend to come to breakfast?”
 

 For downstairs breakfast had been waiting for some time past in the large,
 cool dining-room. The blinds were closed, with the exception of one which
 had just been half opened. It was a cheerful room, with pearl gray panels
 relieved by blue mouldings. The table, the sideboard, and the chairs must
 have formed part of the set of Empire furniture in the bedrooms; and the
 old mahogany, of a deep red, stood out in strong relief against the light
 background. A hanging lamp of polished brass, always shining, gleamed like
 a sun; while on the four walls bloomed four large bouquets in pastel, of
 gillyflowers, carnations, hyacinths, and roses.
 

 Joyous, radiant, Dr. Pascal entered.
 

 “Ah, the deuce! I had forgotten! I wanted to finish. Look at this, quite
 fresh, and perfectly pure this time; something to work miracles with!”
 

 And he showed the vial, which he had brought down in his enthusiasm. But
 his eye fell on Clotilde standing erect and silent, with a serious air.
 The secret vexation caused by waiting had brought back all her hostility,
 and she, who had burned to throw herself on his neck in the morning,
 remained motionless as if chilled and repelled by him.
 

 “Good!” he resumed, without losing anything of his gaiety, “we are still
 at odds, it seems. That is something very ugly. So you don’t admire my
 sorcerer’s liquor, which resuscitates the dead?”
 

 He seated himself at the table, and the young girl, sitting down opposite
 him, was obliged at last to answer:
 

 “You know well, master, that I admire everything belonging to you. Only,
 my most ardent desire is that others also should admire you. And there is
 the death of poor old Boutin—”
 

 “Oh!” he cried, without letting her finish, “an epileptic, who succumbed
 to a congestive attack! See! since you are in a bad humor, let us talk no
 more about that—you would grieve me, and that would spoil my day.”
 

 There were soft boiled eggs, cutlets, and cream. Silence reigned for a few
 moments, during which in spite of her ill-humor she ate heartily, with a
 good appetite which she had not the coquetry to conceal. Then he resumed,
 laughing:
 

 “What reassures me is to see that your stomach is in good order. Martine,
 hand mademoiselle the bread.”
 

 The servant waited on them as she was accustomed to do, watching them eat,
 with her quiet air of familiarity.
 

 Sometimes she even chatted with them.
 

 “Monsieur,” she said, when she had cut the bread, “the butcher has brought
 his bill. Is he to be paid?”
 

 He looked up at her in surprise.
 

 “Why do you ask me that?” he said. “Do you not always pay him without
 consulting me?”
 

 It was, in effect, Martine who kept the purse. The amount deposited with
 M. Grandguillot, notary at Plassans, produced a round sum of six thousand
 francs income. Every three months the fifteen hundred francs were remitted
 to the servant, and she disposed of them to the best interests of the
 house; bought and paid for everything with the strictest economy, for she
 was of so saving a disposition that they bantered her about it
 continually. Clotilde, who spent very little, had never thought of asking
 a separate purse for herself. As for the doctor, he took what he required
 for his experiments and his pocket money from the three or four thousand
 francs which he still earned every year, and which he kept lying in the
 drawer of his writing desk; so that there was quite a little treasure
 there in gold and bank bills, of which he never knew the exact amount.
 

 “Undoubtedly, monsieur, I pay, when it is I who have bought the things;
 but this time the bill is so large on account of the brains which the
 butcher has furnished you—”
 

 The doctor interrupted her brusquely:
 

 “Ah, come! so you, too, are going to set yourself against me, are you? No,
 no; both of you—that would be too much! Yesterday you pained me
 greatly, and I was angry. But this must cease. I will not have the house
 turned into a hell. Two women against me, and they the only ones who love
 me at all? Do you know, I would sooner quit the house at once!”
 

 He did not speak angrily, he even smiled; but the disquietude of his heart
 was perceptible in the trembling of his voice. And he added with his
 indulgent, cheerful air:
 

 “If you are afraid for the end of the month, my girl, tell the butcher to
 send my bill apart. And don’t fear; you are not going to be asked for any
 of your money to settle it with; your sous may lie sleeping.”
 

 This was an allusion to Martine’s little personal fortune. In thirty
 years, with four hundred francs wages she had earned twelve thousand
 francs, from which she had taken only what was strictly necessary for her
 wants; and increased, almost trebled, by the interest, her savings
 amounted now to thirty thousand francs, which through a caprice, a desire
 to have her money apart, she had not chosen to place with M. Grandguillot.
 They were elsewhere, safely invested in the funds.
 

 “Sous that lie sleeping are honest sous,” she said gravely. “But monsieur
 is right; I will tell the butcher to send a bill apart, as all the brains
 are for monsieur’s cookery and not for mine.”
 

 This explanation brought a smile to the face of Clotilde, who was always
 amused by the jests about Martine’s avarice; and the breakfast ended more
 cheerfully. The doctor desired to take the coffee under the plane trees,
 saying that he felt the need of air after being shut up all the morning.
 The coffee was served then on the stone table beside the fountain; and how
 pleasant it was there in the shade, listening to the cool murmur of the
 water, while around, the pine wood, the court, the whole place, were
 glowing in the early afternoon sun.
 

 The doctor had complacently brought with him the vial of nerve substance,
 which he looked at as it stood on the table.
 

 “So, then, mademoiselle,” he resumed, with an air of brusque pleasantry,
 “you do not believe in my elixir of resurrection, and you believe in
 miracles!”
 

 “Master,” responded Clotilde, “I believe that we do not know everything.”
 

 He made a gesture of impatience.
 

 “But we must know everything. Understand then, obstinate little girl, that
 not a single deviation from the invariable laws which govern the universe
 has ever been scientifically proved. Up to this day there has been no
 proof of the existence of any intelligence other than the human. I defy
 you to find any real will, any reasoning force, outside of life. And
 everything is there; there is in the world no other will than this force
 which impels everything to life, to a life ever broader and higher.”
 

 He rose with a wave of the hand, animated by so firm a faith that she
 regarded him in surprise, noticing how youthful he looked in spite of his
 white hair.
 

 “Do you wish me to repeat my ‘Credo’ for you, since you accuse me of not
 wanting yours? I believe that the future of humanity is in the progress of
 reason through science. I believe that the pursuit of truth, through
 science, is the divine ideal which man should propose to himself. I
 believe that all is illusion and vanity outside the treasure of truths
 slowly accumulated, and which will never again be lost. I believe that the
 sum of these truths, always increasing, will at last confer on man
 incalculable power and peace, if not happiness. Yes, I believe in the
 final triumph of life.”
 

 And with a broader sweep of the hand that took in the vast horizon, as if
 calling on these burning plains in which fermented the saps of all
 existences to bear him witness, he added:
 

 “But the continual miracle, my child, is life. Only open your eyes, and
 look.”
 

 She shook her head.
 

 “It is in vain that I open my eyes; I cannot see everything. It is you,
 master, who are blind, since you do not wish to admit that there is beyond
 an unknown realm which you will never enter. Oh, I know you are too
 intelligent to be ignorant of that! Only you do not wish to take it into
 account; you put the unknown aside, because it would embarrass you in your
 researches. It is in vain that you tell me to put aside the mysterious; to
 start from the known for the conquest of the unknown. I cannot; the
 mysterious at once calls me back and disturbs me.”
 

 He listened to her, smiling, glad to see her become animated, while he
 smoothed her fair curls with his hand.
 

 “Yes, yes, I know you are like the rest; you do not wish to live without
 illusions and without lies. Well, there, there; we understand each other
 still, even so. Keep well; that is the half of wisdom and of happiness.”
 

 Then, changing the conversation:
 

 “Come, you will accompany me, notwithstanding, and help me in my round of
 miracles. This is Thursday, my visiting day. When the heat shall have
 abated a little, we will go out together.”
 

 She refused at first, in order not to seem to yield; but she at last
 consented, seeing the pain she gave him. She was accustomed to accompany
 him on his round of visits. They remained for some time longer under the
 plane trees, until the doctor went upstairs to dress. When he came down
 again, correctly attired in a close-fitting coat and wearing a
 broad-brimmed silk hat, he spoke of harnessing Bonhomme, the horse that
 for a quarter of a century had taken him on his visits through the streets
 and the environs of Plassans. But the poor old beast was growing blind,
 and through gratitude for his past services and affection for himself they
 now rarely disturbed him. On this afternoon he was very drowsy, his gaze
 wandered, his legs were stiff with rheumatism. So that the doctor and the
 young girl, when they went to the stable to see him, gave him a hearty
 kiss on either side of his nose, telling him to rest on a bundle of fresh
 hay which the servant had brought. And they decided to walk.
 

 Clotilde, keeping on her spotted white muslin, merely tied on over her
 curls a large straw hat adorned with a bunch of lilacs; and she looked
 charming, with her large eyes and her complexion of milk-and-roses under
 the shadow of its broad brim. When she went out thus on Pascal’s arm, she
 tall, slender, and youthful, he radiant, his face illuminated, so to say,
 by the whiteness of his beard, with a vigor that made him still lift her
 across the rivulets, people smiled as they passed, and turned around to
 look at them again, they seemed so innocent and so happy. On this day, as
 they left the road to Les Fenouilleres to enter Plassans, a group of