# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2014
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    H. J. Mozans, Up the Orinoco and down the Magdalena
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45848/45848-h/45848-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

    Early the morning following our departure from Miami
we were aroused from our slumbers by the cry of a mariner, “Land
ho! all hands ahoy!” We were on deck without delay, and there
before us, under a sky of purest azure, we beheld the hills of Cuba,
clad in a mantle of undying verdure. Its resplendent shores were
arrayed in hues of glowing beauty and unimagined loveliness. Fragrant
groves of orange and pomegranate, luxuriant forests white with clouds
of bloom, formed a glorious setting to the refulgent waves that
reflected the crimson splendors of the rising sun. Delicious zephyrs,
fanning their balmy wings, bathed our brows with dewy freshness, sweet
with perfume from ambrosial fruits and tropic flowers. Yes, we were in
the Pearl of the Antilles, the “Sweet Isle of Flowers”; in
Gan Eden—the Garden of Delight—that in the legends
of long ago was reckoned among the Isles of the Blest.
The beautiful pictures before us, however, were but as a fleeting
panorama. We had but little time to feast our eyes on them before we
were in front of grim, frowning Morro Castle, that for three centuries
and more has stood sentinel of the fair city at its feet. Adjoining the
Castle are the Cabañas, a vast range of fortifications more than
a mile in length, and nearly a thousand feet in breadth. Just opposite,
on the other side of the harbor’s entrance, is the Bateria de la
Punta, and some distance farther beyond is the star-shaped Castle
Atares. From a military standpoint Havana is well protected, and, with
Morro Castle properly equipped with modern artillery, would be
practically impregnable.
Few West Indian cities have greater historic interest than Havana.
From the time it was first visited by Ocampo, four hundred years ago,
until the raising of the flag of the Cuban Republic in 1904, it has
been the witness of many stirring events that have effected the
destinies [21]of millions of people in various parts of the
world. It was from Havana’s port that Cortes, in 1519, sailed on
his memorable voyage to Mexico. It was from this port that Pamphilio de
Narvaez and Hernando de Soto started on their ill-starred expeditions
to Florida. Time and again the city was harassed by Dutch, French and
English pirates and Buccaneers. Oftentimes, too, the daring sea-rovers,
who so long infested West Indian waters, levied tribute on the
unfortunate inhabitants who were unable to defend themselves. Indeed,
it was to defend the city from these marauders that the kings of Spain,
in the middle of the sixteenth century, began the erection of those
fortifications that, since their completion, have excited the
admiration of all who have visited them.
Cuba was one of the islands Columbus discovered during his first
voyage. But he thought he had discovered a continent—that he had
reached the eastern extremity of Asia. He had set out from Spain to
find a western route to the Indies, to offset the discoveries of
Bartholomew Diaz and Vasco da Gama. To him Cuba was the land of the Great
Khan, far-off Cathay, and Española, discovered shortly
afterwards, was Cipango, Japan. Indeed, there is reason to believe that
he died in the belief that Cuba, far from being an island, was a part
of China, as mapped by Toscanelli and described by Marco Polo. We have
no positive evidence that he was ever aware of the circumnavigation of
the island by Pinzón and Solís in 1497, and he was dead
two years before its insularity was again proved by Ocampo. He never
dreamed that he had discovered a new world, nor did any of his
contemporaries or immediate successors have any conclusive reason to
infer that the lands discovered by the great Admiral in his third and
fourth voyages were not a part of the Asiatic continent.
Balboa’s discovery of the Pacific Ocean did not supply such
reasons, neither did the rounding of South America and the
circumnavigation of the globe by Magellan. Nor [22]were the
necessary proofs furnished by the explorations of Drake or Frobisher,
Davis or Hudson or Baffin.
The final demonstration of the complete separation of America from
Asia was a long process and was not given until the noted explorations
of Vitus Behring in 1728, more than two centuries after Balboa from the
summit of a peak in Darien first descried the placid waters of the
great South Sea.13
We had desired to visit the northern and southern coasts of Cuba,
and to feast our eyes on the beautiful scenes that had so captivated
Columbus; to view the hundred harbors that indent its tortuous shores;
to see the Queen’s Gardens—now known as Los Cayos de las
Doce Leguas—which the great navigator fancied to be the seven
thousand spice islands of Marco Polo, but our time was too limited to
permit the long and slow coasting that would be required. Besides, we
preferred to study the interior of the country, and pass through the
sugar and tobacco plantations for which the island is so famous.
Fortunately for the comfort of the traveler, there is now a through
train from Havana to Santiago, so that one can make the entire five
hundred and forty miles in twenty-four hours, and that, too, if one so
elect, in a Pullman car.
Columbus, in writing of his first voyage to Rafael Sánchez
[23]and Luis de Santangel, says that all the
countries he had discovered, but particularly Juana—the name he
gave to Cuba—“are of surpassing excellence,” and
“exceedingly fertile.” “All these islands” he
continues, “are very beautiful and distinguished by a diversity
of scenery; they are filled with a great variety of trees of immense
height, and which I believe retain their foliage in all seasons; for
when I saw them”—in November—“they were as
verdant and luxuriant as they usually are in Spain in the month of
May—some of them were blossoming, some bearing fruit, and all
flourishing in the greatest perfection, according to their respective
stages of growth, and the nature and quality of each.” Again he
writes, “The nightingale and a thousand other sorts of birds were
singing in the month of November wherever I went. There are palm trees
in these countries of six or eight sorts, which are surprising to see,
on account of their diversity from ours, but, indeed, this is the case
with respect to the other trees, as well as the fruits and weeds. Here
are also honey, and fruits of a thousand sorts, and birds of every
variety.”14
The Admiral’s delight and enthusiasm at all he saw knew no
bounds, and in his diary he gives frequent expression to the
pleasurable emotions he experienced. All was new to him, and all
beautiful beyond words to describe. Trees and plants were as different
from those in Spain as day is from night, and the verdure and bloom in
November were as fresh and brilliant as in the month of May in
Andalusia.15 The great navigator had a poet’s love of
nature, and artist’s eye for the beautiful. Indeed, it may be
truthfully said that no one since his time has more correctly and more
succinctly portrayed the salient features of these islands, and it may
be questioned if any one has more deeply appreciated their beauty and
splendor. [24]
That which frequently arrests the attention of the traveler, on the
way from Havana to Santiago, is the numerous sugar and tobacco
plantations everywhere visible. Sugar cane, as is known, was not found
by the Spaniards on their arrival in the New World, but was introduced
there a short time after, most probably from the Madeira or Canary
Islands.
Tobacco, however, is an American plant, and one of the things that
most surprised the Europeans on first coming in contact with the
Indians of the newly discovered islands was to find them smoking the
dried leaves of this now favorite narcotic.
The first mention of tobacco is in Columbus’ diary under date
of November 6, 1492. Referring to two messengers he had sent out among
the Indians, he writes, “The two Christians met on the road a
great many people going to their villages, men and women with brands in
their hands, made of herbs, for taking their customary
smoke.”16 These, then, were the first cigars of which
we have any record. The use of tobacco in pipes was apparently first
observed in Florida by Captain John Hawkins during his voyage to the
peninsula in 1566. Among many other interesting things he tells us
about the inhabitants is that of their use and love of the pipe.
“The Floridians when they trauel haue a kinde of herbe dryed,
which with a cane, and an earthen cup in the end, with fire, and the
dried herbs put together do sucke thoro the cane the smoke thereof,
which smoke satisfieth their hunger, and therewith they liue foure or
five days without meat or drinke, and this all the Frenchmen vsed for
this purpose; yet do they holde opinion withall, that it causeth water
and flame to void from their stomachs.”17
The early Italian traveler, Girolamo Benzoni, evidently [25]did not
share the views of the Floridians and Frenchmen regarding the value of
tobacco. To him it was nothing less than an invention of Satan.
Speaking of its evil effects, he says, “See what a pestiferous
and wicked poison from the devil this must be.”18
But it is the good Old Dominican, Père Labat, who has the
most to say about the introduction and use of tobacco. His charming,
gossipy account of men and things and his vagabunda loquacitas,
have lost none of their fascination for the curious reader since they
were first written nearly two centuries ago.
Among other things he does not hesitate to affirm that the Indians,
“by introducing the use of tobacco among their pitiless
conquerors, succeeded, in great measure, in avenging themselves for the
unjust servitude to which they had been reduced.”19 According to the good father, tobacco proved to
be a veritable apple of discord, because it gave rise to a protracted
war of words among men of science. In this war a large number of
ignoramuses as well as savants participated. And not the last to
declare themselves in favor of or opposed to what they understood no
better than the serious affairs of the day, in which they had been but
too active, were the woman-folk.
Physicians discussed its properties, nature and virtues, as if it
had been known all over the habitable world from the times of Galen,
Hippocrates, and Æsculapius, and their opinions were as diverse,
and as opposed to one another as are to-day the opinions of allopaths
and homeopaths, osteopaths and psychopaths. They prescribed when and
how it was to be taken and in what doses. They and the chemists of the
time soon recognized in tobacco a valuable addition to their
pharmacopœa. Nay, more, it was not long [26]before
it was proclaimed as a panacea for all the ills that poor suffering
humanity is heir to.
Its ashes cured glanders; taken as a powder it cured rheumatism,
headache, dropsy, and paralysis. It was a specific against melancholy
and insanity; against the smallpox and the plague, against fever,
asthma and liver troubles. It strengthened the memory and excited the
imagination, and philosophers and men of science could be, it was
averred, no better prepared to grapple with the most difficult of
abstract problems than by having the nose primed with snuff.
The effects induced by chewing tobacco were said to be even more
marvelous, for among other things it was claimed that by thus using it
hunger and thirst were allayed or prevented. It removed bile, cured
toothache and freed an over-charged brain from all kinds of deleterious
humors. It strengthened and preserved the sight. Oil, extracted from
tobacco, cured deafness, gout, sciatica, improved the circulation, and
was a tonic for the nervous. In a word, it was the great panacea of
which physicians and alchemists had so long dreamed, but had hitherto
been unable to find.
Finally, however, a reaction came. Books were written against it,
and kings and princes forbade its use. On the 26th of March, 1699, the
question was seriously discussed before L’Ecole de
Médecine whether the frequent use of tobacco shortened
life—An ex tabaci usu frequenti vita summa
brevior? And the conclusion was a demonstration that the frequent
use of tobacco did shorten life. Ergo ex frequenti tabaci
usu vita summa brevior.20 [27]
But notwithstanding the opinions of learned men and university
faculties regarding the alleged deleterious properties of tobacco, and
the denunciations hurled against the use of this invention of the Evil
One, the smoking of cigars and pipes soon became a general habit the
world over, and, it was at times difficult for the supply to meet the
demand. How little Las Casas dreamed that this “vicious
habit,” as he called it, was soon to become universal, and that
the time would come when young and old would regard the “fragrant
weed,” prepared in one way or another, not only as an
indispensable luxury, but also as a prime necessity—for rich and
poor alike, if life were to be worth living.
And how far was Columbus from imagining, when he saw the Indians
taking “their customary smoke,” that the leaves which they
had so carefully rolled together for this purpose, would eventually
prove to be one of the great staples of commerce, and one of the
world’s most valued sources of revenue. He crossed “the Sea
of Darkness” to discover a direct route to the lands of spice and
the Golden Chersonese in order to fill the coffers of the land of his
adoption. He and his companions explored every island they met in their
wanderings in quest of gold and pearls and precious stones and here, in
the narcotic plant, that appeared to them as little more than a
curiosity, there were treasures greater than those of “Ormus and
Ind.” In this very island of Cuba, of whose charms he has left us
so glowing a picture, was in after years to be developed from the
humble plant—Nicotiana Tabacum—one of Spain’s
most important industries—an industry that would, in the course
of time, contribute more to the nation’s exchequer than the
combined output of the mines of Pasco and Potosí. Such was
evidently the thought of the Cuban poet, Zequeira, when, in his much
praised Horatian ode, A La Piña, he sings
“¡Salve, suelo felíz, donde
prodiga
Madre naturaleza en abundancia [28]
La ordorifeva planta fumigable!
¡Salve, felíz
Habana!”21
Santiago, like Havana, is a historic city, and, from
its foundation, nearly four centuries ago, until the memorable siege of
1898, it experienced many reverses at the hands of privateers and
pirates. We lingered just long enough to see its chief
attractions—there are not many—outside of the
Morro—and to get a view of the now famous El Caney and San Juan
Hill.
The sun was sinking below the horizon when we boarded the steamer
that was to take us to Haiti and Santo Domingo. As we passed under El
Morro, that has so long and faithfully guarded the entrance to the
placid harbor, and looked towards the setting sun where Cervera’s
proud fleet was scattered, we could not but recall the prophetic words
of Las Casas penned in his last will and testament. Speaking of the
Indians, to whose care and protection he had devoted a long and
fruitful life, the holy bishop writes: “As God is my witness that
I never had earthly interest in view, I declare it to be my conviction
and my faith—I believe it to be in accordance with the faith of
the Holy Roman Catholic Church, which is our rule and guide—that
by all the thefts, all the deaths, and all the confiscations of estates
and other uncalculable riches, by the dethroning of rulers with
unspeakable cruelty, the perfect and immaculate law of Jesus Christ and
the natural law itself have been broken, the name of our Lord and His
holy religion have been outraged, the spreading of the faith has been
retarded, and irreparable harm done to these innocent people. Hence I
believe that, unless it atones with much penance for these abominable
and unspeakably wicked deeds, Spain will be visited by the wrath of
God, because the whole nation has shared, more or less, in the bloody
wealth that has been acquired by the slaughter and extermination of
those people. [29]But I fear that it will repent too late, or never.
For God punishes with blindness the sins sometimes of the lowly, but
especially and more frequently the sins of those who think themselves
wise, and who presume to rule the world. We ourselves are eyewitnesses
of this darkening of the understanding. It is now seventy years since
we began to scandalize, to rob and to murder those peoples, but to this
day we have not come to realize that so many scandals, so much
injustice, so many thefts, so many massacres, so much slavery, and the
depopulation of so many provinces, which have disgraced our holy
religion, are sins or injustices at all.”22
Were the tragic scenes enacted in these waters and in the harbor of
Manila the fulfillment of the prophecy? If we should be disposed to
think so, let us not forget, in contemplating the humiliation and
punishment of Spain, that we too have sinned as Spain sinned. And let
us pray that the blood of the millions of Indians that have been
exterminated in our own land may not call down the vengeance of Heaven
on our children and our children’s children. Nations, like
individuals, are punished where they have sinned.23
A short sail eastwards and we found ourselves crossing
the Windward Passage. Not far from our port quarter was Cape Maisi,
which Columbus, on his first voyage, named Cape Alpha and Omega, as
being the easternmost extremity of Asia; Alpha, therefore, from his own
point of view, and Omega from that of his Portuguese rivals. On his
second voyage Columbus came down through this passage to satisfy
himself that he had actually reached Mangi, the land of the Great Khan,
and coasted along the island of Cuba, [30]as he reckoned, for a
thousand miles. But as fate would have it, he stopped short in his
westward course within a few hours’ sail of the present Cape San
Antonio, the westernmost promontory of the island. If he had only
journeyed on a few miles further, he would have detected the
insularity of what he considered a continent, and thus have anticipated
the discoveries of Vespucius and Ocampo. And he would have done more.
He would have reached the shores of Yucatan and Campeachy and had an
opportunity of exploring the famous ruins of Chichen Itza and Uxmal.
How different, too, it would have been, if, after discovering
Guanahuani, he had directed the prow of the Santa Maria slightly to the
northwest, when a short sail would have brought him to the coast of
Florida! It is interesting to speculate not only how much his own life,
but also how greatly the entire course of American history would have
been affected by these slight changes in his course on these momentous
occasions.
But during his four voyages among these mysterious islands the great
navigator was as one groping his way in the Cretan labyrinth. On his
return eastward from the Cape of Good Hope—the name he gave to
the westernmost point of Cuba attained by him—he found, almost
before he was aware of it, that he had actually circumnavigated what he
had imagined to be Cipango, the great island of Japan. This surprised
and puzzled him beyond expression. Evidently, either he was mistaken or
the authorities on whom he had been relying were mistaken. If the
island—Española—was not Cipango, what was it? He
soon learned that gold mines existed in the interior of the country and
that there was evidence of excavations that had been long
abandoned.24 What more natural, then, than his conclusion that
this was the far-famed Ophir whence King Solomon had obtained the gold
used in the adornment of the temple of Jerusalem! [31]
Whatever may be said of the Admiral’s theory, one thing is
certain, and that is that the discovery of gold in
Española25 was directly or indirectly the cause of
untold misery to the aborigines, and eventually led up to the present
unfortunate condition of this hapless island. It was, as the reader
knows, the work in the mines that was the chief factor in the gradual
decimation and the final extinction of the Indians in Española.
When there were no longer Indians to do the work, negroes were imported
from Africa, and thence dates that hideous period of cruel traffic in
human beings which, for more than three centuries, was the blackest
stain on the vaunted civilization of the Caucasian race. But in this,
as in other similar cases, an avenging Nemesis has either already
overtaken the offending nations or is giving them grave concern
regarding the future. In the black republics of Haiti and Santo Domingo
the slave has replaced the master, and there are already indications
that the day of reckoning is approaching for the powers that are in
control of the other islands of the West Indies. We saw evidences of
this during our visit in Cuba, and are convinced that, if it were not
for the strong arm of the United States, it would not be long before we
should have another black republic at our doors. And what is said of
Cuba may be said of all the islands of the Lesser Antilles from
Trinidad to Puerto Rico. The race question is one that will have to be
met sooner or later. The whites are decreasing in numbers and the
blacks are rapidly increasing and becoming more insistent on what they
claim to be their rights, especially to that of a greater
representation in government affairs, and to a larger share of the
emoluments of public office.
It was only a few years after the colonizing of Española when
negro slavery was introduced into the island. The [32]motive
was, in some measure, a humane one—namely, to spare the Indians
the arduous labor in the mines for which they were physically
incapacitated. The African was much stronger and had much greater
powers of endurance than the native. According to Herrera, “the
negroes flourished so well in Española, that it was thought that
if a negro was not hanged he would never die, for no one had ever seen
one die of disease. Thus the negroes found, like the oranges, a soil in
Española better suited to them than their own country,
Guinea.”26
Monopolies of licenses were granted by the Spanish monarchs for the
importation of negro slaves to the West Indies, first to their own
subjects, and later on to certain Genoese and Germans, and finally, by
a special asiento, or contract, the Spanish government conveyed
to the English the “exclusive right to carry on the most
nefarious of all trades between Africa and Spanish America.” The
British engaged to transport annually to the Spanish Indies during a
term of thirty years, four thousand and eight hundred of what, in trade
language, were called “Indian pieces,” that is to say,
negro slaves, paying a duty per head of thirty-three escudos and
one-third.27 So great was the number of negroes imported into
America from 1517, when Charles V first permitted the traffic, until
1807, when the slave trade was abolished by an act of the English
Parliament, that it has been computed that their total number was not
less than five or six millions. In one single year, 1768, it is said
that the number torn from their homes and country and transported to
Spain’s new colonies was no less than ninety-seven
thousand.28
But the inevitable soon came to pass—much sooner than even the
wisest statesman could have foreseen. The great Cardinal Ximenes, it is
true, realized from the beginning [33]the risk incurred by sending
negroes to the Indies. He contended that it was wrong to send beyond
the ocean people so “apt in war” as the blacks, who might
at any time stir up a servile war against Spanish rule. He insisted
that “the negroes, who were as malicious as they were strong,
would no sooner perceive themselves to be more numerous in the New
World than the Spaniards, than they would lay their heads together to
put on their masters the chains they now carried.”29
The cardinal’s prediction soon came true. In all parts of the
Indies—in the islands of the sea and on Tierra Firme—there
were massacres and uprisings and “servile wars,” without
number, and both the colonies and the mother country had often occasion
to regret the introduction within their boundaries of so dangerous and
warlike subjects. But it was too late to rectify the mistake. It was
impossible to drive them out of the country, or to return them to the
land whence they had been brought against their will. So rapidly had
they increased in numbers that they now, in many places, constituted a
great majority of the population. Española, to-day constituting
the two republics of Haiti and Santo Domingo, was the first island of
which they got supreme control. Which will be the next? The question is
not an idle one. It is one frequently asked in the West Indies. The
unrest and agitation of the blacks are much greater than we in the
North imagine. Their ambition is greater and their political
aspirations higher than those who have not been among them are prepared
to admit. The situation is certainly not one that justifies supine
indifference on the part of the governments now in control, nor is the
difficulty one whose solution can be indefinitely postponed. Every
lover [34]of law and order must hope that some modus vivendi can be arrived at whereby, while all the
legitimate claims of the negro are conceded, the world will he spared
another “decline and fall” like that which has been
witnessed in Española.
We called at several of the ports of Haiti and Santo Domingo but we
found little to interest us outside of the capital of the latter
republic. Santo Domingo is not only the oldest city in the New
World—the early abandoned settlement of Isabella never deserved
the name of city—but is, in many respects, the most interesting.
Founded by Bartholomew Columbus in 1496, and named Santo Domingo after
the patron saint of his father, Domenico, it was, for a while, the seat
of the vice-royalty. It was to this place that Don Diego Colon, the son
of the Admiral, brought his lovely bride, Doña Maria de Toledo,
a daughter of one of the oldest and proudest families of Spain. Here he
set up a vice-regal court that excited the envy of his enemies, and was
by them made the basis of charges preferred against him that he
meditated establishing a government independent of the mother country.
Of the viceroy’s palace, Oviedo writes to Charles V, it
“seemeth unto me so magnificall and
princelyke that yowr maiestie maye bee as well lodged therin as in any
of the mooste exquisite builded houses of
Spayne.”30
From Santo Domingo radiated the lines of discovery and conquest that
culminated in the achievements of Cortes, Balboa and Pizarro. Here
Columbus was loaded with chains and imprisoned by Bobadilla. Here was
established the first university of the New World. Here, within the
walls of the Convent of San Domingo, prayed and labored that noble
“Protector of the Indians,” Las Casas, and here he planned
and began work on his monumental Historia de las
Indias. Until the last assault by Drake in 1586, it was the centre
of commercial activity in the Indies, for it was the chief port of call
to and from Spain [35]and the place where merchants, miners, and
planters disposed of their commodities and amassed fortunes.
But Santo Domingo’s halcyon days were of short duration.
Before the end of the sixteenth century the city began to decline. The
theatre of activity, that had hitherto been confined to
Española, was transferred to Cuba and Mexico, Panama and Peru,
and to-day the once gay and prosperous capital exhibits but a shadow of
its pristine glory.
Homenage Castle, the crumbling palace of Don Diego Columbus, and the
few churches and monasteries that still, even in their neglected
condition, attest the former importance of the place, present a
pathetic picture, and tell, in mute but elegant language, of the
reverses and evil days that have been the lot of America’s first
city.
Besides the buildings just named we were especially interested in
the Cathedral. It is a noble structure and its interior decorations
compare favorably with similar edifices in Spain and Mexico. But there
was one attraction there that had for us, as it must have for all
Americans, a special interest, and which alone would well repay a
pilgrimage to Santo Domingo—the last resting place of the one
“who to Castile and Leon gave a new world.”
As the reader is aware, there has been a long and spirited
controversy as to the location of los restos—the
remains—of the illustrious discoverer. We have been shown his
sepulchre in the Cathedral of Havana, and in that of Seville, yet it
has been demonstrated beyond question that his ashes have never reposed
in either of these places. Without entering into details, it may now be
stated, as facts which no longer admit of any reasonable doubt, that
after his death in 1506, the remains of Columbus were interred in the
Franciscan monastery of Valladolid, whence, in 1508, they were
transferred to the monastery of Las Cuevas, at Seville. In 1541, at the
request of “Doña Maria of Toledo, Vicereine of the Indies,
wife that was of the Admiral Don Diego Columbus,” Charles V, by a
special cedula, granted [36]permission for the transfer of the
remains of Christopher Columbus to Española, to be interred in
the capilla mayor of the Cathedral of Santo Domingo. Here they have
since reposed, with the exception of the short time during which they
were kept in the adjoining church, when the Cathedral was undergoing
certain necessary repairs in 1877 and 1878. The supposed remains of the
first Admiral, that were taken to Havana in 1795, and finally
transferred to Seville in 1899, have been shown to be those of his son,
Don Diego, who, together with Don Luis Columbus, the third Admiral, and
the first Duke of Veragua, was also buried in the capilla mayor of the
Cathedral, where the remains of Don Luis still lie near those of his
illustrious grandfather.31
As our steamer moved out of the water of Santo Domingo our eyes
remained fixed on the Cathedral, whose Spanish tiled roof reflected the
vermilion rays of the setting sun, and afford shelter for one of the
world’s greatest heroes and benefactors.
“Hic locus abscondit præclari membra
Coloni,”
This place hides the remains of the illustrious
Columbus, of him who, in the language of one of the many epitaphs
devoted to his memory,
“Dió riquezas immensas á la
tierra,
Innumerables almas al cielo.”32
And then, as the last vestiges of this noble old
temple vanished from our vision, we thought of the words of Humboldt,
than whom no one was better qualified to pronounce a fitting eulogy on
one of the world’s immortals. [37]
“The majesty of great memories,” he declares,
“seems concentrated in the name of Christopher Columbus. It is
the originality of his vast conceptions, the compass and fertility of
his genius, and the courage which bore out against the long series of
misfortunes, which have exalted the Admiral high above all his
contemporaries.”33
And we dreamed—or was it a telepathic intimation of a future
reality?—when the precious remains, that have so long been
guarded in this distant and rarely visited island, should be
transferred for a third and a last time, but this time where they might
be visited and venerated by millions instead of the few hundred that
now find their way hither, and where they might occupy a noble
sarcophagus, like that which beneath the dome of the Invalides, holds
all that is mortal of the great Corsican, and in a temple worthy alike
of the man and of the greatest nation in the world. There is one
edifice in which all the nations of the hemisphere discovered by
Columbus have a common interest, the splendid structure now being
erected in Washington, for the special use and benefit of the North and
South American Republics. Here in the capital of the nation, in the
district named after the discoverer, in sight of the tomb of the
“Father of his Country,” should the remains of “The
Admiral of the Ocean Sea,” find an abiding place of sepulture
commensurate with the magnitude of his achievements. Alongside and in
connection with this Pan-American building, in the heart of what is to
be “the City Beautiful,” and there alone, let there be
erected a mausoleum that, as a monument of art, shall rank, as did
those of Hadrian and Mausolus, amongst the world’s wonders, and
be a fitting culmination of the architectural creations that have been
planned for the great and growing capital of the New World, the world
of Columbus. [38]
From Santo Domingo we went to Puerto Rico. As is well
known, this island was discovered by Columbus during his second voyage
in 1493. Sixteen years later a settlement was founded here by Ponce de
Leon. It was from here that he set forth in quest of the
“Fountain of Youth,” and it is in San Juan, in the Church
of Santo Domingo, that he was buried after a poisoned arrow from the
bow of an Indian brave had terminated his existence during his second
expedition to Florida. Over his tomb was inscribed the following
epitaph:—
“Mole sub hac fortis requiescunt ossa Leonis
Qui vicit factis nomina magna suis.”34
After sojourning a week in Puerto Rico, we called at
the little Dutch island Curaçao and spent the greater part of
the day in the quaint little town of Willemstad. The harbor is
perfectly landlocked and was at one time the favorite rendezvous for
pirates and buccaneers. In strolling through its streets, we could
easily fancy ourselves in some quiet section of Rotterdam or Amsterdam.
The island is known for its much prized liqueur, Curaçao, which,
however, strange to say, is not made here but in Holland.
Curaçao supplies only the orange rind with which the liqueur is
flavored. Willemstad is a popular resort for smugglers, who do an
extensive business on the mainland, and the temporary home of a colony
of exiled Venezuelan generals and colonels, who here eke out a
precarious existence in the hope that one of their periodical
revolutions may soon give them the eagerly desired opportunity of
enjoying some of the spoils of office, that, for the time being, are
monopolized by their enemies. [39]
We arrived in the roadstead of La Guayra early in the
morning, after our departure from Curaçao, and our vessel was
soon moored alongside a splendid breakwater, which extends out from the
shore for more than a half mile, and gives this port a fairly good
harbor, which even the largest ships may enter. We were now on the
Spanish Main where we had our first view of the great continent of
South America.
As the phrase, “The Spanish Main,” has been given many
and different significations since it was first introduced, I shall
employ it, in what was long its generally accepted meaning, as
designating the southern part of the Caribbean Sea, and the coast line
of what, on the early maps of South America, was known as Tierra
Firme—the Firm Land—namely, that part of the present
republics of Venezuela and Colombia on which the Spaniards effected
their first settlements.
The first thing to attract our attention and that which impressed us
most, was the apparently stupendous height of the mountains in the rear
of the town. Before us were La Silla and Pico de Naiguata, sheer and
precipitous, rising almost from the water’s edge and piercing the
clouds at an altitude of more than eight thousand and two hundred feet.
They are thus apparently higher than any of the peaks of the Rocky
Mountain chain. The summits of the latter are attained only after
traveling over a long and gradual incline, that is scarcely
perceptible, and after scaling numerous foothills that conceal and
dwarf the giants which tower behind and above them. Thus, while the
summit of Pike’s Peak is more then fourteen thousand feet above
sea level, it is less than seven thousand feet above the charming town
of Manitou, that nestles at its feet. For this reason, and because the
sides of the Colorado peak are not so steep as those behind La Guayra,
La Silla and the Pico de Naiguata give an impression of height and
majesty that [40]is not experienced even when contemplating the
loftiest monarchs of the Alps.
The distance from La Guayra to Caracas, in a straight line, is less
than six miles; by rail it is twenty-three. There has been talk of
connecting the capital and its port by a tunnel but under the existing
conditions of the country it will be a long time before such an
undertaking shall be realized.
From sea level to the summit of the range, the railroad is
conspicuous for its heavy grade—about four per cent.—its
sharp curves, its cuts and tunnels, but above all for the magnificent
scenery everywhere visible. From the car window one may look over
precipitous cliffs into yawning abysses far below the track on which
the train slowly and carefully winds its way. On the beetling rocks
above, in the dark and wild gorge below—what a wealth of
vegetation, what luxuriance of growth, what a gorgeous display of
vari-colored fruit and flower, of delicate fern and majestic palm!
As a feat of engineering the road is quite equal to any of the kind
that may be seen in Europe or the United States; but for scenic beauty
and splendor it is absolutely unrivaled. On the lofty flanks of the
Rockies, and in the deep cañons of the Fraser and Colorado
rivers, where the shrill whistle of the locomotive startles the falcon
and the eagle, one can have fully gratified one’s sense of the
grand and the sublime in nature; but here it is beauty, grandeur,
sublimity all combined. And what marvelous perspectives, what
delightful exhibitions of color, what superb and ever-changing effects
of light and shade—scenes that would be the despair of Claude
Lorrain and Salvator Rosa, and as difficult to catch on canvas as the
glories of the setting sun.
No where else in the wide world can one find such another picture as
greets one’s vision when, rising into cloudland, one gets
one’s last view of the Caribbean circling the mountain thousands
of feet beneath the silent and awe-stricken [41]spectator. It is matchless, unique—like
Raphael’s Madonna di San Xysto, impossible to duplicate.
As we reached this point, the sea disclosed itself as a vast mirror
resplendent under the aureate glow of the quivering beams of the
departing lord of day. Fleecy clouds of every form and hue flitting
over sea and land, by a peculiar optical illusion, magnified both
objects and distances, and unfolded before the astonished beholder a
panorama of constantly varying magnitude and of surpassing loveliness.
On the foreground Nature shed her brightest green, and imparted to
flower and foliage the flush of the rainbow. Of a truth,
“Never did Ariel’s plume
At golden sunset hover
O’er scenes so full of bloom.”
Away and beyond was the boundless, glimmering sea,
ravishing in its thousand tints, and in its harmonious dance of
vanishing light and color.
So occupied were we in observing the beauties of the everchanging
landscape, that, before we realized it, we were in Caracas. And so
momentary was the twilight— a characteristic of the
tropics—that the transition from daylight to darkness was almost
startling. We found an unexpected compensation, however, in the
friendly glow of the electric lights which illumine the street and
plazas of Venezuela’s capital.
We spent a month in and about Caracas, finding every hour enjoyable.
It is, in many respects, a beautiful city and located near the base of
the mountains La Silla, the saddle—from its fancied resemblance
to an army saddle—and El Cerro de Avila, in a charming valley
from one to three miles wide and about ten miles long. The valley was
at one time, seemingly, the bed of a lake, and its soil is,
consequently, exceedingly fertile, and admirably adapted to cultivation
of the farm and garden produce of both tropical and temperate climates.
[42]
A friend, who had traveled much, once told us that he regarded
Taormina, in Sicily, as the best and most beautiful winter resort in
the world. We are familiar with both places, and can say, in all
candor, that we prefer Caracas. True, Taormina is one of the beauty
spots of the world, but one expects to find more than beauty in a
winter resort. Some years before our visit to Caracas we were in
Taormina, and during the same time of the winter as marked our visit to
Caracas, and we found it so cold that, during our entire stay, we were
obliged to have our rooms heated by steam. In the latter place we could
leave the doors and windows of our room open day and night, and
enjoyed, during all the time we tarried there, the name soft, balmy,
fragrant air, and the same equable temperature. The mean temperature we
found to be about 70° F., the thermometer seldom rising above
75° F. and rarely falling below 65° F. The only place where we
over had a like experience was on the slope of a mountain in one of the
Hawaiian Islands, where the temperature is so constant that the native
language has no word to express the idea of weather—what we call
“weather” being always the same.
Considering the many natural beauties of the valley of Caracas, its
rich, tropical vegetation, its matchless climate, its soft, balmy
atmosphere, the rippling brooks and purling rivulets that everywhere
gladden the landscape, we can understand how an early Spanish
historian, Oviedo y Baños,35 was in his enthusiasm led
to declare this location of the capital of Venezuela to be that of the
home of perpetual spring—nay, more, that of a terrestrial
paradise. If he could revisit these scenes to-day, he would find but
little change in their general physical aspect, but he would see at
once that the serpent’s trailing has cast a blight over its
former beauty, and that the people, as a whole, have sadly degenerated
since his time. Then, as he tells us, the stranger that had spent two
months in this Eden would [43]never wish to leave it. Alas, that
one cannot say this now!36
On the Coast Range,
Venezuela.
After a month’s sojourn in Caracas we felt the Spiritus
movendi again upon us, urging us onward, we knew not whither. We
were under the spell of what the Germans so aptly call the
Wanderlust and it did not make much difference what direction we
took so long as the road we traveled enabled us to enjoy new scenes and
visit peoples whose manners and customs were different from our
own.
Having thoroughly rested and recuperated the strength we so much
needed, we felt that we should like to take a trip to the Orinoco, in
order that we might have an opportunity of studying the fauna and flora
of its wonderful valley and of meeting some of the many Indian tribes
that rove through its forests. In spite of all our efforts, however, we
could find no one who could give us any satisfactory information about
the best means of reaching the river or the time that would be required
to make the journey. We consulted government officials and merchants
that had business relations along the Orinoco, but their information
was vague and contradictory.
We purposed going first to San Fernando de Apure, on an affluent of
the Orinoco, and thence by water to Ciudad Bolivar and the
Port-of-Spain. We were told that there were steamers plying between San
Fernando and Ciudad Bolivar—the chief city on the
Orinoco—during the wet season, our summer, but not during the dry
season, our winter. That meant that if we went to San Fernando we
should be obliged to use a canoe to reach Ciudad Bolivar, and this
implied a long, tiresome, and somewhat dangerous voyage under a burning
sun and in what we were assured was a malarious region. The time
necessary to reach the river on horseback varied, according to our
informants, [44]from one to two weeks. One well known general, it
was stated, had by an extraordinary tour de force made the trip
the preceding year in four days. Some assured us we could go by
carriage the entire distance. Others were equally positive that there
was nothing more than a trail connecting the points we wished to visit,
and that mules would be better than horses for such a journey. Outside
of one or two small towns, there were no hotels along the route. But
this did not matter. We had our camping outfit with us, and rather
preferred to live in our tent to risking our night’s rest in such
uninviting posadas—lodging houses—as we should meet
with in the way.
Finding that we could not get in Caracas the information we desired,
we resolved to go to Victoria, an interesting town southwest of the
capital, and accessible by rail in a few hours. But our success in
Victoria was no better than it had been in Caracas. In spite of all our
efforts we could elicit no information that would warrant us in
starting on so long a journey as that to the Orinoco, and one that
might involve many hardships and dangers without adequate
compensation.
Yet, notwithstanding our ill success so far, we did not for a moment
think of abandoning our contemplated trip to the valley of the Orinoco.
Far from it. The more we thought of it the more fascinating the project
became. Now that we had gone so far, we were determined to see the
famous river at all hazards. If we could not reach it by one route we
would go by another. We accordingly concluded to continue our journey
by rail to Puerto Cabello, and thence go by steamer to Trinidad. Once
there, we felt reasonably sure we should find some means of attaining
our goal—the grassy plains and vast forests of the Orinoco basin.
As proved by subsequent events, it was for us a most fortunate
occurrence that we did not adhere to our original plan of reaching the
Orinoco by San Fernando de Apure, as our change of programme enabled us
to see far more of South America and under more [45]favorable auspices, than we had before deemed
possible.
Instead of going directly to Puerto Cabello, we spent a week at the
quiet old city of Valencia, Nueva Valencia del Rey, as it was
originally called, and which, according to the Valencianos, should be
the capital of the republic. It was begun in 1555, by Alonzo Diaz
Moreno, twelve years before Santiago de Leon de Caracas—the
original name of the capital—was founded by Diego de Losada. As a
matter of fact, Valencia was designated as the capital of Venezuela at
the time of the revolt against Spain, and congress was actually in
session there at the time Caracas was destroyed by an earthquake in
1812. Five years after its foundation, Valencia was captured by the
infamous Lopez de Aguirre and his sanguinary band, who treated its
inhabitants with the greatest atrocity. Near by, on the plains of
Carabobo, was fought the decisive victory which resulted in Venezuelan
independence.37
As a port of entry, Puerto Cabello is incomparably superior to La
Guayra, and has one of the finest harbors on the Caribbean. The
climate, however, is far from salubrious. Situated, as it is, in low,
marshy ground, surrounded by countless pools of stagnant water, it is
not surprising to find that malarial fevers are prevalent here, and
that El vómito—yellow fever—is a
frequent visitant. The “nymphs that reign o’er sewers and
sinks” can here count more fetid effluvia and putrefactive
ferments than in any place we had so far seen in Venezuela.
A most delightful voyage was ours from Puerto Cabello
to the Port-of-Spain, the capital of Trinidad. The sea was as placid as
an inland lake on a windless day, and the air as balmy as in a morning
of June. The coast of the mainland was nearly always in sight, and at
times the peaks of the Coast Range rose far above the fleecy clouds
that encircled their lofty flanks. The days were beautiful but
[46]the nights were glorious. All our youthful dreams
about the delights of sailing on southern seas, amid emerald isles, and
under bright starlit skies, where soft spice-scented zephyrs blow, were
here realized. The serenity and transparency of the azure vault of
heaven, with its countless shooting stars, had their counterpart in the
smooth, unruffled Caribbean, to whose water millions of Noctilucæ
imparted a phosphorescent glow which rivaled that of molten gold. We
were at last in the favored home of the chambered nautilus, happily,
dreamily gliding along on an even keel
“In gulfs enchanted, where the siren sings,
And coral reefs lie bare,
Where the cold sea-maids rise from crystal springs
To sun their streaming hair.”
Yes, we were skirting along the Pearl Coast,38 celebrated in legend and story—darkened by
deeds of barbarous cruelty and resplendent in records of heroic
achievement. I shall not tell of our second visit to La Guayra and of
the day we spent at Macuto or describe the present conditions of the
historic old towns of Barcelona, Cumana and Carupano, which lay on our
course. Much might be said of all these places, distinguished, since
their foundation, both in peace and war.
I cannot, however, pass this part of the Pearl Coast without
recalling the fact that it was near Cumana that the earliest
settlements in Venezuela were effected and that here it was that one of
the first—if not the first—permanent colonies on the
mainland of the New World was established. Columbus, during his fourth
voyage, attempted to make a settlement in Veragua, that might serve as
a base of future operations, but the attempt resulted in complete
failure. Similar efforts had been made by Alonso de Ojeda and others,
but without lasting results. Panama was not founded until 1516 or 1517.
Nombre de Dios, it is true, [47]was founded somewhat earlier, but in
the beginning was little more than a blockhouse. But here, as early in
1514, on the Rio Manzanares, then the River Cumana, only “a
cross-bow-shot” from the shore, the zealous Sons of St. Francis
had erected a monastery, and a short time subsequently the Dominicans
established another monastery, not far distant, at Santa Fe de
Chiribichi. Here they gathered the simple children of the forest around
them, and soon had the beginnings of flourishing missions.39 The trusting and unspoiled Indians welcomed these
apostles of the gospel of peace and love, and soon learned to regard
them as friends and fathers. So peaceful did all this land become under
the influence of the benign teaching of the gentle friars, that,
according to Oviedo and Las Casas, a Christian trader could go alone
anywhere without ever being molested.40
It was to the Pearl Coast that Las Casas came, after he found, by
sad experience, that his efforts in behalf of the Indians in Cuba,
Española and Puerto Rico were frustrated by influences he was
unable to control. It was here, aided by Franciscans and Dominicans,
who had preceded him by only a few years, that he purposed laying the
corner stone of that vast Indian commonwealth, for which he had secured
letters patent from Charles V.
For this great experiment in colonization, the greatest the world
has ever known, he had received a grant of land extending from Paria to
Santa Marta, and from the [48]Caribbean Sea to Peru. In his
colossal undertaking he planned to have the coöperation of an
order of knights—the Knights of the Golden Spur—specially
created to aid him in the work of civilizing and christianizing the
Indians. It was his dream to bring within the fold of the Church all
the Indians of Central and South America, and to establish for their
behoof and benefit an ideal Christian state such as a century and a
half later was realized in the fertile basins of the Parana and
Paraguay.41
If the noble philanthropist had been properly supported by the rich
and the powerful, the entire course of subsequent events in South
America would have been altered, and the historian would have been
spared the task of penning those dark annals of injustice and iniquity
which, for long centuries, were such a foul blot on humanity. But from
the time he set foot on the Pearl Coast, in pursuance of his noble
plan, he found himself beset by untold difficulties, and his designs
thwarted at every turn, and that, too, by his own countrymen. Blinded
by lust of gold and pleasure, they left nothing undone to insure the
failure of his project, and in the end succeeded in their nefarious
purpose.
Abandoned by those on whose coöperation he fully relied, he
was, in its very inception, forced to relinquish his heroic enterprise,
and return to Española. Discomfited and heartsick, but not
crushed, he sought an asylum in the monastery of Santo Domingo. There
for eight years he devoted himself to prayer and study, and, true
Christian athlete that he was, he was always preparing himself for a
final struggle in a new arena. When his enemies least expected it, he
came forth from his retirement, and, clad in the habit of a Dominican,
proclaimed himself again the champion of the downtrodden Indian. And
from that moment until the day of his death, at the advanced age of
ninety-two, whether as a simple monk or as the bishop of [49]Chiapa,42 his voice was always raised in
behalf of the children of the forest, and against their enslavement by
cruel, soulless seekers after fortune.43
He was, if not the first, the world’s greatest abolitionist,
and if there are still many millions of red men in the New World to-day
who have escaped the bond of servitude, it is mainly due to their
illustrious protector, Bartolomé de Las Casas.44
Within sight of the land where Las Casas went to lay
the first foundation-stone of his ideal commonwealth is a group of
islands which had a special claim on our attention—islands which,
during four centuries, have been the scene of many a romance and have
been stained, no one can tell how often, by the blood of tragedy.
These islands are Coche, Cubagua and Margarita. They were discovered
by Columbus during his third voyage, and the larger of the two was
called Margarita—pearl—from the number and beauty of the
pearls found in the waters [50]that wash its shore. Even before he
had left the Gulf of Paria, between Trinidad and the mainland, he had
observed that the aborigines of Tierra Firme were decked with bracelets
and necklaces of pearl, and soon discovered, to his great satisfaction,
that these much-prized gems could be obtained in great abundance, and
that many of them were of extraordinary size and beauty. Peter Martyr,
as translated by Eden, tells us, “Many of these pearls were as
bygge as hasellnuttes, and oriente (as we caule it), that is lyke unto
them of the Easte partes.”45 During the first third of
the sixteenth century the value of the pearls sent to Europe was equal
to nearly one-half of the output of all the mines in America.46 In one year—1587—after the pearl
fisheries of the Gulf of Panama had been discovered, nearly seven
hundred pounds weight of pearls was sent to the markets of Europe, some
of them rivaling in beauty of sheen and perfection of form the rarest
gems ever found in the waters of Persia or Ceylon. It was from these
fisheries of the New World that Philip II obtained the famous pearl,
weighing two hundred and fifty carats, of the size and shape of a
pigeon’s egg, mentioned by the early chroniclers.
So great was the commercial activity among these little islands,
especially in Cubagua, that the Spaniards built a town there, which
they called New Cadiz, although the site chosen was without water, and
so sterile that the Indians had never lived on it. Toward the end of
the sixteenth century the pearl fishery in these parts diminished
rapidly, and in the early part of the century following, the industry,
[51]according to Laet, had died out altogether, and
the islands of Coche and Cubagua fell into oblivion. But while it
lasted, sad to say, it meant untold misery for the thousands of Indian
and Negro slaves who were forced, at the sacrifice of their health and
often of their lives, to enrich their cruel masters by work that was
almost as fatal as that in the mines of Española.
For more than two hundred years the pearl fisheries in the waters
around these islands were practically abandoned. Even during the last
century comparatively little work was done to develop an industry that,
during the sixteenth century, contributed so much to the coffers of
Spain. About the year 1900, however, a French company secured a
concession from Venezuela to fish in the neighborhood of these islands.
According to agreement, it is to pay the government ten per cent.
royalty, and to employ divers and diving apparatus so as to select only
the larger oysters and avoid the destruction of those that are
immature.
From the estimates available, about $600,000 worth of pearls are
annually sent to the Paris market from Margarita. While a large
proportion of them are cracked and of poor color, there are,
nevertheless, many of the finest orient, and these find ready
purchasers. As for ourselves, we saw few of large size, and none of
great value. Even in Caracas, where we made diligent inquiry about
them, we did not find a single one from these waters that would attract
attention for either size or lustre.47
The weather could not have been more delightful than it [52]was
during our all too brief cruise among these islands around which at one
time, as has been truly remarked, “all the wonder, all the pity
and all the greed of the age had concentrated itself.” They are
now shorn of all their former glory, and there is little to indicate
their pristine importance. They are practically deserted, with the
exception of Margarita, which, on account of the arid and unproductive
soil, is but sparsely inhabited. And yet, as they lay clustered there
on the calm bosom of the Caribbean, without a ripple to disturb its
mirror-like surface, they possessed a certain undefinable beauty that
defied analysis. Besides, there was still hovering over and around them
the glamour of days long past, when they were visited for the first
time by the great Admiral of the Ocean Sea, and later on, by Cristobal
Guerra and Alonzo Niño, and by Francisco Orellana, after his
memorable voyage down the Amazon.
The sun was sloping down to his ocean bed—the air was
glimmering with a mellow light, as we drifted from these waters over
which Merlin seemed to wave his enchanting wand. As the orb of day
touched the distant horizon, and sank into the crimson mist that
floated above the placid sea, it assumed strange oval and pear-shaped
figures that grew larger in their waning splendor. The rainbow hues
that steeped in molten lustre the receding shores seemed to float on
clouds from spirit-land.
A scene it was to swell the tamest bosom, a fairy realm where Fancy
would
“Bid the blue Tritons sound their twisted
shells,
And call the Nereids from their pearly
cells.”
Below us, beneath the dark depths of the crystal sea,
illumined by the lamps of the sea-nymphs, were living flower beds of
coral, the blooms and the palms of the ocean recesses, where the pearl
lies hid, and caves where the gem is sleeping, the gardens, fair and
bewildering in their richness and beauty, of Nereus and Amphitrite. It
was indeed [53]such a scene as the poet has painted for us in
these charming verses:—
“Wherever you wander the sea is in sight,
With its changeable turquoise green and blue,
And its strange transparence of limpid light.
You can watch the work that the Nereids do
Down, down, where their purple fans unfurl,
Planting their coral and sowing their pearl.”
[54]
1 Dec. 1,
Lib. IX, Cap. 10. ↑
2 1513 is the
date given by Garcilaso de la Vega, and Peschel, in his
Geschichte des Zeitalters der Entdeckungen, p. 521,
has proved that this is the date that should be
accepted. ↑
3 The
History of Hernando de Soto and Florida; or Record of the Events of
Fifty-six Years, from 1512 to 1568, p. 111, 78 and passim,
Philadelphia, 1881. ↑
4
“Floridamque appelaverat quia Resurectionis die eam insulam
repererint; vocat Hispanus pascha floridum resurectionis diem.”
Dec. IV, Cap. 5. ↑
5 Les Cortereal et leur Voyage au Nouveau Monde, pp. 111,
151. ↑
6 Le Premier Voyage de Amerigo Vespucci, par F. A. de Varnhagan,
Vienne, 1869, p. 34. ↑
7 Historia General de las Indias, Tom. XXII de
Autores Españoles, Madrid, M. Rivadeneyra, Editor,
1877—I have reproduced the passage in the quaint translation of
Richard Eden, as given in The first three books on America, p.
345, edited by Edward Arber, Westminster, 1895. ↑
8 Colección de documentos inéditos del archivo de
Indias, Tom. V, pp. 536, 537. ↑
9 Elegias de Varones Ilustres de Indias, in the Biblioteca de Autores Españoles, Tom. IV, p. 69,
Collection Rivadeneyra, Madrid, 1850.
In spite, however, of the scepticism of Martyr and
of the ridicule of Castellanos and the denunciation of Oviedo, the
quest for the Fountain of Youth was, according to Herrera, continued
until the end of the sixteenth century, and probably
longer. ↑
10 The
Voiage and Travayle of Sir John Maundeville Knight, chap.
LII. ↑
11 Richard
Eden, op, cit., p. 34. ↑
12 For an
illuminating discussion of this subject, with citation of authorities,
see M. Beauvois’ article, La Fontaine de Jouvence et
le Jourdain dans les Traditions des Antilles et
de la Floride, Le Muséon, Tom. III, No. 3. ↑
13 “By
projecting our modern knowledge into the past,” to employ a
favorite phrase of John Fiske, many, even among recent writers, speak
as if the early explorers knew for a certainty that the land discovered
by Columbus was actually distinct from Asia. None of them, however, go
to the extreme of Lope de Vega, who, in one of his dramas, El Nuevo Mundo Descubierto, makes the Genoese mariner, in a
talk with his brother Bartholomew, ask why is it, that I, “a poor
pilot, broken in fortune, yearn to add to this world another and one so
remote?”—
“Un hombre pobre, y aun roto,
Que casi lo puedo decir,
Y que vive de piloto
Quiere á éste mundo añadir
Otro mundo tan remoto.”
 ↑
14
Writings of Columbus, edited by P. L. Ford, New York,
1892. ↑
15
Relaciones y Cartas de Cristobal Colón in the
Biblioteca Clásica, Tom. CLXIV, Madrid,
1892. ↑
16
Relaciones y Cartas, ut sup., pp. 57,
58. ↑
17
Hakluyt’s Early Voyage, Vol. III, p. 615, London, 1810.
The introduction of tobacco into England is by some attributed to
Hawkins rather than to Lord Raleigh, who is generally supposed to have
introduced it. ↑
18
“Vedete che pestifero e maluagio ueleno del diaulo e
questo.” La Historia del Mondo Nuovo, p. 54, Venezia,
1555. ↑
19
Nouveau Voyage aux Isles de L’Amérique, Vol. II, p.
120, par Jean Baptiste Labat, à la Haye, 1724. ↑
20 Even
royalty took part in the controversy. In A Counterblaste to
Tobacco King James concludes his argument against the use of the
weed as follows:—
“A custome loathsome to the eye, hatefull to
the nose, harmfull to the braine, dangerous to the lungs, and in the
blacke stinking fume thereof, neerest resembling the horrible Stigian
smoke of the pit that is bottomlesse.” The Works of the Most
High and Mightie Prince James, by the Grace of God, King of Great
Britaine, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc., p. 222,
London, 1616. ↑
21
“Hail, happy soil, whence Mother Nature lavishes in abundance the
odoriferous, smokable plant! Hail, happy Havana.” ↑
22
Vida y Escritos de Don Fray Bartolomé de las Casas, Obispo de
Chiapa, por Don Antonio Maria Fabié, Tom. I, pp. 235, 236,
Madrid, 1879. ↑
23
Fray Bartolemé de las Casas, Sus Tiempos y Su Apostolado,
por Carlos Gutierres, pp. 351, 352, 368, 369, Madrid,
1878. ↑
24
Étude sur les Rapports de L’Amérique et de
L’Ancien Continent avant Christophe Colomb, par Paul
Gaffarel. p. 124 et seq., Paris, 1869. ↑
25 The
diminutive of España, and signifying little Spain. Also known by
the Latinized name Hispaniola, and as Isabella, in honor of the
illustrious patron of the discoverer. Haiti is an Indian word meaning
“craggy land,” or “land of
mountains.” ↑
26
Historia de las Indias, Dec. II, Lib. 3, Cap. 14. ↑
27
Southey’s History of Brazil, Vol. III, Chap.
XXXIII. ↑
28 Sir
Clements R. Markham in his introduction to Hawkins’
Voyages, says, speaking of this subject, “It is not therefore
John Hawkins alone who can justly be blamed for the slave trade, but
the whole English people during 250 years, who must all divide the
blame with him.” ↑
29 The
Spanish Conquest in America, by Sir Arthur Helps, Vol. I, p. 350,
London and New York, 1900. See also Girolamo Benzoni, Historia del Mondo Nuovo, p. 65, Venezia, 1565, in which he
says many Spaniards of Española predicted that the island would
surely, within a short time, fall into the hands of the blacks.
“Vi sono molti Spagnuoli que tengono per cosa
certa que quest’ Isola in breue tempo sara posseduta da questi
Mori.” ↑
30
Eden’s First Three English Books on America, p.
240. ↑
31 For a
complete discussion of this subject, see Christopher Columbus, His
Life, His Works, His Remains, pp. 507–613, by J. B. Thatcher,
New York, 1904. According to this author, very small portions of the
precious ashes of the great discoverer exist in the Vatican, in the
University of Pavia, where Columbus was a student, in The Municipal
Hall of Genoa, in the Lenox Library, New York, and in the possession of
four different private individuals whom he names. ↑
32
“To Earth he gave immense riches, to Heaven souls
innumerable.” ↑
33
Histoire de la Géographie du Nouveau Continent, par
Alexander de Humboldt, Vol. V, pp. 177, 178, Paris,
1839. ↑
34
“This narrow space is a sepulchre of the man who was a Lion in
name and much more one in deed.” ↑
35
Historia de la Conquista y población de la Provincia de
Venezuela, Tom. II, p. 36, Madrid, 1885. ↑
36 The
Romans declare that those who cast a coin into the fountain of Trevi
are sure to return to the Eternal City. The Caraquenians have a similar
saying, viz., that he who drinks of the water of the Catuche, a stream
flowing through the city, will return to Caracas. El que
bebe de Catuche vuelve á Caracas. ↑
37
Historia de las Indias, Dec. II, Lib. 3, Cap. 14. ↑
38 The
Pearl Coast extends from Coro to the Gulf of Paria, a distance of more
than five hundred miles. ↑
39 Padre
A. Caulin, Historia coro-grafica, natural y evangelica de
la Nueva Andalucia, Madrid, 1779, and Conversion en
Piritu de Indios Cumanogotos y Palenques, por el P. Fr. Matias Ruiz
Blanco O. S. F. seguido de Los Franciscanos en las
Indias, por Fr. Francisco Alvarez de Vilanueva, O. S. F., Madrid,
1892. ↑
40 Even
Captain John Hawkins, “an atrocious slave dealer,” is
forced to pay his tribute of praise to the gentle and peaceful
character of the Indians of this part of Venezuela, for of them he
writes: “The people bee surely gentle and tractable, and such as
desire to liue peaceablie, or else had it been vnpossible for the
Spaniards to haue conquered them as they did, and the more to liue now
peaceable, they being many in number, and the Spaniards of few.”
Op. cit., Vol. III, p. 28. ↑
41 F. A.
MacNutt’s Bartholomew de las Casas, His Life, His Apostolate
and His Writings, Chaps. VIII, XI, XII, New York,
1909. ↑
42
Antonio de Remesal, Historia de la Provincia de Son Vicente de
Chyapa, 1619. ↑
43 In his
last will he writes “Inasmuch as the goodness and the mercy of
God, whose unworthy minister I am, called me to be the protector of the
inhabitants of the countries, which we call the Indies, who were once
the lords of those lands and kingdoms, ... I have labored in the court
of the Kings of Castile, going and coming from the Indies to Castile
and from Castile to the Indies many times for about fifty
years—i. e., from the year 1540, for the love of God alone and
through compassion seeing those great multitudes of rational men
perish, who originally were approachable, humble, meek and simple, and
well fitted to receive the Catholic faith and practice all manner of
Christian virtues.” Fabié, op. cit., Tom. I, pp. 234,
235. ↑
44
“In contemplating such a life,” writes Fiske, “as
that of Las Casas, all words of eulogy seem weak and frivolous. The
historian can only bow in reverent awe before a figure which is in some
respects the most beautiful and sublime in the annals of Christianity
since the Apostolic age. When now and then in the course of the
centuries God’s providence brings such a life into this world,
the memory of it must be cherished by mankind as one of its most
precious and sacred possessions. For the thoughts, the words, the deeds
of such a man, there is no death. The sphere of their influence goes on
widening forever. They bud, they blossom, they bear fruit, from age to
age.”—The Discovery of America, Vol. II, p.
482. ↑
45 Dec. 1,
Book 8. The same writer informs us that the sailors of Pedro Alonzo
Niño, on leaving Curiana to return to Spain, “had three
score and XVI poundes weight (after VIII vnces to the pownde) of
perles, which they bought for exchange of owre thynges, amountinge to
the value of fyve shyllinges.” ↑
46 Of
these gems of the ocean, “tears by Naiads wept,” one could
then repeat, as well as now, the words of Pliny, “The richest
merchandise of all, and the most soveraigne comoditie throughout the
whole world, are these perles.”—Naturalis Historia,
Lib. IX, Cap. 35. ↑
47 The
Venezuelan pearl-oyster—Margaritifera Radiata—is
related to the Ceylon species, Margaritifera vulgaris, and
ranges in color from white to bronze and, sometimes, black. It is
slightly larger than the Ceylonese gem, and is occasionally of
excellent quality.
About three hundred and fifty boats, each manned by
five or six men, are now engaged in the pearl fishery of Venezuela.
Most of them are from the ports of Cumana, Juan Griego and
Carupano.
The reader who is interested in the pearls of
Margarita and of the Pearl Coast, may consult with profit the very
elaborate work, The Book of the Pearl, by George F. Kunz and
Chas. H. Stevenson, New York, 1908, and The Pearl, by W. R.
Castelle, Philadelphia and London, 1907. ↑
“The battle’s rage
Was like the strife which currents wage,
Where Orinoco, in his pride,
Rolls to the main no tribute tide,
But ’gainst broad ocean urges far
A rival sea of roaring war;
While in ten thousand eddies driven,
The billows fling their foam to heaven,
And the pilot seeks in vain,
Where rolls the river, where the main.”1
—Scott.
The morning following our departure from the Pearl
Islands we were delighted to find our good ship anchored in the
beautiful Gulf of Paria. Thus, almost before we were aware of it, we
found ourselves reposing on the waters of the famed Orinoco which we
had made such futile efforts to reach from Caracas and Victoria. The
Gulf of Paria, as is known, is just north of several of the largest
estuaries of the Orinoco and the line of demarcation between the salt
water of the Atlantic and the fresh water of Venezuela’s great
river is usually quite marked. As we entered the gulf, through the
Dragon’s Mouth, we had the mainland on our starboard and the
island of Trinidad on our port quarter. Although the waters of the
Orinoco now enter the Atlantic through two channels—the Boca del
Draco and the Boca de la Sierpe—there is no doubt that Trinidad
was in recent geological times a part of the mainland of [55]South
America and that the Orinoco, instead of reaching the ocean, as it now
does, flowed almost directly across the island through a depression
which is still quite conspicuous. It will thus be seen that during long
geologic ages there has been an intimate physical connection between
Trinidad and the Orinoco as there has been a close commercial
connection between the two ever since the Spanish conquest.
Owing to the shallow waters of the harbor of the Port-of-Spain, the
capital of Trinidad, our steamer had to anchor about a mile from the
quay. When we were prepared to go ashore—and we lost no time in
getting ready—we were surrounded by a motley crowd of sable,
shouting, importunate boatmen, all clamoring and gesticulating and
sounding the praises of their canoes, and calling attention to their
fantastic names, as if this were a guarantee of their safety and
comfort. In a few moments we were seated in one of these gayly decked
craft, with our baggage beside us, on our way to the customhouse. Here
we were delayed only a few minutes, for the English in their colonies,
as in the mother country, rarely subject the traveler to those delays
and annoyances that constitute so disagreeable a feature in certain
other countries. “What a contrast,” we said to ourselves,
“between the conduct of the officials here and that of the
officious inquisitors at La Guayra!”
After we had been comfortably located in our hotel—there are
several good hotels in the city—our first thought was about our
journey up the Orinoco. To our great delight we learned that there
would be a steamer going to Ciudad Bolivar in about a week. This
accorded with our plans perfectly, as we thus had ample time to visit
the chief points of interest—and there are many—of the
island, and enjoy at least a passing view of the wonderful and varied
floral display for which Trinidad is so famous.
Trinidad, as the reader will recollect, was discovered by Columbus
during his third voyage, and given the name it still bears in honor of
the Blessed Trinity. In his letter [56]to Ferdinand and Isabella,
describing this voyage, he says he started from San Lucar in the name
of the most Holy Trinity, and after two months at sea, during a portion
of which time all aboard suffered intensely from the heat,2
they saw to the westward three mountain peaks, united at the base,
rising up before them. Here, then, was to them the symbol of the Triune
God—the Three in One—in whose name all had left their
native land, and what more natural than that it should be named
Trinidad—the Trinity? “Upon this,” writes the pious
admiral, “we repeated the ‘Salve Regina,’ and other
prayers, and all of us gave thanks to our Lord.”
What a grateful change it was from the extreme heat which they had
endured, to the delightful climate of the newly discovered island.
“When I reached the island of Trinidad,” I again quote from
the Admiral’s letter, “I found the temperature exceedingly
mild; the fields and the foliage were remarkably fresh and green, and
as beautiful as the gardens of Valencia in April.”3
What so deeply impressed Columbus on his arrival at Trinidad was
what likewise most impresses the visitor to-day—its mild climate
and the beauty and luxuriance of its vegetation. Although the island is
but little more than 10° from the Equator the mean annual
temperature is not more than 77° F. In the mornings and evenings of
the cooler season the thermometer is about 10° lower. During our
sojourn of some weeks in Trinidad we never suffered from the heat. On
the contrary, during our morning and evening [57]drives,
especially in the mountains, we found the ocean breeze delightfully
refreshing.
Columbus was also much impressed by the natives of the island. They
had a whiter skin—he had expected to find them very
black—than any he had hitherto seen in the Indies and were very
graceful in form, tall and elegant in their movements.
With the exception of a few scattered families, of more or less
mixed descent, the visitor will find no evidence of the former
existence here of that splendid type of Indian of whom the great
navigator speaks so highly, and of whose race there were then on the
island many thousands of souls. Here, as on the other islands of the
West Indies, the aborigines have disappeared, never to return.
In their place we find the most cosmopolitan agglomeration of people
under the sun—English, Germans, Spaniards, French, Chinese,
Hindoos, and Negroes from the darkest Senegambian to the fairest
Octaroon. About one-half of the population is composed of Negroes,
one-third of Coolies, and one-sixth of whites of various nationalities
and shades of color. As we contemplated the motley crowds which always
throng the streets of the Port-of-Spain we could not but recall Lopez
de Gomara’s curious reflections on the divers colors of the
different races of men. We give his remarks in Richard Eden’s
translation:
“One of the marueylous thynges that god ... vseth in the
composition of man, is coloure; whiche doubtlesse can not bee
consydered withowte great admiration in beholding one to be white and
an other blacke, beinge coloures vtterlye contrary. Sum lykewyse to be
yelowe whiche is betwene blacke and white; and other of other colours
as it were of dyuers liueres. And as these colours are to be marueyled
at, euen so is it to be considered howe they dyffer one from an other
as it were by degrees, forasmuche as sum men are whyte after dyuers
sortes of whytnesse: yelowe after dyuers maners of yelowe: blacke after
dyuers sortes of blacknesse: and howe from whyte they go to
[58]yelowe by ... discolourygne to browne and redde:
and to blacke by asshe colour, and murrey sumwhat lyghter then blacke:
and tawnye lyke vnto the west Indian which are all togyther in general
eyther purple, or tawny lyke vnto sodde quynses, or of the colour of
chestnuttes or olyues: which colour is to them natural and not by theyr
goynge naked as many haue thought: albeit theyr nakednesse haue sumwhat
helped thereunto. Therfore in lyke maner and with suche diuersitie as
men are commonly whyte in Europe and blacke in Affrike, euen with like
varietie are they tawny in these Indies, with diuers degrees diuersly
inclynynge more or lesse to blacke or whyte.”4
The Coolies interested us immensely, in whatever part of the island
we met them—and they are to be seen everywhere—and were for
us the subject-matter of constant study. They occupy an entire suburb
of the Port-of-Spain, and, for those who are interested in sociological
and economic questions, no place is more worthy of a visit. Day after
day, when the delicious evening breezes began to sweep in from the
ocean, we found ourselves directing our course towards the
“Indian Quarter,” as it is called, and we always found
something new to arrest our attention or excite our admiration. It
required no effort whatever of the imagination to fancy ourselves in
the crowded streets and markets of Benares or Madras.
Port-of-Spain, whose population is about 50,000, rejoices in quite a
number of large and handsome public buildings and churches. Among the
latter the Roman Catholic Cathedral is conspicuous. The homes of the
people in the better quarters of the city—surrounded by a rich
profusion of tropical flowers, and shrubs and trees covered with
blooming climbers—are frequently models of architectural
excellence, and betoken refinement, comfort and even affluence.
To us the most attractive part of the city was the Botanical Garden,
adjoining the residence of the governor. [59]This spot is justly
famous not only in the West Indies, but the world over. Here have been
collected from every tropical clime all the plants and shrubs and trees
that are admired, for beauty of bloom, richness of fragrance, or grace
and majesty of form.
Here we see the hibiscus shrub, with large, flaming, crimson
flowers; the poinciana, aglow with a bloom of yellow and orange,
scarlet flowered balisiers, and the poui tree decked with a rich robe
of saffron. Alongside them are oranges and lemons, pineapples, guavas,
mongosteens, nutmegs, tamarinds, and scores of other kinds of tropical
fruits. A little further on we meet with tea shrubs, the clove and the
cinnamon tree, the rubber tree, and the Bertolettia excelsa,
laden with nuts, each of which contains from ten to twenty seeds. Then
there are the curious cannon-ball tree, stately samans, the leopardwood
tree, the trumpet tree and others equally attractive. Besides all these
there are those princes of the forest—the palms—from every
quarter of the tropics, with every variety of trunk and
leaf—date, fern, talipot, Palmyra, and groo-groo palms, the tall
traveler’s-tree with its graceful plantain-like leaves, and the
Oreodoxa speciosa, “the glory of the mountains.” On
and among them are rare orchids, and parasites of countless species,
climbing ferns, and convolvuluses of every hue.
And to complete this scene of beauty, we behold at almost every
step, fluttering across our path, brilliant heliconias and other
butterflies that contribute such life and charm to the forest glories
of tropical lands. And then the humming birds—those lovely
animated gems that flit from bush to bush, and flower to
flower—flashing all the fire of the opal, and emitting in rapid
succession all the brilliant hues of the topaz and the sapphire, the
ruby and the emerald. They are not as numerous now—more is the
pity—as they were formerly, when the aborigines gave the name
Iere—humming bird—to this island on account of their great
numbers and when they protected and venerated [60]them as
the souls of departed Indians. But one still meets them in one’s
strolls through the gardens and the forest, and always with a new sense
of wonder and delight.
Here, of a truth, were realized, nay, eclipsed, all the marvels of
the garden of Alcinous, for here
“There was still
Fruit in his proper season all the year.
Sweet Zephyr breath’d upon them blasts that
were
Of varied tempers. These he made to bear
Ripe fruits, these blossoms. Time made never rape
Of any dainty there.”5
It is, indeed, worth a visit from afar to see and
study these marvels of plant and vine, and bush and tree of the Botanic
Garden. But the whole island is, at least for the stranger from the
North, one vast botanic garden. Go where we will, we are astonished and
bewildered by the novelty and the exuberance of the vegetation that
surrounds us.
If we drive over the broad and well-kept roads along the western
coast, we pass under shady avenues of cocoa palms bending under their
burden of fruit. If we go to the cacao groves—and they are large
and numerous here—our eyes are gladdened by the vermilion bloom
that covers the protecting Erythrina umbrosa.6 In a glen
hard by is a giant ceiba, transformed, by the countless number of
creepers and epiphytes to which it has given hospitality, into a vast
air-garden. Along the streams and mountain torrents are lovely canopies
formed by the plume-like foliage of bamboos—seventy to eighty
feet high—affording retreats of rarest sylvan beauty. Again it is
in the Rosa del Monte, with its crimson bloom, the
purple dracona, the yellow croton, the night-blooming cereus, the
angelim, covered with purple tassels, the carmine poinsettia, the
[61]sweet-scented vanilla, festoons of purple flowered
lianas, and gray candelabra of a giant cereus. Beyond it all, as a
felicitous background to this gorgeous display and at the same time an
adequate enclosure for Flora’s fairy palace, there is such a
profusion of vegetable tracery and arabesques “as would have
stricken dumb with awe and delight him who ornamented the Loggie of the
Vatican.”
Further on we have the comely bread-fruit tree, with its
deeply-lobed leaves and its massive fruit, the many-rooted and
many-branched mangrove,7 and not far distant is a clump
of royal palms, with their smooth pearl-gray columns and coronals of
verdure. Or there is a group of kindred growth—jagua
palms—whose crown of pinnated leaves, each full twenty-five feet
long, caused Humboldt to declare that on this truly magnificent tree
“Nature had lavished every beauty of form.” While standing
by one of the pillar-stems of the jagua palm, beneath its emerald
ostrich plumes, we were quite prepared to share Kingsley’s
enthusiasm for palm trees in general. “Like a Greek statue in a
luxurious drawing-room,” he writes, “sharp-cut, cold,
virginal; shaming by the grandeur of mere form the voluptuousness of
mere color, however rich and harmonious; so stands the palm of the
forest; to be worshipped rather than to be loved.”8
It would tire the reader to attempt a description of the many
pictures of interest of this charming island, of its delightful drives
in every direction, of its beauteous cascades and waterfalls, one of
which, Maracas Falls, three hundred feet in height, is a reproduction
of Bridal Falls in the Yosemite, with the added setting of tropical
verdure. No pen can picture the exquisite charm of the Caura or Maraval
valleys, of Blue Basin and Macaripe Bay, or of [62]the Five
Islands—real gems of the ocean—with their cozy and inviting
cottages. When in Egypt years ago we fancied that we should like to
spend the rest of our days on the island of Philæ, ever in the
presence of its matchless ruins. When we spent a happy day—how
fleeting it was—on one of these five islands—it was the
largest and fairest—we felt that we had at length found that
inland home—far away from noise and strife, from
“Fever and fret and aimless stir”
of which we had so often dreamed, and in which we had
so often longed to dwell.
The people of Trinidad think their island the most beautiful of all
the West Indian group. Having visited, at one time or other, all the
chief islands comprising the Greater and Lesser Antilles, we should
hesitate to dispute their claim. It is certainly very beautiful, and
possesses many attractions that are either entirely absent from the
other islands or are found only in a lesser degree. Puerto Rico and
Jamaica equal it in many respects, and in others surpass it, but in
some important features the American possession is inferior to those of
the British.
I have said nothing of La Brea, the wonderful pitch lake for which
Trinidad has been celebrated since the time of Raleigh,9
and which for some decades past has supplied us with much of the
asphalt used in the United States. This curious phenomenon has been
described so often that there is no call for further comment. Suffice
to say that it, together with the sugar plantations and the cacao
groves, constitutes the chief source of the revenue of the island.
Like Curaçao, Trinidad is a favorite resort of Venezuelan
[63]revolutionists, expatriated generals and colonels
and their sympathizers. As a rule, they are an impecunious set, and
rarely interesting. Crespo and Guzman Blanco both started from here on
their way to the presidential chair in Caracas. So did the unfortunate
Paredes, shortly before our arrival in Venezuela, but he had scarcely
set foot on the soil of his native country, which he had promised to
liberate from the evils of Castroism, before he, with his followers,
was shot down in cold blood.
On account of its proximity to the mainland and commanding, as it
does, the entire Orinoco basin, Trinidad should enjoy an extensive
trade with Venezuela. And this she would undoubtedly have were it not
that Venezuela imposes an extra ad valorem duty of
thirty per cent. on all merchandise that comes from or by way of
Trinidad. This is in retaliation for the island’s harboring
smugglers and revolutionists. One of the results of this policy is
smuggling on a most extensive scale, at which many of the customs
officials connive. This means a great loss to the Venezuelan
government, for it is estimated that it thus loses a greater part of
the duties that should go to the national treasury.
Another temptation to smuggle arises from the excessively high
tariff on certain necessary articles of consumption. Thus salt, which
is a government monopoly, costs sixteen times as much in Ciudad Bolivar
as it does in Trinidad. The natural consequence is that there is a
large contraband traffic in this important commodity. In some cases the
smugglers elude the vigilance of the government officials and pay
nothing whatever in the way of duties. In others they have an
understanding with the officials, and pay por
composicion—that is, only a portion of the tax—the
other portion being divided between the official and the smuggler.
Contraband trade, however, is nothing new in this part of the world.
It dates back to the sixteenth century when, according to Fray Padre
Simon, the learned author of [64]Noticias Historiales de
las Conquistas de Tierra Firme, religion and policy prohibited all
commercial relations between Spaniards and foreigners, especially the
Dutch and the English.
As an obiter dictum, however, it may be remarked that it was
this restricted and short-sighted trade policy that, more than anything
else, led to the enormous losses that Spain suffered during so many
decades from corsairs and buccaneers, and that eventually resulted in
the wars of independence in the Spanish colonies of the New World.
We were still reveling in the countless beauties of
forest and field—quite oblivious of the passage of
time—when we were informed that our steamer would, in a few
hours, start for Ciudad Bolivar, the chief city on the Orinoco, and
distant about two days’ sail from the Port-of-Spain.
Eager as we were to explore the wonders of the famed and mysterious
Orinoco, it was with great reluctance that we tore ourselves away from
the cherished home of flowers and humming birds—sweet Iere. In
Trinidad, thanks to the kind and considerate hospitality of its people,
we had enjoyed all the comforts of home and the same freedom of
movement as if we had been given the keys of the city.
Our steamer was scheduled to leave at two o’clock in the
afternoon, but, as a matter of fact, did not weigh anchor until some
hours later. This, however, we did not regret, as it gave us an
opportunity to have “one last lingering look” at the island
beautiful from the upper deck of the vessel. Besides this, we could by
means of our field glasses take a survey of the Gulf of Paria—for
it is famous in history, this Gulf of Paria—and has been visited
by men whose names are writ large in the annals of the world’s
heroes.
Its waters were visited in 1805 by England’s one-eyed,
one-armed sailor-man, while in pursuit of the French and Spanish
warships which he had chased from Gibraltar to the [65]Caribbean Sea and thence back to Trafalgar, where
Spain lost its navy and England her greatest admiral. “Had Nelson
found the hostile squadron under the lee of Trinidad, the delta of the
Orinoco would now be as famous in naval history as the delta of the
Nile.”
It is, however, the imposing figure of Spain’s great admiral,
Cristobal Colon, that looms highest in these parts. He it was that gave
the chief promontories of island and mainland, and the channels that
separate the one from the other, many of the names they still bear.
Far down to the south is La Boca de la Sierpe—the
Serpent’s Mouth—the channel that separates the
southwesternmost point of Trinidad from Venezuela. It was through this
channel that Columbus passed when he entered the gulf in which we now
are, and from which he got his first view of the mainland of the New
World. But he did not realize at first the magnitude of his discovery.
Thinking the land he saw on his port quarter was an island—for
during his two preceding voyages he had seen nothing but islands,
outside of Cuba, which he fancied to be the eastern part of
Asia—he named it Isla Santa, or Holy Island. A short distance to
the northwest of us is La Boca del Draco, the Dragon’s
Mouth, through which the great navigator
“Push’d his prows into the setting sun,
And made West East.”
The names Serpent’s Mouth and Dragon’s
Mouth were given to the two straits mentioned on account of the strong
currents found there and on account of the danger Columbus experienced
in taking his ships through them. His letter to Ferdinand and Isabella
contains a graphic description of the dangers he encountered while
passing through the Serpent’s Mouth. “In the dead of
night,” he writes, “while I was on deck, I heard an awful
roaring, that came from the south, toward the ship; on the top of this
rolling sea came a mighty wave roaring with a frightful noise, and with
all this terrific uproar were other conflicting currents, [66]producing, as I have already said, a sound as of
breakers upon rocks. To this day I have a vivid recollection of the
dread I then felt lest the ship might flounder under the force of that
tremendous sea; but it passed by, and reached the mouth of the
before-mentioned passage, where the uproar lasted for a considerable
time.”10 He had similar difficulty in making his exit
through the Dragon’s Mouth.
No wonder that the frightened sailors of Columbus imagined that they
were the sport of the Evil One. “Being in the region of
Paria,” writes Navarrete, “the Admiral asked the pilots
what they made their position to be; some said that they were in the
sea of Spain, others that they were in the sea of Scotland, and that
all the seamen were in despair, and said the Devil had brought them
there.”11
Columbus, as has been stated, at first considered the land on his
port side to be insular in character, but before he left the Gulf of
Paria he was evidently convinced by the raging surges of fresh water
that had nearly swamped his ships, that he had discovered a land of
continental dimensions. In his letter to the Spanish sovereigns he
writes, “This land, which your highnesses have sent me to
explore, is very extensive, and I think there are many other countries
in the south of which the world has never had any knowledge.”
He had observed that a very large river debouched from the land of
Gracia and he at once “rightly conjectured that the currents and
the overwhelming mountains of water which rushed into these straits
with such an awful roaring, arose from the contest between the fresh
water and the sea. The fresh water struggled with the salt to oppose
its entrance and the salt water contended against the fresh in its
efforts to gain a passage outward. And I formed the conjecture, that at
one time there was a continuous neck of land from the island of
Trinidad and the land of Gracia, [67]where the two straits now
are.” All these conclusions have been confirmed by the
observations of subsequent explorers.
What, however, will most interest the curious reader are the
speculations into which Columbus was led by the various phenomena
observed in the Gulf of Paria. The most fantastic, from our modern
point of view, were his theories regarding the form of the earth and
the location of the Terrestrial Paradise.
Before his arrival in the Gulf of Paria, he had been a firm believer
in the sphericity of the earth, but in this part of the world he had
observed so many new and unexpected features—“so much
irregularity,” as he phrased it—that he came “to
another conclusion respecting the shape of the earth, namely: that it
is not round, as they describe, but of the form of a pear, which is
very round except where the stalk grows, at which part it is most
prominent.”
It is very easy for us, in the light of all the advance in
scientific knowledge since his time, to smile at his hypotheses, and
the reasonings by which he arrived at his conclusions. What seemed
plausible then appears preposterous now. But we must remember that the
proofs of the rotundity of the earth before his time were quite
empirical, and were far from having the demonstrative force of those
that are now adduced. All the epoch-making work in physics and
astronomy by such men as Galileo and Kepler, Newton and Laplace,
Huyghens and Foucault, and the French academicians, bearing on the form
of our globe, has been accomplished since his time. If we now know that
the earth has the form of an oblate spheroid and not that of a pear, it is
in consequence of the progress of physical astronomy during the four
centuries that have elapsed since Columbus sailed the western seas.
Before his time the learned had located the earthly paradise in
various parts of the eastern hemisphere. Some contended that it was in
Mesopotamia, others that it was in Ethiopia near the head waters of the
Nile, but all agreed that it was somewhere in the East. Now Columbus,
who imagined [68]he had reached the eastern part of Asia, by
sailing westwards from Spain, thought he had incontrovertible evidence
for locating the Garden of Eden in the newly discovered land of
Gracia.
“I do not suppose,” he writes, “that the Earthly
Paradise is in the form of a rugged mountain, as the descriptions of it
have made it appear, but that it in on the summit of the spot which I
have described as being in the form of the stalk of a pear; the
approach of it from a distance must be by a constant and gradual
ascent; but I believe that, as I have already said, no one could ever
reach the top”—except “by God’s
permission,” as he asserts elsewhere. “I think also that
the water I have described may proceed from it, though it be far off,
and that, stopping at the place which I have just left, it forms this
lake. There are great indications of this being the Terrestrial
Paradise, for its site coincides with the opinions of the holy and wise
theologians whom I have mentioned; and moreover, the other evidences
agree with the supposition, for I have never either read or heard of
fresh water coming in so large a quantity, in closer conjunction with
the sea. The idea is also corroborated by the blandness of the
temperature, and if the water of which I speak does not proceed from
the Earthly Paradise, it appears to be still more marvelous, for I do
not believe there is any river in the world so large or so
deep.”12 [69]
Besides Nelson and Columbus, a third celebrated seaman visited this
part of the world. This was Sir Walter Raleigh, of whom we shall have
more to say as we proceed.13
Our parting view of the forest-clad mountains of Trinidad we shall
never forget. The sun was setting on the mainland—the land of
Gracia of Columbus—but before disappearing below the horizon he
tinged Iere’s mountains with a parting smile and enveloped them
in a
“—soft and purple mist
Like a vaporous amethyst;”
reminding one of the azure haze that veils Hymettus as
the sun sinks behind Parnassus in an evening in June—something
that only the gifted Greek poet has ever been able adequately to
describe.
The shades of night had fallen long before we reached the
Serpent’s Mouth, which we were obliged to pass before entering
the Macareo, one of the numerous channels of the Orinoco delta. We were
thus deprived of the opportunity of getting a good view of the huge
billows that are produced by the meeting of river and sea, of which
Columbus has given us so graphic a description.
Those of the passengers that were disposed to become seasick retired
to their staterooms before we arrived at the Macareo bar, where the sea
is roughest, and where the ground-swells are most unpleasant. For half
an hour or more the steamer tossed considerably, reminding one of the
English Channel in stormy weather. But the impact of surge against
surge, of which Columbus speaks, was much less than we had been led to
anticipate, and there was little indication of the forcible eddies of
the [70]“violentlie swift Orinoco,” which
caused Raleigh so much embarrassment.
This was easily accounted for, as the rainy season had not yet set
in, and the waters at the various estuaries were, therefore,
comparatively little agitated. Columbus, however, arrived here towards
the end of the rainy season, when the floods of the Orinoco were at
their height, while Raleigh came after the rainy season was quite well
advanced. Again, ours was a fairly good-sized steamer and better
adapted to stem wave and current than were the fragile barks of
Columbus, or the frail wherries and cock-boats of Raleigh. When the
floods of the Orinoco were at high-water mark, we can well understand
that the early navigators had reason to be deeply impressed by the
dangers that confronted them in these seething and roaring waters, and
that, to their exalted imaginations, the realities of their
surroundings were in nowise short of the fancies of the poet as
indicated in the verses at the head of this chapter. Indeed, so great
were the supposed difficulties, and so dangerous the climate in these
parts, that sailors were wont to say,
“Quien se va al Orinoco,
Si no se muere, se vuelve loco.”14
When it comes to navigating the less known rivers and
caños—channels—which, like a network, intersect the
delta in every direction, the difficulty and danger are even now so
great that the most skilled Indian pilots often become bewildered. When
this occurs nothing remains but to follow the current until one reaches
the gulf, and then enter a branch with which one is familiar. Sir
Walter gives such a graphic account of the difficulties he experienced
in reaching “the great riuer Orenoque,” that I reproduce in
his own words a part of a paragraph bearing on the subject.
After telling us how his Indian pilot had gotten lost in the
[71]maze of caños through which he was trying
to grope his way, he says: “If God had not sent vs another helpe
we might haue wandred a whole yeere in that laborinth of riuers, ere we
had found any way, either out or in, especiallie after we were past the
ebbing and flowing, which was in fower daies: for I know all the earth
doth not yeeld the like confluence of streames and branches, the one
crossing the other as many times, and all as faire and large and so
like one to another, as no man can tell which to take: and if we went
by the Sun or compasse hoping thereby to go directly one way or other,
yet that waie we were also carried in a circle amongst multitudes of
Islands, and euery Island so bordered with high trees as no man could
see any further than the bredth of the riuer, or length of the
breach.”15
Exaggerated as this account seems, it does scant justice to the
reality. Raleigh had no opportunity to explore the delta, and to
acquire definite notions of its immensity, or he would have had much
more to add to the foregoing description of its extent and marvels.
Even to-day we have no map of this region, which is, in many respects,
as unknown as the least explored part of Central Africa. As yet our
knowledge of land and river is limited only to its most salient
features, but this is quite sufficient to excite our wonder. Suffice it
to say that the area of the delta is greater than that of Sicily; that
its base, from its main branch at the Boca de Navios to the embouchure
of the Manamo, is nearly two hundred miles in length; that the Orinoco,
at the bifurcation of its two principal branches, is twelves miles in
width; that there are no fewer than fifty branches conveying the waters
of the mighty river into the Atlantic; that the lowlands of the delta
are divided into thousands of islands, and islets, by a network of
rivers diverging in fan-shape towards the sea, and by innumerable
[72]caños and bayous, some with stagnant water,
others with strong currents, ramifying in every direction in straight
lines and in curves, so that escape from their intricacies by any one,
except an experienced pilot, would be as impossible as would have been
an exit from the Cretan labyrinth without the clew of Ariadne.
When we arose the morning after leaving Trinidad, our steamer had
already advanced quite a distance on its way through the Macareo. This
brazo, or branch, is chosen not because it is the largest or the
deepest, but because it affords the shortest and most direct route
between the Port-of-Spain and Ciudad Bolivar. Although the distance to
this latter place from the mouth of the Macareo is only two hundred and
sixty miles, it usually required nearly two days, counting the stops on
the way, for the trip up the river, so strong is the current The return
trip, however, can be made in much less time.
We shall never forget our first view of the Orinoco and of the
impressions we then received. Was it that we were at last sailing in
the placid waters of the one river of all the world that we had from
our youth most yearned to behold, or was it that we had been dreaming
of the site and beauties of the Terrestrial Paradise, as fancied by
Columbus to exist in these parts, or was it because of both these
elements combined? We know not, but one thing is certain, and that is
that our first view of the Orinoco and its forest-shaded banks,
festooned with vines and flowers, recalled at once those musical words
of Dante,
“Sweet hue of eastern sapphire, that was
spread
O’er the serene aspect of the pure air,
High up as the first circle, to mine eyes
Unwonted joy renewed.”16
and brought vividly back to memory his inimitable
description of his entrance into the Garden of Eden, where he was to
meet again his long-lost Beatrice. [73]
To emphasize the illusion, there suddenly appeared under a noble
moriche palm on the flower-enameled bank of the river and only a few
rods from where we were standing, two children of the forest—a
young man and a young woman—bride and groom, we loved to
think—who were as Columbus found the American, as Adam and Eve
were after the fall, when, in the words of Milton,
“Those leaves
They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe,
And with what skill they had, together sewed
To gird their waist.”
Handsome was the youth and beautiful was the maiden,
strong as Hiawatha, fair as Minnehaha—both fit models for
sculptor and painter, and such as the poet dreams of when depicting his
heroes and heroines of the forest primeval.
Were they the king and queen of their tribe? Fancy said,
“Yes.” But whether they were or not, one could say with
truth that the tan-colored maid was like the one Raleigh met along this
very same river and who, in his own words, “was as well fauored
and as well shaped as euer I saw anie in England.”17
Near this interesting young couple, both in the heyday of youth, lay
a cluster of plantains, which was doubtless to contribute to their
morning repast. But what a coincidence that, even in this trifling
circumstance, we should find an [74]additional reminder of the
Earthly Paradise! Have not men of science named the plantain Musa
Paradisaica, in allusion to the tradition, which has long obtained,
that it was the plantain, and not the apple, that was the forbidden
fruit in Eden?18 It was there to fill out the picture as an
artist in the tropics would wish to see it painted.
But there was still something wanting. While we were yet under the
spell of our environment, and lost in the contemplation of the Edenic
beauties around us, we were awakened from our reverie by a plunge and a
splash before the prow of our vessel—and there, greatest surprise
of all in our series of coincidences, was a giant anaconda, full thirty
feet long, vigorously plowing its way to the opposite bank of the
river. It was like the water-snakes in The Rime of the Ancient
Mariner.
“Blue, glossy, green and velvet black,
It coiled and swam,
And when it reared, the elfish light
Fell off in hoary flakes.”
So startling was this strange apparition that we could
scarcely credit our senses, and, had it not been for exclamations of
surprise by several of the passengers near by, we should have thought,
for a while, that it was all a dream.
The picture was now complete. There was the serpent in this paradise
of delights, as in the paradise of our first [75]parents.
And what added to the strangeness—the uncanniness—of the
appearance of the serpent at this particular juncture was the
extraordinary rarity of such an occurrence. One of the officers of the
steamer told us that he had been sailing up and down the Orinoco for
twenty years and had never seen one of these boas before. And more
wonderful still, it was the first and last we ourselves saw, although
we subsequently traveled many thousands of miles on tropical rivers
along which such serpents have their habitat.19
All in all, our first view of the Orinoco fully met our fondest
expectations so far as they related to variety and exuberance of
vegetation and beauty of scenery. The entire delta of the Orinoco may
aptly be described as one of Nature’s choicest conservatories, in
which Flora has collected together the fairest growths of garden and
forest, and where the charm of foliage and flower is enhanced by the
presence of countless species of the feathered tribe of richest plumage
and of dazzling hue.
A distinguished German traveler, Friedrich Gerstäcker,
writing of his impressions of the delta of the Orinoco, does not
hesitate to declare that “there is not in the world anything more
glorious in vegetation than is to be seen on the banks of the
Orinoco,” and that there is no place more attractive to the
tourist.20 [76]
To form some conception of the wonderful variety of vegetable life
to be seen in the delta, it will suffice to observe that a third of a
century ago botanists had counted in the forests of Guiana no fewer
than 132 families of plants, 772 genera and 2,450 distinct species. Of
the genera more than sixty were indigenous.
Although we saw many things in the delta of the Orinoco that
possessed intense interest for us, we saw none of the natives living in
houses built on the summits of trees, about which some recent writers,
following Raleigh, Humboldt and others, still entertain their readers.
To tell the truth, we did not expect to find such dwellings, as it has
been demonstrated beyond question that they do not now exist, and
probably never did exist in these parts outside of the fertile
imaginations of Raleigh and Gumilla. Humboldt never visited the delta,
and hence, what he says on the subject in Personal Narrative of
Travels to the Equinoctial Regions, is based on reports received
from others.21
Cardinal Bembo, writing in the first half of the sixteenth century,
speaks of them, and Benzoni, his contemporary, who spent fifteen years
in traveling in the New World, illustrates by an engraving what he has
to say about the Indian houses built on the tops of trees.22
Scene on the Orinoco. (From Goering.)
Ferdinand Columbus, who, although a mere youth, had accompanied his
father on his fourth voyage, writes, that [77]when in the Gulf of
Uraba, “We saw people living like birds in the tops of trees,
laying sticks across from bough to bough, and building their huts upon
them; and though we knew not the reason of the custom, we guessed that
it was done for fear of their enemies, or of the griffins that are in
this island.”23
Peter Martyr, who most likely got his information about these
strange dwellings from Ferdinand Columbus, tells us that the trees on
which they were built were of “suche heighth, that the strength
of no mane’s arme is able to hurle a stone to the houses buylded
therein.” He adds, however, that the owners of the houses have
“theyr wyne cellers in the grounde and well replenysshed.”
And he vouchsafes the reason for not keeping the wine, with “all
other necessayre thinges they haue, with theym in the trees. For albeit
that the vehemencie of the wynde, is not of poure to caste downe those
houses, or to breeke the branches of the trees, yet are they tossed
therwith, and swaye sumwhat from syde to syde, by reason therof, the
wyne shulde be muche troubeled with moouinge.... When the Kynge or any
of the other noblemen, dyne or suppe in these trees, theyr wynes are
brought theym from the celleres by theyr seruantes, whyche by meanes of
exercise are accustomed with noo lesse celeritie to runne vppe and
downe the steares adherete to the tree, then doo owre waytynge boyes
vppon the playne grounde, fetche vs what wee caule for from the
cobbarde bysyde owr dynynge table.”
As to the size of the trees the same writer avers, “Owr men
measuringe manye of these trees, founde them to bee of suche biggnes,
that seuen men, ye sumetymes eight, holdinge hande in hande with theyr
armes streached furthe, were scarcely able to fathame them
aboute.”24
Raleigh had evidently read some of these accounts about people
living on tree tops, but not satisfied with the Munchausen [78]tales of
his predecessors, he proceeds to entertain his readers with stories as
marvelous as those of Sindbad the Sailor.
Writing of the Indians of the delta, he says: “In the winter
they dwell vpon the trees, where they build very artificiall towns, and
villages, ... for between May and September, the riuer Orenoke riseth
thirtie foote vpright, and then are those Ilands ouerflowen twentie
foote high aboue the leuell of the ground, sauing some few raised
grounds in the middle of them.... They neuer eate of anie thing that is
set or sowen, and as at home they vse neither planting nor other
manurance, so when they com abroad the refuse to feede of ought but of
that which nature without labor bringeth foorth.”25
Of the Waraus, the Indians who inhabit the delta, the missionary,
Padre Gumilla, writes that when their islands are periodically
inundated by the rise of the Orinoco, they erect their huts on
piles—not on trees, as Raleigh states—above the water.
Furthermore, he tells us that these huts are made of the moriche palm,
which grows abundantly in these islands, and are covered with the
leaves of it. From the fibres of the leaf, they make their hammocks and
their cords for fishing and for bowstrings.
Around the pulpy shoot that ascends from the trunks is a web-like
integument that serves them for the slight covering they wear. On the
productions of this tree, also, they entirely subsist. The pulpy shoot
is eaten as cabbage, and the tree bears a fruit like the date, but
somewhat larger. When the inundation ceases, the tree is cut down, and
being perforated, a palatable juice exudes, from which they make a
drink. The interior substance of it is then taken out and thrown into
vessels of water and well washed and the ligneous fibres being removed,
a white sediment is deposited, which, dried in the sun, is made into a
very wholesome bread.26 [79]
Accepting the foregoing statements as true, Humboldt philosophizes
as follows: “It is curious to observe in the lowest degree of
civilization the existence of a whole tribe depending on a single
species of palm tree, similar to those insects which feed on one and
the same flower, or on one and the same part of a
plant.”27
Yet, notwithstanding all that has been written about the Indians of
the Orinoco delta living on the tops of trees, and depending on only
the moriche palm for food and raiment, it is certain that they do not
do so now, and it is almost equally certain that they have never done
so in the past. Truth to tell, these stories seem to repose on little
better foundation than those so long circulated and credited regarding
Lake Parime, and the great city of Manoa—the home of El
Dorado.
Raleigh had no time or opportunity to explore the delta, and there
is reason to believe that in this, as in other matters, he gave free
reign to his fancy to satisfy his reader’s desire for the
marvelous. Gumilla, apparently, got his information regarding these
particular subjects at secondhand. He spent many years on the middle
Orinoco and some of its affluents, but there is no evidence that he was
ever in a position to verify the stories so long current regarding the
manner of living of the inhabitants of the delta.
The fact is, no one, so far as known, ever made any attempt to
explore the interior of the delta until more than two centuries after
Raleigh’s time and until nearly a half [80]century
after Humboldt’s visit to the valley of the Orinoco. As a
consequence, all that had been reported by earlier writers was
exaggeration and guesswork, if not pure invention.
Sir Robert Schomburgk, who, as Her Majesty’s commissioner to
survey the boundaries of British Guiana, explored the delta in
1841—and some months of his sojourn there was during the rainy
season—states explicitly, that not in a single instance did he
find Indians dwelling on trees. “We can well suppose that the
numerous fires which were made in each hut, and the reflection of which
was the stronger in consequence of the stream of vapor around the
summit of trees in those moist regions, illuminated at night the
adjacent trees; but the fire itself was scarcely ever made on the top
of a tree. The inundation rises at the delta seldom higher than three
or four feet above the banks of the rivers;”—not twenty or
thirty feet, as Raleigh asserts—“and if the immediate
neighborhood of the sea and the level nature of the land be considered,
this is an enormous rise.”28
Herr Appun, who visited the delta some years subsequently to
Schomburgk’s sojourn there, declares, “I have lived more
than a year and a half among the Waraus of the Orinoco delta, and those
of the east coast of South America, from Cape Sabinetta to Cape Nassau,
at the mouth of the Pomeroon river in British Guiana, both during the
dry and the rainy season, and never have I beheld any of the aerial
dwellings that have been described.”29
The one, however, who has most thoroughly explored the interior of
the delta is Sr. Andres E. Level, who spent several years among the
Waraus, or Guaraunos, as they are called by the Spaniards. His
investigations have completely exploded the false notions so long
entertained regarding the delta and its inhabitants. The land is not
all an impassable swamp. Much of it is so elevated above [81]the
river that it is never reached by the high floods of the Orinoco.
Its soil is even more fertile than that of the Nile valley and
produces every tropical fruit and tree in the greatest profusion. Game
is abundant, and the Indians have extensive
rancherias—plantations—which supply them grain,
fruits and vegetables of all kinds. In the rivers near by they have the
greatest variety of fish, besides turtle that would be the delight of
the epicure.
As the Waraus of the interior are a timid people and have long since
learned to distrust the white man, they remain, as a rule, concealed in
the depths of forests that are impassable. They are, however, a quiet,
industrious, home-loving people, and are famous among the tribes in
this section of Guiana for their beautiful curiaras, or
canoes—made from a single log of the cedar, or of a tree called
Bioci. Some of these dugouts—the monoxyla of the
Greeks—are full fifty feet long and from five to six feet broad
and find a ready sale as far south as Demerara.
Far from being a dismal swamp, inhabited only by poor, starving
savages, condemned to live on tree tops, and to find food and clothing
in a single palm, Sr. Level30 shows us that the delta is a
garden of exceeding richness and that the Indians, if the government
did its duty towards them by developing the marvelous resources of
their land and by giving its inhabitants, so long neglected, some
measure of attention and assistance, would eventually make efficient
contributors to the national revenue, and become desirable citizens of
the republic. [82]
1 Rokeby,
Canto I, 13. ↑
2
“The wind then failed me, and I entered a climate where the
intensity of the heat was such that I thought both ships and men would
have been burned up, and everything suddenly got into such a state of
confusion that no man dared go below deck to attend to the securing of
the water-cask and the provisions. This heat lasted eight days; on the
first day the weather was fine, but on the seven other days it rained
and was cloudy, yet we found no alleviation of our distress; so that I
certainly believe that if the sun had shone, as on the first day, we
should not have been able to escape in anyway.”—Writings
of Christopher Columbus, ut sup., pp. 113, 114, and Irving’s
Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus, Chap.
XXIX. ↑
3 Op.
cit., p. 136. ↑
4
Eden’s First Three English Books on America, p.
338. ↑
5
Chapman’s Odyssey, Bk. VII. ↑
6 Called
Bois immortelle by the French, and in Spanish bearing
the appropriate name of madre de cacao, mother of
cacao. ↑
7 It was
upon the “boughs and spraies” of these trees that Raleigh
found “great store of oisters, very salt and wel tasted.” A
species of edible oyster is still found on this tree—the
Rhizophora Mangle of Linnæus—but, although served on
the table in the West Indies, it is far from being as luscious as our
“Blue Points” or as large as our “Lynn
Havens.” ↑
8 At
Last, p. 79, London, 1905. ↑
9
“At this point called Tierra de Brea or Piche,” writes
Raleigh, “there is that abondance of stone pitch, that all the
ships of the world may therewith loden from thence, and wee made triall
of it in trimming our ships to be most excellent good, and melteth not
with the sunne, as the pitch of Norway, and therefore for ships trading
in the south partes very profitable.”—The Discovery of
Guiana, pp. 3 and 4, published for the Hakluyt Society, London,
1848. ↑
10
Writings of Columbus, op. cit., pp. 120, 121. ↑
11
Coleccion de los Viajes y descubrunientos que hiaeron por mar los
Españoles desde fines dil siglo XV. Tom. III, p.
583. ↑
12 See the
aforementioned letter of Columbus to Ferdinand and Isabella for the
quotations above given. The whole letter will well repay perusal. See
also Relaciones y Cartas de Cristobal Colon, Tom. CL,
XIV, de la Biblioteca Clasica, Madrid, 1892, p. 268 et
seq.
Americus Vespucius shared with Columbus the belief
in the existence of the Terrestrial Paradise in the newly-discovered
lands near the equator. Writing to his friend, Lorenzo de Medici,
giving him an account of his second voyage, he declares “In the
fields flourish so many sweet flowers and herbs, and the fruits are so
delicious in their fragrance, that I fancied myself near the
terrestrial paradise,” and again, “If there is a
terrestrial paradise in the world it cannot be far from this
region.”—The Life and Voyages of Americus Vespucius,
pp. 197 and 214, by C. Edwards Lester and Andrew Foster, New York,
1846. ↑
13 The
curious reader will be interested in learning that Sir Walter Raleigh,
as well as Columbus and Vespucius, speculated about the probable site
of Paradise. In his History of the World he devotes a long
chapter to the subject, and several pages to the discussion “Of
their Opinion which make paradise as high as the moon; and of others
which make it higher than the middle region of the air,” Chap.
III, Oxford, 1829. ↑
14 He
who goes to the Orinoco dies or becomes crazy. ↑
15 The
Discovery of the Large, Rich and Beautiful Empire of Guiana, p. 46,
edited by Sir Robert Schomburgk, printed for the Hakluyt Society,
London, 1848. ↑
16
Purgatorio, Canto 1, vv. 13–16. ↑
17 Sir
Robert Schomburgk is no less enthusiastic in his praise of the tawny
beauties of this part of South America. Commenting on Raleigh’s
opinion, just quoted, he writes as follows:—
“During our eight years’ wandering
among the tribes of Guiana, who inhabit the vast regions from the coast
of the Atlantic to the interior, between the Cassiquiare and the upper
Trombetas, we have met with many an Indian female who in figure and
comeliness might have vied with some of our European beauties. Although
they are rather small in size, their feet and hands are generally
exquisite, their ankles well turned, and their waists, left to nature
and not forced into artificial shape by modern inventions, resemble the
beau ideal of classical sculpture.”—The Discoverie of
Guiana, ut sup., p. 41. ↑
18 The
reader, I am sure, will be interested in the following paragraph from
Peter Martyr on the plantain.
Speaking of the fruit of the Cassia tree (as he
calls the plantain), he, in Michael Lok’s translation,
says,—
“The Egyptian common people babble
that this is the apple of our first created Father Adam, whereby
hee ouerthrewe all mankinde. The straunge and farraine Marchantes of
vnprofitable Spices, perfumes, Arabian Yseminating odours, and
woorthlesse precious stones trading those Countries for gaine, call
those fruites the Muses. For mine owne part I cannot call to
minde, by what name I might call that tree or stalke in Latine,”
p. 273. De Novo Orbe, the Historie of the West Indies, comprised
in eight Decades whereof three haue beene formerly translated into
English by R. Eden, whereunto the other fiue are newly added by
the industrie and painfull Trauaile of M. Lok, Gent., London,
1612. ↑
19 The
Anaconda is called by the inhabitants of Guiana, La Culebra de Agua, or
Water Serpent. It is also named El Traga Venado—Deer
Swallower—while in British Guiana it is known as the Camoudi. Mr.
Waterton, speaking of it, says, “The Camoudi snake has been
killed from thirty to forty feet long; though not venomous, his size
renders him destructive to the passing animals. The Spaniards in the
Oroonoque positively affirm that he grows to the length of seventy or
eighty feet, and that he will destroy the strongest and largest bull.
His name seems to confirm this; there he is called
‘matatoro,’ which literally means
‘bull-killer.’ Thus be may be ranked among the deadly
snakes; for it comes nearly to the same thing in the end, whether the
victim dies by poison from the fangs, which corrupts his blood, and
makes it stink horribly, or whether his body be crushed to mummy, and
swallowed by this hideous beast.”—Wanderings in South
America, First Journey. ↑
20
Neue Reisen, p. 698, Berlin. Cf. Wandertage eines Deutschen Touristen im Strom und
Küstengebiet des Orinoko, Chap. XXXIII–XXXV, von
Eberhard Graf zu Erbach, Leipzig,
1892. ↑
21
“The navigator,” writes the illustrious savant, “in
proceeding along the channels of the delta of the Orinoco at night,
sees with surprise the summit of the palm trees illumined by large
fires. These are the habitations of the Guarons (Titivitas and
Waraweties of Raleigh), which are suspended from the trunks of trees.
These tribes hang up mats in the air, which they fill with earth, and
kindle, on a layer of moist clay, the fire necessary for their
household wants. They had owed their liberty and their political
independence for ages to the quaking and swampy soil, which they pass
over in the time of drought, and on which they alone know how to walk
in security to their solitude in the delta of the Orinoco; to their
abode on the trees, where religious enthusiasm will probably never lead
any American stylites. Vol. III, Chap. XXV. ↑
22
History of the New World, printed for the Hakluyt Society, pp.
237, 238. ↑
23
Historia del Almirante de las Indias, Don Cristobal
Colón, Escrita por Don Fernando Colón, p. 178,
Madrid, 1892. ↑
24 Dec.
II, Bk. IV. Eden’s translation. ↑
25 Op.
cit., pp. 50, 51. ↑
26 With
reason does the pious missionary call the moriche palm—Mauritia flexuosa—”nuevo
arbol de la vida, y milagro del Supremo Autor de la
naturaleza”—a new tree of life, and a miracle of the
Author of Nature—for this tree alone furnishes the Indian with
victum et amictum—food and raiment.—Historia
Natural Civil y Geografica de las naciones situadas en las Riberas del
Rio Orinoco, Vol. I, Cap. IX, Barcelona, 1882. Compare the
following lines of Thomson’s Seasons:—
“Wide o’er his isles, the branching
Oronoque
Rolls a brown deluge, and the native drives
To dwell aloft on life-sufficing trees,
At once his home, his robe, his food, his
arms.”
 ↑
27 Op.
cit., Vol. III, p. 9. ↑
28
Discoverie of Gviana, p. 50. ↑
29
Unter den Tropen, Erster Band, p. 521, Jena,
1871. ↑
30
El Delta del Orinoco tomado de la esploracion al alto bajo Orinoco y
central en 1850, por Andres E. Level, Vol. III, de la Memoria de
la Dirección General de Estradistica al Presidente de los
Estados Unidos de Venezuela, en 1873. ↑
“What a wide river!” was the exclamation
of a fellow-passenger as our steamer passed out of the Macareo and
turned the apex of the delta. It was, indeed, very wide, and the bank
of the Orinoco on our port-quarter was almost invisible. Here, even
during the dry season, this mighty water course is no less than four
leagues in width. We now, for the first time, fully realized that we
were sailing on the broad waters of one of the world’s master
rivers. After the Parana and the Amazon, it is the largest waterway in
South America, and, for the volume of water it carries into the ocean,
it ranks with the Mississippi, the Congo, Yang-tse-Kiang, and the
Brahmaputra. Well have the natives of the lands through which it flows
named it the Great River—for it is great in every way—great
in the immense basin it drains; great in the tribute it carries to the
ocean, and great in the number and magnitude of the rivers it counts
among its affluents from the distant Cordilleras.
As along the Macareo, so here along the Orinoco, one never tires of
gazing at the magnificent forest trees and the dense shrubbery with
which the banks are fringed. At one time it is the wide-branched ceiba,
covered with bright-blooming epiphytes; at another a clump of graceful
moriche palms, whose tremulous plumes are given an added beauty by the
presence of a bevy of multicolored parrots and macaws. The foliage of
tree and shrub is here ever fresh and luxuriant and retains always that
delicate hue so characteristic of the leafage of our northern woodlands
in the early days of spring.
Most of the trees, large and small, are literally weighed
[83]down with parasites and epiphytes. Among the
latter growths are orchids of countless variety and rarest beauty, such
as are seldom seen in our northern floral conservatories. And the way
in which the trees are held together by those strange forms of
vegetable life—so abundant in the tropics—the
bejucos or bush ropes! Sometimes they are as thick as a
man’s arm, sometimes they are like a ship’s cable,
sometimes they may be mistaken for telegraph wires—so long and
fine are they. They extend from the ground to the tops of the highest
trees, or drop from the summits of the loftiest monarchs of the forest
to the earth beneath, sometimes singly, sometimes by scores. Then again
they cross one another from tree to tree and form a trelliswork that at
times is next to impassable. And these bejucos, or lianas, as they are
also called, are, like the trees, burdened with air-plants of various
species, at one time large masses of leaves, at another long spikes of
the richest blossoms.
At almost every turn the vision is delighted by lovely arboreal
groups and charming natural bowers, all graced with the most gorgeous
combinations of emerald foliage and ruby bloom—interspersed with
delicate tufts of lilac, pink and canary—and illumined by gleams
of flitting sunshine which bring out a glorious play of color effects
with which the eye is never tired. “A dryad’s home,”
we heard an enthusiastic señorita exclaim, as we passed one of
these flower-decked bowers, on which glittered the checkered sunlight.
And so well it might be, it was so rare a gem of sylvan loveliness.
While passing up this majestic river and admiring the ever-varying
panorama of rarest floral beauty, we recalled a couple of paragraphs in
Darwin’s Journal of Researches, in which he refers to the
futility of attempting to describe, for one who has never visited the
tropics, the wonders of the scenery there and above all the marvels of
the vegetable world. He expresses himself as follows:
“Such are the elements of the scenery, but it is a hopeless
[84]attempt to paint the general effect. Learned
naturalists describe these scenes of the tropics by naming a multitude
of objects, and mentioning some characteristic feature of each. To a
learned traveler this possibly may communicate some definite ideas; but
who else from seeing a plant in an herbarium can imagine its appearance
when growing in its native soil? Who from seeing choice plants in a
hothouse, can magnify some into the dimensions of forest trees, and
crowd others into an entangled jungle? Who, when examining in the
cabinet of the entomologist the gay exotic butterflies, and singular
cicadas, will associate with these lifeless objects, the ceaseless
harsh music of the latter, and the lazy flight of the former—the
sure accompaniments of the still, glowing noonday of the tropics? It is
when the sun has attained its greatest height, that such scenes should
be viewed; then the dense, splendid foliage of the mango hides the
ground with its darkest shade, whilst the upper branches are rendered,
from the profusion of light, of the most brilliant green. In the
temperate zones the case is different—the vegetation there is not
so dark or so rich, and hence the rays of the declining sun, tinged of
a red, purple, or bright yellow color, add most to the beauties of
those climes.
“When quietly walking along the shady pathways, and admiring
each successive view, I wished to find language to express my ideas.
Epithet after epithet was found too weak to convey to those who have
not visited the intertropical regions, the sensation of delight which
the mind experiences. I have said that the plants in a hothouse fail to
communicate a just idea of the vegetation, yet I must recur to it. The
land is one great wild, untidy, luxuriant hothouse, made by Nature for
herself, but taken possession of by man, who has studded it with gay
houses and formal gardens. How great would be the desire in every
admirer of Nature to behold, if such were possible, the scenery of
another planet! yet to every person in Europe, it may be truly said,
that at the distance of only a few degrees from [85]his
native soil, the glories of another world are opened to him. In my last
walk I stopped again and again to gaze on these beauties, and
endeavored to fix in my mind for ever, an impression which at the time
I knew sooner or later must fail. The form of the orange tree, the
cocoa-nut, the palm, the mango, the tree-fern, the banana, will remain
clear and separate; but the thousand beauties which unite these into
one perfect scene must fade away; yet they will leave, like a tale
heard in childhood, a picture full of indistinct, but most beautiful
figures.”1
While the flora of the Orinoco, near the apex of the delta, is so
varied and exuberant, but little is seen of its fauna, notwithstanding
all that has been said and written to the contrary. In a recent work,
for instance, written by one who pretends to have made the trip from
Trinidad, is a sentence that will equal any of the extravagances of
Jules Verne’s Le Superbe Orénoque.
“The jaguar,” says the author, “will stop
drinking, or the tapir look up from browsing on the grass, and the
monkey pause in swinging from tree to tree, as the boats hurry noisily
by, while the drowsy alligator or manatee floats lazily on, his head
half out of the water, until perhaps a conical bullet from a Winchester
rifle or from a revolver, which everyone carries, rouses him to a
knowledge that it is not good to trust too much to mankind.”
It is quite safe to say that neither the author of the work quoted
nor any one else has ever seen a jaguar, or a tapir or a manatee under
the circumstances mentioned. They are all timid animals and are never
seen from the deck of noisy steamers.
Although we saw no quadrupeds like those just mentioned, there were
countless birds, large and small. Those that were most conspicuous were
ibises, flamingoes and herons of various species. So numerous at times
were the flamingoes that, to borrow an idea from Trowbridge, the
sunrise flame of their reflected forms actually crimsoned [86]“the glassy wave and glistening
sands.” Of the herons, the largest species is named by the
natives soldado—a soldier—so called both from its
size and the stately attitude it assumes, which, at a distance, gives
it the appearance of a sentry on duty.
A flock of these tall, white birds, seen feeding in an everglade in
Cuba was, during the second voyage of Columbus, taken for a party of
men clad in white tunics, and led the Admiral to believe that they were
inhabitants of Mangon, a province just south of Cathay. Indeed, so
striking is their resemblance to men posted as sentinels that,
according to Humboldt, “the inhabitants of Angostura, soon after
the foundation of their city, were one day alarmed by the sudden
appearance of soldados and garzas, on a mountain towards
the south. They believed they were menaced with an attack of Indios
monteros, wild Indians, called mountaineers; and the people were
not perfectly tranquilized till they saw the birds soaring in the air
and continuing their migration towards the mouths of the
Orinoco.”2
Our first stopping place was Barrancas, a small and squalid village
of mud, palm-thatched huts. It is situated in the centre of one of the
finest grazing regions of Venezuela and under a wise and progressive
government, would soon become a place of considerable importance.
In the time of the Franciscan Missions here, suppressed nearly a
century ago, the herds that roamed the beautiful undulating prairies on
both sides of the Orinoco counted no fewer than one hundred and fifty
thousand cattle, and with the markets that could easily be had for beef
and hides, this number could, under favorable conditions, be greatly
increased. As it is, however, it is known rather as a favorite
rendezvous for that numerous class of revolutionists for whom the
country is so noted, that have been born insolvent, but who, by
grandiloquent pronunciamientos, and through the coöperation
of hungry spoil-seekers like themselves, hope one day to improve their
financial condition. [87]
Near Barrancas we were shown the spot where General Antonio Paredes
and his confiding followers were shot in cold blood, a few days before
our arrival, in pursuance of an order, we were told, that President
Castro had issued from his sick bed in Macuto. This speedy, albeit
unconstitutional, disposition of the leaders of what was heralded as a
great popular reform movement was designed to put a quietus on other
revolutionists who were making or preparing to make
pronunciamientos in various parts of the republic. It did not,
however, seem to have the desired effect, as during our sojourn in the
country two other revolutions cropped out when least expected. For a
while one of these gave the government very grave concern but was
finally suppressed; not, however, until the country had suffered by
anticipation many of the miseries of internecine strife.
Before our departure from Caracas, we tried in vain to get some
information not only about the dates of sailing of the Orinoco steamers
but also about their character. After leaving the capital, some of our
friends tried to dissuade us from our projected trip to Ciudad Bolivar,
assuring us that the only craft plying up and down the river were
filthy cattle boats unfit for a white man to enter. Imagine our
surprise, then, when we found that our vessel, far from being the
unclean, poorly-provisioned boat that had been pictured to us, was in
every way fairly comfortable, and with a cuisine and service that were
far from bad. In construction and general arrangement, it was not
unlike the smaller double-decked steamers on the Hudson river or on our
northern lakes. Our cabins were spacious, with broad berths, and clean
bedding and furniture. Indeed, we have often had cabins in our large
transatlantic steamers in which there was less of comfort and
convenience than were afforded by our cabin in this unpretending boat
on the Orinoco.
As to the passengers, they were quite a cosmopolitan crowd. Among
them were some Europeans and several [88]Americans, but the
greater number were Venezuelans—most of them bound for Ciudad
Bolivar. Of the Americans there were two men in quest of fortune in the
celebrated Yuruari mining district in southern Guiana.
The upper deck of the boat was reserved for the first-class
passengers, while the lower one was occupied by those of the
second-class, and by such freight as was carried up and down the river.
On returning to the Port-of-Spain, the steamer usually carried about
two hundred head of cattle for the Trinidad market. When these were
taken on board at night, as sometimes happened, sleep was impossible.
What with the tramping and bellowing of the affrighted brutes below us
and the shouting of the cattlemen and crew, there was a veritable
pandemonium which continued the greater part of the night.
Frequently there are not enough cabins for the passengers. But this
makes very little difference to the Venezuelan. He simply swings his
chinchorro—hammock—between two stanchions of the
vessel and is soon calmly reposing in slumberland. Indeed, many of the
inhabitants of the tropics prefer a hammock to a bed, and do not apply
for a stateroom when traveling on the rivers of equatorial America.
The second-class passengers sleep in their hammocks if they happen
to have them; if not, they lie down anywhere they can find room and are
soon fast asleep. Many of them have no beds at home, except a mat, a
rawhide, or the lap of Mother Earth, and the absence of a bed or
hammock is no appreciable privation to them.
There is no more curious sight than is presented at night on a
crowded river steamer in the tropics. One sees scores of hammocks swung
in every conceivable place. All davits and stanchions, all uprights and
crosspieces are provided with hooks and rings, so that hammocks, when
necessary, may be attached to them. In saloons and passageways, on
forward-deck and after-deck, wherever there is any available space,
there is stretched on the floor, or snugly [89]ensconced in his chinchorro, some quietly sleeping
or loudly snoring specimen of humanity. Sometimes one will see several
persons stowed away in a single hammock. It is not an unusual thing to
see two persons in the same chinchorro, and one may now and then see a
mother and three children serenely reposing in one of these aerial
cots. How they do it, it is difficult to say, but the fact is that they
do it, and there is apparently not a budge in the hammock’s
occupants until they are awakened in the morning by the call of the
birds—Nature’s alarm clocks in the tropics.
A place of more than passing interest between Barrancas and Ciudad
Bolivar is Los Castillos, formerly Guayana la Vieja, founded by Antonio
de Berrio in 1591. It was here, in 1618, that young Walter Raleigh, the
son of the Admiral, lost his life in an encounter with the Spaniards
who had possession of this stronghold. It was near here, also, that
Bolivar, at a critical hour during the War of Independence, saved his
life by hiding in a swamp near the village.
About ten leagues further up the river, at the mouth of the Caroni,
and opposite the island of Fajardo, Diego de Ordaz—the officer
under Cortes who got sulphur out of the crater of
Popocatepetl—found in 1531 a settlement called Carao during his
exploration of the Orinoco. This was afterwards named Santo Tomé
de Guayana, and was for a short time a missionary centre—the
first on the Orinoco. It was, however, destroyed in 1579 by the Dutch
under Jansen. There is little now at this point to interest the
traveler except the beautiful Salto—cataract—of the
Caroni river, so celebrated for its picturesque scenery, and the wealth
of orchideous plants with which the adjacent trees are clothed. Raleigh
in describing these falls says that so great was the mass of vapor due
to the fury and rebound of the waters that “we tooke it at the
first for a smoke that had risen ouer some great towne,” and
Padre Caulin, in his description of it, says the roar of the cataract
is so great that it can be heard at a distance of several [90]leagues.
Both these accounts are quite exaggerated. The falls are very beautiful
and romantic, but by no means so grand or so imposing as they have been
depicted.
Near the confluence of the Caroni and the Orinoco is the straggling
little town of San Felix. At this point our mining party left us for
their long journey of one hundred and fifty miles on mule-back to
Callao. They gave us a cordial invitation to accompany them, but we had
other plans, and, although we should have enjoyed exploring this famous
mining district of southern Guiana, we felt constrained to continue our
course westwards.
For a number of years the Yuruari mining district promised to equal,
if not surpass, the most famous gold fields of Nevada and California.
One of the mines, the Callao, rivaled the great Comstock mines of
Virginia City, and for “a considerable period,” we are
assured, “original shares of 1,000 pesos produced dividends of
72,000 pesos yearly.” In 1895, however, the main lode was lost,
and since that time, owing to lack of funds, little has been done in
any of the mines in the district. The owners of the Callao mine still
hope to find the lost lode, and it was to investigate the condition of
this mine, and of certain others in the neighborhood, that our American
friends undertook their long trip southwards. If the outlook justifies
it, they purpose improving the present wretched cart-road, which
connects the mines with San Felix, and putting on suitable traction
engines for the transportation of freight, which has hitherto been
carried on the backs of burros and in carts of the most primitive
type.
During the halcyon days of the Callao mine, when all eyes were
directed towards this quarter of the world, a certain syndicate tried
to secure from the government a concession for building a railroad from
the Orinoco to the Yuruari gold fields. The then president of Venezuela
was quite willing to grant the concession, but insisted, it is said, on
having by anticipation a much larger share of the prospective profits
of the road than the company was willing [91]to give. Had the railway
been constructed, there is no doubt that many other valuable mines
would have been developed, and that southeastern Guiana would soon have
become one of the most productive regions of the republic. The road
would have benefited not only the mining interests but would have led
to a rapid development of the grazing and agricultural industries,
which, in this part of Venezuela, could, under favorable conditions, be
second only to those of the llanos of the Apure, and of the fertile
plains of the states of Bermudez and Bolivar.
Aside from the interest that attaches to this part of South America,
on account of its many scenic attractions and its varied natural
resources of forest and field and mine, it will always possess an added
interest by reason of its connection with Raleigh’s ill-fated
search for El Dorado. When his purse became depleted, and he had fallen
from the favor of Queen Elizabeth—who for a while was so
“much taken with his elocution” that she “took him
for a kind of oracle”—he bethought him of retrieving
fortune and favor by the discovery and conquest of a second Incaic
empire, and, with this end in view, he projected his famous voyage
to
“Yet unspoil’d
Guiana, whose great city Geryon’s sons
Call El Dorado.”
It is beside my purpose to comment on the
“cruell and blood-thirsty Amazones,” and the race of people
who “haue their eyes in their shoulders, and their mouths in the
middle of their breasts,”3 about whom Raleigh writes
in his [92]remarkable book, so often quoted, The
Discoverie of Gviana, and which caused Hume to brand the work as
being a tissue of “the grossest and most palpable lies.” We
are here interested only in what he says about the finding of gold in
the region bordering the Caroni and in his fantastic tales regarding El
Dorado.4
Whether Raleigh himself really believed in the existence of El
Dorado, such as he has described it, or whether he wished to work on
the imaginations of his countrymen, who were as credulous and as great
lovers of the marvelous as were their contemporaries on the continent
of Europe, cannot be affirmed with certainty. It is probable that he
possessed a full share of the credulity of his age, and that, if he
embellished his accounts of what he saw or exaggerated the reports
which he received from the aborigines, he really gave credence to the
leading features of the extraordinary stories that were then current
regarding the fabulous riches of the great city of Manoa.4
And he was most likely in earnest when he declared that
“whatsoeuer Prince shall possess
it”—Guiana—“that Prince shal be Lorde of more
gold, and of a more beautifull Empire, and of more Cities and people,
then eyther the King of Spayne, or the great Turke,” and was
probably honest in the belief that he who should “conquerere the
same,” would “performe more than euer was done in Mexico by
Cortez, or in Peru by Pacaro.”
The New World was, for the people of the Old, still a land of
mystery and enchantment, and the great majority [93]of the
adventurers in the newly discovered lands were quite ready to credit
the wildest tales, and follow the most elusive phantoms, provided they
gave indications, however slight, of the possibility of satisfying that
auri sacra fames which consumed the poor and rich
alike.
The remarkable thing about Raleigh is that he actually found gold
and gold-bearing quartz in the land watered by the Caroni, and located
the capital of El Dorado near where the great Callao mine was
discovered nearly three centuries later. And not only did he discover
gold-bearing quartz, but he found a variety of gold quartz essentially
the same as that which occurs in the Yuruari districts. It is
interesting to speculate what effect the actual discovery by him of the
Callao mine would have had on his subsequent career and on
England’s schemes of expansion in the Western Hemisphere. One
thing is certain. He would have recouped his lost fortunes, and his
head, in all probability, would never have fallen on the block in Old
Palace Yard.5
The following is Raleigh’s résumé of the riches
and marvels of Guiana and the Orinoco valley, and at the same time a
sample of the stories then current regarding the land of El
Dorado—stories which those to whom the writer appealed, found
little difficulty in accepting as unquestioned expressions of
unvarnished truth:
“For the rest, which my selfe haue seene I will promise these
things that follow and knowe to be true. Those that are desirous to
discouer and to see many nations, may be satisfied within this riuer,
which bringeth forth so many armes and branches leading to seuerall
countries, and prouinces, aboue 2000 miles east and west, and 800 miles
south and north: and of these, the most eyther rich in Gold, or in
other merchandizes. The common soldier shal here fight for gold, and
pay himselfe, in steede of pence, with [94]plates of halfe a foote
brode, wheras he breaketh his bones in other warres for prouant and
penury. Those commanders and Chieftaines, that shoote at honour, and
abundance, shal find there more rich and bewtifull cities, more temples
adorned with golden Images, more sepulchers filled with treasure, than
either Cortez found in Mexico, or Pazarro in Peru,
and the shining glorie of this conquest will eclipse all those so farre
extended beames of the Spanish nation. There is no countrey which
yeeldeth more pleasure to the inhabitants, either for these common
delights of hunting, hawking, fishing, fowling, and the rest, then
Guiana doth. It hath so many plaines, cleare riuers, abundance
of Phesants, Partridges, Quailes, Rayles, Cranes, Herons, and all other
fowls: Deare of all sortes, Porkes, Hares, Lyons, Tygers, Leopards, and
diuers other sortes of beastes, eyther for chace, or
foode.”6
Although we were intensely interested in the fauna and flora of the
Orinoco, and never tired of the magnificent prospects, which, like an
ever-changing panorama, were constantly presented to our view, we found
time to observe the native population, especially the Indians, who are
seen in considerable numbers along the entire course of the river. In
the Delta and in its immediate neighborhood, they are represented
chiefly by the Waraus, Aruacs, and Caribs.
An Indian Home on the
Orinoco.
The Waraus have a slightly darker complexion than either the Aruacs
or Caribs. Owing to their lack of personal cleanliness, and the amount
of oil with which they besmear their bodies, their hue becomes so dark,
that, were [95]it not for their straight hair, it would at times
be difficult to distinguish them from negroes. In consequence of their
careless habits regarding their persons and places of abode, and the
way in which they neglect their children, they are despised by the
neighboring tribes. Their rude huts, often no more than a little palm
thatch supported by a few uprights, afford them but little protection
from sun and rain. With these, however, they seem to be quite
satisfied.
The Aruacs found here belong to that great group of Indians that, at
the time of the arrival of the Spaniards in the New World, inhabited
all the large islands of the Antilles. According to ethnologists, their
original home was probably on the eastern slopes of the Bolivian
Cordilleras. Thence they migrated towards the north and east and
constituted for a time one of the most powerful races in the Western
Hemisphere.
They are also one of the oldest of the great South American tribes.
They were the first Indians with whom the Spaniards came in contact and
are to-day, as they were in the time of Columbus, a friendly,
good-natured, peace-loving people, in spite of all the harsh treatment
their forefathers received from their cruel conquerors. They are fairer
than either the Waraus or the Caribs, and their women are reputed the
most beautiful of all the native Guianians.7 Their hair
is occasionally so long that it reaches the ground, and, although they
sometimes do it up and in the most tasteful manner, they usually allow
it to fall over their shoulders. They anoint it daily with Carapa nut
oil, and seem to realize as fully as do their white sisters in the
north, that “a woman’s glory is in her
hair.”8 [96]
The Caribs here referred to belong to that dread race of whom
Columbus heard such blood-curdling stories from the peaceful
inhabitants of Cuba and Española. They are, too, among the
youngest of the great migratory races of South America, and their
original abode seems to have been in the upper basins of the Xingu and
Tapajos, two of the great affluents of the Amazon.
Descending these rivers, they took possession of the greater part of
the continent bordering the Atlantic from the mouth of the Amazon to
the Caribbean sea, which is named from them. Subsequently, in large
fleets of canoes, in making which they excelled, they pushed their way
up the Orinoco and its principal tributaries, spreading death and
destruction wherever they went. And not satisfied with their conquests
on land, they eventually extended their dominion over the islands of
the Lesser Antilles as far as St. Thomas. Had it not been for the
timely arrival of the Spaniards, there is no doubt that they would have
driven the peaceful Waraus out of the Greater Antilles, as they had
forced them from their other homes in the islands to the southeast and
on the mainland of South America.
They were the terror of all the tribes with whom they came in
contact. They enslaved the women, and celebrated their victories by
devouring the men. They were the cannibals who so strenuously opposed
the Spaniards on many a bloody field, and who, it is alleged,
celebrated their victory over the white invader by serving up, at their
savage banquets, the captives taken in ambush or in battle. Indeed, the
word cannibal is but a corruption of the word Carib.9
[97]For many generations they preyed on the peaceful
Indians of the missions of the Orinoco basin and elsewhere, and time
and again the zealous missionary saw the work of years undone in a few
moments by the sudden onslaught of these dread and ruthless
visitants.
Thanks to the tireless efforts of the Spanish Franciscans,
[98]the Caribs who inhabit the eastern part of
Venezuela were eventually civilized and Christianized, and converted
from wild nomads into peaceful and useful citizens, having their own
towns and villages. They were chiefly engaged in the breeding of cattle
and in agriculture.
A century ago there were in the territory bounded by the Caroni, the
Cuyuni and the Orinoco no fewer than thirty-eight missions, with
sixteen thousand civilized Indians. But by decrees promulgated by the
Republic of Colombia in the years 1819 and 1821 these missions were
suppressed and to-day one sees scarcely a vestige of their former
existence. The Indians are not only much less numerous than formerly,
but most of them have returned to the mode of life they led before the
advent of the missionary. [99]
They are, as a rule, peaceful and harmless, but as they have been so
long neglected by the government, their social status is but little
above that of their savage ancestors. More is the pity. The suppression
of the missions here was followed by the same consequences as resulted
from the suppression of the missions in Paraguay and
elsewhere—the relapse of the Indians into savagery and the loss
to the state of thousands of useful and worthy citizens. It is
difficult to see the wisdom of thus eliminating from the body politic
elements so prolific of good and so essential to the public weal.
Père Labat, referring to the language of the Caribs, writes
as follows:—“The Caribs have three kinds of language. The
first, the most ordinary, and that which every one speaks, is the one
affected by the men.
“The second is so proper to the women, that, although the men
understand it, they would consider themselves dishonored if they spoke
it, or if they answered their women in case they had the temerity to
address them in this language. They—the women—know the
language of their husbands, and must make use of it when they speak to
them, but they never use it when they talk among themselves, nor do
they employ any language but the one peculiar to themselves, which is
entirely different from that of the men.
“There is a third language, which is known only by the men who
have been in war, and particularly by the old men. It is rather a
jargon than a language. They use it in important assemblies of which
they desire to keep the resolutions secret. The women and young men are
ignorant of it.”10
This statement was for a long time discredited, and classed among
those fables regarding the New World that were unworthy of the
attention of serious men. Later on it was discovered that the
victoriosa loquacitas of the charming [100]monk
was based on fact. But the next thing was to explain the fact. On
investigation it was found that something similar exists among other
Indian tribes of South America, as, for instance, among the Guaranis,
the Chiquitos, the Omaguas and the Quichuas.
In explanation of this strange phenomenon, it was then suggested
“that women, from their separate way of life, frame particular
terms which men do not adopt.” Cicero observes that old forms of
language are best preserved by women, because, by their position in
society, they are less exposed to those vicissitudes of life, changes
of place and occupation, which tend to corrupt the primitive purity of
language among men.11
This suggestion, ingenious though it be, was far from satisfactory
to philologists and ethnologists. The quest, therefore, for a solution
of the strange problem, was continued with renewed interest, and with
the result that the mystery was at length completely solved. As has
been stated, it was the custom of the Caribs in their wars with other
Indian tribes to massacre the men and reduce the women to servitude. In
some instances many of the women and not infrequently the majority of
them became the wives of their conquerors. But even after this enforced
alliance, the women retained their own language. The consequence was
that, in families thus constituted, there were two languages
spoken—that of the conqueror and that of the conquered.
While, however, the general accuracy of Père Labat’s
statements were thus put beyond further doubt, it was discovered, by a
comparative study of the languages of the Caribs and those of the
tribes which they had subjugated, that it was not strictly true to
assert that the language of the women was entirely different from that
of the men—totalement different de celui des
hommes—as the good [101]Dominican had affirmed. They were
entirely different in the words of daily use and of most frequent
occurrence, but the difference extended in reality only to the minor
part of the vocabulary actually employed. But the difference was quite
sufficient to justify the interest it had so long excited among men of
science, and to stimulate the researches which have only in recent
years been crowned with success.12
The night before arriving at Ciudad Bolivar, while dreamily
reclining in a steamer chair, I was awakened from my musings by a
vivacious senorita, of pronounced Castilian type, rushing up to her
father, near by, and exclaiming in an excited manner,
“Mira, padre, mira, la Cruz del
Sur!” Look, father, look—the Southern Cross! And
sure enough, there, in the constellation Centauri, was the “Croce
Maravigliosa,”—the marvelous cross—of the early
navigators, the “Crucero” of incomparable beauty and
brightness, the celestial clock of the early missionaries in the
tropical lands of the New World. The cloud-veiled skies of the
preceding nights had prevented us from getting a view of these
“luci sante”—holy lights—but
now we were privileged to behold them in all their heavenly splendor.
At once we recalled that well-known passage of Dante, which the lovers
of the great Florentine have applied to this constellation:—
“To the right hand I turned, and fixed my
mind,
On the other pole attentive, where I saw
Four stars ne’er seen before save by the ken
Of our first parents. Heaven of their rays [102]
Seemed joyous. O, thou northern site! bereft
Indeed, and widened, since of these
deprived!”13
We never suspected it at the time, but as subsequent
events proved, the señorita’s Cruz del Sur was to be our
timepiece for many subsequent months. During long wanderings over
mountain and plain and in many changing climes, it was the Southern
Cross that served as our guide, and marked the hours of night, in lieu
of Polaris and Ursa Major, which had disappeared below the horizon.
Toward noon, the second day after leaving the Port-of-Spain, we got
our first view of Ciudad Bolivar, founded in 1764 by Joaquin Moreno de
Mendoza, and since that time the capital of Guiana, now the great State
of Bolivar. Situated upon an eminence, on the right bank of the river,
it presents a very imposing appearance and seems much larger than it is
in reality. The white stone walls of the houses, and the brownish-red
tiles of the roofs, together [103]with the delicate green crowns of
lofty palms that dot every part of the city, enhance in a marked degree
the beauty of the picture as seen under the brilliant light of the
noonday sun. The cathedral, and the government buildings around the
plaza in the higher part of the town, loom up with splendid effect.
Indeed, it would be difficult to find a more beautiful picture of a
city, when seen at a distance, than is that of Ciudad Bolivar.
As one approaches this metropolis of the Orinoco basin, the details
of the city come gradually into view. Parallel with the river bank is
the principal business street—La Calle del Coco—which is at
the same time the most delightful promenade in the place. Here is the
custom-house, the American and other consulates, and a number of large
mercantile establishments, controlled chiefly by Germans, Americans and
Corsicans.
From a broad waterway, from two to three miles in width, the river
here contracts to a narrow channel which, at low water, is not more
than a half mile in width. According to Codazzi,14 the mean
depth of the river at this point is sixty feet. Towards the end of the
rainy season, however, the water rises from forty to fifty feet above
low-water mark. Sometimes it rises considerably higher. In 1891 the
flood was so high that the stores and dwellings of the part of the city
fronting the river were inundated to a height of several feet. Then the
inhabitants were obliged to have recourse to canoes in passing from
house to house. Then, too, stray alligators were seen in the streets
and it was possible to catch enough fish for a meal in the
patio—court-yard—of one’s residence.
The original name of the city was Santo Tomé de la Nueva
Guayana—the third place on the river to bear this name. The
first, it will be remembered, was situated at the confluence of the
Caroni and the Orinoco and was destroyed by the Dutch in 1579. The
second, now known as Los Castillos—formerly Guayana la
Vieja—was [104]founded by Antonio de Berrio in 1591, and
is famous in the history of this part of Venezuela for its vigorous
resistance to Sir Walter Raleigh, whom Spanish writers designate as the
“great pirate Gualtero Reali.” As the inhabitants found the
first name of their city inconveniently long they called it
Angostura—the Narrows—from the contraction of the river at
this point. The name was so appropriate that it is a pity it could not
have been retained. In 1819, however, Congress gave it the name of
Ciudad Bolivar, in honor of Simon Bolivar, the Liberator of South
America.
As our steamer neared the steep bank in front of the city our
attention was arrested by a large, dark, granitic mass—La
Piedra del Medio—looming up in the middle of the river. Like
the celebrated Nileometer at Cairo, this rock, which may appropriately
be called an Orinocometer, serves as a gauge of the annual rise of the
flood. As we passed it, we could see distinctly the height to which the
waters had risen the preceding year.
If ever the long-talked-of railroad from Caracas to Ciudad Bolivar
shall be constructed, this rock, almost midway between the latter city
and Soledad, a small town on the opposite side of the river, will serve
as an invaluable pier for the bridge that is planned to span the
Orinoco at this point. Until, however, the country shall have a more
stable government than it has now, and until foreign capital shall have
more confidence in the future of the republic than it has at present,
it is quite safe to say that there will be neither bridge nor railroad,
although both are very much needed to develop the vast resources of
this section of Venezuela.
In its location and surroundings, Ciudad Bolivar possesses all the
essential elements of a beautiful and prosperous metropolis. It
controls the trade of the immense Orinoco basin, and the amount of
business transacted here should, under favorable conditions, be many
times what it is at present. But, at the time of our visit, everything
[105]was in a state of abandonment that was sad to
behold. The streets, parks and public buildings, which could easily be
made the most attractive features of the city, were in a neglected
condition, and the number of vacant houses in certain sections, some
crumbling into ruins, showed the inevitable effects of protracted
misrule and periodic turmoil.
When I asked one of the prominent merchants of the city the reason
for the deplorable state referred to, he replied:—”No hay dinero. Hay tantas revoluciones.” (“There
is no money. There are so many revolutions.”) And when I sought a
reason for the business lethargy everywhere manifested, a similar reply
was forthcoming. “Somos pobres, estamos arruinados.
Hay tantas guerras y el gobierno es
malísimo.”—(“We are poor, ruined. There
have been so many wars and the government is very bad.”)
Merchants, tradesmen, day-laborers, professional men—all, except
government employees, who were interested in retaining their positions
as long as possible, had the same pitiful story to relate.
Oppressive taxes, exorbitant prices for many of the necessaries of
life, intolerable monopolies, controlled by leading government
officials or their favorites, had reduced the majority of the
population to a condition bordering on despair. No encouragement was
given to foreign capital for the exploitation and development of the
immense natural resources of the country. On the contrary, foreigners
were looked upon with suspicion, while Castro and his henchmen were
openly antagonistic to them. Nor was it only in Ciudad Bolivar and in
other parts of the Orinoco valley that this lamentable condition of
things obtained. We found the same business depression, the same
hopeless outlook in Caracas, Valencia, Puerto Cabello, and other
commercial centres of the republic. Small wonder, then, was it that the
discouraged, downtrodden people were longing and praying for a change
in the administration.
The long desired change came at last, and in a way that [106]no
one could have foreseen. The dramatic downfall of Castro suddenly and
unexpectedly opened the way to an amelioration of conditions that had
become intolerable, while the accession of Gomez to power has inspired
all patriotic and peace-loving Venezuelans with the hope that their
long distracted country is about to enter upon a new era—an era
of social progress and business prosperity—an era of amity with
other nations accompanied by a spirit of comity which was so long
conspicuous by its absence.
Notwithstanding the comparatively large number of vessels that come
to this place, there is no wharf, and people here say that the great
rise and fall of the river make it impossible to construct one.
Fortunately, it is not a prime necessity, as the water, even in the dry
season, is so deep that the largest vessels can approach so near the
bank that both freight and passengers can be discharged by an ordinary
gangplank.
Our steamer, like all the others there, was moored head and stern by
cables leading to the venerable Ceiba trees that lined la Calle del
Coco high above us. The inclination of the bank, where merchandise is
landed, amounts in places to almost 45°, and yet no machinery of
any kind is used for transferring even the heaviest kinds of freight
from the vessel to the top of the acclivity. All is carried on the
shoulders of men, usually mestizos and negroes.
We spent a week in and around Ciudad Bolivar, and, during this time,
we had ample opportunities to study the manners and customs of its
people. The population of the city is not more than twelve or thirteen
thousand—a small number for the entrepot of the immense Orinoco
basin. Under less untoward conditions it would be many times as
great.15 [107]
To this place are brought the products of the forests and plains of
the upper Orinoco and its numerous tributaries. Among the most
important articles of export are hides, rubber—especially the
coarser variety known as balata—cacao, coffee, and tobacco from
Zamora, pelts of the jaguar and other wild animals, tonka beans,
copaiba and feathers.
The last item is amazing, when one considers what a slaughter of the
feathered tribe it implies. We met a Frenchman here who was just
packing for shipment to Paris several hundred thousand egrets, the
result of a three-years’ hunt in the forests and plains of the
Orinoco basin. But he was not the only one engaged in this wholesale
slaughter of birds. There were many others, and their work of
despoiling the tropics of their most attractive ornaments extends to
all the vast regions on both sides of the equator.
The small egret—Ardea candidissima—which supplies
the most valuable plumes, and the large egret—Ardea
garzetta—which produces a coarser feather, are the principal
victims. As only a few drooping plumes from the backs of the birds are
taken, one can readily see what a terrific slaughter is required to
meet the demands of the markets of the world.
The worst feature about the business is that the birds are killed
during the mating and breeding season. Already the result is manifest
in the rapidly diminishing numbers of egrets that frequent the
garceros—the name given to the places where they nest and
rear their young.
“The beauty of a few feathers on their backs,” writes
one who, if not a misogynist, is evidently in sympathy with the aims
and purposes of our Audubon society, “will be the cause of their
extinction. The love of adornment common to most animals is the source
of their troubles. The graceful plumes which they doubtless admire in
each other have appealed to the vanity of the most destructive of all
animals. They are doomed, because the women of civilized [108]countries continue to have the same fondness for
feathers and ornaments characteristic of savage tribes.”16
The houses of Ciudad Bolivar, built on a hill of dark, almost bare
hornblende-schist, are in marked contrast with those of the
Port-of-Spain. In Trinidad’s capital each residence—usually
frame—is provided with numerous doors, and jalousied windows, and
surrounded by gardens, with a profusion of the most beautiful tropical
flowers and trees. Here, on the contrary, the houses, generally only
one story high, have but one door, with all the external windows
crossed by heavy iron bars, not unlike those of our jails.17
This, however, is not peculiar to Ciudad Bolivar, but obtains
throughout Latin America, as it obtains in all the parts of Spain
formerly occupied by the Moors. Yet these windows, which are in
themselves so forbidding, are in the cool of the evening the most
attractive parts of the house. Here bevies of bright, well-dressed
señoritas, who, during the heat of the day remain secluded in
their rooms or some shady corner of the patio, congregate to
enjoy the fresh air that is wafted to them on the wings of the
trade-winds, to listen to the daily gossip and to exchange confidences
with those of their companions who may have called to spend the
evening. Here and there one will observe some philandering caballero,
dressed as faultlessly as Beau Brummel, exchanging vows with some
languishing Dulcinea behind the bars. So absorbed are they in each
other that they are totally oblivious of all else in the world, and
utterly unconscious of the attention they attract from the passers-by.
For the time being they themselves are the world and for them
everything else is nonexistent. [109]
We were sitting one evening in the beautiful plaza of Ciudad
Bolivar, listening to the music of the military band which plays here
several times a week. The élite of the city were there.
Beautiful, dark-eyed señoritas, adorned with their graceful
mantillas, were promenading with their fathers and mothers, and gay
young cavaliers were following at a discreet distance, á la Española. The tropical trees and flowers,
which gave to the plaza the aspect of a botanical garden, were
beautifully illuminated, and, without any effort of the imagination,
one could easily imagine one’s self in fairyland. Hard by, a
young lady from Trinidad, on whose finger was a sparkling solitaire,
was recounting, in a more audible tone than she imagined, the pleasures
of her voyage up the Orinoco. In the glow of her enthusiasm she
declared to her confidant, “I am going to come to the Orinoco
during my honeymoon. Don Esteban”—evidently her
fiancé—“will just have to bring me here. I cannot
imagine a more delightful trip anywhere.”
This young lady, who had traveled extensively, in this inadvertent
publication of her secret but expresses the impression that would be
reiterated, I fancy, by the majority of her sex under the same
circumstances. The Orinoco is, indeed, beautiful, and a sail on its
placid waters, if not “the most delightful excursion one could
take,” as Miss Trinidad declared, is certainly one of the most
delightful.
The day before we were to return to the Port-of-Spain, while
chatting with a friend on the upper deck of our steamer—which we
had made our hotel, because the lodging houses of the city were so
poor—we saw a small vessel coming down stream under a full head
of steam. On inquiry we found it to be a boat from Orocué, a
small town in Colombia, on the river Meta. We immediately called upon
the captain of the craft, and, as a result of our interview, determined
to accompany him on his return trip to this distant point.
When we left Trinidad, we had no intention of going [110]further up the river than Ciudad Bolivar, but we
had enjoyed everything so much, that now that an occasion thus so
unexpectedly presented itself, we rejoiced that we should have an
opportunity of seeing more of the great Orinoco, and of sailing on the
waters of its great tributary, the historic Meta.
Dreams of the past began at once to flit before us as possible
realities in the near future. If we once got to Orocué, what was
to prevent us from going further up the river—as far as its
waters were navigable? Then by crossing the llanos of eastern Colombia,
and the Cordilleras of the Andes we would be in far-famed
Bogotá, the Athens of South America.
We had had, it is true, visions of this trip, but rather as
something greatly to be desired than as even a remote possibility. And
now, in a few moments—after a brief conversation with the captain
of the boat that had just moored alongside our own, the journey was
decided on, and nothing remained but to make the necessary
preparations.
As, however, the steamer would not be ready to go to Orocué
for about two weeks, we concluded to return to the Port-of-Spain and
come back the following week. This would give us an opportunity of
studying more in detail several interesting features of the lower
Orinoco that we had only gotten a glimpse of during the upward trip,
and of seeing by daylight parts of the river that we had before passed
during the night. We would also be able to spend a few more days in the
beautiful island of Trinidad, and feast our eyes on its thousand
beauties which greet one at every turn.
It was, indeed, providential for us that we returned to Trinidad as
we did, for while there—was it chance or was it our usual good
fortune?—we found, what above all else we needed in this
juncture—a good, brave, enthusiastic companion for the long and
arduous trip before us. Our compagnon de voyage, who would
fondly affect the ways and dress of a dapper young caballero, and whom,
therefore, [111]we shall call C.—caballero—was a
professor of languages. He had traveled extensively, was interested in
the Spanish language and literature and the peoples we were about to
visit. He was, like ourselves, fond of adventure, and was not averse to
its being accompanied by an element of danger. This only gave
additional zest to what were else rather tame and prosaic. Our plans
were soon made, and, before the steamer was ready to return to Ciudad
Bolivar, we were fully equipped with everything necessary for our long
trip across the continent. [112]
1 Chapter
XXXI. ↑
2 Op. cit,
Vol. II, pp. 255, 256. ↑
3 The
Ewaipanomas, to whom Othello, in his address to the fair Desdemona,
refers in the following passage:—
“... the cannibals that each other eat,
The anthropophagi, and men whose heads
Do grow beneath their shoulders.”
Captain Keymis, who served under Raleigh, tells us,
as we read in Hakluyt, of people “who have eminent heads like
dogs, and live all the day-time in the sea, and they speak the Carib
language.” ↑
4 John Hagthorpe, a
contemporary of Raleigh, writes about the matter as follows: “Sir
Walter Rawley knewe very well when he attempted his Guayana businesse,
who err’d in nothing so much,—if a free man may speak
freely,—as in too much confidence in the relations of the
countrie: For who knowes not the policy and cunning of the fat Fryers,
which is to stirre up and animate the Souldiers and Laytie to the
search and inquisition of new Countries, by devising tales and coments
in their Cloysters where they live at ease, that when others have taken
payne to bringe in the harvest, they may feed upon the best and fattest
of the croppe?”—England’s Exchequer, or A
Discourse of the Sea and Navigation with Some Things Thereunto
Coincident Concerning Plantations, London, 1625. ↑
5 Kingsley
in Westward Ho! speaks of Columbus and Raleigh as “the two
most gifted men, perhaps, with the exception of Humboldt, who ever set
foot in tropical America.” Spanish writers, it is safe to say,
would strongly demur to this statement so far as Raleigh is
concerned. ↑
6
Elsewhere he tells us of the thousands of “vglie serpents,”
which he calls Lagartos, the Spanish word for lizards, that he
saw everywhere along the Orinoco. They were what are now known as
crocodiles and caymans, the former of which, according to Schomburgk,
are seldom more than six to eight feet long, while the latter are said
sometimes to attain a length of twenty-five feet. We saw several of
them every day but their number was far from being as great as is
usually represented.
Of the armadillo, which is prized as a delicacy in
Guiana, Raleigh says “it seemeth to be barred ouer with small
plates like to a Renocero with a white horne growing in his
hinder parts, as big as a great hunting horne which they vse to winde
in steed of a trumpet.” Op. cit., p. 74. ↑
7
According to Sr. F. Michelenena y Rojas, Exploracion
Oficial, p. 54, the palm for physical superiority and intelligence
is to be awarded to the Caribs. He says the Carib race is without doubt
... the most beautiful, the most robust and the most intelligent of all
those in Venezuela. Not only this; he seems inclined to consider them
the superiors of all the Indians in South America. Vespucci speaks,
too, of them as “magnae sapientiae
viri”—men of superior intelligence—as well as men
of superior strength and valor. ↑
8 Raleigh
gives the following graphic description of the wife of an Indian chief
whom he met during his voyage to this region:—
“In all my life I haue seldome
seene a better fauored woman: She was of good stature, with blacke
eies, fat of body, of an excellent countenance, hir haire almost as
long as hir selfe, tied vp againe in pretie knots, and it seemed she
stood not in that aw of hir husband, as the rest, for she spake and
discourst, and dranke among the gentlemen and captaines, and was very
pleasant, knowing hir owne comelines, and taking great pride therein. I
haue seene a Lady in England so like hir, as but for the difference of
colour I would haue sworne might haue beene the same.” Op. cit.,
p. 66. ↑
9 Peter
Martyr says of them:—”Edaces humanarum
carnium novi helluones anthropophagi, Caribes alias Canibales
appellati.”
Notwithstanding all that has been said on the
subject since the discovery of America, it is still a moot question
with many serious investigators whether the Caribs of Tierra Firme were
ever cannibals, as is so generally believed. That the Caribs of certain
of the West Indian islands were addicted to anthropophagy there can, it
seems, be little doubt. The concurrent testimony of the earlier
writers, including Peter Martyr and Cardinal Bembo and others, have
apparently placed the matter beyond controversy. It was the cruelties
and anthropophagous habits of the Caribs, as reported to Spain, that
provoked the law which was promulgated in 1504 in virtue of which every
Indian, who could be proved to be of Carib origin, might be enslaved by
the Spaniards. This law, however, although designed by its framers to
eliminate a practice that was a disgrace to humanity, opened the door
to evils almost as great—if not greater in some
instances—as those it was expected to suppress. Selfish, soulless
colonists had but to circulate the report that certain Indians, whom
they coveted for slaves, were cannibals, in order to justify themselves
before the law for tearing them from their homes and keeping them in
servitude. Thus it happened that, shortly after the promulgation of the
law aforesaid, the Caribs of the Mainland, as well as those of the West
Indies, were classed as cannibals. They were accordingly hunted like
wild beasts, and countless thousands of them—the same innocent,
gentle, inoffensive creatures that so strongly appealed to
Columbus—were sold into slavery and met with a cruel death in the
mines of Española. So successful were the atrocious
slave-dealers of the time in fixing the stigma of cannibal on the
Indians of the Mainland that Herrera felt authorized to declare that
there was in every pueblo of Venezuela a slaughter house in which human
flesh could be obtained—en cada Pueblo havia
Caneceria publica de carne humana (Dec. VIII, Lib. II, Cap.
XIX).
Direct and specific as is this charge, it is quite
safe to assert that it is utterly devoid of foundation in fact. The
most charitable construction we can put on Herrera’s statements
is that he was misled by the false reports of those whose interest it
was to have it believed that the Caribs of Venezuela, as well as those
of the West Indies, indulged in the horrid practice of devouring their
enemies. Humboldt was among the first to raise his voice in defense of
the Indians of the Mainland and to assert that it was only the Caribs
of the West Indies that had “rendered the names cannibals,
Caribbees and anthropophagi, synonymous.” (Personal
Narrative, Vol. II, p. 414.)
A recent Venezuelan writer, Tavera-Acosta, declares
that it is “an incontrovertible fact that so far the
anthropophagy of which they have been accused by their ferocious and
ignorant executioners has never been proved” against the Caribs.
Their sole crime was that they took arms against their ruthless
invaders in defense of their homes, and relying on their numbers and
conscious superiority over other tribes endeavored by all possible
means to preserve their independence. (Anales de
Guayana, p. 320, Ciudad Bolivar, 1905.)
There can be no doubt that the Indians, during the
period of the conquest and subsequently, were the victims of gross
misrepresentations and had in consequence to endure untold hardships
and miseries. Not content with denouncing them as cannibals, their
relentless persecutors—Dutch, Germans, English, French and
Portuguese, as well as Spaniards—insisted on regarding them as
mere animals—like a species of chimpanzee or
orang-outang—that had no souls and no rights any one was bound to
respect. It required the bull—Sublimis Deus—of Pope
Paul III to define the status of the hapless Indians, to make it clear
that they are not “dumb brutes created for our service,”
but that they “are truly men”; that “they are by no
means to be deprived of their liberty or the possession of their
property”; that they are not “to be in any way
enslaved”; and that “should the contrary happen, it shall
be null and of no effect.”
What has been said of the cannibalism of the South
American Indian in times past may with even greater truth be iterated
of it to-day. In spite of what has been written to the contrary, even
by so distinguished an explorer as Rafael Reyes—ex-president of
Colombia—it may well be doubted if there is a single tribe in
South America that can justly be accused of cannibalism. Some of them,
owing to their miserable social condition, or because they have for
generations past been the victims of the injustice and cruelty of the
whites, may be ferocious and vindictive, but, that even the worst of
them are cannibals, is yet to be proved. Compare Oviedo y
Baños, op. cit., II, p. 377 et seq., and Across the South
American Continent, Exploration of the Brothers Reyes, Paper Read at
the Pan-American Conference, by General Rafael Reyes, the Delegate for
Colombia, Dec. 30th, 1901, Mexico and Barcelona,
1902. ↑
10
Nouveau Voyage aux Isles de l’Amérique, Vol. VI,
pp. 127, 128, Paris, 1743. ↑
11
“Facilius enim mulieres incorruptam antiquitatem conservant, quod
multorum sermonis expertes ea tenent semper, quæ prima
didicerunt.”—De Orat., Lib. III, Cap. XII,
45. ↑
12 See,
among other works on the subject, Du Parler des Hommes et
du Parler des Femmes dans la Langue Caraïbe, par Lucien Adam,
Paris, 1879, in which the author makes the following
statement:—
“Le double langage se réduit, au
point de vue de la lexicologie, à cette singularité que,
pour exprimer environ 400 idées sur 2,000 à 3,000, les hommes invariablement, et les
femmes seulment entre elles, se servaient de mots différents.”
See also Introduction à la
grammaire Caraïbe, du P. R. Breton, and the Dictionaire Caraïbe, of the same author. ↑
13 The
Purgatorio, Canto I, vv. 22–27.
The poet is not to be taken too literally in this
last verse. In consequence of the precession of the equinoxes, the
constellations are ever changing their position with reference to any
given point on the earth’s surface. There was a time, in the
distant past, when the Southern Cross was visible in the very land in
which Dante penned his immortal poem. “At the time of Claudius
Ptolemæus,” says Humboldt, “the beautiful star at the
base of the Southern Cross had still an altitude of 6° 10′ at
its meridian passage at Alexandria, while at the present day it
culminates there several degrees below the horizon.
“In the fourth century, the Christian
anchorites in the Thebaid desert might have seen the Cross at an
altitude of ten degrees.” And again, “The Southern Cross
began to become invisible in 52° 30′ north latitude 2900
years before our era, since, according to Galle, this constellation
might previously have reached an altitude of more than 10°. When it
disappeared from the horizon of the countries on the Baltic, the great
pyramid of Cheops had already been erected more than five hundred
years. The pastoral tribe of the Hyksos made their incursion seven
hundred years earlier. The past seems to be visibly nearer to us when
we connect its measurement with great and memorable
events.”—Cosmos, Vol. II, pp. 288–291, New
York, 1850.
For an interesting discussion of Dante’s
“quattro stelle,” four stars, with references, see
Vernon’s Readings on the Purgatorio, Vol. I, pp. 10, 11,
third edition. Compare also Ramusio, Delle Navigazioni e
Viaggi, Vol. I, pp. 127 and 193, Venetia, 1550, and Oviedo,
Historia General y Natural de las Indias. Lib. II,
Cap. 11, pp. 45 and 46, Madrid, 1851. ↑
14
Geografia Statistica de Venezuela, p. 461, Firenze,
1864. ↑
15 It was
here that the well-known brand of Angostura bitters was first prepared
by Dr. Siegert. The women of the city, however, maintain that its
discovery was due to a Venezolana, who was the wife of the
German doctor. Owing to the exactions of the Venezuelan government, the
manufacture of this widely used infusion was long ago transferred to
the Port-of-Spain, where it now constitutes one of the city’s
chief industries. ↑
16 A
Naturalist in the Guianas, p. 65, by Eugene André, New York,
1904. ↑
17 In the
quasi-suburb, known as morichales, from the number of moriche palms
found there, the homes of the well-to-do people are not unlike those we
so much admired in Trinidad. Some of them are delightful arbors,
surrounded by gardens filled with the rarest shrubs and blooms. Here
truly, in the language of Pliny, flowers are the joy of trees, and they
vie with one another in the brilliance of their colors, and in the
exuberance of their growth. ↑
At last we were ready to start on our long journey up
the Orinoco and the Meta, and then across the llanos of Eastern
Colombia, and the Cordilleras to far-off Bogotá. For several
days the swarthy stevedores of Ciudad Bolivar had been busy in
transferring to our little steamer the freight that had here been
accumulating for her during the preceding six months.
For several days, too, our friends and acquaintances had been
endeavoring to dissuade us from what one and all pronounced a rash and
dangerous undertaking. All meant well, but all were prophets of ill. No
one, we were assured, had ever gone to Bogotá by the route we
purposed taking,1 [113]and we were solemnly warned time
and again that we were surely risking our health if not exposing our
lives. Everything, it was averred, was against the successful
termination of our journey, and it would be a miracle if we ever
reached Bogotá alive.
First of all, there were the steaming, miasmatic exhalations in the
Orinoco and Meta valleys, from which they were never free, and the ever
present danger of yellow fever and other malignant diseases. Even
people who were thoroughly acclimated incurred the greatest risk in
traveling through this pestiferous, germ-laden atmosphere. How much
more then should we, who had so recently come from the chilly north, be
exposed, if we still persisted in our foolhardy venture? And then, if
we fell sick, as we surely must, we should be in a trackless
wilderness, among savages, and far away from medical aid of any
kind.
Then there was the torrid climate to take into account. By reason of
the intense heat, it would be impossible to travel by day. We should
then perforce be obliged to travel by night. And this implied new
dangers—dangers of straying from a poorly defined trail, or of
falling into ravines, or quagmires, and dangers from wild animals of
all kinds, with which the forests and plains were always infested.
There was the jaguar, always prowling about, seeking whom he might
devour; the labairi and boaquira, serpents whose envenomed fangs bring
certain death to their victims, and the dread boa that was pictured as
hanging in untold numbers from the branches of the trees in the forests
through which we should pass.
A torrid climate, a reeky, malarial atmosphere, a region infested
with venomous serpents—all this was bad enough, [114]but
this was far from being the sum total of the pests and plagues we
should encounter.
There was that ever-present pest—whose name is not legion, but
billion—on which travelers in South America have exhausted their
supply of adjectives in the vain attempt adequately to express their
sentiments. I refer to what the Spaniard has so aptly called the
plaga—the plague—the cloud of mosquitoes of many
species that constantly torment the traveler, and give him no rest
night or day. We had read what various writers on the equinoctial
regions had to say of the murderous onslaughts of the mosquito from the
time of the early missionaries down to our own, and such reading was
far from calculated to reassure one who was about to form a more
intimate acquaintance of the plaga in question.2
[115]
In a work written on the Orinoco in 1822, Mr. J. H. Robertson,
referring to this matter, declares that “the biting, blistering,
and intolerable itching” which is produced by clouds of
mosquitoes is “indeed enough to make a man mad.” He says
that they made the passengers—blacks as well as others, that were
on the boat with him, “almost roar with agony,” and that in
the morning the “whole body exhibited one mass of small blisters
from millions of bites we had received during the
night.”3
In a more recent book, by another Englishman, it is stated that the
Orinoco is the “paradise of mosquitoes, and the hell of
travelers. There, insects of unusual size, and speckled in an ominous
and snake-like manner, issued from the bush in millions and assailed
every square inch of the exposed skin.... Moreover, they stung through
the boots, coat and waistcoat, and drew blood wherever they
penetrated.”4 [116]
On looking over these works again, we found that the miseries
referred to were endured chiefly in the delta of the Orinoco, and not
so much in the river above. Yet, strange to say, our experience, so far
at least, was the very contrary of all this, although we had passed
through the delta three times. On none of these occasions had we ever
been molested by a single mosquito or had we ever thought of using a
mosquito net. As a matter of fact, nobody ever used such a protection
against insects, as there was no call for it. Our natural inference was
that the reports about this plaga of the Orinoco were much
exaggerated, and we had reason to suspect that the same was true about
the terrific heat against which we had so repeatedly been warned.
We had been twice in La Guaira, which Humboldt declared to be one of
the hottest places on earth, and had not suffered so much from the
elevated temperature there as we had frequently suffered from the
sweltering heat that so often oppresses one in New York and Washington.
We remembered, too, that another German writer had characterized Ciudad
Bolivar, on account of the intensity [117]of the heat
prevailing there, as “the exit of hell, as La Guaira is its
entrance.” And yet during our sojourn of nearly two weeks in the
Orinoco city, we never experienced the slightest discomfort from the
temperature, nor did the thermometer ever rise within ten degrees of
the temperature often registered in some of our North Atlantic coast
cities during the months of July and August.
The truth was, we were beginning to grow quite sceptical about the
much vaunted dangers of equatorial travel. From our experience in
traveling in other lands, we had learned how prone the majority of
those who do not travel are to exaggerate—unconsciously,
perhaps—dangers with which they have no personal acquaintance,
and how inclined certain travelers are to magnify slight discomforts
and trifling occurrences into dangerous and trying adventures,
especially when their imaginary deeds of prowess are performed in
countries rarely visited, and, therefore, beyond the control of a
truthful recorder.5
The little heed we gave to all the dire predictions that had been so
freely volunteered and our persistence in going forward on our journey,
as we had planned it, evidently led one of our friends to suspect our
scepticism, and he accordingly resorted to what he honestly believed to
be conclusive evidence of the futility of our purpose and the danger of
our undertaking. This was an article that had recently been published
in an English magazine which had just reached Ciudad Bolivar. The
article was entitled, Adventures on the Orinoco, and contained
the following paragraph:—
“For many reasons the Orinoco is one of the most dangerous
rivers in the world. Not only are there countless physical dangers in
the shape of sunken rocks, wrecks and tree trunks, huge sand banks,
ever-changing channels and [118]bewildering currents, but also
many living, though often hidden, perils in the form of man, beast or
reptile. The higher one ascends, and the farther one penetrates beyond
the Maipures rapids into the heart of the Alto Orinoco, the wilder the
scene, and the more perilous the river. Sparsely populated as is the
vast region above and immediately below the rapids, it is often the
home of anarchy and misrule, and always a domain where the passions of
men know not the restraints of law, and civilization is still a
dream.”
To clinch his argument, our friend assured us that the Meta
region—whither we were bound—was far worse than that of the
Upper Orinoco. The banks of the Meta were always infested by hordes of
savage Guahibos, the terror of eastern Colombia. Hiding in the dense
underbrush that skirts the river, the first indication of their
presence would be a shower of well-directed, poisoned arrows against
the daring intruder into their jealously guarded domains. Only a few
months before, a steamer like ours had been attacked near the mouth of
the Meta by several hundred Indians and outlaws, and we were exposed to
a similar assault from the same quarter, unless we would listen to
reason, and desist from our hazardous and reckless enterprise.
“Besides,” he added finally, “it is by no means
certain that your boat will be permitted to reach its destination. As
you know, the government is now engaged in quelling the revolution led
by one Peñalosa. Only a few days ago a large steamer was
dispatched to San Fernando, laden with arms and ammunition, and orders
have been issued for your boat to call at Caicara and Urbana and be
subject to the orders of the army officers there awaiting instructions
from the scene of war. If the steamer shall be needed by the
government, as now seems more than probable, you will be left wherever
the boat happens to be commandeered, and then you will have no means of
returning hither except in a dugout, if you are fortunate enough to
find one. To continue your course up the river in an [119]Indian canoe, at this season of the year, at the
beginning of the rainy season, is, of course, impossible.”
We were not frightened by the thought of meeting the Indians. We had
met them before in many places, and had never found them so dangerous
as depicted. The thought, however, of being put ashore, in case the
government should need our boat, and of being compelled to make our way
back to Ciudad Bolivar in an Indian dugout was something that caused us
to ponder, but not to hesitate. We had been in similar quandaries
before, and, relying on our good luck, which has never failed us in our
wanderings, we determined to take our chances. We had faith in our
star, and we instinctively felt, in spite of the untoward outlook, that
we should in due course arrive safe and sound at Orocué. We
recalled and were encouraged by Minerva’s words to
Ulysses:—
ἔργοισιν
τελέθει, εἰ
καί ποθεν
ἄλλοθεν
ἔλθοι.6
Finally, long after the hour scheduled for our
departure from Ciudad Bolivar, our boat slipped her moorings, and she
was soon out in mid-river with her prow directed toward the setting
sun. It was the last week in April and the rainy season had already set
in—much earlier than usual. The river had been rising rapidly for
several days, and we, therefore, had no reason to apprehend danger on
the score of shallow water. The usual time for the opening of
navigation to the Upper Meta was anticipated by more than a month. This
was a favorable omen to begin with. By starting thus in advance of the
usual time we should be able to reach the river Magdalena before its
high waters would begin to subside. This was of prime importance to us,
as it would enable us to escape those long and embarrassing delays that
are so frequently occasioned in this river during the dry season.
[120]
The word season has been frequently used in these pages, but,
strictly speaking, there are in the tropics no such things as seasons
as we know them in higher latitudes. In the equatorial regions it is
always summer and verdure and bloom are perennial. For the sake of
convenience the natives speak of two seasons, the rainy season, known
as winter, and the dry season which is called summer. The winter season
in the valleys of the Orinoco and the Meta begins about the first of
May and lasts until October. The remaining months, constituting the
winter and a part of the spring of regions farther north, is known as
summer.
Sir Walter Raleigh’s account of the seasons in these parts is
so pertinent and so accurate in the main that I give it in his own
words. “The winter and the summer,” he writes,
“as touching cold and heate differ not,
neither do the trees euer, senciblie lose the leaues, but haue alwaies
fruite either ripe or green at one time: But their winter onelie
consisteth of terrible raynes, and ouerflowings of the riuers, with
many great storms and gusts, thunder, and lightnings, of which we had
our fill, ere we returned.”7
Our boat was a double-deck stern-wheeler of very light
draft—about two feet—and capable of carrying about fifty
tons. Her chief cargo was salt, groceries and dry-goods, most of which
was destined for Orocué.
Outside of the crew there were but few passengers—not more
than eight or ten all told. Among the most congenial were a Colombian
from Bogotá, and a young German, who was traveling in the
interest of a large commercial house in Ciudad Bolivar. The crew was a
motley one. The majority of them were Venezuelan mestizos. Besides
these, there were three or four West Indian negroes, and six or seven
full-blooded Indians from the Upper Meta. The latter had come down the
river only a few days previously and were now returning with us to
their homes. They had been engaged to perform some menial services
aboard, for which they received a trifling compensation. They all
belonged [121]to the ferocious tribe of Guahibos, about whom
we had heard such frightful stories, but these particular members of
the tribe we found to be very quiet and harmless. One of them spoke
Spanish fairly well, and through him we were able to learn much about
the manners and customs of his tribe. He was quite intelligent and took
pleasure in telling us about the mode of life and occupations of his
people. Later on, especially in Orocué, where we spent ten days,
we were able to verify his statements. All his companions aboard,
although below the average height, were broad-shouldered, well-formed,
and possessed of extraordinary strength and endurance. Judging from the
work we saw them do, we were not surprised to learn that they are
considered among the best warriors among the savage tribes in this part
of South America.
The first place of any special interest on the Orinoco above Ciudad
Bolivar is what is known as La Puerta del
Infierno—The Gate of Hell. It is nothing more than a
contraction of the river where the current is unusually strong, and
where, on account of the large rocks in the river bed, there are
numerous eddies and whirlpools. From what we had been told, the passage
at this point was more difficult and dangerous than shooting the rapids
of the St. Lawrence, and the scenery was represented as grand beyond
description. The scenery was wild and interesting, but far from sublime
or awe-inspiring. The current, it is true, was quite rapid, and our
little craft made but slow progress through the surging, seething
waters, but there was never any danger. For small sloops or schooners,
and especially for curiaras, or dugouts, the passage
would doubtless be difficult and somewhat perilous. It is, however,
important that the pilot and helmsman should exercise considerable care
so as to avoid striking the massive rocks with which the bed of the
river is so thickly studded.
Considering the fertility of the soil, and the splendid grazing
lands on the north bank of the Orinoco, one is surprised [122]at
the sparseness of the population. It is only at long intervals that one
sees any signs of human habitations, and then they are of the most
primitive character. Mapire and Las Bonitas are two straggling villages
whose inhabitants are chiefly engaged in stock-raising. The latter
place was also at one time the centre of the tonka bean industry, but
most of this trade has been transferred to Ciudad Bolivar.
Of the people of Las Bonitas, the noted explorer Crevaux writes as
follows: “Every man here has a cabin, a mandolin, a hammock, a
gun, a wife and the fever. These constitute all his
wants.”8
Near the confluence of the Apure with the Orinoco is the town of
Caicara, with a population of six or seven hundred souls. It is
something of a distributing centre for this section of the country.
Besides stock-raising and agriculture, which receive considerable
attention here, there is quite a trade carried on with the Indians of
the interior, who bring into the town certain much valued articles of
commerce. Among these are hammocks, made from the leaf of the moriche
palm, and ropes made from the fibres of a palm called by the natives
chichique—attalea funifera—which
are highly prized for their strength, durability, and above all, on
account of their being less affected by water and moisture than ropes
made from other materials. Large quantities of sarrapia or tonka beans
are brought here from the neighboring forests. They are much esteemed
as an ingredient of certain perfumes and for flavoring tobacco.
In the Llanos of
Venezuela.
Indians of
Mid-Orinoquia.
[123]
The town has a splendid location, and under a stable and
enterprising government would be the centre of a large inland trade.
Towering about a hundred and fifty feet above the town is a hill of
gneissic granite, on the summit of which are the ruins of a Capuchin
monastery, which has been abandoned since the War of Independence.
Our party was here augmented by a Venezuelan hide and cattle
merchant. He was a sociable fellow, and reminded us very much of a
Colorado or New Mexican cowboy. He left us at Urbana, the last town of
any importance, between Caicara and Orocué.
We arrived at Urbana, a town of about the same size and importance
as Caicara, shortly after six o’clock in the evening, and were
surprised that there was no one at the landing place to meet us. At
every other place at which we had stopped, every man, woman and child
was out to see us. It is only five or six times a year that a steamer
calls at this place, and then only during the rainy season, when the
river is high. The place was as silent as the grave, and seemed
absolutely deserted. There was not even a dog bark to break the
oppressive stillness, and not a single light was to be seen in house or
street. On enquiry we were informed that everybody had retired for the
night. The sun had just set only a few minutes before, but like the
domestic fowl in the back yard, all the denizens of the town had sought
rest with the approach of darkness, and, under ordinary circumstances,
would not have been seen before dawn the next day. This custom
impressed us at first as being very extraordinary, but we afterwards
learned that it is not unusual in small interior South American towns.
In fact, we soon found ourselves imitating the example of the natives.
Shortly after sunset—there is scarcely any twilight in this
latitude—we sought our berth or our hammock, and rarely awoke
before the caroling of the birds announced the break of another day. Of
course, we often had a special reason for retiring as early as we did.
A lighted lamp, especially on the Orinoco and the [124]Meta, became at once the centre of attraction
for a cloud of insects of all kinds—some of which emitted a most
offensive odor. But aside from this we soon became quite accustomed to
early slumbers. The ever warm climate seems to predispose to sleep,
and, even after a good night’s rest, one would welcome an
hour’s siesta after luncheon.
After the steamer whistle had blown several times, and set all the
dogs in town to barking, the male population was aroused and came
straggling one by one to where we were moored. We were in need of a new
supply of provisions, as what we had brought from Ciudad Bolivar was
almost exhausted. After making the round of the town, our steward was
able, but not without difficulty, to get some eggs, chickens, and a
novilla—heifer. This would last us a few days, at the
expiration of which we hoped to find a new supply further up the
river.
Much, however, as we were concerned about our commissariat, our
interest was just then centered in the result of a confidential
interview in progress between the captain and an army officer, who was
to decide whether we should be permitted to proceed on our journey, or
whether our boat should be appropriated for use in the campaign against
the revolutionists, who were said to be heading towards the llanos of
the Apure. This contingency had, like the sword of Damocles, been
hanging over us ever since we left Ciudad Bolivar. Only a few days
before, we had met a steamer returning from San Fernando de Apure,
whither it had been dispatched with arms and ammunition, and there were
grave reasons, so we were informed, for believing that we should be
obliged to disembark at Urbana. If we could only reach Orocué,
we had every reasonable hope of making the remainder of our
transcontinental journey without any special difficulty or danger. If,
however, the steamer were now required for military service, we should
be obliged to remain in Urbana for an indefinite period, and
perhaps—the thought was [125]almost maddening—be
forced to abandon entirely an enterprise on which we had so set our
hearts.
The suspense, which did not last more than a
half-hour—although it seemed a whole day—was finally
relieved by the joyful announcement that we should be permitted to
continue our journey to Orocué. No one who lives in a country
like ours can realize what good news this was to all of us. In the
United States, if we miss a train, we can get another a few hours
later. There, on the contrary, far off in the wilderness, where the
means of communication are so rare, the permission to proceed was like
the commutation of a sentence for a long term of imprisonment into the
granting of immediate liberty.
After this happy decision had been conveyed to us, we wished to
start without a moment’s delay. Hitherto, thanks to the bright
moonlight with which we had been favored, we had been able to travel
night and day. Now, for the first time, the sky became clouded, and we
were obliged, as a precautionary measure, to remain where we were,
until the clouds disappeared. To attempt to navigate the river in these
parts, where the channel is ever changing, where there are so many sand
bars, and so many floating trees and obstructions of all kinds, would
be extremely dangerous, and might mean the wrecking of our vessel when
we least expected it. Fortunately, the clouds soon passed by, and we
were again on our way rejoicing, and rejoicing as only those can
realize who have been placed in circumstances similar to ours at that
critical juncture.
The scenery along the Orinoco between Ciudad Bolivar and Urbana is
quite different from that of the delta. There we have one of
Nature’s hothouses on an immense scale, with a luxuriance of
vegetation that is not surpassed in any part of the known world.
Further up the river there is less variety and richness, and the trees
are smaller and fewer in number. One soon observes, also, a marked
contrast between the vegetation on the right as compared with that on
the left bank. On the right bank the forest [126]land
still continues, while on the left bank, for the greater part of the
distance, we have the llanos or plains—for many reasons so
celebrated in Venezuelan annals. On both sides the land is
comparatively low and flat, although here and there, especially on the
right bank, there are highlands, and occasionally, when the forest
fringing the river permits it, one can see hills and mountains towards
the south.
The part of Venezuela south of the Orinoco—known as Venezuelan
Guiana—is still practically an unknown land. Humboldt, Michelena
y Rojas, Schomburgk, and others, it is true, have explored portions of
the upper Orinoco and some of the tributaries, but the impenetrable
forest lands through which these rivers pass are still quite
unknown.9 As to the territory north of the Orinoco and the
Arauca it has been quite well known since the times of the early
mission period of Venezuela. Much of it, indeed, was explored by the
conquistadores.
The llanos extend southward from the mountain range bordering the
Caribbean to the Orinoco and its great tributary, the Meta. They have
an area more than four times as great as that of the state of New York
and are, in many respects, the most valuable lands of this part of
tropical America. And strange as it may appear, they are the most
neglected and most undeveloped. Their population and products are less
than they were in the days of the early [127]missionaries, and,
from present indications, there is little probability that there shall
soon be any change for the better. Everywhere are immense savannas, in
which are numerous clumps of trees and groves, swamps and lagoons, all
teeming with multitudinous forms of animal life. Here—especially
along the Apure—bird-life is particularly conspicuous. It is here
that occur the most extensive garceros in Venezuela, if not in
South America, and it is here that the annual slaughter of the egret is
greatest.
Tens of thousands of square miles of the llanos are inundated during
the rainy season. Then certain parts of the country present the
appearance of immense inland seas. The rivers overflow their banks, and
the floods rise almost to the tree tops of the nearly submerged forest.
The landscape then is not unlike what it must have been during the
Carboniferous Period—immense stretches of dense, luxuriant
woodlands in a vast fresh-water sea. It is then that it seems “an
unfinished country, the mountains not yet having lent enough material
to the llanos to keep them out of water during the entire
year.”
For centuries past the llanos have been famous for their immense
herds of cattle and horses. It is said that Gen. Crespo, one of the
presidents of Venezuela, had no fewer than two hundred and fifty
thousand cattle10 on his hatos—ranches—and
we were told of an old bachelor who now has a hato that counts a
hundred thousand head of cattle, not to speak of an immense number of
horses.
During the War of Independence the wild horses and cattle were in
some parts “so numerous as literally to render it necessary for a
party of cavalry to precede an army on the march, for the purpose of
clearing the way for the infantry and guns.”11 And only
a few decades ago, we were assured, the number of cattle was so great
that they were slaughtered for their hides alone. During [128]recent years, however, owing to the number of
revolutions, and the little encouragement afforded by the government to
stock raisers, the herds on the llanos have greatly dwindled in size
and number.12
Under favorable conditions they could with ease greatly be
multiplied, and be made to contribute materially to the world’s
beef supply. The unlimited pampas, with their rich, succulent grasses,
ten to twelve feet high, are capable of supporting millions of cattle,
and there is no reason why they should not be made available for the
European and North American markets at much lower prices than the beef
that is shipped from Argentina and Australia. Specially constructed
cattle boats, of light draft, could be made to ply the Orinoco, the
Apure, the Arauca and the Meta at all seasons of the year. Under a
settled and progressive government the grazing industry should be the
chief source of revenue of the Venezuelan republic. But, as conditions
now are, cattle raising is in a most deplorable state. When we asked
the Llaneros—people of the plains—along the Orinoco and the
Meta why they did not have larger herds on their magnificent savannas,
they invariably replied: “What is the use? We get a large herd,
and then there is a revolution. The army comes along and appropriates
our cattle, and we never get a penny for them.”
During our trip up the Orinoco we tried at a
conuco—small farm—to purchase some chickens, but
were told by the proprietor that, although he usually had large numbers
[129]for sale, he did not then have a single one
left. “I heard yesterday that the revolutionists were coming this
way”—he had heard of the Peñalosa
outbreak—“and I at once killed all my chickens and gave my
family and friends a great chicken feast. If the soldiers had come they
would have taken all and would not have given me anything for
them.”
There are no better horsemen in the world than the Llaneros of
Venezuela and Colombia. They have often been called the Cossacks of
South America, and the name is not undeserved. In daring feats of
horsemanship their only rivals are the cowboys of our western plains,
and the intrepid Gauchos of the pampas of Argentina.
And no one has a greater love for horses than has the Llanero. Like
the Arab, he would rather part with his most cherished possessions than
dispose of a favorite steed. For one who has met this modern Centaur,
or who is familiar with his mode of life, the reason is evident. As the
Llanero spends the greater part of his life on horseback, his faithful
charger is to him, as to the Arab, not only a companion, but his
dearest and most reliable friend. Hence one need not be surprised to
hear him exclaim in the words of a llano bard:—
“Mi mujer y mi caballo
Se murieron a un tiempo;
Que mujer, ni que demonio,
Mi caballo es lo que siento.”13
“All his actions and exertions,” declares
Páez, “must be assisted by his horse; for him the noblest
effort of man is when, gliding swiftly over the boundless plains and
bending over his spirited charger, he overturns an enemy or masters a
wild bull.” [130]
Like the character described by Victor Hugo, “He would not
fight except on horseback. He forms but one person with his horse. He
lives on horseback; trades, buys and sells on horseback; eats, drinks,
sleeps and dreams on horseback.”
Give the Llanero a horse, and the equipment of a lance and a gun, a
poncho and a hammock, and he is independent. With these he is at home
wherever the setting sun may happen to find him. The hammock serves him
for a bed, and the poncho for a protection against sun and rain, while
with his lance and gun he can easily secure the food he may require.
Having these things, he is happy, and although he may be poor in all
other worldly goods, he is ever ready merrily to sing
“Con mi lanza y mi caballo
No me import a la fortuna,
Alumbre o no alumbre el sol
Brille o no brille la luna.”14
It was the Llaneros who during the war with Spain
contributed so much towards achieving the independence of both
Venezuela and New Granada. Under their leader, Páez, they
allowed the Spanish army no peace day or night. Armed with their long
lances, they seemed to be ubiquitous and pursued their enemies with
unrelenting fury. And the novelty of their methods of warfare—an
anticipation of those so successfully employed by the Boers in their
recent war with England—were such as quite to disconcert those
who rigidly adhered to the tactics in vogue in Europe. On one occasion
Páez dislodged a large detachment of Spaniards by driving wild
cattle against them, and then, burning the grass by which they were
surrounded, utterly destroyed all of them. How like De Wett’s
methods in the Transvaal!15 [131]
On another occasion it was necessary for Bolivar’s army to
cross the Apure, near San Fernando, in order to engage Morillo, whose
headquarters were then at Calabozo. But Bolivar had no boats, and the
Apure at this point was wide and deep. Besides, the Spanish flotilla
was guarding the river at the point opposite to which the patriot
forces were marching. Bolivar was in despair. Turning to Páez,
he said, “I would give the world to have possession of the
Spanish flotilla, for without it I can never cross the river, and the
troops are unable to march.” “It shall be yours in an
hour,” replied Páez. Selecting three hundred of his
Llanero lancers, all distinguished for strength and bravery, he said,
pointing to the gun-boats, “We must have these flecheras
or die. Let those follow Tio16 who please.” And at the
same moment, spurring his horse, he dashed into the river and swam
towards the flotilla. The guard followed him with their lances in their
hands, now encouraging their horses to bear up against the current by
swimming by their sides and patting their necks, and shouting to scare
away the crocodiles, of which there were hundreds in the river, till
they reached the boats, when mounting their horses, they sprang from
their backs on board them, headed by their leader, and to the
astonishment of those who beheld them from the shore, captured every
one of them. To English officers it may appear inconceivable that a
body of cavalry with no other arms than their lances, and no other mode
of conveyance across a rapid river than their horses, should attack and
take a fleet of gun-boats amidst shoals of alligators; but strange as
it may seem, it was actually accomplished, and there are many officers
now in England who can testify to the truth of it.17
The islands between Urbana and the cataracts of Atures have long
been famous for the number of turtles that annually [132]congregate on them. During the dry season they
come to these islands by hundreds of thousands, and deposit their eggs
in the playas, or sand banks, which are here quite extensive. So
great is their number, says Padre Gumilla, that “It would be as
difficult to count the grains of sand on the shores of the Orinoco as
to count the immense numbers of turtles that inhabit its margins and
waters. Were it not for the vast consumption of turtles and their eggs,
the river Orinoco, despite its great magnitude, would be unnavigable,
for vessels would be impeded by the enormous multitude of the
turtles.”18
Humboldt estimated the number which, in his time, annually deposited
their eggs on the banks of the middle Orinoco to be nearly a million.
Owing to the abandonment of the system of collecting the eggs, that
prevailed in the time of the missionaries, the number of turtles is not
now so great as formerly. The amount of oil, however, that is still
prepared from turtle eggs, is sufficient to constitute quite an
important article of commerce. The time of the Cosecha—egg
harvest—always brings together a large crowd of Indians of
various tribes, besides a number of pulperos—small
traders—from Urbana and Ciudad Bolivar.
To our great disappointment, we arrived a few days too late for the
harvest. We were able to see no more than a few belated turtles here
and there and the abandoned palm-leaf huts that served to protect the
Indians from the sun during their temporary residence on these sand
banks which have been the favorite resorts of countless turtles from
time immemorial. Our steward was fortunate enough to get a large fine
turtle, weighing fully fifty pounds, and we had turtle steak and turtle
soup that would delight the most confirmed epicure. Our chef, we
may add in this connection, took pride in his work, and his skill and
attention contributed not a little to the pleasure of our
fortnight’s voyage on the little steamer which he served so well.
[133]
A matter of ever-increasing astonishment to us was the continued
great width of the Orinoco, after we had passed such immense
tributaries as the Caroni, the Caura, the Apure, and the Arauca. Near
Urbana, six hundred miles from its mouth, it has a breadth of more than
three miles. This peculiar feature of the great river has attracted the
attention of travelers from the earliest times.
Padre Gilli, a learned missionary, who spent more than eighteen
years in the Orinoco region, thus writes of the great river in his
informing Saggio de Storia Americana, “One
cannot understand how the external appearance of the Orinoco remains
practically uniform, except near its source, whether the waters of
other rivers are or are not added to it.”19 Depons
tells us that the inhabitants attribute to the waters of the Orinoco
“many medical virtues, and affirm that they possess the power of
dispelling wens and such like tumors.”20 As for
ourselves, we made no experiments in this direction. We found the water
so muddy from the delta to the Meta, that if a tumbler full of it were
set aside for a while, the bottom of the glass became covered with
quite a thick layer of yellow sediment. We did not find it to possess
the offensive, disgusting odor, due to dead crocodiles, turtles and
manatees of which many travelers have complained, but we did take good
care never to drink any of it without having it carefully filtered.
On leaving Ciudad Bolivar we had a limited supply of ice in a small
refrigerator. This was a real luxury while it lasted. At first we
thought it would be difficult to become accustomed to drinking the warm
water of the river—it had a temperature of 82° F.—but
we soon became quite used to it, and rarely, if ever, thought of the
absence of ice.
We had spent nearly two months in Venezuela and were about to enter
the neighboring republic of Colombia. During that period we had visited
most of the chief cities [134]of the coast and of the interior,
and had come into contact with all classes of people. We had talked
with them about matters religious, educational, social, economic,
political, and only rarely did they manifest any disinclination to
express their honest opinions about men and things. Apart from a
certain class of professional revolutionists—who have everything
to gain and nothing to lose from internecine strife—we found that
the great majority of the population is, in spite of what has been said
to the contrary, peace-loving and thoroughly sick of the turmoil of
which they have so long been the helpless victims. The better
element—old Venezuelan families of Spanish descent—which
should be the ruling element, but which is too often kept in the
background by ambitious adventurers and unscrupulous spoilsmen, have
lofty ideals for their country, and long to see it become the home of
peace and industry, of progress and culture.
For few, if for any of the countries of South America, has Nature
done more than for Venezuela.
She has in the first place the dominating advantage of location. She
is nearer to Europe and the United States than any of the other South
American republics, and should, under a strong and stable government,
enjoy corresponding trade advantages. From her numerous ports on the
Caribbean sea, as well as from points on the Orinoco and its affluents,
freight can be transferred in a few days to our ports on the Gulf and
Atlantic coast, while from La Guaira to Cadiz the distance is but
little greater than it is from New York to London.
And what a great commercial future there is for this at present
hapless and neglected country when it shall be blessed by wise and
progressive rulers! It has soil of marvelous fertility and possesses
mineral deposits of all kinds and of untold value. It has tens of
thousands of square miles of the best grazing land in the world,
capable of supporting millions of cattle. In the lowlands all the
productions of the tropics are found and their annual yield
[135]could be enormously increased. In the plateaus
of the mountain chains are produced the fruits and cereals of the
temperate zone—of the best quality and in surprising abundance.
Then there are the rare and beautiful woods of its interminable virgin
forests; sources of wealth yet untouched and all but unknown, except to
the few who have explored this land of marvelous natural resources.
Such are some of Nature’s gifts to Venezuela. But the extent
of her bounty is as astonishing as its variety. How few are there who
have an adequate conception of the extent of this country? It is a land
that is scarcely known to the general reader except in connection with
one of its periodic revolutions. And yet it has an area almost seven
times as great as that of Great Britain and nearly ten times as great
as that of the whole of New England. In extent of territory it equals
France, Germany and Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands, Ireland and
Switzerland all combined.
And yet, incredible as it may appear, its total population,
including Indians—savage as well as civilized—is less than
that of New York City. If the population of Venezuela were as dense as
that of Belgium the country would count three hundred and fifty-eight
million inhabitants.
Sparse as is the population, it is rather a matter of surprise that
the number of inhabitants is so great rather than that it is so small.
During a period of seventy years there have been no fewer than
seventy-six revolutions. During sixty of these years the country has
seen two armies almost continually in the field. The poor soldiers,
mere puppets of soulless adventurers, rarely knew what they were
fighting for. Against their will, they were torn from their homes and
families to enable ambitious leaders to get control of the government.
The death-rate has been appalling—at times greater by far than
the birth-rate. Some of the revolutions, it is estimated, have caused
the loss of more than a hundred thousand lives. For this reason, there
has been a decrease in the population during [136]the
last fifty years instead of an increase. Indeed, it may be questioned
whether there are as many inhabitants in the country to-day as there
were before the war with Spain, or even at the time it was first
visited by Europeans.
It would be difficult to name another country, except possibly
Haiti, where, in proportion to the population, war has wrought greater
ravages and counted more victims. A country that should be a land of
peace and plenty has for generations been an armed camp of contending
factions, in which the worst elements have come to the front and in
which justice and innocence and respectability have been trampled under
foot. With all this were the usual concomitants of such a condition of
affairs—atrocities that the pen would fail to describe, deaths
from famine and pestilence, deaths from the machete and from
imprisonment in dark and foul dungeons.
Like northern Italy, after the death of Frederick II, Venezuela, in
the words of Dante, has been for nearly a century
“Full
Of tyrants, and the veriest peasant lad
Becomes Marcellus in the strife of
parties.”21
And there was the consequent stagnation of business
and paralysis of industry of every kind, and the destruction of
property on a scale that seems incredible. Such has been the fate of
Venezuela since the time of Bolivar, whom its people hail as the
Liberator, as the Washington of South America.
But pitiful as has been the country’s lot, unfortunate as it
is to-day, the future is not without hope. Only one thing is necessary
to change the present lamentable condition of affairs, and convert
Venezuela into a great and happy country. That one thing is a
man—a ruler of strong arm and stout heart, who is a patriot in
deed as well as in name; a president who, forgetful of self, will
devote himself [137]entirely to the development of the
country’s resources and to the happiness of his people; a
statesman, who will be intelligent enough and forceful enough to bring
order out of chaos, and give to a long-suffering people those blessings
of civilization which, for generations past, they have known only by
name.22
The task is difficult, very difficult, but it is not impossible. It
is only a few decades ago since Mexico was as turbulent a country and
as noted for pronunciamentos and revolutions as
Venezuela is to-day. Lawlessness was rampant, credit was gone, commerce
languished and the only railroad was a short one extending from Vera
Cruz to the national capital. Within a single generation this has been
all changed, and through the efforts of one man—Porfirio Diaz.
Under his wise and beneficent guidance, Mexico has emerged from that
state of confusion and anarchy from [138]which she had so long
suffered, and now occupies an honored position among the nations of the
world. Give Venezuela a statesman and a patriot of the stamp of Garcia
Moreno or of Diaz, or of our own Roosevelt, and she, too, from being a
comparative waste, will be made to bloom as the rose, and, from being a
byword among the peoples of the earth, will be enabled to attain to
that commercial and economic eminence which is hers by nature and
manifest destiny. [139]
1 Sr.
Pérez Triana, the son of a former president of Colombia, was in
1893 obliged to flee from his country, and as the seaports were watched
he and his companions were forced to escape by way of the Meta and the
Orinoco. He tells us in his charming book, De
Bogotá al Atlantico, p. 3, of the dread inspired by the
thought of “lo incierto del viaje, que emprendiamos
hacia regiones desconocidas, acaso nunca holladas par la planta del
hombre civilizado,” “the uncertainty of the journey we
were undertaking to unknown regions, probably never trod by the foot of
civilized man.”—Segunda Edición,
Madrid, 1905.
Mr. Cunninghame Graham, in his introduction to this
book, remarks that “The voyage in itself was memorable because,
since the first conquerors went down the river with the faith that in
their case, if rightly used, might have smoothed out all the mountain
ranges in the world, no one, except a stray adventurer, or india-rubber
trader, has followed in their footsteps,” p. 13, English edition,
London, 1902.
Another Colombian, Sr. Modesto Garces, had made the
same journey eight years before, a record of which he has given us in
his little work, Un viaje á Venezuela,
Bogotá, 1890. But neither he nor Sir Pérez Triana saw
the lower Meta, for they left this river a short distance above
Orocué, and voyaged to the Orinoco by way of the Vichada.
Three years subsequently to Pérez
Triana’s trip the same journey, with slight modifications, was
made by a German naturalist, Dr. Otto Bürger. He has given us a
record of it in his Reisen eines Naturforschers im
Tropischen America, Leipzig, 1900.
So far as I am aware, no writer has made the
journey up the river from Ciudad Bolivar to Bogotá. In a certain
limited sense it was, therefore, probably true that we were the first
to undertake the journey described in the following
pages. ↑
2 The
plaga, as understood by the natives, has special reference to
the insects known to them as mosquitoes, zancudos and
jejenes. What they call mosquitoes we call gnats. The zancudo is
our mosquito. The jejen is a small fly whose bite is quite as painful
as that of the zancudo. Sometimes the term zancudo is applied to all
these pests indiscriminately.
Besides these insects, that are often the cause of
much suffering to the traveler in low woodlands, there are others that
are sometimes included under the general designation of the
plaga. These are a very small red insect known as the
coloradito, and the nigua, or jigger—pulex
penetrans—which, on account of the misery they occasion, are
often more dreaded than serpents or the wild beasts of the forest. They
usually bury themselves under the toe nails, where they lay their eggs.
If not immediately removed they cause painful and often dangerous
sores. It is related of Sir Robert Schomburgk that a negress once
extracted from his feet no fewer than eighty-three jiggers at one
sitting.
The coloradito, called by the French
bête-rouge, and in some places known as the red tick, is
almost invisible to the naked eye. It is found everywhere in the
equatorial lowlands, especially during the rainy season. Its bite
causes an intolerable itching, and when one has been exposed to the
combined attacks of many of these microscopic insects, the result is as
painful as the burning produced by the poisoned tunic of Nessus.
Schomburgk, in describing his personal experience, declares that
“the bite of this insect drives by day the perspiration of
anguish from every pore, and at night makes one’s hammock
resemble the gridiron on which St. Lawrence was roasted.” Simson
informs us that the intense irritation produced by the bites of the
bête-rouge at times drove him almost to the verge of madness.
“Notwithstanding every effort of self-control,” he writes,
“to bear the itching sensation, I have many times awoke in the
night to find myself sitting up in the bed, and literally tearing the
skin off my legs, where most of the insects collect, with my
nails.” Mosquitoes and the zancudos are bad enough, but, as a
pest, the coloradito is far worse. Truth to tell, our greatest
suffering in the tropics came from the coloradito, but it was in
great measure due to our lack of precaution. Had we exercised more care
we should have avoided many painful hours. The best way to allay the
pain is to rub the part affected with rum or lemon juice.
Padre Gumilla assures us that leaving the Gulf of
Paria and entering the Orinoco, or any of the tropical rivers, is
tantamount to engaging in a fierce and continued warfare, day and
night, with countless insects of all kinds. Of certain mosquitoes, he
tells us, their sharp, uninterrupted noise is more to be dreaded than
their piercing proboscis.
So trying and difficult did Raleigh consider a
voyage up the Orinoco that he declared it a task “fitter for
boies,” than for men of mature years, although, when he visited
Guiana, he was nearly three lustra younger than was the author of the
present work when he made the journey herein described. ↑
3
Journal of an Expedition 1400 miles up the Orinoco and 300 up the
Arauca, pp. 62 and 66, London, 1822. ↑
4
Adventures Amidst the Equatorial Forests and Rivers of South
America, p. 63, by Villiers Stuart, London, 1891.
Accepting as true these and similar exaggerated
statements made by travelers from the time of Gumilla to our own
regarding the insect pests of tropical America, the reader will no
doubt be inclined to agree with Sydney Smith that it is better for one
to become reconciled to the trials of our northern climate than to
expose oneself to the still greater trials in the lands bordering the
equator. In a characteristic article in the Edinburgh Review on
Waterton’s Wanderings, the genial humorist has the
following paragraph:—
“Insects are the curse of tropical climates.
The bête-rouge lays the foundation of a tremendous ulcer. In a
moment you are covered with ticks. Chigoes bury themselves in your
flesh, and hatch a large colony of young chigoes in a few hours. They
will not live together, but every chigoe sets up a separate ulcer, and
has his own private portion of pus. Flies get entry into your mouth,
into your eyes, into your nose; you eat flies, drink flies, and breathe
flies. Lizards, cockroaches, and snakes, get into the bed; ants eat up
the books; scorpions sting you on the foot. Everything bites, stings,
or bruises; every second of your existence you are wounded by some
piece of animal life that nobody has ever seen before, except
Swammerdam and Meriam. An insect with eleven legs is swimming in your
teacup, a nondescript with nine wings is struggling in the small beer,
or a caterpillar with several dozen eyes in his belly is hastening over
your bread and butter! All nature is alive, and seems to be gathering
all her entomological hosts to eat you up, as you are standing, out of
your coat, waistcoat, and breeches. Such are the tropics. All this
reconciles us to our dews, fogs, vapours, and drizzle—to our
apothecaries rushing about with gargles and tinctures—to our old,
British, constitutional coughs, sore throats, and swelled
faces.” ↑
5
“In a region,” says Humboldt, “where travelling is so
uncommon, people seem to feel a pleasure in exaggerating to strangers
the difficulties arising from the climate, the wild animals and the
Indians.” Op. cit., Vol. I, p. 361. ↑
6
“More bold a man is, he prevails the more,
Though man nor place he ever saw before.”
—The Odyssey, Book VII, vv. 50, 51.
 ↑
7 Op.
cit., p. 87. ↑
8
Voyages dans l’Amérique du Sud, p. 578, Paris, 1883.
Major Stanley Patterson, writing in the Royal
Geographical Journal, Vol. XIII, No. 1, p. 40, 1899, of the
Venezuelans living on the Orinoco, declares that “All are
avaricious, thriftless, independent, faithless, untruthful, lazy,
capable of hard work, quick-tempered, vindictive, changeful and full of
laughter. If there are clouds these children of the sun see them not;
nothing is really serious to them.” Certain of his adjectives may
apply to some of the inhabitants but they surely cannot truthfully be
applied to all of them. We found many good people among them and retain
the pleasantest recollections of their kindness and
hospitality. ↑
9 As to
the flora of the forests of Venezuelan Guiana one can truthfully say
what Richard Schomburgk affirms of the flora of British Guiana. In his
Reisen in British Guiana, Vol. II, p. 216, speaking of
the plants in the country around Roraima, he writes as follows:
“Not only the orchids, but the shrubs and low trees were unknown
to me. Every shrub, herb and tree was new to me, if not as to the
family, yet as to the species. I stood on the border of an unknown
plant-zone, full of wondrous forms which lay as if by magic before
me.... Every step revealed something new.”
As an evidence of the variety of plant life in this
part of the world, it suffices to state that Bonpland, the companion of
Humboldt in his memorable journey to South America, discovered no fewer
than six hundred species of new plants on his way to the Cassiquiare,
and that, too, in spite of the fact that his investigations were
necessarily confined entirely to the banks of the river along which he
passed. There are still many large tracts in Venezuela and Colombia
that have never been visited by the botanist. ↑
10 S.
Pérez Triana, op. cit., p. 309. ↑
11
Campaigns and Cruises in Venezuela and New Granada from
1817–1830, Vol. I, p. 119, London. ↑
12 In his
Travels and Adventures in South and Central America, Don Ramon
Paez, the son of the first president of Venezuela, writes as follows of
a certain cattle farm in the llanos: “Its area, would measure at
least eighty square leagues, or about one hundred and fifty thousand
acres of the richest land, but which under the present backward and
revolutionary state of the country is comparatively valueless to the
owner. The number of cattle dispersed throughout the length and breadth
of this wide extent of prairie land was computed to be about a hundred
thousand head, and at one time, ten thousand horses; but what with the
peste, revolutionary exactions, and skin hunters, comparatively
very few of the former and none of the latter have been left.”
Pp. 202, 203, New York, 1864. ↑
13
“My wife and my valued horse
Died both at the same time.
To the devil with my wife,
For my horse do I repine.”
 ↑
14
“With my lance and horse, I care not for fortune, and it matters
not whether the sun shines or the moon gives
light.” ↑
15 For
valuable information regarding the llanos and their inhabitants, the
Llaneros, the reader may consult, besides Páez, already quoted,
Aus den Llanos, von Carl Sachs, Leipzig, 1879, and
Vom Tropischen Tieflande zum Ewigen Schnee, von Anton
Goering, Leipzig. ↑
16 Uncle,
a name by which Páez was frequently addressed by the
Llaneros. ↑
17
Recollections of a Service of Three Years during the War of
Extermination in the Republics of Venezuela and Colombia, pp. 176,
178, London, 1728. ↑
18
El Orinoco Ilustrado, Cap. XXII. ↑
19 Op.
cit., Cap. VIII. ↑
20 Tom. I,
p. 2. ↑
21
Purgatorio, VI, 124–126. ↑
22 The
unstable and turbulent condition from which the country has so long
suffered cannot be attributed to a defective constitution or to
impracticable laws. The constitution of Venezuela is modeled after that
of the United States, and the laws are largely based on the best
legislation of other countries. But this is not sufficient. Of this
unhappy country, and especially of its rulers, one may exclaim in the
words of the great Florentine poet:—
“Laws indeed there are,
But who is he observes them? None.”
During our wanderings through this country, which
Nature has so highly favored, we often thought that the interests of
the people and of humanity would be subserved by adopting a method of
government that, for a while, was deemed necessary in Florence. To
quell sedition and dissension and break up the factions that had so
long made law and order impossible, rulers were brought in from
outside—men who had no affiliations with either the Bianchi or
the Neri, Guelphs or Ghibellines, and who could, therefore, be counted
upon to execute the laws with strict impartiality, regardless of family
or party.
Unless those responsible for the government of the
country shall soon give evidence of being able to guarantee peace and
tranquillity and give the people an opportunity of developing the
resources of the country—something in which the whole civilized
world is becoming daily more interested—the time may come when
the great powers will find it necessary, in the interests of
international expediency, to appoint some one who may be counted upon
to keep the peace, and foster the commercial and social development
that is so greatly needed and is so essential to national progress and
prosperity. ↑
“Yendo de la manera que refiero
Habiendo muchos dias navegado,
Dieron en la gran boca del estero
De Meta sumamente deseado:
Alegrose cualquiera compañero,
Pensando ser concluso su cuidado,
Pues aunque de poblado no ven cosa,
La tierra se muestra mas lustrosa.”
—Juan de
Castellanos.1
“Having traveled many days in the manner above
described, we finally reached the mouth of the much desired Meta. Every
one rejoiced, thinking their gravest solicitudes were at an end. And
although no human habitations were visible, nevertheless the land was
of a bright and cheerful aspect.”
Thus, in sonorous octava rima, does the illustrious
historiographer of Tunja2 give expression to the joy which
[140]Alonso de Herrera and his companions experienced
on their arrival at what they fondly hoped was the goal of their long
and daring expedition. It was now more than a year since they had left
the mouth of the Orinoco. Before starting on their adventurous journey,
they had to construct flat-bottomed boats and make other preparations
indispensable for a voyage so replete with danger and of such uncertain
duration.
Herrera was the second of the conquistadores to reach the Meta by
the Orinoco. He was drawn thither by the reports of vast amounts of
gold existing in the province of the Meta. But the reports proved to be
as misleading in his case as they had been in that of so many other
valiant leaders of expeditions in search of another Mexico or Peru. He
had scarcely reached what he was led to believe was the land of gold
and precious stones when, in a fight with Indians, his life was cut
short by a poisoned arrow.
Unlike Herrera, we were glad of our arrival at the Meta, not because
we were in hopes of finding treasure in its neighborhood, but because
we were at last sure that our boat would not be commandeered for
military purposes. True, we had been told at Urbana that there was
nothing to apprehend on this score, but we were not entirely satisfied
with the assurances given. When, however, we had entered the Meta, we
were in Colombian territory and away from Venezuelan telegraphs and
dispatch boats. After this we had no further anxiety, for we had every
reason to believe that we should arrive in due course at our
destination—Orocué.
Although Herrera’s voyage to the Meta took place as early as
1535, he was not the first Spaniard to explore this part of South
America. Diego de Ordaz, a captain under [141]Cortes in Mexico, had
preceded him to this region by four years. Instead of continuing his
journey up the Meta, as he had been advised by his Indian guides, who
assured him that toward the west he would find an abundance of gold, he
endeavored to go towards the south on the Orinoco. He found his plans
thwarted by the great rapids he encountered—probably those of
Atures or Maipures—and was compelled to return without having
accomplished anything more than making a general reconnoissance of the
country through which he had passed.
I refer especially to the expedition of Diego de Ordaz because it
was the first of those famous expeditions made on the great rivers of
the New World by the conquistadores. He anticipated Orellana’s
marvelous voyage down the Amazon by nearly ten years.
I have also another reason—a personal one—for alluding
to it. Twenty-five years before my arrival at the juncture of the
Orinoco and the Meta I had made the ascent of Popocatepetl and explored
the same crater from which, more than three and a half centuries
before, Diego de Ordaz, to the great amazement of the Indians, had
taken out sulphur for the manufacture of gunpowder. When scaling this
lofty volcano, I had frequently thought of the courage and endurance of
this dauntless Spaniard in accomplishing a task which was then far more
difficult than it is now. According to Herrera it was then in action,
and the smoke and flames rendered the ascent next to impossible. To the
Indians the crater was the mouth of hell in which tyrants had to be
purified before they could enter the abode of the blest.
But difficult and hazardous as was the ascent of Popocatepetl, the
voyage up the Orinoco was, in the days of Ordaz, far more so. Not so
to-day, when the trip can be made in a steamer with comparative ease
and comfort. But it did seem strange—passing strange—that
we two should have visited two such unlikely places and so widely
separated from each other in time and space. It was [142]almost like having a rendezvous with an old
friend. I confess that I not only thought of Ordaz, but imagined that I
felt his presence.
The great conquistador should have been permitted not only to wear a
burning volcano on his armorial bearings—as was allowed him by
Charles V—but he should also have been granted the privilege of
having depicted on his coat of arms one of the great rapids of the
Orinoco—La Puerta del Infierno—for instance, which he had
so successfully passed. His achievements have been eclipsed by many of
his contemporaries, but in enterprise and daring he is second to
none.
As I have said, we were glad—very glad—to reach the
Meta, but I personally felt a pang of regret on leaving the Orinoco.
Nothing would have pleased me more than to have continued on the waters
of this great river until we should have reached the wonderful
Cassiquiare, which connects the Orinoco with the great Rio Negro and
with the still greater Amazon. I consoled myself with the thought that
possibly I might be able to make this journey later on, and then
probably extend it through the Madeira, Mamoré, Pilcomayo and
Parana to Buenos Ayres. This had long been a fond dream of mine. Will
it ever be realized? In the language of one of my Spanish companions,
Dios verá—God will see—for it is not
impossible.
I say it is not impossible, because a part of the journey—from
the Orinoco to the Amazon—has often been made and is still
frequently made every year by traders, missionaries and others. And
contrary to what is often asserted, it is not an undertaking of any
particular difficulty or danger. The same may be said of the journey
from the Amazon to the Parana.
There is reason to believe that the first to make the journey
between the Amazon and the Orinoco, by way of the Cassiquiare, were
Lópe de Aguirre, the traitor, and his companions, who went from
Peru to the northern coast of Venezuela in 1561. The first white man to
pass [143]from the Orinoco to the Rio Negro by the
Cassiquiare was the missionary, Padre Román. He made the round
trip from his mission near the mouth of the Meta to the Rio Negro in
about eight months, and at a time when some of his
associates—Padre Gumilla among the number—were endeavoring
to prove that there was no connection between the Orinoco and the
Amazon, and that, consequently, a journey from one to the other by boat
was impossible.3
After Padre Román’s time the journey between the
Amazon, the Orinoco and vice versa was a very ordinary occurrence for
missionaries and traders. It was made in 1756 by the Spanish commission
sent to settle the boundary line between Brazil and Venezuela, by
Humboldt and Bonpland, Michelena y Rojas and numerous other explorers
who have left us accounts of their travels.
Since the missions have been suppressed the Indian population
between Urbana and San Fernando de Atabapo has greatly diminished and,
as a result, the traveler at times finds great difficulty in securing
boats and rowers. In Humboldt’s time the trip was comparatively
easy. There were flourishing missions along the entire course of his
travels—through New Andalusia and Barcelona, through the llanos
of Venezuela, along the Orinoco from Angostura to Urbana and from
Urbana to the Brazilian frontier on the Rio Negro.
Now all this is changed. If he could return to the scene of his
famous explorations he would not be able to locate even the site of
many of the missions where he was so kindly entertained and of whose
hospitality he writes in terms of such unstinted praise. From Ciudad
Bolivar to San Carlos on the Rio Negro—a distance of nearly a
thousand miles—he would not find more than one or two at most.
Even San Fernando de Atabapo, that in Humboldt’s time was the
capital of a province and an important missionary centre, is to-day
without a pastor. A priest [144]from Ciudad Bolivar goes to this
distant place—more than seven hundred miles away—once a
year to look after the spiritual welfare of the few inhabitants that
still remain there. The other missions, of which the illustrious savant
gives us such interesting accounts, have long since disappeared, and
the places they occupied are now covered with a dark, impenetrable
forest growth. Most of these were suppressed at the time of the War of
Independence, or died out during the countless revolutions that have
since desolated the country.
In the kindly and hospitable padres in charge of these
missions, Humboldt always found counselors and friends, and in some of
his longest and most difficult journeys they also proved to be his best
and most intelligent guides. It was through them, too, that he was able
always to obtain food, boats and boatmen—three essentials that
the traveler of to-day often finds it extremely difficult to
procure.
Shortly before entering the Meta we passed through the Raudal de
Cariben, a swift and foaming cataract, which rushes between immense
masses of black granite that stand like sentinels on both sides of the
river to warn the navigator against the perils of further advance.
The forms of the rocks are bizarre in the extreme. Some of them are
columnar in structure and resemble the sombre pillars of a Hindoo
temple. Others are more fantastic in shape and would easily pass for a
Sardinian noraghe in ruins. From one point of view the rocks present
the appearance of a dismantled fortress with its bastions, parapets and
embrasures; its glacis, scarps and counter-scarps.
But the most singular spectacle of all is a formation on the right
bank of the river that seemed, for all the world, to be a petrified
battleship—just such a man of war as might have been fashioned by
the hammer of Thor and used by a race of Titans. The celebrated Garden
of the Gods in Colorado does not exhibit more grotesque or diversified
rock formations than does the Raudal of [145]Cariben and it is
entirely devoid of that wonderful setting given the Orinoco by the
luxuriant tropical forest and a cataract that resembles in many
respects the rapids above the Falls of Niagara.
One is not surprised to learn that the Indians have woven many
legends about this cataract, which is almost as picturesque as are
those of Atures and Maipures further up the river. And still less is
one surprised to read of the accounts given by the early missionaries
of the difficulties and perils attending the passage of these rapids.
For small craft, especially canoes, it is necessary to keep them near
the shore and punt them, or pull them along by ropes. With our
stern-wheeler we never felt that there was any danger, but our progress
was exceedingly slow. At times we were actually at a stand still and
once or twice it looked as if we were going to be carried down stream,
so great was the force of the current. But finally, after a long and
determined struggle, we passed the cataract in safety. To be frank, we
all experienced a feeling of relief when we saw that all the reefs and
remolinos—whirlpools—were behind us, and that we
were again once more in placid and safe water.
“Este raudal es muy maluco,”4—this cataract is very bad—said our
pilot to us after the strain was over. “It is much more difficult
to steer a boat through it than through La Puerto del Infierno,
near Ciudad Bolivar.” Fortunately for all concerned, he knew his
business well and was as conscientious as he was skillful. He had been
navigating the Orinoco and the Meta for nearly twenty years and was
thoroughly familiar with every feature and peculiarity of both of them.
He had never had an accident and was justly proud of his record. He had
the eye of a hawk and could judge of the relative depths of the water
by differences of color that were quite imperceptible to the ordinary
observer. Only once, during our entire journey, did we graze a sandbar,
and that was only for [146]a moment. But it was quite
sufficient to make a young Ethiopian among our crew think that his last
day had arrived, and that we were surely going to the bottom. Greatly
frightened, he turned to us and remarked, “It am very unwholesome
to travel in dis ribber. Dat am certain.”
It was at the mouth of the Meta, according to certain alarmists whom
we had met in Ciudad Bolivar, that we should be exposed to grave danger
from savages. A band of murderous Guahibos, led by a certain
sambo5—a refugee from the llanos of
Venezuela—had for some time, we were assured, been stationed at
this point, where they attacked every vessel that passed by, and where
they had already robbed and killed a large number of people who had
ventured too near the outlaw’s lair. The first intimation of
their presence, we were told, would be a shower of poisoned arrows from
the dense underbrush where the enemy would be concealed. But this
report, like so many others regarding the dangers of our journey,
proved to be unfounded. There was not a Guahibo, much less a sambo
leader to be seen anywhere. Everything was as quiet as on the
proverbial Potomac.
Speaking of the Meta, Padre Gilli says: “Its width is greater
than that of a dozen Tibers, and in the summer season, when the wind is
high, the waves become very large.”6 Far from
being an exaggeration, as might appear to the reader, this statement is
rather an underestimate of the reality, at least as regards its
breadth. In places it is fully two miles wide—almost as broad as
the [147]Orinoco near the delta. And this is not because
of the shallowness of the river. According to Humboldt, its mean depth
near its mouth is thirty-six feet, and it sometimes attains to more
than twice this depth.
One of the chief affluents of the Meta from the north is the river
Casanare. We were much interested in this on account of its historical
associations. It was down this river that Don Antonio Berrio, the
son-in-law of the famous adelantado, Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada, came
on his celebrated expedition from Bogotá to Trinidad. He was the
first white man to undertake this long journey, and, considering the
difficulties of travel at that time, through an unknown land, and often
through the territory of hostile savages, his finally attaining his
destination was, indeed, a wonderful achievement, comparable, in some
respects, with that of Orellana down the Amazon a few decades
before.
For a long time the Casanare river was the favorite route of the
missionaries who went from Bogotá to evangelize the various
tribes who dwelt in the valley of the Meta and in the valleys of many
of its chief tributaries. Indeed, for a long time some of the most
flourishing missions in New Granada were in the country through which
we are now passing. But after the religious orders in charge of the
missions were withdrawn or suppressed, the Indians returned to their
native wilds, and gradually reverted to their original savage
condition.
Much as we tried, we could not discover even a vestige of any of the
former missions on the Meta. And not only have the former villages and
towns disappeared, but even the Indian tribes who, at one time, were so
numerous on both sides of the river, seem to have vanished also. We
sailed an entire week on the Meta without seeing or hearing a single
human being. In some cases the Indians have, for greater security,
retired into the depths of the forest. In others, war and disease have
done their work and whole tribes, as in other parts of South America,
have been exterminated. The names of the mission villages and towns
[148]along the Meta still figure on the maps, but the
traveler is unable to find the slightest trace of even the sites on
which they were located.
About the least favorable place in the world for cultivating
literature would, one would think, be in a rude hut in an Indian
village on the Meta. And yet, strange as it may seem, one of the most
interesting and valuable works that have ever been written on the
missions of South America, on the manners, customs, and languages of
the various Indian tribes of the plains and forests of Colombia, was
produced on the banks of the Meta.
Its author was the zealous and scholarly Padre Juan Rivero, who
spent sixteen years as a missionary in this part of the New World. He
wrote many works on doctrinal subjects in their own language for the
benefit of the Indians. Besides this he gave to the world what are
probably the most useful grammars in existence of several of the more
important languages and dialects spoken by the various tribes among
whom he labored with such marked success.
The work, however, to which I specially refer, is his Historia de las Misiones de los Llanos de Casanare y los Rios
Orinoco y Meta.7 It has been the basis of many
other works on the same subject—Gumilla’s El
Orinoco Ilustrado for example—but, notwithstanding the
numerous books that have been written since then on the Indians of the
Orinoco and its tributaries, Rivero’s is still facile
princeps, and must always be consulted by one who desires accurate
knowledge regarding the condition, character, rivalries and wars of the
divers savage tribes to whom he preached the gospel of peace and
brotherly love. Besides this, he gives us exact information concerning
the geography of the country through which he passed and affords us
entertaining [149]accounts of its fauna and flora. He supplies us,
too, with rare and curious data of great scientific value to the
historian and ethnologist, and gives us the benefit of his unique
experience as to the best means of civilizing and Christianizing the
savage hordes that in his day—1720 to 1736—wandered over
the plains and through the woodlands of northern South America.
It was indeed in consequence of the recognized importance of his
work, as a contribution to the solution of certain social and
economical difficulties, that confronted the Colombian government some
decades ago, that it was finally published in 1883, after lying in the
dust in manuscript for nearly a hundred and fifty years.
For several years some of the Indians of eastern Colombia had given
great trouble to the whites in the more distant settlements. Robberies
and massacres and atrocities were becoming daily more frequent and the
numerous savage hordes threatened to extend their incursions toward the
villages and towns of the interior. The inhabitants were in
consternation and called upon the government to devise immediate means
for their safety and protection. The authorities were willing to do
anything in their power but did not know what steps to take. They had
to deal with a foe about whose character, numbers and home they were
almost entirely ignorant.
It was then that someone, by a happy inspiration, suggested calling
in as adviser one who knew more about the Indians than any of the
officials of the government, one who had long lived among them and had
won their confidence and affection, one, consequently, who would be
better able to counsel in the emergency that confronted the government
than any one else that could be named.
The adviser and expert was one who had been dead nearly a century
and a half—the sainted missionary Padre Juan Rivero. He could not
testify orally, but his great manuscript work on the Indians was in the
archives of Bogotá, and it was decided to print it at once, and
in this [150]wise give the public the benefit of the great
missionary’s advice and utilize his knowledge of a wild and
untractable race that had already become a serious menace to the peace
and prosperity of the country.
When published, the book was found to be so modern in many of the
views expressed, so well adapted to supply information then sorely
needed, that it appeared to be written expressly to meet recent
difficulties and throw light on questions that modern legislators and
political economists had been discussing, but without sufficient
knowledge or the necessary data. Both the data and the knowledge were
furnished by Padre Rivero of happy memory.
In the preface to his work the author tells us of the difficulties
under which he labored in its production. “The banks of the
Meta,” he writes, “have been the workshop in which this
work has been forged. Here the inconvenience of the house in which I
live, the concourse of Indians with their importunate demands, the
visits of the heathen Chiricoas, who are the most noisy chatterers
conceivable, and various other disturbances, which would require time
to recount, have been the retirement which I have enjoyed, and the
quiet which has been allowed me for such an
undertaking.”8
Speaking of the Indians who inhabited the llanos and the banks of
such rivers as the Casanare and the Meta, he declares they were as
numerous as the sands of the seashore and the stars of heaven. During
more than three [151]weeks spent in the valley of the Meta, we
saw but one small encampment of wild Indians—Indios
bravos—about midway between Cariben and Orocué. They
greeted us in a friendly manner and seemed to be a very harmless
people. They were Guahibos, those merciless savages who, we were
assured, would be lying in ambush awaiting our arrival, prepared to
assail us with a shower of poisoned arrows, preparatory to serving us
up at one of their cannibalistic feasts.
As to the monkeys, skipping from tree to tree along the Meta, and
exciting the admiration of the traveler by their antics and grimaces,
he avers that their number is an embarrassment to the arrows directed
against them. Yet, although we were daily on the lookout for these
interesting animals, as well as for others popularly supposed to exist
in countless numbers along the rivers and in the forests of Venezuela
and Colombia, we never got a glimpse of even a single specimen of any
of the quadrumanous tribes.9 [152]
Padre Rivero was probably the first to give an account of that
curious custom—the Couvade—which prevailed among the
Indian tribes with whom he was acquainted. As is known, this
extraordinary custom has, at one time or another, obtained in all
quarters of the globe—in Asia, Africa, in Europe as well as in
North and South America. Marco Polo found evidence of it during his
travels in the Orient. It is, however, in South America that it is most
prevalent and where the prescriptions connected with it are most
scrupulously observed. And it was the early missionaries who have
furnished us with the most interesting data regarding this widespread
custom, and which, according to recent travelers, is still as prevalent
in certain parts of South America as it was generations ago.
“It is a ridiculous thing,” says Rivero, “of which
I am about to speak, but it is nevertheless a reality. It is this. When
a woman gives birth to a child, it is the husband that is to receive
the care and attention given on such occasions and not the miserable
woman. Scarcely is the child born, when the husband, with the behavior
of one who has escaped from a grave mischance, goes to bed complaining
as if he were ill. The wife then bestows on him the most tender care,
as if on this the welfare of the home depended. As a reason for these
superstitious practices and ridiculous ceremonies, they assert that, if
during this time they should go walking, they would trample on the head
of the infant; if they should chop wood, they would cleave the
child’s head; if they should shoot birds in the mountain, they
would infallibly shoot the newly born. And so is it with other foolish
things of a similar character which they firmly
believe.”10
The time during which the father must keep to his bed, [153]or
hammock, varies from a few days to several weeks. In some tribes it is
longer than in others. During this season and even for months
afterwards some articles of food are quite tabooed. He must then
abstain from certain kinds of birds or fish, “firmly believing
that this would injure the child’s stomach, and that it would
participate in the natural faults of the animals on which the father
had fed. If, for example, the father ate turtle, the child would be
deaf and have no brains, like this animal; if he ate manatee, the child
would have little round eyes like this creature.” Again, if he
eats the flesh of a waterhaas—Capybara—a large rodent with
very protruding teeth—the teeth of the child will grow like those
of this animal; or if he eats the flesh of the spotted labba, the
child’s skin will become spotted. Among some tribes the father is
forbidden to bathe, to smoke, or to use snuff, or even to scratch
himself with his finger nails. In their place he must employ “for
this purpose a splinter, specially provided, from the mid-rib of a
cokerite palm.”
Dobrizhoffer, a noted missionary in Paraguay, in his very
interesting History of the Abipones, is even more explicit about
this superstitious practice. “No sooner,” he says,
“do you hear that the wife has borne a child, than you will see
the Abipone husband lying in bed, huddled up with mats and skins, lest
some rude breath of air should touch him, fasting, kept in private, and
for a number of days abstaining religiously from certain viands. You
would swear it was he who had had the child.... They are fully
persuaded that the sobriety and quiet of the father is effectual for
the well-being of the new-born offspring and even necessary.... And
they believe, too, that the father’s carelessness influences the
new-born offspring, from a natural bond and sympathy between both.
Hence if the child comes to a premature end, its death is attributed by
the women to the father’s intemperance, this or that cause being
assigned. Among these would be that he did not abstain from meat, that
he had loaded his stomach with [154]waterhog, that he had swum
across the river when the air was chilly, that he had neglected to
shave off his long eye-brows, that he had devoured underground honey,
stamping on the bees with his feet, that he had ridden till he was
tired and sweated. With ravings like this the crowd of women accuse the
father with impunity of causing the child’s death and are
accustomed to pour curses on the unoffending husband.”11
The whole subject of the couvade opens up many interesting questions
for the ethnologist, and its careful study may be productive of much
valuable information regarding the early races of mankind. For the
student of linguistics and folklore, there is still among the little
known tribes of Eastern Colombia a broad and rich field for research
concerning the languages, customs and traditions of these people, and
the works of the early missionaries are replete with the most precious
data respecting them.12 [155]
As we quietly sailed up the broad forest-clad Meta, we could not
help harking back to the distant past, when, ever and anon, along its
banks were to be seen the smiling homes and villages of happy Indians
under the watchful eye and protecting arm of their “father
priest,” and comparing it with the present desolate and deserted
land that for days at a time does not exhibit the slightest trace of a
human habitation.
Then, in the beautiful language of Colombia’s great lyric
poet, D. José Joaquin Ortíz, “One clime and one
region was not sufficient for the ardor that inflamed the breasts of
the holy disciples of Christ. They will go to enkindle the pure flame
of love in the breast of the savage, at the same time teaching him the
arts of peace in the immense solitudes which are fertilized by the
Arauca, and the Meta and the Casanare and the torrential Upia. They
will scale the ever-precipitous throne of the deafening storm, and will
finally hear the canticle sounding in praise of the redeeming cross, in
as many tongues and by as many tribes as people my native land from the
West to the East.”
And then, too, was to be seen one of those charming gatherings so
beautifully pictured by our own Longfellow in “The Children of
the Lord’s Supper”—“Thus all the children of
the Mission hasten, at the sound of the bell, to gather about the
cross, which is raised on high, and to approach near the venerable man
who with his silver locks towers above so many infantile heads. Oh,
neither Plato nor Socrates, famous in the annals of knowledge, after
long years of continuous vigils, ever knew what these poor, ingenuous
[156]children learnt from the tremulous lips of the
old man at the foot of a tree-trunk in the forest.”13
Much, however, as we were disposed to linger on the glories of the
past, and to regret the absence of what, in days gone by, possessed
such an intense human interest, we were not insensible to the marvelous
natural beauties of river and forest that defiled before our admiring
gaze from morning until night.
At one time it is a colossal Bombax ceiba14 that
claims our attention. This tree is remarkable alike for the height it
often attains and for the wonderful expanse of its branches. To support
such a giant of the forest, Nature has made a special provision. It is
supplied by large buttresses, from six to twelve inches thick and from
ten to twenty feet above the ground, which project like rays from all
sides of its lofty trunk. Were it not for these peculiar stays the tree
would be uprooted by the first violent wind to which it might be
exposed.
At another time it is a huge fig tree that we admire, or a tall and
graceful Candelero, so named from its resemblance to an ornate
candlestick. In both cases we observe [157]the same peculiar,
buttressed roots that are so characteristic of the ceiba and some other
giants of the forest.
But more wonderful far than the ceiba is a tree called by the
natives by the expressive name of Matapalo—Tree-Killer. It
is a species of fig tree, known to naturalists as the Ficus
dendroica. It is at first but a feeble, climbing shrub, sometimes
resembling a vine, but it soon spreads itself over the tree on which it
has fastened itself and eventually encloses it in a tubular mass. It is
a veritable boa constrictor of the vegetable world, for it sooner or
later crushes the life out of its victim.
“After the incarcerated trunk has been stifled and destroyed,
the grotesque form of the parasite, tubular, corkscrew-like, or
otherwise fantastically contorted, and frequently admitting the light
through interstices like loopholes in a turret, continues to
maintain an independent existence among the straight-stemmed trees of
the forest—the image of an eccentric genius in the midst of a
group of sedate citizens.”15
Another remarkable tree seen in the tropics is the cow tree, the
palo de vaca, or arbol de
leche—the milk tree of the natives. Its sap resembles milk in
taste and appearance, and is extensively used as an aliment, especially
by the negroes and mestizos. In referring to this strange specimen of
plant life, Humboldt remarks: “Amidst the great number of curious
phenomena which I have observed in the course of my travels, I confess
there are few that have made so powerful an impression on me as the
aspect of the cow tree.... It is not here the solemn shades of forests,
the majestic course of rivers, the mountain wrapped in eternal snow,
that excite our emotion. A few drops of vegetable juice recall to our
minds all the powerfulness and the fecundity of nature. On the barren
flank of a rock grows a tree with coriaceous and dry leaves. Its large
woody roots can scarcely penetrate into the stone. For several months
of the year not a single shower moistens [158]its foliage. Its
branches appear dead and dried; but when the trunk is pierced there
flows from it a sweet and nourishing milk. It is at the rising of the
sun that this vegetable fountain is most abundant. The negroes and
natives are then seen hastening from all quarters, furnished with large
bowls to receive the milk, which grows yellow and thickens at the
surface. Some empty the bowls under the tree itself, others carry the
juice home to their children.”16
After leaving the Orinoco we made no attempt to travel at night. The
ever-changing bed of the river, the sand banks, the large trunks of
trees that were hurried along by the current, eddies and rapids and
rocks and islands unnumerable, made sailing at night quite impossible.
For this reason, at nightfall we sometimes moored at the river’s
bank, attaching our boat by a rope to the nearest tree, but, more
frequently, in order to escape mosquitoes and other insects, we dropped
anchor in mid-river.
The night was always tranquil, and we were never disturbed by any of
those noises—the howling of monkeys and the cries of
jaguars—which, in tropical forests, are usually supposed to be so
pronounced a feature. Nor were we ever troubled by mosquitoes during
our entire trip of two weeks from Ciudad Bolivar. And never did we deem
it necessary to take the precaution of putting up our
mosquiteros—mosquito nets—to protect ourselves from
the plaga—plague—which we had been assured would be
a nightly visitant during our entire journey.
We had been told, too, that the intense heat of the atmosphere would
be another cause of continual suffering[159]—day and night.
But we did not find it so. At no time did the thermometer rise higher
than 86° F., and it frequently sank as low as 66° F., when we
were glad to put on wraps of some kind. We observed that a variation of
a few degrees was more appreciable than the same variation in our
northern latitudes. A drop of two or three degrees below 70° F.
produced a greater sensation of cold than a fall to 50° would
produce in New York.
As a matter of fact, one need not remain long in the tropics before
he becomes affected by very slight changes of temperature. And another
fact is soon impressed on the observer, which is that the heat in the
tropics is not so much greater than that in more northern latitudes, as
measured by the thermometer. It is the almost uniform temperature, day
and night, the whole year through, that eventually becomes so
depressing and so difficult to endure.
At no time, either on the Orinoco or the Meta, did we ever see the
thermometer rise within fifteen degrees of the intense heat one
frequently experiences during the summer in New York and Washington.
The nights, although usually warm, were never unpleasant. A sheet was
generally sufficient covering, but we sometimes found it necessary to
use a blanket. Only once were we annoyed—and that for but a short
time—by insects, and that was because we moored near the bank
under large, overhanging trees, which seemed to be alive with certain
bugs of a very noxious odor.
Once or twice during each day it was necessary to stop to take on
wood, which was usually ready and piled up on the bank. Sometimes,
however, the owner would demand more than the captain was willing to
give, and that meant that the crew was then obliged to go into the
forest and cut fuel sufficient to take us to the next wood-pile further
up the river. Fortunately, we were not often obliged to cut the wood
ourselves. Each time we did so meant an extra delay of three or four
hours.
Besides stopping for wood, it was at times necessary to [160]call
for provisions, fruits, chickens, eggs, and a certain queso á mano—hand-made cheese—of which the
Llaneros are very fond and which we found very palatable.
On one occasion our supply of beef became exhausted, and it was
necessary to stop—about noon—at a hato along the
river to get a heifer for our next meal. Unfortunately, the owner of
the ranch was not at home. He was out among his herds several miles
distant. Our steward, nothing disconcerted, started in search of him,
but before he had found the proprietor of the herd, and had gotten the
desired novilla—heifer—on board, it was dark. There
was then nothing to do but tie our boat up near the house in which we
had spent most of the afternoon, and wait until the following morning
before continuing our journey.
At first, it would appear that such delays would prove very
annoying, but this was very far from being the case. On the contrary,
it was most interesting, as it gave us an opportunity of getting
acquainted with the people, and of familiarizing ourselves with their
mode of life and occupations, and enjoying many interesting
conversations with them about matters in which they were most
concerned. We always found them very hospitable and very entertaining.
They always gave us a cordial welcome to their humble home, and rarely
allowed us to depart without giving us something from their simple
store. Sometimes it was a brace of chickens, at other times a basket of
fruit, a calabash of eggs, or generous piece of queso
á mano—which was made by the mistress of the house
herself.
Here we were among people who lived the simple life, and appeared
all the happier for it. We saw no evidences of suffering anywhere. The
only thing that seemed to concern them was the instability of the
government. True, Colombia had been in the enjoyment of peace for
several years past, but every now and then some gossip-monger would
circulate reports about another uprising in some part of the country,
and about the imminent danger to which the men were exposed of being
drafted into the [161]army, and of being torn away from their
families, to whom they are devotedly attached.
Our Crew Ashore for
Fuel.
Occasionally, while the crew was cutting wood, we were able to make
a collection of orchids, of which there are along the Meta many
wonderfully beautiful species. At one time our deck was a veritable
bower of all kinds of orchids of the most brilliant colors and of the
strangest imaginable forms. Some of them possessed a most delicate
fragrance, while others emitted a delightful perfume that spread over
the greater part of our deck.
Linnæus knew only about a dozen exotic orchids, and expressed
it as his opinion that when the world was fully explored by botanists,
it might probably yield a hundred species all told. How surprised he
would be if he could now return to the world and find that the species
of this curious plant are actually counted by thousands! To English
horticulturists alone some thousands of species are known. Even some of
the many genera of this extensive order contain hundreds of species. Of
odontoglossums there are more than a hundred species catalogued. Of
oncidiums more than two hundred and fifty species have been described.
Of dendrobiums between three and four hundred species are known, while
the genus Habenaria counts more than four hundred species. Then
there are the countless hybrids—and their number is rapidly
increasing—that, during the last few years, have been produced in
the conservatories of Europe and America.
Orchids are found in all parts of the world; in the marshes and
groves of the lowlands and in the lofty plateaus of mountain ranges.
But it is in the warm and humid regions of the equator that they occur
in the greatest variety and profusion. Twenty years ago the number of
species known in Venezuela alone exceeded six hundred. In Colombia the
number is probably greater. It is here, too, that some of the choicest
specimens have their habitat. From this country tens of thousands of
plants are shipped annually to the florists of Europe and the United
States. [162]As an illustration of the extent of this
industry it suffices to state that a single firm has under cultivation
no fewer than one hundred thousand Odontoglossums, for of this species
alone hundreds of thousands of plants are marketed annually. Other
species are scarcely less popular. To supply the ever-increasing demand
for them, there is now a small army of men continually engaged in the
tropical forests in the work of collecting and preparing them for
shipment. We met several of them in both Venezuela and Colombia.
In the forests along the Meta we could within a small area easily
have collected more orchids than were known to Linnæus. They were
everywhere—in the forks of trees, on their branches, on decaying
trunks, on the lianas stretching from one tree to another, and, forming
with the flowering epiphytes17 with which they were laden, the
most beautiful tapestry, beside which the most exquisite Gobelin
masterpiece would pale into insignificance. In other places they grew
on bare, precipitous rocks, where they were quite inaccessible, on
prickly cactus plants, near beautiful cascades, or clumps of
arborescent ferns. We found them flourishing near the ocean shore and
near the limits of perpetual snow on the crests of the Cordilleras.
Everywhere they were attractive and worthy of study—some on
account of their bizarre forms, mimicking insects and butterflies,
others on account of their delicate fragrance, [163]and
others still on account of their gorgeous colors, which fairly rival
those of the rainbow.
The odors of orchids are almost as diverse as their colors and
forms. While most of them have an agreeable scent, there are some that
have an unbearably fetid odor. Some emit a faint and delicate perfume;
others possess a fragrance which, although delicious, is almost
overpowering. In some the fragrance is perceptible only in the morning,
in others solely in the evening. Some have a scent like that of
violets, others like that of musk or noyeau, and others again like that
of angelica or cinnamon. More wonderful still, “some
species,” we are told, “give out different scents at
different times, such as Dendrobium nobile, which smells like
grass in the evening, like honey at noon, and has in the morning a
faint odor of primroses.”18
It was a fortnight, almost to the hour, since we had left Ciudad
Bolivar, when, one bright day, as the sun was approaching the zenith,
our captain, pointing to a tongue of land in the river ahead of us,
said, in a cheerful tone of voice, “A la
vueltá esta Orocué.” Orocué is beyond
that point.
And so it was. In a few minutes more we had the town in full view.
We had finished another stage of our journey and that, too, without an
untoward incident of any kind whatsoever. The entire voyage had been
made with comfort and pleasure, and we actually regretted to leave the
[164]boat on which we had spent so many delightful
and happy hours. It was indeed an experience of a lifetime, one of
enchanting panoramas, such as can be witnessed only along the great
water courses of the equator. The flora, the fauna, the people, the
lands, so rich in romance and so celebrated for the achievements of the
conquistadores—those of the cross as well as those of the
world—all fascinated us and enchained our interest during every
moment of our wakeful hours. Yes, it was a memorable,
never-to-be-forgotten experience, one of those experiences that
necessarily exalt the lover of Nature and bring him near to
Nature’s God.
All the inhabitants in Orocué—men, women and
children—were gathered on the bank to witness the arrival of our
little steamer. So rarely does anything larger than a small sailboat
come here that the arrival of a steamboat is regarded as an event of
paramount interest and importance. Most grateful to us, for it was so
