# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Gutenberg Project, English
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45623/45623-h/45623-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

see that, as I love him, the odds are that he doesn't love
me?"
"But he tells me he does!"
"What is his bare assertion—weighed against the doctrine
of probability! How many girls do you suppose
Silverdale has met in his varied career?"
"A thousand, I dare say."
"Ah, that's only reckoning English Society (and
theatres). And then he has seen Society (and theatres)
in Paris, Berlin, Rome, Boston, a hundred places! If we
put the figure at three thousand it will be moderate. Here
am I, a single girl——"
"Who oughtn't to remain so," growled the millionaire.
"One single girl. How wildly improbable that out of
three thousand girls, Silverdale should just fall in love with
me. It is 2999 to 1 against. Then there is the probability
that he is not in love at all—which makes the odds
5999 to 1. The problem is exactly analogous to one
which you will find in any Algebra. Out of a sack containing
three thousand coins, what are the odds that a man
will draw the one marked coin?"
"The comparison of yourself to a marked coin is correct
enough," said the millionaire, thinking of the files of fortune-hunters
to whom he had given the sack. "Otherwise
you are talking nonsense."
"Then Pascal, Laplace, Lagrange, De Moivre talked
nonsense," said Lillie hotly; "but I have not finished. We
must also leave open the possibility that the man will not
be tempted to draw out any coin whatsoever. The odds
against the marked coin being drawn out are thus 5999
to 1. The odds against Silverdale returning my affection
are 6000 to 1. As Butler rightly points out, probability
is the only guide to conduct, which is, we know
from Matthew Arnold, three-fourths of life. Am I to risk
[pg 14]
ruining three-fourths of my life, in defiance of the unerring
dogmas of the Doctrine of Chances? No, father, do not
exact this sacrifice from me. Ask me anything you please,
and I will grant it—oh! so gladly—but do not, oh, do not
ask me to marry the man I love!"
The millionaire stroked her hair, and soothed her in
piteous silence. He had made his pile in pig-iron, and had
not science enough to grapple with the situation.
"Do you mean to say," he said at last, "that because
you love a man, he can't love you?"
"He can. But in all human probability he won't. Suppose
you put on a fur waistcoat and went out into the
street, determined to invite to dinner the first man in a
straw hat, and supposing he replied that you had just forestalled
him, as he had gone out with a similar intention to
look for the first man in a fur waistcoat.—What would
you say?"
The millionaire hesitated. "Well, I shouldn't like to
insult the man," he said slowly.
"You see!" cried Lillie triumphantly.
"Well, then, dear," said he, after much pondering, "the
only thing for it is to marry a man you don't love."
"Father!" said Lillie in terrible tones.
The millionaire hung his head shamefacedly at the outrage
his suggestion had put upon his daughter.
"Forgive me, Lillie," he said; "I shall never interfere
again in your matrimonial concerns."
So Lillie wiped her eyes and founded the Old Maids'
Club.
She said it was one of her matrimonial concerns, and so
her father could not break his word, though an entire suite
of rooms in his own Kensington mansion was set aside for
the rooms of the Club. Not that he desired to interfere.
Having read "The Bachelors' Club," he thought it was
the surest way of getting her married.
[pg 15]
The object of the Club was defined by the foundress as
"the depolarization of the term 'Old Maid'; in other
words, the dissipation of all those disagreeable associations
which have gradually and most unjustly clustered about
it; the restoration of the homely Saxon phrase to its pristine
purity, and the elevation of the enviable class denoted by
it to their due pedestal of privilege and homage."
The conditions of membership, drawn up by Lillie, were:
1. Every candidate must be under twenty-five. 2. Every candidate
must be beautiful and wealthy, and undertake to continue so.
3. Every candidate must have refused at least one advantageous offer
of marriage.
The rationale of these rules was obvious. Disappointed,
soured failures were not wanted. There was no virtue in
being an "Old Maid" when you had passed twenty-five.
Such creatures are merely old maids—Old Maids (with
capitals) were required to be in the flower of youth and
the flush of beauty. Their anti-matrimonial motives must
be above suspicion. They must despise and reject the
married state, though they would be welcomed therein
with open arms.
Only thus would people's minds be disabused of the
old-fashioned notions about old maids.
The Old Maids were expected to obey an elaborate array
of by-laws, and respect a series of recommendations.
According to the by-laws they were required:
1. To regard all men as brothers. 2. Not to keep cats, lap-dogs,
parrots, pages, or other domestic pets. 3. Not to have less than one
birthday per year. 4. To abjure medicine, art classes, and Catholicism.
5. Never to speak to a Curate. 6. Not to have any ideals or
to take part in Woman's Rights Movements, Charity Concerts, or
other Platform Demonstrations. 7. Not to wear caps, curls, or
similar articles of attire. 8. Not to kiss females.
In addition to these there were the
[pg 16]
General Recommendations:
Never refuse the last slice of bread, etc., lest you be accused
of dreading celibacy. Never accept bits of wedding cake,
lest you be suspected of putting them under your pillow.
Do not express disapproval by a sniff. In travelling,
choose smoking carriages; pack your umbrellas and parasols
inside your trunk. Never distribute tracts. Always
fondle children and show marked hostility to the household
cat. Avoid eccentricities. Do not patronize Dorothy
Restaurants or the establishments of the Aerated Bread
Company. Never drink cocoa-nibs. In dress it is better
to avoid Mittens, Crossovers, Fleecy Shawls, Elastic-side
Boots, White Stockings, Black Silk Bodies, with Pendent
Gold Chains, and Antique White Lace Collars. One-button
White Kid Gloves are also inadvisable for afternoon
concerts; nor should any glove be worn with fingers
too long to pick up change at booking-offices. Parcels
should not be wrapped in whitey-brown paper and not
more than three should be carried at once. Watch Pockets
should not be hung over the bed, sheets and mattresses
should be left to the servants to air, and rooms should be
kept in an untidy condition.
Refrain from manufacturing jam, household remedies,
gossip or gooseberry wine. Never nurse a cold or a relative.
It is advisable not to have a married sister, as she
might decease and the temptation to marry her husband
is such as no mere human being ought to be exposed to.
For cognate reasons eschew friendship with cripples and
hunchbacks (especially when they have mastered the violin
in twelve lessons), men of no moral character, drunkards
who wish to reform themselves, very ugly men, and husbands
with wives in lunatic asylums. Cultivate rather the
acquaintance of handsome young men (who have been
duly vaccinated), for this species is too conceited to be
dangerous.
[pg 17]
On the same principle were the rules for admitting
visitors:
1. No unmarried lady admitted. 2. No married gentlemen admitted.
If they admitted single ladies there would be no privilege
in being a member, while if they did not admit single gentlemen,
they might be taunted with being afraid that they
were not fireproof. When Lillie had worked this out to
her satisfaction she was greatly chagrined to find the two
rules were the same as for "The Bachelors' Club." To
show their club had no connection with the brother institution,
she devised a series of counterblasts to their
misogynic maxims. These were woven on all the antimacassars;
the deadliest were:
The husband is the only creature entirely selfish. He is a low organism,
consisting mainly of a digestive apparatus and a rude mouth.
The lover holds the cloak; the husband drops it. Wedding dresses
are webs. Women like clinging robes; men like clinging women.
The lover will always help the beloved to be helpless. A man likes
his wife to be just clever enough to comprehend his cleverness and
just stupid enough to admire it. Women who catch husbands rarely
recover. Marriage is a lottery; every wife does not become a widow.
Wrinkles are woman's marriage lines; but when she gets them her
husband will no longer be bound.
The woman who believes her husband loves her, is capable of believing
that she loves him. A good man's love is the most intolerable
of boredoms. A man often marries a woman because they
have the same tastes and prefer himself to the rest of creation. If a
woman could know what her lover really thought of her she would
know what to think of him. Possession is nine points of the marriage
law. It is impossible for a man to marry a clever woman. Marriages
are made in heaven, but old maids go there.
Lillie also painted a cynical picture of dubious double-edged
incisiveness. It was called "Latter-day Love," and
represented the ill hap of Cupid, neglected and superfluous,
his quiver full, his arrows rusty, shivering with the
[pg 18]
cold, amid contented couples passing him by with never
an eye for the lugubrious legend, "Pity the Poor Blind."
The picture put the finishing touch to the rooms of the
Club. When Lillie Dulcimer had hung it up, she looked
round upon the antimacassars and felt a proud and happy
girl.
The Old Maids' Club was now complete. Nothing was
wanting except members.
Latter-Day Love.
[pg 19]
THE HONORARY TRIER.
Lord Silverdale was the first visitor to the Old Maids'
Club. He found the fair President throned alone among
the epigrammatic antimacassars. Lillie received him with
dignity and informed him that he stood on holy ground.
The young man was shocked to hear of the change in her
condition. He, himself, had lately spent his time in plucking
up courage to ask her to change it—and now he had
been forestalled.
"But you must come in and see us often," said Lillie.
"It occurs to me that the by-laws admit you."
"How many will you be?" murmured Silverdale, heartbroken.
"I don't know yet. I am waiting for the thing to get
about. I have been in communication with the first candidate,
and expect her any moment. She is a celebrated
actress."
"And who elects her?"
"I, of course!" said Lillie, with an imperial flash in
her passionate brown eyes. She was a brunette, and her
face sometimes looked like a handsome thunder-cloud.
"I am the President and the Committee and the Oldest
Old Maid. Isn't one of the rules that candidates shall
not believe in Women's Rights? None of the members will
have any voice whatever."
[pg 20]
"Well, if your actress is a comic opera star, she won't
have any voice whatever."
"Lord Silverdale," said Lillie sharply, "I hate puns.
They spoiled the Bachelors' Club."
His lordship, who was the greatest punster of the peers,
and the peer of the greatest punsters, muttered savagely
that he would like to spoil the Old Maids' Club. Lillie
punned herself sometimes, but he dared not tell her of it.
"And what will be the subscription?" he said aloud.
"There will be none. I supply the premises."
"Ah, that will never do! Half the pleasure of belonging
to a club is the feeling that you have not paid your
subscription. And how about grub?"
"Grub! We are not men. We do not fulfil missions
by eating."
"Unjust creature! Men sometimes fulfil missions by
being eaten."
"Well, papa will supply buns, lemonade and ices.
Turple the magnificent, will always be within call to hand
round the things."
"May I send you in a hundred-weight of chocolate
creams?"
"Certainly. Why should weddings have a monopoly
of presents? This is not the only way in which you can
be of service to me, if you will."
"Only discover it for me, my dear Miss Dulcimer.
Where there's a way there's a will."
"Well, I should like you to act as Trier."
"Eh! I beg your pardon?"
"Don't apologize; to try the candidates who wish to be
Old Maids."
"Try them! No, no! I'm afraid I should be prejudiced
against bringing them in innocent."
"Don't be silly. You know what I mean. I could not
tell so well as you whether they possessed the true apostolic
[pg 21]
spirit. You are a man—your instinct would be truer
than mine. Whenever a new candidate applies, I want
you to come up and see her."
"Really, Miss Dulcimer, I—I can't tell by looking at
her!"
"No, but you can by her looking at you."
"You exaggerate my insight."
"Not at all. It is most important that something of
the kind should be done. By the rules, all the Old Maids
must be young and beautiful. And it requires a high
degree of will and intelligence——"
"To be both!"
"For such to give themselves body and soul to the
cause. Every Old Maid is double-faced till she has been
proved single-hearted."
"And must I talk to them?"
"In plain English——"
"It's the only language I speak plainly."
"Wait till I finish, boy! In plain English, you must
flirt with them."
"Flirt?" said Silverdale, aghast. "What! With young
and beautiful girls?"
"I know it is hard, Lord Silverdale, but you will do it for
my sake!" They were sitting on an ottoman, and the
lovely face which looked pleadingly up into his was very
near. The young man got up and walked up and
down.
"Hang it!" he murmured disconsolately. "Can't you
try them on Turple the magnificent. Or why not get a
music-master or a professor of painting?"
"Music-masters touch the wrong chord, and professors
of painting are mostly old masters. You are young and
polished and can flirt with tact and taste."
"Thank you," said the poor young peer, making a wry
face. "And therefore I'm to be a flirtation machine."
[pg 22]
"An electric battery if you like. I don't desire to
mince my words. There's no gain in not calling a spade
a spade."
"And less in people calling a battery a rake."
"Is that a joke? I thought you clubmen enjoyed
being called rakes."
"That is all most of us do enjoy. Take it from me
that the last thing a rake does is to sow wild oats."
"I know enough of agriculture not to be indebted to
you for the information. But I certainly thought you
were a rake," said the little girl, looking up at him with
limpid brown eyes.
"You flatter me," he said with a mock bow; "you are
young enough to know better."
"But you have seen Society (and theatres) in a dozen
capitals!"
"I have been behind the scenes of both," he answered
simply. "That is the thing to keep a man steady."
"I thought it turned a man's head," she said musingly.
"It does. Only one begins manhood with his head
screwed the wrong way on. Homœopathy is the sole
curative principle in morals. Excuse this sudden discharge
of copy-book mottoes. I sometimes go off that
way, but you mustn't take me for a Maxim gun. I am
not such a bore, I hope."
Lillie flew off at a feminine tangent.
"All of which only proves the wisdom of my choice in
selecting you."
"What! To pepper them with pellets of platitude?"
he said, dropping despairingly into an arm-chair.
"No. With eyeshot. Take care!"
"What's the matter?"
"You're sitting on an epigram."
"Take care! You're sitting on an epigram."
The young man started up as if stung, and removed the
antimacassar, without, however, seeing the point.
[pg 23]
"I hope you don't mind my inquiring whether you
have any morals," said Lillie.
"I have as many as Ćsop. The strictest investigation
courted. References given and exchanged," said the peer
lightly.
"Do be serious. You know I have an insatiable curiosity
to know everything about everything—to feel all
sensations, think all thoughts. That is the note of my
being." The brown eyes had an eager, wistful look.
"Oh, yes—a note of interrogation."
"O that I were a man! What do men think?"
[pg 24]
"What do you think? Men are human beings first and
masculine afterwards. And I think everybody is like a
suburban Assembly Hall—to-day a temperance lecture,
to-morrow a dance, next day an oratorio, then a farcical
comedy, and on Sunday a religious service. But about this
appointment?"
"Well, let us settle it one way or another," Lillie said.
"Here is my proposal——"
"I have an alternative proposal," he said desperately.
"I cannot listen to any other. Will you, or will you not,
become Honorary Trier of the Old Maids' Club?"
"I'll try," he said at last.
"Yes or no?"
"Shall you be present at the trials?"
"Certainly, but I shall cultivate myopia."
"It's a short-sighted policy, Miss Dulcimer. Still, sustained
by your presence, I feel I could flirt with the most
beautiful and charming girl in the world. I could do it,
even unsustained by the presence of the other girl."
"Oh, no! You must not flirt with me. I am the only
Old Maid with whom flirtation is absolutely taboo."
"Then I consent," said Silverdale with apparent irrelevance.
And seating himself on the piano stool, after
carefully removing an epigram from the top of the instrument,
he picked out "The Last Rose of Summer" with
a facile forefinger.
"Don't!" said Lillie. "Stick to your lute."
Thus admonished, the nobleman took down Lillie's
banjo, which was hanging on the wall, and struck a few
passionate chords.
"Do you know," he said, "I always look on the banjo
as the American among musical instruments. It is the
guitar with a twang. Wasn't it invented in the States?
Anyhow it is the most appropriate instrument to which
to sing you my Fin de Sičcle Love Song."
[pg 25]
"For Heaven's sake, don't use that poor overworked
phrase!"
"Why not? It has only a few years to live. List to my
sonnet."
So saying, he strummed the strings and sang in an
aristocratic baritone:
AD CHLOEN.—A Valedictory.
Lillie laughed. "My actress's name is something like
Chloe. It is Clorinda—Clorinda Bell. She tells me she
is very celebrated."
"Oh, yes, I've heard of her," he said.
"There is a sneer in your tones. Have you heard anything
to her disadvantage?"
"Only that she is virtuous and in Society."
"The very woman for an Old Maid! She is beautiful,
too."
"Is she? I thought she was one of those actresses who
reserve their beauty for the stage."
"Oh, no. She always wears it. Here is her photograph.
Isn't that a lovely face?"
[pg 26]
"It is a lovely photograph. Does she hope to achieve
recognition by it, I wonder?"
"Sceptic!"
"I doubt all charms but yours."
"Well, you shall see her."
"All right, but mention her name clearly when you introduce
me. Women are such changing creatures—to-day
pretty, to-morrow plain, yesterday ugly. I have to be reintroduced
to most of my female acquaintances three times
a week. May I wait to see Clorinda?"
"No, not to-day. She has to undergo the Preliminary
Exam. Perhaps she may not even matriculate. Where
you come in is at the graduation stage."
"I see. To pass them as Bachelors—I mean Old
Maids. I say, how will you get them to wear stuff gowns?"
The bell rang loudly. "That may be she. Good-bye,
Lord Silverdale. Remember you are Honorary Trier of
the Old Maids' Club, and don't forget those chocolate
creams."
[pg 27]
THE MAN IN THE IRONED MASK.
The episode that turned Clorinda Bell's thoughts in the
direction of Old Maidenhood was not wanting in strangeness.
She was an actress of whom everybody spoke well,
excepting actresses. This was because she was so respectable.
Respectability is all very well for persons who
possess no other ability; but bohemians rightly feel that
genius should be above that sort of thing. Clorinda never
went anywhere without her mother. This lady—a portly
taciturn dame, whose hair had felt the snows of sixty winters—was
as much a part of her as a thorn is of a rose.
She accompanied her always—except when she was singing—and
loomed like some more substantial shadow before
or behind her at balls and receptions, at concerts and
operas, private views and church bazaars. Her mother
was always with her behind the scenes. She helped her to
make up and to unmake. She became the St. Peter of the
dressing-room in her absence. At the Green Room Club
they will tell you how a royal personage asking permission
to come and congratulate her, received the answer: "I shall
be most honored—in the presence of my mother."
There were those who wished Clorinda had been born
an orphan.
But the graver sort held Miss Bell up as a typical harbinger
of the new era, when actresses would keep mothers
instead of dog-carts. There was no intrinsic reason, they
[pg 28]
said, why actresses should not be received at Court, and
visit the homes of the poor. Clorinda was very charming.
She was tall and fair as a lily, with dashes of color stolen
from the rose and the daffodil, for her eyes had a sparkle
and her cheeks a flush and her hair was usually golden.
Not the least of her physical charms was the fact that
she had numerous admirers. But it was understood that
she kept them at a distance and that they worshipped there.
The Society journals, to which Clorinda was indebted
for considerable information about herself, often stated
that she intended to enter a convent, as her higher nature
found scant satisfaction in stage triumphs, and she had
refused to exchange her hand either for a coronet or a pile
of dollars. They frequently stated the opposite, but a
Society journal cannot always be contradicting a contemporary.
It must sometimes contradict itself, as a proof
of impartiality. Clorinda let all these rumors surge about
her unheeded, and her managers had to pay for the advertisement.
The money came back to them, though, for
Clorinda was a sure draw. She brought the odor of
sanctity over the footlights, and people have almost as
much curiosity to see a saint as a sinner—especially when
the saint is beautiful.
Gentlemen in particular paid frequent pilgrimages to
the shrine of the saint, and adored her from the ten-and-sixpenny
pews. There was at this period a noteworthy
figure in London dress circles and stalls, an inveterate
first-nighter, whose identity was the subject of considerable
speculation. He was a mystery in a swallow-tail coat.
No one had ever seen him out of it. He seemed to go
through life armed with a white breastplate, starched shot-proof
and dazzling as a grenadier's cuirass. What wonder
that a wit (who had become a dramatic critic through
drink) called him. "The Man in the Ironed Mask."
Between the acts he wore a cloak, a crush-hat and a
[pg 29]
cigarette. Nobody ever spoke to him nor did he ever reply.
He could not be dumb, because he had been heard to
murmur "Brava, bravissima," in a soft but incorrect foreign
manner. He was very handsome, with a high, white
forehead of the Goth order of architecture, and dark, Moorish
eyes. Nobody even knew his name, for he went to
the play quite anonymously. The pit took him for a
critic, and the critics for a minor poet. He had appeared
on the scene (or before it) only twelve months ago, but
already he was a distinguished man. Even the actors and
actresses had come to hear of him, and not a few had
peeped at him between their speeches. He was certainly
a sight for the "gods."
Latterly he had taken to frequenting the Lymarket,
where Miss Clorinda Bell was "starring" for a season of
legitimate drama. It was the only kind the scrupulous
actress would play in. Whenever there was no first night
on anywhere else, he went to see Clorinda. Only a few
rivals and the company knew of his constancy to the entertainment.
Clorinda was, it will be remembered, one of
the company.
It was the entr'acte and the orchestra was playing a
gavotte, to which the eighteenth-century figures on the
drop scene were dancing. The Man in the Ironed Mask
strolled in the lobby among the critics, overhearing the
views they were not going to express in print. Clorinda
Bell's mother was brushing her child's magnificent hair
into a more tragical attitude in view of the fifth act. The
little room was sacred to the "star," the desire of so many
moths. Neither maid nor dresser entered it, for Mrs.
Bell was as devoted to her daughter as her daughter to
her, and tended her as zealously as if she were a stranger.
"Yes, but why doesn't he speak?" said Clorinda.
"You haven't given him a chance, darling," said her
mother.
[pg 30]
"Nonsense—there is the language of flowers. All my
lovers commence by talking that."
"You get so many bouquets, dear. It may be—as you
say his appearance is so distinguished—that he dislikes
so commonplace a method."
"Well, if he doesn't want to throw his love at my feet,
he might have tried to send it me in a billet-doux."
"That is also commonplace. Besides, he may know
that all your letters are delivered to me, and opened by
me. The fact has often enough appeared in print."
"Ah, yes, but genius will find out a way. You remember
Lieutenant Campbell, who was so hit the moment he
saw me as Perdita that he went across the road to the
telegraph-office and wired, 'Meet me at supper, top floor,
Piccadilly Restaurant, 11.15,' so that the doorkeeper sent
the message direct to the prompter, who gave it me as I
came off with Florizel and Camilla. That is the sort of
man I admire!"
"But you soon tired of him, darling."
"Oh, mother! How can you say so? I loved him the
whole run of the piece."
"Yes, dear, but it was only Shakespeare."
"Would you have love a Burlesque? 'A Winter's
Tale' is long enough for any flirtation. Let me see, was it
Campbell or Belfort who shot himself? I for——oh! oh!
that hairpin is irritating me, mother."
"There! There! Is that easier?"
"Thanks! There's only the Man in the Ironed Mask
irritating me now. His dumb admiration provokes
me."
"But you provoke his dumb admiration. And are you
sure it is admiration?"
"People don't go to see Shakespeare seventeen times.
I wonder who he is—an Italian count most likely. Ah,
how his teeth flash beneath his moustache!"
[pg 31]
"You make me feel quite curious about him. Do you
think I could peep at him from the wing?"
"No, mother, you shall not be put to the inconvenience.
It would give you a crick in your neck. If you desire to
see him, I will send for him."
"Very well, dear," said the older woman submissively,
for she was accustomed to the gratification of her daughter's
whims.
So when the Man in the Ironed Mask resumed his seat,
a programme girl slipped a note into his hand. He read
it, his face impassive as his Ironed Mask. When the play
was over, he sauntered round to the squalid court in which
the stage door was located and stalked nonchalantly up
the stairs. The doorkeeper was too impressed by his air
not to take him for granted. He seemed to go on instinctively
till he arrived at a door placarded, "Miss Clorinda
Bell—Private."
He knocked, and the silvery accents he had been listening
to all the evening bade him come in. The beautiful
Clorinda, clad in diaphanous white and radiating perfumes,
received him with an intoxicating smile.
"It is so kind of you to come and see me," she
said.
He made a stately inclination. "The obligation is
mine," he said. "I am greatly interested in the drama.
This is the seventeenth time I have been to see you."
"I meant here," she said piqued, though the smile stayed
on.
"Oh, but I understood——" His eyes wandered interrogatively
about the room.
"Yes, I know my mother is out," she replied. "She is
on the stage picking up the bouquets. I believe she sent
you a note. I do not know why she wants to see you, but
she will be back soon. If you do not mind being left
alone with me——"
[pg 32]
"Pray do not apologize, Miss Bell," he said considerately.
"It is so good of you to say so. Won't you sit down?"
The Man in the Ironed Mask sat down beside the
dazzling Clorinda and stared expectantly at the door.
There was a tense silence. His cloak hung negligently
upon his shoulders. He held his crush hat calmly in his
hand.
Clorinda was highly chagrined. She felt as if she could
slap his face and kiss the place to make it well.
"Did you like the play?" she said, at last.
He elevated his dark eyebrows. "Is it not obvious?"
"Not entirely. You might come to see the players."
"Quite so, quite so."
He leaned his handsome head on his arm and looked
pensively at the floor. It was some moments before he
broke the silence again. But it was only by rising to his
feet. He walked towards the door.
"I am sorry I cannot stay any longer," he said.
"Oh, no! You mustn't go without seeing my mother.
She will be terribly disappointed."
"Not less so than myself at missing her. Good-night,
Miss Bell." He made his prim, courtly bow.
"Oh, but you must see her! Come again to-morrow
night, anyhow," exclaimed Clorinda desperately. And
when his footsteps had died away down the stairs, she
could not repress several tears of vexation. Then she
looked hurriedly into a little mirror and marvelled silently.
"Is he gone already?" said her mother, entering after
knocking cautiously at the door.
"Yes, he is insane."
"Madly in love with you?"
"Madly out of love with me."
He came again the next night, stolid and courteous.
To Clorinda's infinite regret her mother had been taken
[pg 33]
ill and had gone home early in the carriage. It was raining
hard. Clorinda would be reduced to a hansom.
"They call it the London gondola," she said, "but it is
least comfortable when there's most water. You have to
be framed in like a cucumber in a hothouse."
"Indeed! Personally I never travel in hansoms.
And from what you tell me I should not like to make the
experiment to-night. Good-bye, Miss Bell; present my
regrets to your mother."
"Deuce take the donkey! He might at least offer me a
seat in his carriage," thought Clorinda. Aloud she said:
"Under the circumstances may I venture to ask you to
see my mother at the house? Here is our private address.
Won't you come to tea to-morrow?"
He took the card, bowed silently and withdrew.
In such wise the courtship proceeded for some weeks,
the invalid being confined to her room at teatime and
occupied in picking up bouquets by night. He always
came to tea in his cloak, and wore his Ironed Mask,
and was extremely solicitous about Clorinda's mother. It
became evident that so long as he had the ghost of an
excuse for talking of the absent, he would never talk of
Clorinda herself. At last she was reduced to intimating
that she would be found at the matinée of a new piece
next day (to be given at the theatre by a débutante) and
that there would be plenty of room in her box. Clorinda
was determined to eliminate her mother, who was now
become an impediment instead of a pretext.
But when the afternoon came, she looked for him in
vain. She chatted lightly with the acting-manager, who
was lounging in the vestibule, but her eye was scanning
the horizon feverishly.
"Is this woman going to be a success?" she asked.
"Oh, yes," said the acting-manager promptly.
"How do you know?"
[pg 34]
"I just saw the flowers drive up."
"I just saw the flowers drive up."
Clorinda laughed. "What's the piece like?"
"I only saw one rehearsal. It seemed great twaddle.
But the low com. has got a good catchword, so there's
some chance of its going into the evening bills."
"Oh, by the way, have you seen anything of that—that—the
man in the Ironed Mask, I think they call him?"
[pg 35]
"Do you mean here—this afternoon?"
"Yes."
"No. Do you expect him?"
"Oh, no; but I was wondering if he would turn up. I
hear he is so fond of this theatre."
"Bless your soul, he'd never be seen at a matinée."
"Why not?" asked Clorinda, her heart fluttering violently.
"Because he'd have to be in morning dress," said the
actor-manager, laughing heartily.
To Clorinda his innocent merriment seemed the laughter
of a mocking fiend. She turned away sick at heart.
There was nothing for it but to propose outright at teatime.
Clorinda did so, and was accepted without further
difficulty.
"And now, dearest," she said, after she had been allowed
to press the first kiss of troth upon his coy lips,
"I should like to know who I am going to be?"
"Clorinda Bell, of course," he said. "That is the advantage
actresses have. They need not take their husband's
name in vain."
"Yes, but what am I to call you, dearest?"
"Dearest?" he echoed enigmatically. "Let me be
dearest—for a little while."
She forbore to press him further. For the moment it
was enough to have won him. The sweetness of that
soothed her wounded vanity at his indifference to the
prize coveted by men and convents. Enough that she
was to be mated to a great man, whose speech and silence
alike bore the stamp of individuality.
"Dearest be it," she answered, looking fondly into his
Moorish eyes. "Dearest! Dearest!"
"Thank you, Clorinda. And now may I see your
mother? I have never learnt what she has to say to me."
"What does it matter now, dearest?"
[pg 36]
"More than ever," he said gravely, "now she is to be
my mother-in-law."
Clorinda bit her lip at the dignified rebuke, and rang
for his mother-in-law elect, who came from the sick room
in her bonnet.
"Mother," she said, as the good dame sailed through
the door, "let me introduce you to my future husband."
A Family Reunion.
The old lady's face lit up with surprise and excitement.
She stood still for an instant, taking in the relationship
so suddenly sprung upon her. Then she darted with
open arms towards the Man in the Ironed Mask and
strained his Mask to her bosom.
"My son! my son!" she cried, kissing him passionately.
He blushed like a stormy sunset and tried to disengage
himself.
"Do not crumple him, mother," said Clorinda pettishly.
"Your zeal is overdone."
[pg 37]
"But he is my long-lost Absalom! Think of the rapture
of having him restored to me thus. O what a happy
family we shall be! Bless you, Clorinda. Bless you, my
children. When is the wedding to be?"
The Man in the Ironed Mask had regained his composure.
"Mother," he said sternly, "I am glad to see you looking
so well. I always knew you would fall on your feet if
I dropped you. I have no right to ask it—but as you
seem to expect me to marry your daughter, a little information
as to the circumstances under which you have
supplied me with a sister would be not unwelcome.
"Stupid boy! Don't you understand that Miss Bell was
good enough to engage me as mother and travelling companion
when you left me to starve? Or rather, the impresario
who brought her over from America engaged me,
and Clorinda has been, oh, so good to me! My little
drapery business failed three months after you left me to
get a stranger to serve. I had no resource but—to go
on the stage."
The old woman was babbling on, but the cold steel of
Clorinda's gaze silenced her.
The outraged actress turned haughtily to the Man in
the Ironed Mask.
"So this is your mother?" she said with infinite scorn.
"So this is not your mother!" he said with infinite indignation.
"Were you ever really simple enough to suspect me of
having a mother?" she retorted contemptuously. "I had
her on the hire system. Don't you know that a combination
of maid and mother is the newest thing in actresses'
wardrobes? It is safer then having a maid, and more
comfortable than having a mother."
"But I have been a mother to you, Clorinda," the old
dame pleaded.
[pg 38]
"Oh, yes, you have always been a good, obedient woman.
I am not finding fault with you, and I have no wish to
part with you. I do find fault and I shall certainly part
with your son."
"Nonsense," said the Man in the Ironed Mask. "The
situation is essentially unchanged. She is still the mother
of one of us, she can still become the mother-in-law of the
other. Besides, Clorinda, that is the only way of keeping
the secret in the family."
"You threaten?"
"Certainly. You are a humbug. So am I. United
we stand. Separated, you fall."
"You fall, too."
"Not from such a height. I am still on the first rungs."
"Nor likely to get any higher."
"Indeed? Your experience of me should have taught
you different. High as you are, I can raise you yet higher
if you will only lift me up to you."
"How do you climb?" she said, his old ascendency
reasserting itself.
"By standing still. Profound meditation on the
philosophy of modern society has convinced me that
the only way left for acquiring notoriety is to do
nothing. Every other way has been exploited and is suspected.
It is only a year since the discovery flashed upon
me, it is only a year that I have been putting it in practice.
And yet, mark the result! Already I am a known man.
I had the entrée to no society; for half-a-guinea a night
(frequently paid in paper money) I have mingled with the
most exclusive. When there was no premiere anywhere, I
went to see you—not from any admiration of you, but because
the Lymarket is the haunt of the best society, and
in addition, the virtue of Shakespeare and of yourself
attracts there a highly respectable class of bishops whom
I have not the opportunity of meeting elsewhere. By
[pg 39]
doing nothing I fascinated you—somebody was sure to be
fascinated by it at last, as the dove flutters into the jaws
of the lethargic serpent—by continuing to do nothing I
completed my conquest. Had I met your advances, you
would have repelled mine. My theories have been completely
demonstrated, and but for the accident of our having
a common mother——"
"Speak for yourself," said Clorinda haughtily.
"It is for myself that I am speaking. When we are one,
I shall continue this policy of masterly inactivity of which
I claim the invention, though it has long been known in
the germ. Everybody knows for instance that not to
trouble to answer letters is the surest way of acquiring
the reputation of a busy man, that not to accept invitations
is an infallible way of getting more, that not to care
a jot about the feelings of the rest of the household, is an
unfailing means of enforcing universal deference. But
the glory still remains to him who first grasped this great
law in its generalized form, however familiar one or two
isolated cases of it may be to the world. 'Do nothing' is
the last word of social science, as 'Nil admirari' was its
first. Just as silence is less self-contradictory than speech,
so is inaction a safer foundation of fame than action. Inaction
is perfect. The moment you do anything you are
in the region of incompleteness, of definiteness. Your
work may be outdone—or undone. Your inventions may
be improved upon, your victories annulled, your popular
books ridiculed, your theories superseded, your paintings
decried, the seamy side of your explanations shown up.
Successful doing creates not only enemies but the material
for their malice to work upon. Only by not having done
anything to deserve success can you be sure of surviving
the reaction which success always brings. To be is
higher than to do. To be is calm, large, elemental; to
do is trivial, artificial, fussy. To be has been the moth of
[pg 40]
the English aristocracy, it is the secret of their persistence.
Qui s'excuse s'accuse. He who strives to justify
his existence imperils it. To be is inexpugnable, to do
is dangerous. The same principle rules in all departments
of social life. What is a successful reception? A gathering
at which everybody is. Nobody does anything. Nobody
enjoys anything. There everybody is—if only for
five minutes each, and whatever the crush and discomfort.
You are there—and there you are, don't you know?
What is a social lion? A man who is everywhere. What
is social ambition? A desire to be in better people's
drawing-rooms. What is it for which people barter health,
happiness, even honor? To be on certain pieces of flooring
inaccessible to the mass. What is the glory of doing
compared with the glory of being? Let others elect to
do, I elect to be."
"So long as you do not choose to be my husband——"
"It is husband or brother," he said, threateningly.
"Of course. I become your sister by rejecting you, do
I not?"
"Don't trifle. You understand what I mean. I will
let the world know that your mother is mine."
They stood looking at each other in silent defiance.
At last Clorinda spoke:
"A compromise! let the world know that my mother is
yours."
"I see. Pose as your brother!"
"Yes. That will help you up a good many rungs. I
shall not deny I am your sister. My mother will certainly
not deny that you are her son."
"Done! So long as my theories are not disproved.
Conjugate the verb 'to be,' and you shall be successful.
Let me see. How does it run? I am—your brother,
thou art—my sister, she is—my mother,—we are—her children,
you are—my womankind, they are—all spoofed."
[pg 41]
So the man in the Ironed Mask turned out to be the
brother of the great and good actress, Clorinda Bell.
And several people had known it all along, for what but
fraternal interest had taken him so often to the Lymarket?
And when his identity leaked out, Society ran after him,
and he gave the interviewers interesting details of his sister's
early years. And everyone spoke of his mother, and
of his solicitous attendance upon her. And in due course
the tale of his virtues reached a romantic young heiress
who wooed and won him. And so he continued being, till
he was—no more. By his own request they buried him
in an Ironed Mask, and put upon his tomb the profound
inscription
"Here Lies the Man Who Was."
And this was why Clorinda, disgusted with men and
lovers, and unable to marry her brother, caught at the
notion of the Old Maids' Club and called upon Lillie.
It was almost as good a cover as a mother, and it was
well to have something ready in case she lost her, as you
cannot obtain a second mother even on the hire system.
But Lord Silverdale's report consisted of one word,
"Dangerous!"—and he rejoiced at the whim which
enabled him thus to protect the impulsive little girl he
loved.
Clorinda divined from Lillie's embarrassment next day
that she was to be blackballed.
"I am afraid," she hastened to say, "that on second
thoughts I must withdraw my candidature, as I could not
make a practice of coming here without my mother."
Lillie referred to the rules. "Married women are admitted,"
she said simply. "I presume, therefore, your
mother——"
[pg 42]
"It's just like your presumption," interrupted Clorinda,
and flouncing angrily out of the Club, she invited a journalist
to tea.
Next day the Moon said she was going to join the Old
Maids' Club.
[pg 43]
THE CLUB GETS ADVERTISED.
"I see you have disregarded my ruling, Miss Dulcimer!"
said Lord Silverdale, pointing to the paragraph
in the Moon. "What is the use of my trying the candidates
if you're going to admit the plucked?"
"I am surprised at you, Lord Silverdale. I thought
you had more wisdom than to base a reproach on a Moon
paragraph. You might have known it was not true."
"That is not my experience, Miss Dulcimer. I do not
think a statement is necessarily false because it appears
in the newspapers. There is hardly a paper in which I
have not, at some time or other, come across a true piece
of news. Even the Moon is not all made of green
cheese."
"But you surely do not think I would accept Clorinda
Bell after your warning. Not but that I am astonished.
She assured me she was ice."
"Precisely. And so I marked her 'Dangerous.' Are
there any more candidates to-day?"
"Heaps and heaps! From all parts of the kingdom
letters have come from ladies anxious to become Old
Maids. There is even one application from Paris. Ought
I to entertain that?"
"Certainly. Candidates may hail from anywhere—excepting
naturally the United States.
[pg 44]
"But what, I wonder, has caused this tide of applications?"
"The Moon, of course. The fiction that Clorinda Bell
intended to take the secular veil has attracted all these
imitators. She has given the Club a good advertisement
in endeavoring merely to give herself one."
"You suspect her, then, of being herself responsible
for the statement that she was going to join the Club?"
"No. I am sure of it. Who but herself knew that she
was not?"
"I can hardly imagine that she would employ such
base arts."
"Higher arts are out of employment nowadays."
"Is there any way of finding out?"
"I am afraid not. She has no bosom friends. Stay—there
is her mother!"
"Mothers do not tell their daughters' secrets. They
do not know them."
"Well, there's her brother. I was introduced to him
the other day at Mrs. Leo Hunter's. But he seems such
a reticent chap. Only opens his mouth twice an hour,
and then merely to show his teeth. Oh, I know! I'll
get at the Moon man. My aunt, the philanthropist, who
is quite a journalist (sends so many paragraphs round
about herself, you know), will tell me who invents that
sort of news, and I'll interview the beggar."
"Yes, won't it be fun to run her to earth?" said Lillie
gleefully.
Silverdale took advantage of her good-humor.
"I hope the discovery of the baseness of your sex will
turn you again to mine." There was a pleading tenderness
in his eyes.
"What! to your baseness? I thought you were so
good."
"I am no good without you," he said boldly.
[pg 45]
"Oh, that is too rich! Suppose I had never been
born?"
"I should have wished I hadn't."
"But you wouldn't have known I hadn't."
"You're getting too metaphysical for my limited understanding."
"Nonsense, you understand metaphysics as well as I
do."
"Do not disparage yourself. You know I cannot
endure metaphysics."
"Why not?"
"Because they are mostly made in Germany. And all
Germans write as if their aim was to be misunderstood.
Listen to my simple English lay."
"Another love-song to Chloe?"
"No, a really great poem, suggested by the number of
papers and poems I have already seen this Moon paragraph
in."
He took down the banjo, thrummed it, and sang:
THE GRAND PARAGRAPHIC TOUR.
[pg 46]
[pg 47]
"That is what will happen with Clorinda Bell's membership
of our club," continued the poet. "She will remain
a member long after it has ceased to exist. Once a thing
has appeared in print, you cannot destroy it. A published
lie is immortal. Age cannot wither it, nor custom stale its
infinite variety. It thrives by contradiction. Give me a
cup of tea and I will go and interview the Moon-man at
once."
The millionaire, hearing tea was on the tray, came in to
join them, and Silverdale soon went off to his aunt, Lady
Goody-Goody Twoshoes, and got the address of the man
in the Moon.
"Lillie, what's this I see in the Moon about Clorinda
Bell joining your Club?" asked the millionaire.
"An invention, father."
The millionaire looked disappointed.
"Will all your Old Maids be young?"
"Yes, papa. It is best to catch them young."
"I shall be dining at the Club sometimes," he announced
irrelevantly.
"Oh, no, papa. You are not admissible during the sittings."
"Why? You let Lord Silverdale in."
"Yes, but he is not married."
"Oh!" and the millionaire went away with brighter
brow.
The Millionaire.
[pg 48]
The rest of the afternoon Lillie was busy conducting the
Preliminary Examination of a surpassingly beautiful girl
who answered to the name of "Princess," and would give
no other name for the
present, not even to Turple
the magnificent.
"You got my letter,
I suppose?" asked the
Princess.
"Oh, yes," said the
President. "I should
have written to you."
"I thought it best to
come and see you about
it at once, as I have
suddenly determined to
go to Brighton, and I
don't know when I may
be back. I had not
heard of your Club till
the other day, when I
saw in the Moon that
Clorinda Bell was going
to join it, and anything
she joins must of course
be strictly proper, so I
haven't troubled to ask
the Honorable Miss
Primpole's advice—she
lives with me, you know. An only orphan cannot be too
careful!"
"You need not fear," said Lillie. "Miss Bell is not to
be a member. We have refused her."
"Oh, indeed! Well, perhaps it is as well not to bring
the scent of the footlights over the Club. It is hard upon
[pg 49]
Miss Bell, but if you were to admit her, I suppose other
actresses would want to come in. There are so many of
them that prefer to remain single."
"Are you sure you do?"
"Positive. My experience of lovers has been so harassing
and peculiar that I shall never marry, and as my best
friends cannot call me a wall-flower, I venture to think you
will find me a valuable ally in your noble campaign against
the degrading superstition that Old Maids are women who
have not found husbands, just as widows are women who
have lost them."
"I sincerely hope so," said Lillie enthusiastically.
"You express my views very neatly. May I ask what are
the peculiar experiences you speak of?"
"Certainly. Some months ago I amused myself by recording
the strange episodes of my first loves, and in anticipation
of your request I have brought the manuscript."
"Oh, please read it!" said Lillie excitedly.
"Of course I have not given the real names."
"No, I quite understand. Won't you have a chocolate
cream before you commence?"
"Thank you. They look lovely. How awfully sweet!"
"Too sweet for you?" inquired Lillie anxiously.
"No, no. I mean they are just nice."
The Princess untied the pretty pink ribbon that enfolded
the dainty, scented manuscript, and pausing only to munch
an occasional chocolate cream, she read on till the shades
of evening fell over the Old Maids' Club and the soft glow
of the candles illuminated its dainty complexion.
[pg 50]
"THE PRINCESS OF PORTMAN SQUARE."
I am an only child. I was born with a silver spoon in
my mouth, and although there was no royal crest on it, yet
no princess could be more comfortable in the purple than
I was in the ordinary trappings of babyhood. From the
cradle upwards I was surrounded with love and luxury.
My pet name "Princess" fitted me like a glove. I was
the autocrat of the nursery and my power scarce diminished
when I rose to the drawing-room. My parents were very
obedient and did not even conceal from me that I was
beautiful. In short they did their best to spoil me, though
I cannot admit that they succeeded. I lost them both
before I was sixteen. My poor mother died first and my
poor father followed within a week; whether from grief or
from a cold caught through standing bareheaded in the
churchyard, or from employing the same doctor, I cannot
precisely determine.
After the usual period of sorrow, I began to pick up a
bit and to go out under the care of my duenna, a faded
flower of the aristocracy whose declining years my guardian
had soothed by quartering her on me. She was a
gentle old spinster, the seventh daughter of a penniless
peer, and although she has seen hard times and has almost
been reduced to marriage, yet she has scant respect for
my ten thousand a year. She has never lost the sense of
condescension in living with me, and would be horrified
to hear she is in receipt of a salary. It is to this sense of
[pg 51]
superiority on her part that I owe a good deal of the liberty
I enjoy under her régime. She does not expect in me that
rigid obedience to venerable forms and conventions which
she. prescribes for herself; she regards it as a privilege of
the higher gentlewoman to be bound hand and foot by
fashionable etiquette, and so long as my liberty does not
degenerate into license I am welcome to as much as I please
of it. She has continued to call me "Princess," finding
doubtless some faint reverberation of pleasure in the magnificent
syllables. I should add that her name is the
Honorable Miss Primpole and that she is not afraid of
the butler.
Our town-house was situated in Portman Square and my
parents tenanted it during the season. There is nothing
very poetic about the Square, perhaps, not even in the
summer, when the garden is in bloom, yet it was here that
I first learnt to love. This dull parallelogram was the
birthplace of a passion as spiritual and intangible as ever
thrilled maiden's heart. I fell in love with a Voice.
It was a rich, baritone Voice, with a compass of two
and a half octaves, rising from full bass organ-notes to
sweet, flute-like tenor tones. It was a glorious Voice, now
resonant with martial ecstasy, now faint with mystic
rapture. Its vibrations were charged with inexpressible
emotion, and it sang of love and death and high heroic
themes. I heard it first a few months after my father's
funeral. It was night. I had been indoors all day, torpid
and miserable, but roused myself at last and took a few
turns in the square. The air was warm and scented, a
cloudless moon flooded the roadway with mellow light and
sketched in the silhouettes of the trees in the background.
I had reached the opposite side of the square for the
second time when the Voice broke out. My heart stood
still and I with it.
On the soft summer air the Voice rose and fell; it was
[pg 52]
accompanied on the piano, but it seemed in subtler harmony
with the moonlight and the perfumed repose of the
night. It came through an open window behind which
the singer sat in the gloaming. With the first tremors of
that Voice my soul forgot its weariness in a strange sweet
trance that trembled on pain. The song seemed to draw
out all the hidden longing of my maiden soul, as secret
writing is made legible by fire. When the Voice ceased,
a great blackness fell upon all things, the air grew bleak.
I waited and waited but the Square remained silent. The
footsteps of stray pedestrians, the occasional roll of a
carriage alone fell on my anxious ear. I returned to my
house, shivering as with cold. I had never loved before.
I had read and reflected a great deal about love, and was
absolutely ignorant of the subject. I did not know that I
loved now—for that discover only came later when I
found myself wandering nightly to the other side of the
parallelogram, listening for the Voice. Rarely, very
rarely, was my pilgrimage rewarded, but twice or thrice a
week the Square became an enchanted garden, full of
roses whose petals were music. Round that baritone
Voice I had built up an ideal man—tall and straight-limbed
and stalwart, fair-haired and blue-eyed and noble-featured,
like the hero of a Northern Saga. His soul was
vast as the sea, shaken with the storms of passion, dimpled
with smiles of tenderness. His spirit was at once
mighty and delicate, throbbing with elemental forces yet
keen and swift to comprehend all subtleties of thought
and feeling. I could not understand myself, yet I felt
that he would understand me. He had the heart of a
lion and of a little child; he was as merciful as he was
strong, as pure as he was wise. To be with him were
happiness, to feel his kiss ecstasy, to be gathered to his
breast, delirium, But alas! he never knew that I was
waiting under his window.
[pg 53]
I made several abortive attempts to discover who he
was or to see him. According to the Directory the house
was occupied by Lady Westerton. I concluded that he
was her elder son. That he might be her husband—or
some other lady's—never even occurred to me. I do not
know why I should have attached the Voice to a bachelor,
any more than I can explain why he should be the eldest
son, rather than the youngest. But romance has a logic
of its own. From the topmost window of my house I
could see Lady Westerton's house across the trees, but I
never saw him leave or enter it. Once, a week went by
without my hearing him sing. I did not know whether to
think of him as a sick bird or as one flown to warmer
climes. I tried to construct his life from his periods of
song, I watched the lights in his window, my whole life
circled round him. It was only when I grew pale and
feverish and was forced by the doctors and my guardian
to go yachting that my fancies gradually detached themselves
from my blue-eyed hero. The sea-salt freshened
my thoughts, I became a healthy-minded girl again,
carolling joyously in my cabin and taking pleasure in
listening to my own voice. I threw my novels overboard
(metaphorically, that is) and set the Hon. Miss Primpole
chatting instead, when the seascape palled upon me. She
had a great fund of strictly respectable memories. Most
people's recollections are of no use to anybody but the
owner, but hers afforded entertainment for both of us. By
the time I was back in London the Voice was no longer
part even of my dreams, though it seemed to belong to
them. But for accident it might have remained forever
"a voice and nothing more." The accident happened at
a musical-afternoon in Kensington. I was introduced
to a tall, fair, handsome blue-eyed guardsman, Captain
Athelstan by name. His conversation was charming and
I took a lot of it, while Miss Primpole was busy flirting
[pg 54]
with a seductive Spaniard. You could not tell Miss
Primpole was flirting except by looking at the man. In
the course of the afternoon the hostess asked the captain
to sing. As he went to the piano my heart began to
flutter with a strange foreboding. He had no music with
him, but plunged at once into the promontory chords.
My agitation increased tenfold. He was playing the
prelude to one of the Voice's songs—a strange, haunting
song with a Schubert atmosphere, a song which I had
looked for in vain among the classics. At once he was
transfigured to my eyes, all my sleeping romantic fancies
woke to delicious life, and in the instant in which I waited,
with bated breath, for the outbreak of the Voice at the well-known
turn of the melody, it was borne in upon me that
this was the only man I had ever loved or would ever
love. My Saga hero! my Berserker, my Norse giant!
Miss Primpole was flirting with a seductive Spaniard.
When the Voice started it was not my Voice. It was a
thin, throaty tenor. Compared with the Voice of Portman
Square, it was as a tinkling rivulet to a rushing full-volumed
river. I sank back on the lounge, hiding my
emotions behind my fan.
When the song was finished, he made his way through
the "Bravas" to my side.
"Sweetly pretty!" I murmured.
"The song or the singing?" he asked with a smile.
"The song," I answered frankly. "Is it yours?"
"No, but the singing is!"
His good-humor was so delightful that I forgave his not
having my Voice.
"What is its name?"
"It is anonymous—like the composer."
"Who is he?"
"I must not tell."
"Can you give me a copy of the song?"
He became embarrassed.
[pg 56]
"I would with pleasure, if it were mine. But the fact is—I—I—had
no right to sing it at all, and the composer
would be awfully vexed if he knew."
"Original composer?"
"He is, indeed. He cannot bear to think of his songs
being sung in public."
"Dear me! What a terrible mystery you are making of
it," I laughed.
"O r-really there is no abracadabra about it. You
misunderstand me. But I deserve it all for breaking
faith and exploiting his lovely song so as to drown my
beastly singing."
"You need not reproach yourself," I said. "I have
heard it before."
He started perceptibly. "Impossible," he gasped.
"Thank you," I said freezingly.
"But how?"
"A little bird sang it me."
"It is you who are making the mystery now."
"Tit for tat. But I will discover yours."
"Not unless you are a witch!"
"A what?"
"A witch."
"I am," I said enigmatically. "So you see it's of no
use hiding anything from me. Come, tell me all, or I will
belabor you with my broomstick."
"If you know, why should I tell you?"
"I want to see if you can tell the truth."
"No, I can't." We both laughed. "See what a cruel
dilemma you place me in!" he said beseechingly.
"Tell me, at least, why he won't publish his songs. Is
he too modest, too timid?"
"Neither. He loves art for art's sake—that is all."
"I don't understand."
"He writes to please himself. To create music is his
[pg 57]
highest pleasure. He can't see what it has got to do with
anybody else."
"But surely he wants the world to enjoy his work?"
"Why? That would be art for the world's sake, art
for fame's sake, art for money's sake!"
"What an extraordinary view!"
"Why so? The true artist—the man to whom creation
is rapture—surely he is his own world. Unless he is
in need of money, why should he concern himself with the
outside universe? My friend cannot understand why
Schopenhauer should have troubled himself to chisel
epigrams or Leopardi lyrics to tell people that life was not
worth living. Had either been a true artist, he would
have gone on living his own worthless life, unruffled by
the applause of the mob. My friend can understand a poet
translating into inspired song the sacred secrets of his soul,
but he cannot understand his scattering them broad-cast
through the country, still less taking a royalty on them.
He says it is selling your soul in the market-place, and
almost as degrading as going on the stage."
"And do you agree with him?"
"Not entirely, otherwise I should never have yielded to
the temptation to sing his song to-night. Fortunately he
will never hear of it. He never goes into society, and I
am his only friend."
"Dear me!" I said sarcastically. "Is he as careful
to conceal his body as his soul?"
His face grew grave. "He has an affliction," he said
in low tones.
"Oh, forgive me!" I said remorsefully. Tears came
into my eyes as the vision of the Norse giant gave away
to that of an English hunchback. My adoring worship
was transformed to an adoring matronly tenderness.
Divinely-gifted sufferer, if I cannot lean on thy strength,
thou shalt lean on mine! So ran my thought till the mist
[pg 58]
cleared from my eyes and I saw again the glorious Saga-hero
at my side, and grew strangely confused and distraught.
"There is nothing to forgive," answered Captain Athelstan.
"You did not know him."
"You forget I am a witch. But I do not know him—it
is true. I do not even know his name. Yet within a
week I undertake to become a friend of his."
He shook his head. "You do not know him."
"I admitted that," I answered pertly. "Give me a week,
and he shall not only know me, he shall abjure those sublime
principles of his at my request."
The spirit of mischief moved me to throw down the
challenge. Or was it some deeper impulse?
He smiled sceptically.
"Of course if you know somebody who will introduce
you," he began.
"Nobody shall introduce me," I interrupted.
"Well, he'll never speak to you first."
"You mean it would be unmaidenly for me to speak to
him first. Well, I will bind myself to do nothing of
which Mrs. Grundy would disapprove. And yet the result
shall be as I say."
"Then I shall admit you are indeed a witch."
"You don't believe in my power, that is. Well, what
will you wager?"
"If you achieve your impossibility, you will deserve
anything."
"Will you back your incredulity with a pair of gloves?"
"With a hundred."
"Thank you. I am not a Briareus. Let us say one
pair then."
"So be it."
"But no countermining. Promise me not to communicate
with your mysterious friend in the interval."
[pg 59]
"I promise."
"But how shall I know the result?"
I pondered. "I will write—no, that would be hardly
proper. Meet me in the Royal Academy, Room Six, at the
'Portrait of a Gentleman,' about noon to-morrow week."
"A week is a long time!" he sighed.
I arched my eyebrows. "A week a long time for such
a task!" I exclaimed.
Next day I called at the house of the Voice. A gorgeous
creature in plush opened the door.
"I want to see—to see—gracious! I've forgotten his
name," I said in patent chagrin. I clucked my tongue,
puckered my lips, tapped the step with my parasol, then
smiled pitifully at the creature in plush. He turned out
to be only human, for a responsive sympathetic smile
flickered across his pompous face. "You know—the
singer," I said, as if with a sudden inspiration.
"Oh. Lord Arthur!" he said.
"Yes, of course," I cried, with a little trill of laughter.
"How stupid of me! Please tell him I want to see him
on an important matter."
"He—he's very busy, I'm afraid, miss."
"Oh, but he'll see me," I said confidently.
"Yes, miss; who shall I say, miss?"
"The Princess."
He made a startled obeisance, and ushered me into a
little room on the right of the hall. In a few moments he
returned and said—"His lordship will be down in a second,
your highness."
Sixty minutes seemed to go to that second, so racked
was I with curiosity. At last I heard a step outside and
a hand on the door, and at that moment a horrible thought
flashed into my mind. What certainty was there my
singer was a hunchback? Suppose his affliction were
something more loathly. What if he had a monstrous
[pg 60]
wen! For the instant after his entry I was afraid to look
up. When I did, I saw a short, dark-haired young man,
with proper limbs and refined features. But his face wore
a blank expression, and I wondered why I had not divined
before that my musician was blind!
He bowed and advanced towards me. He came straight
in my direction so that I saw he could see. The blank
expression gave place to one of inquiry.
"I have ventured to call upon your lordship in reference
to a Charity Concert," I said sweetly; "I am one of
your neighbors, living just across the square, and as the
good work is to be done in this district, I dared to hope that
I could persuade you to take part in it."
I happened to catch sight of my face in the glass of a
chiffonier as I spoke, and it was as pure and candid and
beautiful as the face of one of Guido's angels. When I
ceased, I looked up at Lord Arthur's. It was spasmodically
agitated, the mouth was working wildly. A nervous
dread seized me.
After what seemed an endless interval, he uttered an
explosive "Put!" following it up by "f-f-f-f-f-f-f-f-or two
g-g-g-g-g-g-g-g——"
"It is very kind of you," I interrupted mercifully.
"But I did not propose to ask you for a subscription. I
wanted to enlist your services as a performer. But I fear
I have made a mistake. I understood you sang." Inwardly
I was furious with the stupid creature in plush for
having misled me into such an unpleasant situation.
"I d-d-d-o s-s-s-s-s——" he answered.
As he stood there hissing, the truth flashed upon me at
last. I had heard that the most dreadful stammerers enunciate
as easily as anybody else when they sing, because the
measured swing of the time keeps them steady. My heart
sank as I thought of the Voice so mutilated! Poor young
peer! Was this to be the end of all my beautiful visions?
[pg 61]
As cheerfully as I could I cut short his sibilations.
"Oh, that's all right, then," I said. "Then I may put
you down for a couple of items."
He shook his head, and held up his hands deprecatingly.
"Anything but that!" he stammered; "Make me a
patron, a committee-man, anything! I do not sing in
public."
While he was saying this I thought long and deeply.
The affliction was after all less terrible than I had a right
to expect, and I knew from the advertisement columns that
it was easily curable. Demosthenes, I remembered, had
stoned it to death. I felt my love reviving, as I looked
into his troubled face, instinct with the double aristocracy
of rank and genius. At the worst the singing Voice was
unaffected by the disability, and as for the conversational,
well there was consolation in the prospect of having the
last word while one's husband was still having the first.
En attendant, I could have wished him to sing his replies
instead of speaking them, for not only should I thus enjoy
his Voice but the interchange of ideas would proceed less
tardily. However that would have made him into an operatic
personage, and I did not want him to look so ridiculous
as all that.
It would be tedious to recount our interview at the
length it extended to. Suffice it to say that I gained my
point. Without letting out that I knew of his theories of
art for art's sake, I yet artfully pleaded that whatever one's
views, charity alters cases, inverts everything, justifies
anything. "For instance," I said with charming naďveté,
"I would not have dared to call on you but in its sacred
name." He agreed to sing two songs—nay, two of his
own songs. I was to write to him particulars of time and
place. He saw me to the door. I held out my hand and
he took it, and we looked at each other, smiling brightly.
[pg 62]
"B-but I d-d-d-don't know your n-n-name," he said suddenly.
"P-p-p-rincess what?"
He spoke more fluently, now he had regained his composure.
"Princess," I answered, my eyes gleaming merrily.
"That is all. The Honorable Miss Primpole will give
me a character, if you require one." He laughed—his
laugh was like the Voice—and followed me with his eyes
as I glided away.
I had won my gloves—and in a day. I thought remorsefully
of the poor Saga hero destined to wait a week in suspense
as to the result. But it was too late to remedy this,
and the organization of the Charity Concert needed all my
thoughts. I was in for it now, and I resolved to carry it
through. But it was not so easy as I had lightly assumed.
Getting the artists, of course, was nothing—there are always
so many professionals out of work or anxious to be brought
out, and so many amateurs in search of amusement. I
could have filled the Albert Hall with entertainers. Nor
did I anticipate any difficulty in disposing of the tickets.
If you are at all popular in society you can get a good deal
of unpopularity by forcing them on your friends. No, the
real difficulty about this Charity Concert was the discovery
of an object in aid of which to give it. In my innocence
I had imagined that the world was simply bustling
with unexploited opportunities for well-doing. Alas!
I soon found that philanthropy was an over-crowded profession.
There was not a single nook or corner of the universe
but had been ransacked by these restless free-lances;
not a gap, not a cranny but had been filled up. In vain I
explored the map, in the hopes of lighting on some undiscovered
hunting-ground in far Cathay or where the khamsin
sweeps the Afric deserts. I found that the wants of the
most benighted savages were carefully attended to, and
that, even when they had none, they were thoughtfully
[pg 63]
supplied with them. Anxiously I scanned the newspapers
in search of a calamity, the sufferers by which I might relieve,
but only one happened during that week, and that
was snatched from between my very fingers by a lady who
had just been through the Divorce Court. In my despair
I bethought myself of the preacher I sat under. He was
a very handsome man, and published his sermons by
request.
I went to him and I said: "How is the church?"
"It is all right, thank you," he said.
"Doesn't it want anything done to it?"
"No, it is in perfect repair. My congregation is so very
good."
I groaned aloud. "But isn't there any improvement that
you would like?"
"The last of the gargoyles was put up last week. Medićval
architecture is always so picturesque. I have had
the entire structure made medićval, you know."
"But isn't the outside in need of renovation?"
"What! When I have just had it made medićval!"
"But the interior—there must be something defective
somewhere!"
"Not to my knowledge."
"But think! think!" I cried desperately. "The aisles—transept—nave—lectern—pews—chancel—pulpit—apse—porch—altar-cloths—organ—spires—is
there nothing
in need of anything?"
He shook his head.
"Wouldn't you like a colored window to somebody?"
"All the windows are taken up. My congregation is so
very good."
"A memorial brass then?"
He mused.
"There is only one of my flock who has done anything
memorable lately."
[pg 64]
My heart gave a great leap of joy. "Then why do you
neglect him?" I asked indignantly. "If we do not perpetuate
the memory of virtue——"
"He's alive," he interrupted.
I bit my lips in vexation.
"I think you need a few more choristers," I murmured.
"Oh no, we are sending some away."
"The Sunday School Fund—how is that?"
"I am looking about for a good investment for the surplus.
Do you know of any? A good mortgage, perhaps?"
"Is there none on the church?" I cried with a flicker
of hope.
"Heaven forbid!"
I cudgelled my brains frantically.
"What do you think of a lightning-rod!"
"A premier necessity. I never preach in a building
unprotected by one."
I made one last wild search.
"How about a reredos?"
He looked at me in awful, pained silence.
I saw I had stumbled. "I—I mean a new wing," I
stammered.
"I am afraid you are not well this morning," said the
preacher, patting my hand soothingly. "Won't you come
and talk it over, whatever it is, another time?"
"No, no," I cried excitedly. "It must be settled at
once. I have it. A new peal of bells!"
"What is the matter with the bells?" he asked anxiously.
"There isn't a single one cracked."
I saw his dubiety, and profited by it. I learnt afterwards
it was due to his having no ear of his own.
"Cracked! Perhaps not," I replied in contemptuous
accents. "But they deserve to be. No wonder the newspapers
keep correspondences going on the subject."
[pg 65]
"Yes, but what correspondents object to is the bells
ringing at all."
"I don't wonder," I said. "I don't say your bells are
worse than the majority, or that I haven't got a specially
sensitive ear for music, but I know that when I hear
their harsh clanging, I—well I don't feel inclined to go
to church and that's the truth. I am quite sure if you
had a really musical set of chimes, it would increase the
spirituality of the neighborhood."
"How so?" he asked sceptically.
"It would keep down swearing on Sunday."
"Oh!" He pondered a moment, then said: "But that
would be a great expense."
"Indeed? I thought bells were cheap."
"Certainly. Area bells, hand-bells, sleigh-bells. But
Church-bells are very costly. There are only a few foundries
in the kingdom. But why are you so concerned
about my church?"
"Because I am giving a Charity Concert, and I should
like to devote the proceeds to something."
"A very exemplary desire. But I fear one bell is the
most you could get out of a Charity Concert."
I looked disappointed. "What a pity! It would have
been such a nice precedent to improve the tone of the
Church. The 'constant readers' would have had to cease
their letters."
"No, no, impossible. A 'constant reader' seems to be
so called because he is a constant writer."
"But there might have been leaders about it."
"Hardly sensational enough for that! Stay I have an
idea. In the beautiful Ages of Faith, when a Church-bell
was being cast, the pious used to bring silver vessels
to be fused with the bell-metal in the furnace, so as to
give the bell a finer tone. A medićval practice is always
[pg 66]
so poetical. Perhaps I could revive it. My congregation
is so very good."
"Good!" I echoed, clapping my hands.
"But a Concert will not suffice—we shall need a Bazaar,"
said the preacher.
"Oh, but I must have a Concert!"
"Certainly Bazaars include
Concerts."
How the Duchess wanted
to appear.
That was how the Great
Church Bazaar originated
and how the Rev. Melitos
Smith came to resurrect
the beautiful medićval
custom which brought him
so much kudos and extracted
such touching sentiments
from hardened
journalists. The Bazaar
lasted a week, and raised a
number of ladies in the
social scale, and married
off three of my girl-friends,
and cut me off the visiting
list of the Duchess of
Dash. She was pining for
a chance of coming out in
a comic opera chanson,
but this being a Church
Bazaar I couldn't allow her
to kick up her heels. Everything
could be bought at that Bazaar, from photographs
of the Rev. Melitos Smith to impracticable mouse-traps,
from bread-and-cheese to kisses. There were endless
side-shows, and six gipsy girls scattered about the rooms,
so that you could have your fortune told in six different
[pg 67]
ways. I should not like to say how much that Bazaar cost
me when the bill for the Bells came in, but then Lord Arthur
sang daily in the Concert Hall, and I could also deduct
the price of the pair of gloves Captain Athelstan gave me.
For the Captain honorably stood the loss of his wager, nay,
more, cheerfully accepted his defeat, and there on the spot—before
the "Portrait of another Gentleman"—offered
to enlist in the Bazaar. And very useful he proved, too.
We had to be together, organizing it, nearly all day and
I don't know what I should have done without him. I
don't know what his Regiment did without him, but then
I have never been able to find out when our gallant officers
do their work. They seem always to be saving it up for
a rainy day.
I was never more surprised in my life than when, on
the last night of the Bazaar-boom, amid the buzz of a
brisk wind-up, Lord Arthur and Captain Athelstan came
into the little presidential sanctum, which had been run
up for me, and requested a special interview.
"I can give you five minutes," I said, for I felt my
finger was on the pulse of the Bazaar, and my time correspondingly
important.
They looked grateful, then embarrassed. Captain
Athelstan opened his mouth and closed it.
"You had better tell her," he said, nervously, to Lord
Arthur.
"N-n-no, y-y-y-y——"
"What is it, Captain Athelstan?" I interrupted, pointedly,
for I had only five minutes.
"Princess, we both love you," began the Captain, blushing
like a hobbledehoy, and rushing in medias res. I
allowed them to call me Princess, because it was not my
Christian name.
"Is this the time—when I am busy feeling the pulse of
the Bazaar?"
[pg 68]
"You gave us five minutes," pleaded the Captain, determined
to do or die, now he was in the thick of it.
"Go on," I said, "I will forgive you everything—even
your love of me—if you are only brief."
"We both love you. We are great friends. We have
no secrets. We told each other. We are doubtful if you
love either—or which. We have come together."
He fired off the short, sharp sentences as from a six-barrelled
revolver.
"Captain Athelstan—Lord Arthur," I said. "I am
deeply touched by the honor you have done your friendship
and me. I will be equally frank—and brief—with
you. I cannot choose either of you, because I love you
both. Like every girl, I formed an ideal of a lover. I
have been fortunate in finding my ideal in the flesh. I
have been unfortunate in finding it in two pieces. Fate
has bisected it, and given the form to one and the voice
to the other. My ideal looks like you, Captain Athelstan,
and sings like you, Lord Arthur. It is a stupid position,
I know, and I feel like the donkey between two bundles
of hay. But under the circumstances I have no choice."
They looked at each other half-rapturously, half-despairingly.
"Then what's to be done?" cried the Captain.
"I don't know," I said, hopelessly. "Love seems not
only blind, but a blind alley, this time."
"D-do you m-m-ean," asked Lord Arthur, "'how happy
could I be with either, were t'other dear charmer away?'"
I was glad he sang it, because it precipitated matters.
"That is the precise position," I admitted.
"Oh, then, Arthur, my boy, I congratulate you," said
the Captain, huskily.
"N-n-no, I'll g-g-go away," said the singer.
They wrangled for full ten minutes, but the position
remained a block.
[pg 69]
Bazaar proposal of Marriage.
[pg 70]
"Gentlemen," I interposed, "if either of you had consented
to accept the other's sacrifice, the problem would
have been solved; only I should have taken the other.
But two self-sacrifices are as bad as none."
"Then let us toss up for you, Princess," said the Captain,
impulsively.
"Oh, no!" I cried, with a shudder. "Submit my life
to the chances of head or tail! It would make me
feel like a murderess, with you for gentlemen of the
jury."
A painful silence fell upon the sanctum. Unwitting of
the tragedy playing within, all the fun of the fair went on
without.
"Listen," I said, at last. "I will be the wife of him
who wins me. Chance shall not decide, but prowess.
Like the princesses of old, I will set you a task. Whoever
accomplishes it shall win my hand."
"Agreed," they said eagerly, though not simultaneously.
"Ay, but what shall it be?" I murmured.
"Why not a competition?" suggested the Captain.
"Very well, a competition—provided you promise to
fight fair, and not play into each other's hands."
They promised, and together we excogitated and rejected
all sorts of competitions. The difficulty was to
find something in which each would have a fair chance.
At length we arranged that they should play a game of
chess, the winner to be mated. They agreed it would be
a real "match game." The five minutes had by this time
lasted half an hour, so I dismissed them, and hastened to
feel the pulse of the Bazaar, which was getting more and
more feverish as the break-up drew nigh.
They played the game in Lord Arthur's study. Lord
Arthur was white and the Captain black. Everything was
fair and above board. But they played rather slowly.
Every evening I sent the butler over to make inquiries.
[pg 71]
"The Princess's compliments," he was told to say,
"and how is it to-day?"
"It is getting on," they told him, and he came back
with a glad face. He was a kind soul despite his calves,
and he thought there was a child dying.
Once a week I used to go over and look at it. Ostensibly
I called in connection with the Bazaar accounts. I
could not see any difference in the position from one
week's end to another. There seemed to be a clump of
pawns in the middle, with all the other pieces looking idly
on; there was no thoroughfare anywhere.
They told me it always came like that when you played
cautiously. They said it was a French opening. I could
not see any opening anywhere; it certainly was not the
English way of fighting. Picture my suspense during those
horrible weeks.
"Is this the way all match-games are played?" I said
once.
"N-n-o," admitted Lord Arthur. "We for-g-g-ot to
p-p-p-ut a t-t-t-t-t-time-limit."
"What's the time-limit?" I asked the Captain, wishing
my singer could learn to put one to his sentences.
"So many moves must be made in an hour—usually
fifteen. Otherwise the younger champion would always
win, merely by outliving the elder. We forgot to include
that condition."
At length our butler brought back word that "it couldn't
last much longer." His face was grave and he gave the
message in low tones.
"What a blessing. It's been lingering long enough!
I wish they would polish it off," I murmured fretfully.
After that I frequently caught him looking at me as if I
were Lucrezia Borgia.
The end came suddenly. The butler went across to make
the usual inquiry. He returned, with a foolish face of
[pg 72]
horror and whispered, "It is all over. It has been drawn
by perpetual check!"
"Great Heavens!" I cried. My consternation was
so manifest that he forgave the utterance of a peevish
moment. I put on my nicest hat at once and went over.
We held a council of war afresh.
"Let's go by who catches the biggest trout," suggested
the Captain.
"No," I said. "I will not be angled for. Besides, the
biggest is not grammatical. It should be the bigger."
Thus reproved, the Captain grew silent and we came
to a deadlock once more. I gave up the hunt at last.
"I think the best plan will be for you both to go away
and travel. Go round the world, see fresh faces, try to forget
me. One of you will succeed."
"But suppose we both succeed?" asked the Captain.
"That would be more awkward than ever," I admitted.
"And if neither succeed?" asked Lord Arthur at some
length.
"I should say neither succeeds," I remarked severely.
"Neither takes a singular verb."
"Pardon me," said Lord Arthur with some spirit. "The
plurality is merely apparent. 'Succeed' is subjunctive
after if."
"Ah, true," I said. "Then suppose you go round the
world and I give my hand to whoever comes back and
proposes to me first."
"Something like the man in Jules Verne!" cried the
Captain. "Glorious!"
"Except that it can be done quicker now," I said.
Lord Arthur fell in joyously with the idea, which was a
godsend to me, for the worry of having about you two
men whom you love and who love you cannot be easily
conceived by those who have not been through it. They,
too, were pining away and felt the journey would do them
[pg 73]
good. Captain Athelstan applied for three months' furlough.
He was to put a girdle round the earth from West
to East, Lord Arthur from East to West. It was thought
this would work fairly—as whatever advantages one outgoing
route had over the other would be lost on the return.
Each drew up his scheme and prepared his equipment.
The starting-point was to be my house, and consequently
this was also the goal. After forty-eight days had passed
(the minimum time possible) I was to remain at home day
and night, awaiting the telegram which was to be sent the
moment either touched English soil again. On the receipt
of the telegram I was to take up my position at the front
window on the ground floor, with a white rose in my hair
to show I was still unwon, and to wait there day and night
for the arrival of my offer of marriage, which I was not
to have the option of refusing. During the race they were
not to write to me.
The long-looked-for day of their departure duly arrived.
Two hansoms were drawn up side by side, in front of the
house. A white rose in my hair, I sat at the window. A
parting smile, a wave of my handkerchief, and my lovers
were off. In an instant they were out of sight. For a
month they were out of mind, too. After the exhausting
emotions I had undergone this period of my life was truly
halcyon. I banished my lovers from my memory and enjoyed
what was left of the season and of my girlish freedom.
In two months I should be an affianced wife and
it behoved me to make the best of my short span of spinsterhood.
The season waned, fashion drifted to Cowes,
I was left alone in empty London. Then my thoughts
went back to the two travellers. As day followed day,
my anxiety and curiosity mounted proportionately. The
forty-eight days went by, but there was no wire. They
passed slowly—oh, so slowly—into fifty, while I waited,
waited, from dawn to midnight, with ears pricked up, for
[pg 74]
that double rat-tat which came not or which came about
something else. The sands of September dribbled out,
and my fate still hung in the balance. I went about the
house like an unquiet spirit. In imagination I was seeing
those two men sweeping towards me—one from the East
of the world, one from the West. And there I stood, rooted
to the spot, while from either side a man was speeding inevitably
towards me, across oceans and continents, through
canals and tunnels, along deserts or rivers, pressing into
his service every human and animal force and every blind
energy that man had tamed. To my fevered imagination
I seemed to be between the jaws of a leviathan, which
were closing upon me at a terrific rate, yet which took days
to snap together, so wide were they apart, so gigantic was
the monster. Which of the jaws would touch me first?
The fifties mounted into the sixties, but there was no
telegram. The tension became intolerable. Again and
again I felt tempted to fly, but a lingering sense of honor
kept me to my post. On the sixty-first day my patience
was rewarded. Sitting at my window one morning I
saw a telegraph-boy sauntering along. He reached the
gate. He paused. I rushed to the door and down the steps,
seized the envelope and tore it frantically open.
"Coming, but suppose all over.—Arthur."
I leaned on the gate, half fainting. When I went to my
room, I read the wire again and noted it had been handed
in at Liverpool. In four or five hours at most I should
cease to belong to myself. I communicated the news to the
Honorable Miss Primpole who congratulated me cordially.
She made no secret of her joy that the nobleman had
won. For my part I was still torn with conflicting emotions.
Now that I knew it was to be the one, I hankered after
the other. Yet in the heart of the storm there was peace
[pg 75]
in the thought that the long suspense was over. I
ordered a magnificent repast to be laid for the home-coming
voyager, which would also serve to celebrate our
nuptials. The Honorable Miss Primpole consented to
grace the board and the butler to surrender the choicest
vintages garnered in my father's cellar.
Two hours and a half dragged by; then there came
another wire—I opened it with some curiosity, but as my
eye caught the words I almost swooned with excitement.
It ran:
"Arrived, but presume too late.—Athelstan."
With misty vision I strove to read the place of despatch.
It was Dover. A great wave of hope surged in my bosom.
My Saga-hero might yet arrive in time. Half frenziedly I
turned over the leaves of Bradshaw. No, after sending
that wire, he would just have missed the train to Victoria!
Cruel! Cruel! But stay! there was another
route. He might have booked for Charing Cross. Yes!
Heaven be praised, if he did that, he would just catch a
train. And of course he would do that—surely he would
have planned out every possibility while crossing the
Channel, have arranged for all—my Captain, my blue-eyed
Berserker! But then Lord Arthur had had two and a
half hours' start.—I turned to Liverpool and essayed to
discover whether that was sufficient to balance the difference
of the two distances from London. Alas! my head
swam before I had travelled two stations. There were
no less than four routes to Euston, to St. Pancras, to
King's Cross, to Paddington! Still I made out that if
he had kept his head very clear, and been very, very fortunate,
he might just get level with the Captain. But
then on a longer route the chances of accidental delays
were more numerous. On the whole the odds were
decidedly in favor of the Captain. But one thing was
[pg 76]
certain—that they would both arrive in time for supper.
I ordered an additional cover to be laid, then I threw myself
upon a couch and tried to read. But I could not.
Terrible as was the strain, my thoughts refused to be distracted.
The minutes crawled along—gradually peace
came back as I concluded that only by a miracle could
Lord Arthur win. At last I jumped up with a start, for
the shades of evening were falling and my toilette was
yet to make. I dressed myself in a dainty robe of white,
trimmed with sprays of wild flowers, and I stuck the white
rose in my hair—the symbol that I was yet unasked in
wedlock, the white star of hope to the way-worn wanderer!
I did my best to be the fairest sight the travellers should
have seen in all the world.
The Honorable Miss Primpole started when she saw
me. "What have you been doing to yourself, Princess?"
she said. "You're lovelier than I ever dreamed."
And indeed the crisis had lent a flush to my cheek and
a flash to my eye which I would not willingly repay.
My bosom rose and fell with excitement. In half an hour
I should be in my Saga-hero's arms! I went down to the
ground-floor front and seated myself at the open window
and gazed at the Square and the fiery streaks of sunset in
the sky. The Honorable Miss Primpole lay upon an ottoman,
less excited. Every now and again she asked,
"Do you see anything, Princess?"
"Nothing," I answered.
Of course she did not take my answer literally. Several
times cabs and carriages rattled past the window,
but with no visible intention of drawing up. Duskier,
duskier grew the September evening, as I sat peering into
the twilight.
"Do you see anything, Princess?"
"Nothing."
A moment after a hansom came dashing into sight—a
[pg 77]
head protruded from it. I uttered a cry and leant forward,
straining my eyes. Captain Athelstan. Yes! No! No!
Yes! No! No! Will it be believed that (such is the
heart of woman) I felt a sensation of relief on finding the
issue still postponed? For in the moment when the Captain
seemed to flash upon my vision—it was borne in
upon me like a chilling blast that I had lost my Voice.
Never would that glorious music swell for me as I sat
alone with my husband in the gloaming.
The streaks of sunset faded into gray ashes.
"Do you see anything, Princess?"
"Nothing."
Even as I spoke I heard the gallop of hoofs in the
quiet Square, and, half paralyzed by the unexpected vision,
I saw Lord Arthur dashing furiously up on horseback—Lord
Arthur, bronzed and bearded and travel-stained, but
Lord Arthur beyond a doubt. He took off his hat and
waved it frantically in the air when he caught sight of my
white figure, with the white rose of promise nestling in my
hair. My poor Saga-hero!
At the winning Post.
He reined in his beautiful steed before my window and
commenced his proposal breathlessly.
"W-w-w——"
Even Mr. Gladstone, if he had been racing as madly
as Lord Arthur might well have been flustered in his
speech. The poor singer could not get out the first word,
try as he would. At last it came out like a soda-water
cork and 'you' with it. But at the 'be' there was—O
dire to tell!—another stoppage.
"B-b-b-b-b——"
"Fire! Fire! Hooray!" The dull roar of an advancing
crowd burst suddenly upon our ears, mingled with the
piercing exultation of small boys. The thunderous clatter
of the fire-engine seemed to rock the soil of the Square.
But neither of us took eyes off the other.
[pg 78]
"Be!" It was out at last. The end was near. In
another second I should say "Yes."
"Fire! Fire!" shrieked the small boys.
"M-m-m-y——"
Lord Arthur's gallant steed shifted uneasily. The fire-engine
was thundering down upon it.
"W-w-w——"
"Will you be——" The clarion notes of the Captain
rang out above the clatter of the fire-engine from which he
madly jumped.
"Wife?" }
"Mine?" } the two travellers exclaimed together.
"Dead heat," I murmured, and fell back in a dead faint.
My overwrought nerves could stand no more.
Nevertheless it was a gay supper-party; the air was
thick with travellers' tales, and the butler did not spare the
champagne. We could not help being tickled by the
quaint termination of the colossal globe-trotting competition,
and we soothed Lord Arthur's susceptibilities by insisting
that if he had only remembered the shorter proposal
formula employed by his rival, he would have won
by a word. It was a pure fluke that the Captain was able
to tie, for he had not thought of telegraphing for a horse,
but had taken a hansom at the station, and only exchanged
to the fire-engine when he heard people shouting there was
a fire in Seymour Street. Lord Arthur obliged five times
during the evening, and the Honorable Miss Primpole relaxed
more than ever before and accompanied him on the
banjo. Before we parted, I had been persuaded by my
lovers to give them one last trial. That night three months
I was to give another magnificent repast, to which they
were both to be invited. During the interval each was to
do his best to become famous, and at the supper-party I
was to choose the one who was the more widely known
[pg 80]
throughout the length and breadth of the kingdom. They
were to place before me what proofs and arguments they
pleased, and I was to decide whose name had penetrated
to the greater number of people. There was to be no
appeal from my decision, nor any limitation to what the
candidates might do to force themselves upon the universal
consciousness, so
long as they did
not merely advertise
themselves at so
much a column or
poster. They could
safely be trusted
not to do anything
infamous in the attempt
to become famous,
and so there
was no need to impose
conditions. I
had a secret hope
that Lord Arthur
might thus be induced
to bring his
talents before the
world and get over
his objection to the
degradation of public
appearances. My
hope was more than
justified.
"Ba, ba, ba, boodle-dee."
I grieve to say neither strove to benefit his kind. His
lordship went on the music-hall stage, made up as a costermonger,
and devoted his wonderful voice and his musical
genius to singing a cockney ballad with a chorus consisting
merely of the words "Ba, ba, ba, boodle-dee" repeated
[pg 81]
sixteen times. It caught on like a first-class epidemic.
"Ba, ba, ba, boodle-dee" microbes floated in
every breeze. The cholera-chorus raged from Piccadilly
to Land's End, from Kensington to John o'Groats. The
swarthy miners hewed the coal to it. It dropped from
passing balloons, the sailors manned the capstan to it, and
the sound of it superseded fog-horns. Duchesses danced
to it, and squalid infants cried for it. Divines with difficulty
kept it out of their sermons, philosophers drew
weighty lessons from it, critics traced its history, and as
it didn't mean anything the greatest Puritans hummed it
inaccurately. "Ba, ba, ba, boodle-dee," sang Lord Arthur
nightly at six halls and three theatres, incidentally clearing
off all the debts on the family estates, and, like a flock
of sheep, the great British public took up the bleat, and in
every hall and drawing-room blossomed the big pearl
buttons of the cockney costermonger.
But Captain Athelstan came to the front far more easily,
if less profitably. He sent a testimonial to the Perfect
Cure Elixir. The Elixir was accustomed to testimonials
from the suffering millions. The spelling generally had to
be corrected before they were fit for publication. It also
received testimonials which were useless, such as: "I
took only one bottle of your Elixir and I got fourteen
days." But a testimonial from a Captain of the Guards
was a gold-mine. The Captain's was the best name the
Elixir had ever had, and he had enjoyed more diseases than
it had hitherto professed to cure. Astonished by its own
success the Elixir resolved to make a big spurt and kill off
all its rivals. For the next few months Captain Athelstan
was rammed down the throats of all England. He came
with the morning milk in all the daily papers, he arrived by
the first post in a circular, he stared at people from every
dead wall when they went out to business, he was with
them at lunch, in little plaques and placards in every
[pg 82]
restaurant, he nodded at them in every bar, rode with
them in every train and tram-car, either on the wall or on
the back of the ticket, joined them at dinner in the evening
papers and supplied the pipe lights after the meal.
You took up a magazine and found he had slipped
between the sheets, you went to bed and his diseased
figure haunted your dreams. Life lost its sweetness, literature
its charm. The loathsome phantasm of the complexly-afflicted
Captain got between you and the sunshine.
Stiff examination papers (compiled from the Captain)
were set at every breakfast-table, and you were sternly
interrogated as to whether you felt an all-gone sensation
at the tip of your nose, and you were earnestly adjured to
look at your old diseases. You began to read an eloquent
description of the Alps, and lo! there was the Captain
perched on top. You started a thrilling story of the sea,
and the Captain bobbed up from the bottom; you began
a poetical allegory concerning the Valley of the Shadow,
and you found the Captain had been living there all his
life—till he came upon the Elixir. A little innocent
child remarked, "Pater, it is almost bath-time," and you
felt for your handkerchief in view of a touching domestic
idyl, but the Captain froze your tears. "Why have sunstroke
in India?" you were asked, and the Captain supplied
the answer. Something came like a thief in the
night. It was the Captain. You were startled to see
that there was "A Blight Over All Creation," but it
turned out to be only the Captain. Everything abutted
on the Captain—Shakespeare and the musical glasses,
the Venus of Milo and the Mikado, Day and Night and
all the seasons, the potato harvest and the Durham Coal
Strike, the advantages of early rising, and the American
Copyright Act. He was at the bottom of every passage,
he lurked in every avenue, he was at the end of every
perspective. The whole world was familiar with his
[pg 83]
physical symptoms, and his sad history. The exploits of
Julius Cćsar were but a blur in the common mind, but
everybody knew that the Captain's skin grew Gobelin blue,
that the whites of his eyes turned green, and his tongue
stuck in his cheek, and that the rest of his organism
behaved with corresponding gruesomeness. Everybody
knew how they dropped off, "petrified by my breath," and
how his sympathetic friends told him in large capitals
"You will never get better, Captain,"
and how his weeping mother, anxious to soothe his last
hours, remarked in reply to a request for another box of
somebody else's pills,
"The only box you'll ever want will be a Coffin,"
and how
"He thought it was only Cholera,"
but how one dose of the Elixir (which new-born babies
clamored for in preference to their mother's milk) had
baffled all their prognostications and made him a celebrity
for life. In private the Captain said that he really had
these ailments, though he only discovered the fact when
he read the advertisements of the Elixir. But the Mess
had an inkling that it was all done for a wager, and christened
him "The Perfect Cure." To me he justified himself
on the ground that he had scrupulously described
himself as having his tongue in his cheek, and that he
really suffered from love-sickness, which was worse than
all the ills the Elixir cured.
I need scarcely say that I was shocked by my lovers'
practical methods of acquiring that renown for which so
many gifted souls have yearned in vain, though I must
admit that both gentlemen retained sufficient sense of
decorum to be revolted by the other's course of action.
[pg 84]
They remonstrated with each other gently but firmly.
The result was that their friendship snapped and a week
before the close of the competition they crossed the Channel
to fight a duel. I got to hear of it in time and wired
to Boulogne that if they killed each other I would marry
neither, that if only one survived I would never marry my
lover's murderer, and that a duel excited so much gossip
that, if both survived, they would be equally famous and
the competition again a failure.
These simple considerations prevented any mishap.
The Captain returned to his Regiment and Lord Arthur
went on to the Riviera to while away the few remaining
days and to get extra advertisement out of not appearing
at his halls through indisposition. At Monte Carlo he
accidentally broke the bank, and explained his system to
the interviewers. To my chagrin, for I was tired of see-sawing,
this brought him level with the Captain again. I
had been prepared to adjudicate in favour of the latter,
on the ground that although "Ba, ba, ba, boodle-dee"
was better known than the Patent Cure Elixir, yet the
originator of the song remained unknown to many to
whom the Captain was a household word, and this in
despite of the extra attention secured to Lord Arthur by
his rank. The second supper-party was again sicklied
over with the pale cast of thought.
"No more competitions!" I said. "You seem destined
to tie with each other instead of with me. I will return
to my original idea. I will give you a task which it is not
likely both will perform. I will marry the man who asks
me, provided he comes, neither walking nor riding, neither
sailing nor driving, neither skating nor sliding nor flying,
neither by boat nor by balloon nor by bicycle, neither by
swimming nor by floating nor by anybody carrying or dragging
or pushing him, neither by any movement of hand
or foot nor by any extraordinary method whatever. Till
[pg 85]
this is achieved neither of you must look upon my face
again."
"They looked aghast when I set the task. They went
away and I have not seen them from that day to this. I
shall never marry now. So I may as well devote myself
to the cause of the Old Maids you are so nobly championing."
She rolled up the MS.
"But," said Lillie excitedly, breaking in for the first
time, "what is the way you want them to come?"
The Princess laughed a silvery laugh.
"No way. Don't you understand? It was a roundabout
way of saying I was tired of them."
"Oh!" said Lillie.
"You see, I got the idea from a fairy-tale," said the
Princess. "There, the doer evaded the conditions by being
dragged at a horse's tail—I have guarded against this,
so that now the thing is impossible." Again her mischievous
laughter rang out through the misanthropic room.
Lillie smiled, too. She felt certain Lord Silverdale would
find no flaw in the Princess's armor, and she was exultant
at so auspicious an accession. For the sake of formality,
however, she told her that she would communicate her
election by letter.
The next day a telegram came to the Club.
"Compelled to withdraw candidature. Feat accomplished.
Princess, Hotel Metropole, Brighton."
Equally aghast and excited, Lillie wired back, "How?"
and prepaid the reply.
"Lover happened to be here. Came up in lift as I was
waiting to go down."
Still intensely piqued by curiosity and vexation, Lillie
telegraphed.
"Which?"
"Leave you to guess," answered the electric current.
[pg 86]
THE GRAMMAR OF LOVE.
The Moon-man's name was Wilkins, and he did nine-tenths
of the interviews in that model of the new journalism.
Wilkins was the man to catch the weasel asleep, hit
off his features with a kodak, and badger him the moment
he awoke as to why he popped. Wilkins lived in a flat
in Chancery Lane, and had his whiskey and his feet on the
table when Silverdale turned the handle of the door in the
gloaming.
"What do you want?" said Wilkins gruffly.
"I have come to ask you a few questions," said Silverdale
politely.
"But I don't know you, sir," said Wilkins stiffly.
"Don't you see I'm busy?"
"It is true I am a stranger, but remember, sir, I shall
not be so when I leave. I just want to interview you
about that paragraph in the Moon, stating——"
"Look here!" roared Wilkins, letting his feet slide from
the table with a crash. "Let me tell you, sir, I have no
time to listen to your impertinence. My leisure is scant
and valuable. I am a hard-worked man. I can't be pestered
with questions from inquisitive busybodies. What
next, sir? What I write in the Moon is my business and
nobody else's. Damn it all, sir, is there to be nothing
private? Are you going to poke and pry into the concerns
of the very journalist? No, sir, you have wasted your
time as well as mine. We never allow the public to go
behind what appears in our paper."
[pg 87]
"But this is a mere private curiosity—what you tell me
shall never be published."
"If it could be, I wouldn't tell it you. I never waste
copy."
"Tell me—I am willing to pay for the information—who
wrote the paragraph about Clorinda Bell and the Old
Maids' Club."
"Go to the devil!" roared Wilkins.
"I thought you would know more than he," said Silverdale,
and left. Wilkins came downstairs on his heels,
in a huff, and walked towards Ludgate Hill. Silverdale
thought he would have another shot, and followed him unseen.
The two men jumped into a train, and after an endless-seeming
journey arrived at the Crystal Palace. A
monster balloon was going off from the grounds. Herr
Nickeldorf, the great aeronaut, was making in solitude an
experimental night excursion to Calais, as if anxious to
meet his fate by moonlight alone. Wilkins rushed up to
Nickeldorf, who was standing among the ropes giving
directions.
"Go avay!" said Nickeldorf, when he saw him. "I hafe
nodings to say to you. You makes me schwitzen." He
jumped into the car and bade the men let go.
Ordinarily Wilkins would have been satisfied with this
ample material for half a column, but he was still in a bad
temper, and, as the car was sailing slowly upwards, he
jumped in, and the aeronaut gave himself up for pumped.
In an instant, moved by an irresistible impulse, Silverdale
gave a great leap and stood by the Moon-man's side. The
balloon shot up and the roar of the crowd became a faint
murmur as the planet flew from beneath their feet.
"Good-evening, Mr. Wilkins," said Lord Silverdale. "I
should just like to interview you about——"
"You jackanapes!" cried the Moon-man, pale with anger,
"If you don't go away at once, I'll kick you down stairs."
Go away, or I'll kick you Down Stairs.
[pg 88]
"My dear Mr. Wilkins," suavely replied Lord Silverdale,
"I will willingly go down, provided you accompany
me. I am sure Herr Nickeldorf is anxious to drop both
of us."
"Wirklich," replied the aeronaut
"Well, lend us a parachute," said Silverdale.
"No, danks. Beobles never return barachutes."
"Well, we won't go without one. I forgot to bring
mine with me. I didn't know I was going to have such a
high old time."
"By what right, sir," said Mr. Wilkins, who had been
struggling with an attack of speechlessness, "do you persecute
me like this? You are not a member of the Fourth
Estate."
"No, I belong merely to the Second."
"Eh? What? A Peer!"
"I am Lord Silverdale."
"No, indeed! Lord Silverdale!"
"Lord Silverdale!" echoed the aeronaut, letting two
sand-bags fall into the clouds. Most people lose their
ballast in the presence of the aristocracy.
"Oh, I am so glad! I have long been anxious to meet
your lordship," said the Moon-man, taking out his notebook.
"What is your lordship's opinion of the best fifty
books for the working man's library?"
"I have not yet written fifty books."
"Ah!" said the Moon-man, carefully noting down the
reply. "And when is your lordship's next book coming
out?"
"I cannot say."
"Thank you," said the Moon-man, writing it down.
"Will it be poetry or prose?"
"That is as the critics shall decide."
"Is it true that your lordship has been converted to
Catholicism?"
[pg 90]
"I believe not."
"Then how does your lordship account for the rumor?"
"I have an indirect connection with a sort of new
nunnery, which it is proposed to found—the Old Maids'
Club."
"Oh, yes, the one that Clorinda Bell is going to join."
"Nonsense! who told you she was going to join?"
The Moon-man winced perceptibly at the question, as
he replied indignantly: "Herself!"
"Thank you. That's what I wanted to know. You
may contradict it on the authority of the president. She
only said so to get an advertisement."
"Then why give her two by contradicting it?"
"That is the woman's cleverness. Let her have the
advertisement, rather than that her name should be connected
with Miss Dulcimer's."
"Very well. Tell me something, please, about the
Club."
"It is not organized yet. It is to consist of young and
beautiful women, vowed to celibacy to remove the reproach
of the term 'Old Maid.'"
"It is a noble idea!" said the Moon-man, enthusiastically.
"Oh, what a humanitarian time we are having!"
"Lord Silverdale," said Herr Nickeldorf, who had
been listening with all his ears, "I hafe to you give de
hospitality of my balloon. Vill you, in return, take mein
frau into de Old Maids' Club?"
"As a visitor? With pleasure, as she is a married
woman."
"Nein, nein. I mean as an old maid. Ich habe sic
nicht nöthig. I do not require her any longer."
"Ah, then, I am afraid we can't. You see she isn't an
old maid!"
"But she haf been."
"Ah, yes, but we do not recognize past services."
[pg 91]
"Oh, warum wasn't the Club founded before I married?"
groaned the old German. "Himmel, vat a terrible mistake!
It is to her I owe it that I am de most celebrated
aeronaut in der ganzeu welt. It is the only profession in
wich I escape her gewiss. She haf de kopf too veak to rise
mit me. Ah, when I come oop here, it is Himmel."
"Rather taking an unfair rise out of your partner, isn't
it?" queried the Moon-man with a sickly smile.
"And vat vould you haf done in—was sagt man—in my
shoes?"
The Moon-man winced.
"Not put them on."
"You are not yourself married?"
The Moon-man winced.
"No, I'm only engaged."
"Mein herr," said the old German solemnly, "I haf nodings
but drouble from you. You make to me mein life von
burden. But I cannot see you going to de altar widout
putting out de hand to safe you. It was stupid to yourself
engage at all—but, now dat you haf committed de
mistake, shtick to it!"
"How do you mean?"
"Keep yourself engaged. Do not change your gondition
any more."
"What do you say, Lord Silverdale?" said the Moon-man,
anxiously.
"I am hardly an authority. You see I have so rarely been
married. It depends on the character of your betrothed.
Does she long to be of service in the world?"
The Moon-man winced.
"Yes, that's why she fell in love with me. Thought a
Moon-man must be all noble sentiment like the Moon
itself!"
"She is, then, young," said Silverdale, musingly. "Is
she also beautiful?"
[pg 92]
The Moon-man winced.
"Bewitching. Why does your lordship ask?"
"Because her services might be valuable as an Old
Maid."
"Oh, if you could only get Diana to see it in that light!"
"You seem anxious to be rid of her."
"I do. I confess it. It has been growing on me for
some time. You see hers is a soul perpetually seeking
more light. She is always asking questions. This thirst
for information would be made only more raging by
marriage. You know what Stevenson says:—'To marry
is to domesticate the Recording Angel.' At present my
occupations keep me away from her—but she answers
my letters with as many queries as a 'Constant Reader.'
She wants to know all I say, do, or feel, and I never see
her without having to submit to a string of inquiries. It's
like having to fill up a census paper once a week. If I
don't see her for a fortnight she wants to know how I am
the moment we meet. If this is so before marriage, what
will it be after, when her opportunities of buttonholing
me will be necessarily more frequent?"
"But I see nothing to complain of in that!" said Lord
Silverdale. "Tender solicitude for one's betrothed is the
usual thing with those really in love. You wouldn't like
her to be indifferent to what you were doing, saying,
feeling?"
The Moon-man winced.
"No, that's just the dilemma of it, Lord Silverdale. I
am afraid your lordship does not catch my drift. You
see, with another man, it wouldn't matter; as your lordship
says, he would be glad of it. But to me all that sort
of thing's 'shop.' And I hate 'shop.' It's hard enough
to be out interviewing all day, without being reminded of
its when you get home and want to put your slippers on
the fender and your feet inside them and be happy. No,
[pg 93]
if there's one thing in this world I can't put up with, it's
'shop' after business hours. I want to forget that I get
my gold in exchange for notes of interrogation. I shudder
to be reminded that there are such things in the world as
questions—I tremble if I hear a person invert the subject
and predicate of a sentence. I can hardly bear to read
poetry because the frequent inversions make the lines
look as if they were going to be inquisitive. Now you
understand why I was so discourteous to your lordship,
and I trust that you will pardon the curt expression of
my hyper-sensitive feelings. Now, too, you understand
why I shrink from the prospect of marriage, to the brink
of which I once bounded so heedlessly. No, it is evident
a life of solitude must be my portion. If I am ever to
steep my wearied spirit in forgetfulness of my daily grind,
if my nervous system is to be preserved from premature
break-down, I must have no one about me who has a right of
interrogation, and my housekeeper must prepare my meals
without even the preliminary 'Chop or Steak, sir?' My
home-life must be restful, peaceful, balsamic—it must
exhale a papaverous aroma of categorical proposition."
"But is there no way of getting a wife with a gift of
categorical conversation?"
"Please say, 'There is no way, etc.,' for unless you
yourself speak categorically, the sentences grate upon my
ear. I can ask questions myself, without experiencing the
slightest inconvenience, but the moment I am myself interrogated,
every nerve in me quivers with torture. No, I
am afraid it is impossible to find a woman who will
eschew the interrogative form of proposition, and limit
herself to the affirmative and negative varieties; who will,
for mere love of me, invariably place the verb after the
noun, and unalterably give the subject the precedence
over the predicate. Often and often, when my Diana, in
all her dazzling charms, looks up pleadingly into my face,
[pg 94]
I feel towards her as Ahasuerus felt towards the suppliant
Queen Esther, and I yearn to stretch out my reporter's
pencil towards her, and to say: 'Ask me what you will—even
if it be half my income—so long as you do not ask
me a question.'"
"But isn't there—I mean there is—such a thing obtainable
as a dumb wife?"
"Mutes are for funerals, and not for marriages. Besides,
then, everybody would be asking me why I married her.
No, the more I think of it, the more I see the futility of
my dream of matrimonial felicity. Why, a question lies
at the very threshold of marriage—'Wilt thou have this
woman to be thy wedded wife?'—and to put up the
banns is to loose upon yourself an interviewer in a white-tie!
No, leave me to my unhappy destiny. I must dree
my weird. And anything your lordship can do in the way
of enabling me to dree it by soliciting my Diana into the
Old Maids' Club, shall be received with the warmest
thanksgiving and will allow me to remain your lordship's
most grateful and obedient servant, Daniel Wilkins."
"Enough!" said Lord Silverdale, deeply moved, "I
will send her a circular. But do you really think you would
be happy if you lost her?"
"If," said the Moon-man moodily. "It would require
a great many 'ifs' to make me happy. As I once wrote:
Your lordship might give me a poem in exchange," concluded
the Moon-man conceitedly. "An advance quote
from your next volume, say."
"Very well," and the peer good-naturedly began to
recite the first fytte of an old English romance.
At this point a sudden shock threw both bards off their
feet, inverting them in a manner most disagreeable to the
Moon-man. While they were dropping into poetry, the
balloon had been dropping into a wood, and the aeronaut
had thrown his grapnel into the branches of a tree.
"What's the matter?" they cried.
"Change here for London!" said the Herr, phlegmatically,
"unless you want to go mit me to Calais. In five
more minutes I shall be crossing de Channel."
[pg 96]
"No, no, put us down," said the Moon-man. "I never
could cross the Channel. Oh, when are they going to
make that tunnel?" Thereupon he lowered himself into
the tree, and Lord Silverdale followed his example.
Coming Down from the Clouds.
"Guten nacht!" said the Herr. "Folkestone should
be someveres about. Fordunately, de moon is out, and
you may be able to find it!"
"I say!" shrieked the Moon-man, as the balloon began
to free itself on its upward flight, "How far off is it?"
"I vill not be—was heist es?—interviewed. Guten
nacht."
Soon the great sphere was no bigger than a star in the
heavens.
"This is a nice go," said the Moon-man, when they had
climbed down.
"Oh, don't trouble. I know the Southeast coast well.
There is sure to be a town within a four mile radius."
"Then let us take a hansom," said the Moon-man.
"Wilkins, are you—I mean you are—losing your head,"
said Lord Silverdale. And linking the interviewer's arm
in his, he fared forth into the darkness.
"Do you know what I thought," said Wilkins, as they
undressed in the lonely roadside inn (for ballooning makes
us acquainted with strange bedfellows), "when I was
sliding down the trunk with you on the branches above?"
"No—what did you—I mean you did think what?"
"Well, I'm a bit superstitious, and I saw in the situation
a forecast of my future. That tree typifies my
genealogical tree, for when I have grown rich and prosperous
by my trade, there will be a peer perched somewhere
on the upper branches. Debrett will discover him."
"Indeed I hope so," said the peer fervently, "for in
the happy time when you shall have retired from business
you will be able to make Diana happy."
[pg 98]
THE IDYL OF TREPOLPEN.
"No, we can't have Diana," the President said, when
Lord Silverdale reported the matter. "That is, not if
the Moon-man breaks off the engagement. According
to the rules, the candidate must have herself discarded an
advantageous marriage, and that Miss Diana will give up
Mr. Wilkins is extremely questionable."
"Like everything connected with the Moon-man's bride.
However, my aerial expedition has not been fruitless; if I
have not brought you a member from the clouds, at least
we know how right I was to pluck Clorinda Bell."
"Yes, and how right I was to appoint you Honorary
Trier!" said Lillie. "I have several more candidates for
you, chosen from my last batch of applications. While
you were in the clouds, I was working. I have already interviewed
them. They fulfil all the conditions. It only
remains for you to do your part."
"Have they given good reasons for their refusal to
marry their lovers?"
"Excellent reasons. Reasons so strange as to bear the
stamp of truth. Here is the first reduced to writing. It
is compounded of what Miss Ellaline Rand said to me and
of what she left unsaid. Read it, while I put another of
these love stories into shape. I am so glad I founded the
Old Maids' Club. It has enlarged my experience incalculably."
Lord Silverdale took the manuscript and read.
[pg 99]
When John Beveridge went to nurse his misanthropy
in the obscure fishing village of Trepolpen, he had not
bargained for the presence of Ellaline Rand. And yet
there she was, living in a queer little cottage on the very
top of the steep hill which constituted Trepolpen, and
sloped down to a pebbly beach where the dark nets dried
and the trawl boats were drawn up. The people she was
staying with were children of the soil and the sea—the
man, a rugged old fish-dealer who had been a smuggler
in his time; the woman, a chirpy grandame whose eyes
were still good enough to allow her to weave lace by lamplight.
The season was early June, and the glittering smile
on the broad face of the Atlantic made the roar of the
breakers sound like stentorian laughter. There was always
a whiff of fish—a blend of mackerel and crabs and mullet—striking
up from the beach, but the salt in the air kept
the odoriferous atoms fairly fresh. Everything in Trepolpen
was delightfully archaic, and even the far-away suggestions
of antiquity about the prevailing piscine flavor
seemed in poetic keeping with the spirit of the primitive
little spot.
In a village of one street it is impossible not to live in
it, unless you are a coastguard, and then you don't live in
the village. This was why John Beveridge was a neighbor
of Ellaline's. He lived much lower down, where the
laugh of the Atlantic was louder and the scent of the fish
was stronger, and before he knew of Ellaline's existence
he used to go down hill (which is easy), smoke his pipe and
chat with the trawlers, and lie on his back in the sun.
After they had met, he grew less lazy and used to take
exercise by walking up to the top of the hill. Probably by
this time the sea-breezes had given him strength. Sometimes
he met Ellaline coming down; which was accident.
Then he would turn and walk down with her; which was
design. The manner of their first meeting was novel, but
[pg 100]
in such a place it could not be long delayed. Beveridge
had obeyed a call from the boatmen to come and help
them drag in the seine. He was tugging with all his
might at the section of the netting, for the fishers seemed
to be in luck and the fish unfortunate. Suddenly he heard
the pit-pat of light feet running down the hill, and the
next moment two little white hands peeping out of white
cuffs were gripping the net at the side of his own fleshy
brown ones. For some thirty seconds he was content to
divine the apparition from the hands. There was a flutter
of sweet expectation about his heart, a stirring of the sense
of romance.
The day was divine. The sky was a brooding blue;
the sea was a rippling play of light on which the seine-boat
danced lightly. One little brown sail was visible far
out in the bay, the sea-gulls hovering about it. It seemed
to Beveridge that the scene had only been waiting for
those gentle little hands, whose assistance in the operation
of landing the spoil was such a delicious farce. They
could be no native lass's, these soft fingers with their pink
little nails like pretty sea-pearls. They were fingers that
spoke (in their mute digital dialect) of the crayon and the
violin-bow, rather than of the local harmonium. There
was something, too, about the coquettish cuffs, irresistibly
at variance with the village Wesleyanism. Gradually, as
the net came in, Beveridge let his eyes steal towards her
face. The prevision of romance became a certainty. It
was a charming little face, as symmetrically proportioned
to the hands as the face of a watch is. The nose was retroussé
and piquant, but the eyes contradicted it, being
demure and dreamy. There was a little Cupid's bow of
a mouth, and between the half-parted rosy lips a gleam of
white teeth clenched with the exertion of hauling in the
seine. A simple sailor's hat crowned a fluff of flaxen hair,
and her dress was of airy muslin.
[pg 101]
She was so absorbed in the glee of hauling in the fish
that it was some moments before she seemed to notice
that her neighbor's eyes were fixed upon her, and that
they were not set in the rugged tan of the local masculine
face. A little blush leapt into the rather pale cheeks and
went out again like a tiny spurt of rosy flame. Then she
strained more desperately than ever at the net. It was
soon ashore, with its wild and whirling mixture of mackerel,
soles, dabs, squids, turbot—John Beveridge was not certain
but what his heart was already among the things fluttering
there in the net at her feet.
While the trawlers were sorting out the fish, spreading
some on the beach and packing the mackerel in baskets,
Ellaline looked on, patently interested in everything but
her fellow amateur. After all, despite his shaggy coat and
the clay pipe in his mouth, he was of the town, towny;
some solicitor, artist, stockbroker, doctor, on a holiday;
perhaps, considering the time of year, only a clerk.
What she had come to Trepolpen for was something more
primitive. And he! Surely he had seen and loved pretty
women enough, not to stir an inch nearer this dainty
vision. For what but to forget the wiles and treacheries
of women of the town had he buried himself here? And
yet was it the unexpectedness, was it that while bringing
back the atmosphere of great cities she yet seemed a
creature of the woods and waters, he felt himself drawn to
her? He wanted to talk to her, to learn who she was and
what she was doing here, but he did not know how to
begin, though he had the gift of many tongues. Not that
he deemed an introduction necessary—in Trepolpen,
where not to give everybody you met "good-morning"
was to court a reputation for surliness. And it would have
been easy enough to open on the weather, or the marine
harvest they had both helped to gather in. But somehow
John Beveridge learnt embarrassment in the presence of
[pg 102]
this muslined mermaiden, who seemed half of the world
and half of the sea. And so, amid the bustle of the beach,
the minutes slipped away, and Beveridge spoke no word
but leaned against the cliff, content to drowse in the light
of the sun and Ellaline.
The dealers came down to the beach—men and women—among
them a hale, grizzly old fellow who clasped Ellaline's
hand in his huge, gnarled fist. The auction began.
John Beveridge joined the crowd at a point behind the
strangely assorted couple. Of a sudden Ellaline turned
to him with her great limpid eyes looking candidly into
his, and said, "Some of those poor mackerel are not quite
dead yet—I wonder if they suffer." John Beveridge was
taken aback. The last vestiges of his wonted assurance
were swept away before her sweet simplicity.
"I—I—really—I don't know—I've never thought about
it," he stammered.
"Men never do," said Ellaline with a gentle reproachful
look. "They think only of their own pain. I do hope
fish have no feelings."
"They are cold-blooded," he reminded her, beginning
to recover himself.
"Ah!" she said musingly. "But what right have we
to take away their lives? They must be—oh so happy!—in
the beautiful wide ocean! I am sorry I had a hand in
destroying them. I shall never do it again."
"You have very little to reproach yourself with," he
said, smiling.
"Ah! now you are laughing at me. I know I'm not big
and strong, and that my muscles could have been dispensed
with. But the will was there, the intention was
there," she said with her serious air.
"Oh, of course, you are a piscicide in intention," he
admitted. "But you will enjoy the mackerel all the
same."
[pg 103]
"No, I won't," she said with a charming little shake of
the head, "I won't eat any."
"What! you will nevermore eat fish?"
"Never," she said emphatically. "I love fish, but I
won't eat 'em! only tinned things, like sardines. Oh, what
a little stupid I am! Don't laugh at me again, please. I
forgot the sardines must be caught first, before they are
tinned, mustn't they?"
"Not necessarily," he said. "It often suffices if sprats
are caught."
She laughed. Her laugh was a low musical ripple, like
one of the little sunlit waves translated into sound.
"Twenty-two shillings!" cried the owner of a lot.
"I'll give 'ee eleven!" said Ellaline's companion, and
the girl turned her head to listen to the violent chaffering
that ensued, and when she went away she only gave John
Beveridge a nod and a smile. But he followed her with
his eyes as she toiled up the hill, growing ever smaller and
daintier against the horizon. The second time he met her
was at the Cove, a little way from the village, where great
foliage-crowned cliffs came crescent-wise round a space
of shining sand, girdled at its outer margin by tumbling
green, foam-crested surges. Huge mammoth-like boulders
stood about, bathing their feet in the incoming tide, the
cormorants perching cautiously down the precipitous half-worn
path that led to the sands. There was a point at
which the landward margin of the shore beneath first
revealed itself to the descending pedestrian, and it was a
point so slippery that it was thoughtless of Fate to have
included Ellaline in the area of vision. She was lying,
sheltered by a blue sunshade, on the golden sand, with her
head on the base of the cliff, abstractedly tearing a long
serpentine weed to dark green ribbons, and gazing out
dreamily into the throbbing depths of sea and sky. There
was an open book before her, but she did not seem to be
[pg 104]
reading. John Beveridge saved himself by grasping a
stinging bush, and he stole down gently towards her, forgetting
to swear.
He came to her with footsteps muffled by the soft sand,
and stood looking down at her, admiring the beauty of the
delicate flushed young face and the flaxen hair against the
sober background of the aged cliff with its mellow subtly-fused
tints.
"Thinking of the little fishes—or of the gods?" he said
at last in a loud pleasant voice.
Ellaline gave a little shriek.
"Oh, where did you spring from?" she said, half raising
herself.
"Not from the clouds," he said.
"Of course not. I was not thinking of the gods," said
Ellaline.
He laughed. "I am not even a Perseus," he said, "for
the tide though coming in is not yet dangerous enough to
be likened to the sea-monster, though you might very well
pass for Andromeda."
Ellaline blushed and rose to her feet, adjusting a wrap
round her shoulders. "I do not know," she said with dignity,
"what I have done to encourage such a comparison."
John Beveridge saw he had slipped. This time there
was not even a stinging bush to cling to.
"You are beautiful, that is all I meant," he said apologetically.
"Is it worth while saying such commonplace things?"
she said a little mollified.
It was an ambiguous remark. From her it could only
mean that he had been guilty of compliment.
"I am very sorry. A thousand pardons. But, pray, do
not let me drive you away. You seemed so happy here.
I will go back." He made a half turn.
[pg 105]
"Yes, I was happy," she said simply. "In my foolish
little way I thought I had discovered this spot—as if anything
so beautiful could have escaped the attention of those
who have been near it all their lives."
Her words caused him a sudden pang of anxious jealousy.
Must they not be true of herself?
"And you, too, seemed to have discovered it," she went
on. "Doubtless you know all the coast well, for you were
here before me. Do you know," she said, looking up at
his face with her candid gray eyes, "this is the first time
in my life I have seen the sea, so you must not laugh if I
seem ignorant, but oh! how I love to lie and hear it roar,
tossing its mane like some great wild animal that I have
tamed and that will not harm me."
"There are other wild animals that you may tame, here
by the sea," he said.
She considered for a moment gravely.
"That is rather pretty," she announced. "I shall re-remember
that. But please do not tell me again I am beautiful."
She sat down on the sand, with her back to the cliff,
re-adjusting her parasol.
"Very well. I sit reproved," he replied, taking up his
position by her side. "What book is that you are reading?"
She handed him the little paper-covered, airily-printed
volume, suggesting summer in every leaf.
"Ah, it is The Cherub That Sits Up Aloft!" he said,
with a shade of superciliousness blent with amusement.
"Yes, have you read it?" she asked.
"No," he said, "I have heard of it. It's by that new
woman who came out last year and calls herself Andrew
Dibdin, isn't it?"
"Yes," said Ellaline. "It's made an enormous hit, don't
you know."
"Oh, yes, I know," he said, laughing. "It's a lot of
sentimental rot, isn't it? Do you like it?"
[pg 106]
"I think it is sweetly pretty," she said, a teardrop of
vexation gathering on her eyelid. "If you haven't read
it, why should you abuse it?"
"Oh, one can't read everything," he said. "But one
gets to pick up enough about a book to know whether he
cares to read it. Of course, I am aware it is about a little
baby on board a ship that makes charming inarticulate
orations and is worshipped by everybody, from the captain
to the little stowaway, and is regarded by the sailors as
the sweet little cherub that sits up aloft, etc., and that
there is a sensational description of a storm at sea—which
is Clarke Russell and water, or rather Clarke Russell and
more water."
"Ah, I see you're a cynic," said Ellaline. "I don't like
cynics."
"No, indeed, I am not," he pleaded. "It is false, not
true, sentiment I object to."
"And how do you know this is false sentiment?" she
asked in honest indignation. "When you haven't read
it?"
"What does it matter?" he murmured, overwhelmed
by her sense of duty. She was evidently unaccustomed
to the light flippancies of elegant conversation.
"Oh, nothing. To some people nothing matters. Will
you promise to read the book if I lend it you?"
"Of course I will," he said, delighted at the establishment
of so permanent a link. "Only I don't want to
deprive you of it—I can wait till you have finished with it."
"I have finished. I have read it over and over again.
Take it." She handed it to him. Their finger-tips met.
"I recant already," he said. "It must have something
pure and good in it to take captive a soul like yours."
And indeed the glamour of Ellaline was over every page
of it. As he read, he found tears of tenderness in his
eyes, when otherwise they might have sprung from laughter.
[pg 107]
He adored the little cherub who sat up aloft on the
officers' table and softened these crusty sea-dogs whose
hearts were become as ship's-biscuits. He could not tell
what had come over himself, that his own sere heart
should be so quick again to the beauties of homely virtue
and duty, to the engaging simplicity and pathos of childhood,
to the purity of womanhood. Was it that Ellaline
was all these things incarnate?
He avowed his error and his conversion, and gradually
they came to meet often in the solitary creek, as was but
right for the only two intellectual people in Trepolpen.
Sometimes, too, they wandered further afield, amid the
ferny lanes. But the Cove was their favorite trysting
place, and there lying with his head in her lap, he would
talk to her of books and men and one woman.
Talked to her of books and men and one woman.
He found her tastes were not limited to The Cherub
That Sits Up Aloft, for she liked Meredith. "Really,"
he said, "if you had not been yourself, I should have
doubted whether your admiration was genuine."
"Yes, his women are so real. But I do not pretend to
care for the style."
"Style!" he said, "I call it a five-barred fence. To
me style is everything. Style alone is literature, whether
it be the man or not."
"Oh, then you are of the school of Addiper?"
"Ah, have you heard of that? I am. I admire Addiper
and agree with him. Form is everything—literature
is only a matter of form. And a book is only a form of
matter."
"I see," she said, smiling. "But I adore Addiper myself,
though I regret the future seems likely to be his. I
have read all he has written. Every line is so lucid.
The form is exquisite. But as for the matter——!"
"No matter!" summed up John Beveridge, laughing
heartily.
[pg 109]
"I am so glad you agree with me sometimes," said
Ellaline. "Because it shows you don't think I am so
very stupid after all."
"Of course I don't—except when you get so enthusiastic
about literary people and rave about Dibdin and Addiper
and Blackwin and the rest. If you mixed with them,
my little girl, as I have done, you would soon lose your
rosy illusions. Although perhaps you are better with
them."
"Ah, then you're not a novelist yourself?" she said
anxiously.
"No, I am not. What makes you ask?"
"Nothing. Only sometimes, from your conversation,
I suspected you might be."
"Thank you, Ellaline," he said, "for a very dubious
compliment. No, I am afraid I must forego that claim
upon your admiration. Unless I tell a lie and become
a novelist by doing so. But then wouldn't it be the
truth?"
"Are you, then, a painter or a musician?"
He shook his head. "No, I do not get my living by
art."
"Not of any kind?"
"Not of any kind."
"How do you get it?" she asked simply, a candid light
shining in the great gray eyes.
"My father was a successful saddle-maker. He is
dead."
"Oh!" she said.
"Leather has made me, from childhood up—it has
chastised, supported, educated me, and given me the
entrée everywhere. So you see I cannot hold a candle to
your demigods."
"Ah, but there is nothing like leather," said Ellaline,
and stroked the head in her lap reassuringly.
[pg 110]
The assurance permeated John Beveridge's frame like
a pleasant cordial. All that was hard and leathery in him
seemed to be soaked soft. Here, at last, was a woman
who loved him for himself—an innocent, trusting woman
in whose weakness a man might find strength. Her pure
lips were like the wayside well at which the wearied wanderer
from great stony cities might drink and be refreshed.
And yet, delightful as her love would be in his
droughty life, he felt that his could not prove less delightful
to her. That he, John Beveridge, with the roses
thrusting themselves into his eyes, should stoop to pick
the simple little daisy at his feet, could not fail to fill
her with an admiring gratitude that would add the last
charm to her passion for him.
But it was not till a week afterwards that the formal
proposal, so long impending, broke. They were resting in a
lane and discussing everything they didn't want to discuss,
the unspoken playing with subtle sweetness about
the spoken.
"Have you read Mr. Gladstone's latest?" she asked at
last.
"No," he said; "has Mr. Gladstone ever a latest?"
"Oh, yes, take him day by day, like an evening paper.
I'm referring to his article on 'Ancient Beliefs in a Future
State.'"
"What's that—the belief of old maids that they'll get
married?"
"Now you are blasphemous," she cried with a pretty
pout.
"How? Are old maids a sacred subject?"
"Everything old should be sacred to us," she said
simply. "But you know that is not what I mean."
"Then why do you say it?" he asked.
"Oh, what a tease you are!" she cried. "I shan't be
[pg 111]
sorry to be quit of you. Your flippancy is quite dreadful."
"Why, do you believe in a future state?" he said.
"Of course I do. If we had only one life, it would not
be worth living."
"But nine times one life would be worth living. Is
that the logic? If so, happy cats! I wonder," he added
irrelevantly, "why the number nine always goes with cats—nine
lives, nine tails, nine muses?"
Ellaline made a moue and shrank petulantly away from
him. "I will not discuss our future state, unless you are
prepared to do it seriously," she said.
"I am," he replied with sudden determination. "Let
us enter it together. I am tired of the life I've been leading,
and I love you."
"What!" she said in a little horrified whisper. "You
want us to commit suicide together?"
"No, no—matrimony. I cannot do it alone—I have
never had the courage to do it at all. With you at my
side, I should go forward, facing the hereafter cheerfully,
with faith and trust."
"I—I—am—afraid—I——" she stammered.
"Why should you be afraid?" he interrupted.
"Have you no faith and trust in me?"
"Oh, yes," she said with a frank smile, "if I had not
confidence in you, I should not be here with you."
"You angel!" he said, his eyes growing wet under
her clear, limpid gaze. "But you love me a little,
too?"
"I do not," she said, shaking her head demurely.
John Beveridge groaned. After so decisive an avowal
from the essence of candor, what remained to be said?
Nothing but to bid her and his hopes farewell—the latter
at once, the former as soon as she was escorted back to
Trepolpen. His affection had grown so ripe, he could
[pg 112]
not exchange it for the green fruit of friendship. And
yet, was this to be the end of all that sweet idyllic interlude,
a jarring note and then silence for evermore?
"But could you never learn to love me?"
She laughed her girlish, ringing laugh.
"I am not so backward as all that," she said. "I mastered
it in a dozen lessons."
He stared at her, a wild hope kindling in his eyes.
"Did I hear aright?" he asked in a horse tone.
She nodded, still smiling.
"Then I did not hear aright before?"
"Oh, yes, you did. I said I did not love you a little.
I love you a great deal."
There were tears in the gray eyes now, but they smiled
on. He caught her in his arms and the Devonshire lane
was transformed to Eden. How exquisite this angelic
frankness, when the words pleased! How delicious the
frankness of her caress when words were de trop!
But at last she spoke again. "And now that I know
you love me for myself, I will tell you a secret." The
little hands that had first clasped his attention were laid
on his shoulders, the dreamy face looked up tenderly and
proudly into his. "They say a woman cannot keep a
secret," she said. "But you will never believe that again,
when I tell you mine?"
"I never believed it," he said earnestly. "Consider
how every woman keeps the great secret of her age."
"Ah, that is not what I am going to tell you," she said
archly. "It is another of the great secrets of my age.
You remember that book you liked so much—The Cherub
That Sits Up Aloft?"
"Yes!" he said wonderingly.
"Well, I wrote it!"
"You!" he exclaimed, startled. His image of her
seemed a pillar of sand upon which the simoom had burst.
[pg 113]
This fresh, simple maiden a complex literary being, a
slave of the midnight lamp.
"Yes, I—I am Andrew Dibdin—the authoress who
drew tears from your eyes."
"You, Andrew Dibdin!" he repeated mechanically.
She nodded her head with a proud and happy smile. "I
knew you would be pleased—but I wanted you to love me,
not my book."
"I love both," he exclaimed. The new conceptions
had fitted themselves into the old. He saw now what the
charm of the little novel was—the book was Ellaline between
covers. He wondered he had not seen it before.
The grace, the purity, the pathos, the sweet candor, the
recollections of a childhood spent on the great waters in
the company of kindly mariners—all had flowed out at
the point of her pen. She had put herself into her work.
He felt a subtle jealousy of the people who bought her on
the bookstalls for a shilling—or even for ninepence at the
booksellers'. He wanted to have her all to himself. He
experienced a mad desire to buy up the edition. But
there would be a new one. He realized the feelings of
Othello. Oh, if he could but arrest her circulation!
"If you knew how happy it made me to hear you say
you love my book!" she replied. "At first I hated you
because you sneered at it. All my friends love my books—and
I wanted you to be a friend of mine."
"I am more than that," he said exultantly. "And I
want to love all your books. What else have you written?"
"Only two others," she said apologetically. "You see
I have only been in literature six months and I only
write straight from the heart."
"Yes, indeed!" he said. "You wear your heart upon
your leaves."
Jealous as he was of her readers, he felt that there was
balm in Gilead. She was not a hack-writer, turning out
[pg 114]
books for the market of malice aforethought; not the
complex being he had figured in the first moment of consternation,
the literary quack with finger on the pulse of
the public. She did but write as the birds carolled—not
the slave, but the genius of the midnight lamp.
"But I must not wear my heart out," she replied,
laughingly. "So I came down here for a month to get
fresh material. I am writing a novel of Cornish peasant
life—I want to photograph the people with all their
lights and shades, all their faiths and superstitions, all
their ways of speech and thought—the first thorough
study ever made of a fast-fading phase of Old English
life. You see, I didn't know what to do; I feared the
public would be tired of my sailor-stories and I thought
I'd locate my next story on land. Accident determined
its environment. I learnt, by chance, that we had some
poor relatives in Trepolpen, whom my people had dropped,
and so I thought I'd pick them up again, and turn them
into 'copy,' and I welcomed the opportunity of making
at the same time the acquaintance of the sea, which, as I
think I told you, I have never seen before. You see I
was poor myself till The Cherub That Sits Up Aloft
showered down the gold, and, being a Cockney, had
never been able to afford a trip to the seaside."
"My poor Ellaline!" he said, kissing her candid lips.
She was such an inveterate truth-teller that he could
only respect and admire and adore—though she fell from
heaven. Her candor infected him. He felt an overwhelming
paroxysm of veracity.
The mask could be dropped now. Did she not love
John Beveridge?
"Now I see why you rave so over literary people!" he
said. "You are dipped in ink yourself."
"Yes," she said with a happy smile, "there is nobody
I admire so much as our great writers."
[pg 115]
"But you would not love me more, if I were a great
writer?" he said anxiously.
"No, certainly not. I couldn't," she said decisively.
He stooped and kissed her gratefully. "Thank you
for that, my sweet Ellaline. And now I think I can
safely confess that I am Addiper."
She gave a little shriek. Her face turned white.
"Addiper!" she breathed.
"Yes, dearest, it is my nom de guerre. I am Addiper,
the writer you admire so much, the man with whose
school, you were pleased to say, the future lies."
"Addiper!" she said again. "Impossible! why you
said you did not get your living by art of any kind."
"Of course I don't!" he said. "Books like mine—all
style, no sentiment, morals or theology—never pay. Fortunately
I am able to publish them at my own expense.
I write only for writers. That is why you like me.
Successful writers are those who write for readers, just as
popular painters are those who paint for spectators."
The poor little face was ashen gray now. The surprise
was too much for the fragile little beauty. "Then you
really are Addiper!" she said in low, slow tones.
"Yes, dearest," he said not without a touch of pride.
"I am Addiper—and in you, love, I have found a fresh
fount of inspiration. You shall be the guiding star of my
work, my rare Ellaline, my pearl, my beryl. Ah, this is a
great turning-point in my life. To-day I enter into my
third manner."
"This is not one of your teasing jokes?" she said
appealingly, her piteous eyes looking up into his.
"No, my Ellaline. Do you think I would hoax you
thus—to dash you to earth again?"
"Then," she said slowly and painfully, "then I can
never marry you. We must say 'good-bye.'"
Her lover gazed at her in dazed silence. The butterflies
[pg 117]
floated in the summer air, a bee buzzed about a wayside
flower, from afar came the tinkle of a brook. A deep
peace was on all things—only in the hearts of the two
littérateurs was pain and consternation.
The Confession of Ellaline.
"You can never marry me!" repeated John Beveridge
at last. "And why not?"
"I have told you. Because you are Addiper."
"But that is no reason."
"Is it not?" she said. "I thought Addiper would
have a subtler apprehension."
"But what is it you object to in me?"
"To your genius, of course."
"To my genius!"
"Yes, no mock modesty. Between augurs it won't do.
Every author must know very well he stands apart from
the world, or he would not set himself to paint it. I know
quite well I am not as other women. What is the use of
paltering with one's consciousness!"
Still the same delicious candor shone in the gray eyes.
John Beveridge, not at all grasping his dismissal, felt an
unreasoning impulse to kiss them.
"Well, supposing I am a genius," he said instead.
"Where's the harm?"
"No harm till you propose to yoke me with it! I never
will marry a genius."
"Oh, don't be so absurd, Ellaline!" he said. "You've
been reading the foolish nonsense about the geniuses necessarily
making bad husbands. No doubt in some prominent
instances geniuses have not been working models of
the domestic virtues, but on the other hand there are scores
of instances to the contrary. And blockheads make quite
as bad husbands as your Shelleys and your Byrons. Besides
it was only in the past that geniuses were blackguards;
to-day it is the correct thing to be correct. Respectability
nowadays adds chastity to the studies from the nude;
[pg 118]
marital fidelity enhances the force of poems of passion:
and philanthropy adds the last touch to tragic acting. So
why should I suffer for the sins of my predecessors? If
I may judge myself by my present sensations, what I am
gifted with is a genius for domesticity. Do not sacrifice
me, dearest, to an unproved and unscientific generalization."
"It is not of that I am thinking," Ellaline replied, shaking
her head sadly. "In my opinion the woman who
refused Shakespeare merely on the ground that he wrote
Shakespeare's works, should be sent to Coventry as a
coward. No, do not fancy I am that. I may not be strong,
but I have courage enough to marry you if that were all.
It is not because I am afraid you would make me unhappy."
"Ah, there is something you are hiding from me," he
said anxiously, impressed by the gravity and sincerity of
her tones.
"No, there is nothing. I cannot marry you, because you
are a genius."
He saw what she meant now. She had been reading
the modern works on genius and insanity.
"Ah, you think me mad!" he cried.
"Mad—when you love me?" she said, with a melancholy
smile.
"You know what I mean. You think that 'great wits
to madness nearly are allied,' that sane as I appear, there
is in me a hidden vein of madness. And yet, if anything,
the generalization connecting genius with insanity is more
unsound than that connecting it with domestic infelicity.
It would require a genius to really prove such a connection,
and as he would, on his own theory, be a lunatic,
what becomes of his theory?"
"Your argument involves a fallacy," replied Ellaline
quietly. "It does not follow that if a man is a lunatic
[pg 119]
everything he says or does has the taint of madness. A
genius who held that genius meant insanity might be sane
just on this one point."
"Or insane just on the one point. Seriously, Ellaline,"
said John Beveridge, beginning to lose his temper, "you
don't mean to say that you believe that genius is really 'a
psychical neurosis of the epileptoid order.' If you do you
must be mad yourself, that's all I can say."
"Of course I should have to admit I am mad myself if
I held the theory that genius meant insanity. But I
don't."
"You don't!" he said, staring blankly at her. "You
don't believe I'm insane, and you don't believe I'll make
a bad husband—I should be insane if I did, my sweet little
Ellaline. And you still wish to cry off?"
"I must."
"Then you no longer love me!"
"Oh, I beg of you, do not say that! You do not know
how hard it is for me to give you up—do not make our
parting harder."
"Ellaline, in heaven's name vex me no further. What
is this terrible mystery? Why can you no longer think of
me?"
"If you only thought of me a little you would guess.
But men are so selfish. If it were only you that had genius
the thing would be simple. But you forget that I, too——"
She paused; a little modest blush completed the sentence.
"Yes, I know you are a genius, my rare Ellaline. But
what then?" he cried. "I only love you the more for it."
"Yes, but if we marry," said Ellaline, "we two geniuses,
look what will happen."
He stared at her afresh—she met his gaze unflinchingly.
"What new scientific bogie have you been conjuring up."
he murmured.
"Oh, I wish you would drive science out of your head,"
[pg 120]
she replied pettishly. "What have I to do with science?
Really, if you go on so stupidly I shall believe you're not
a genius after all."
"And then you will marry me?" he said eagerly.
"Don't be so stupid! To speak plainly, for you seem
as dull as a clod-hopper to-day, I cannot afford to marry
a genius, and a recognized genius to boot. I am only a
struggling young authoress, with a considerable following,
it is true, but still without an unquestioned position. The
high-class organs that review you all to yourself still take
me as one of a batch and are not always as complimentary
as they might be. The moment I marry you and my rushlight
is hidden in your bushel, out it goes. I become absorbed
simply in you, a little satellite circling round your
planetary glory. I shall have no independent existence—the
fame I have toiled and struggled for will be eclipsed
in yours. 'Mrs. Addiper—the wife of the celebrated writer,
scribbles a little herself, don't you know! Wonder what
he could see in her!' That's how people will talk of me.
When I go into a room we shall be announced, 'Mr. and
Mrs. Addiper'—and everybody will rush round you and
hang on your words, and I shall be talked to only by the
way of getting you at second-hand, as a medium through
which your personality is partially radiated. And parties
will be given 'To meet Mr. Addiper,' and I shall accompany
you for the same reason that your dress-coat will—because
it is the etiquette."
"But, Ellaline——" he protested.
"Let me finish. I could not even afford to marry you,
if my literary position were equal to yours. Such a union
would do nothing to enhance my reputation. No woman
of genius should marry a man of genius—were she even
the greater of the two she would become merged in him,
even as she would take his name. The man I must marry,
the man I have been waiting to fall in love with and be
[pg 121]
loved by, is a plain honest gentleman, unknown to fame
and innocent of all aspiration but that of making me happy.
He must devote his life to mine, sink himself in me, sacrifice
himself on the altar of my fame, live only for the enhancement
of my reputation. Such a man I thought I had
found in you—but you deceived me. I thought here is a
man who loves me only for myself, but whose love will increase
tenfold when he learns that I stand on a pedestal of
glory, and who will rejoice at the privilege of passing the rest
of his days uplifting that pedestal to the gaze of the world,
a man who will say of me what I can hardly say of myself,
who will drive the bargains with my publishers, wrap me
up against the knowledge of malicious criticisms, conduct
my correspondence, receive inconvenient callers, arrange
my interviews, and send incessant paragraphs to the papers
about me, commencing Mrs. John Beveridge (Andrew Dibdin),
varied by Andrew Dibdin (Mrs. John Beveridge).
Here is a man who will be a living gratuitous advertisement,
inserted daily in the great sheets of the times, a steadfast
column of eulogy, a pillar of praise. Here is a man
who will be as much a halo as a husband. When I enter
a drawing-room with him (so ran my innocent, maiden
dream) there will be a thrill of excitement, everybody will
cluster round me, he will efface himself or be effaced, and,
even if he finds anybody to talk to, it is about me he will
talk. Invitations to our own 'At Homes' will be eagerly
sought for—not for his sake, but for mine. All that is
famous in literature and art will crowd our salon—not for
his sake, but for mine. And while I shall be the cynosure
of every eye, it will be his to note down the names of
the illustrious gazers in society paragraphs beginning Mrs.
John Beveridge (Andrew Dibdin), alternating with Andrew
Dibdin (Mrs. John Beveridge). And am I to give up all
this, merely because I love you?"
So ran my Innocent Maiden Dream.
"Yes, why not!" he said passionately. "What is fame,
[pg 123]
reputation, weighed against love? What is it to be on
the World's lips, if the lips we love are to be taken away?"
"How pretty!" she said with simple admiration. "If
you will not claim the phrase, I should like to give it to
my next heroine."
"Claim it!" he said bitterly. "I do not want any
phrases. I want you."
"Do you not see it is impossible? If you could become
obscure again, it might be. You say fame is nothing
weighed against love. Come now, would you give up
your genius, your reputation, just to marry me?"
He was silent.
"Come!" she repeated. "I have been frank with you,
have I not!"
"You have," he admitted, with a melancholy grimace.
"Well, be equally frank with me. Would you sacrifice
these things to your love for me?"
"I could not if I would."
"But would you, if you could?"
He did not answer.
"Of course you wouldn't," she said. "I know you as
I know myself."
"What is the use of thinking of what can never be!"
he said impatiently.
"Just so. That is what I say. I can never give you
my hand; so give me yours and we'll turn homewards."
He gave her his hand and she jumped lightly to her
feet. Then he got up and shook himself, and looked still
in a sort of daze, at the gentle face and the dainty figure.
He seized her passionately by the arms.
"And must this be the end?" he cried hoarsely.
"Finis," she said decisively, though the renewed pallor
of her face showed what it cost her to complete the idyl.
"An unhappy ending?" he said in hopeless interrogation.
[pg 124]
"It is not my style," she said simply, "but, after all,
this is only real life."
He burst forth in a torrent of half reproachful regrets—he,
Addiper, the chaste, the severe, the self-contained.
"And you the sweet, innocent girl who won the heart I
no longer hoped to feel living, you would coldly abandon
the love for whose existence you are responsible! You,
who were to be so fresh and pure an influence on my
work, are content to deprive literature of those masterpieces
our union would have called into being! Oh, but
you cannot unshackle yourself thus from my life—for good
or evil your meeting with me determined my third manner.
Hitherto I thought it was for good; now I fear it will be
for evil."
"You seem to have forgotten all your manners," she
said, annoyed. "And if our meeting was for evil, at least
our parting shall be for good."
John Beveridge and Ellaline Rand spake no more, but
walked home in silence through the country lanes on
which the sunlight seemed to lie cold. The past was but
a dream—not for these two the simple emotions which
cross with joy or sorrow the web of common life. At the
cottage near the top of the hill, where the sounds and
scents of the sea were faintest, they parted. The idyl of
Trepolpen was ended.
And John Beveridge went downhill.
[pg 125]
MORE ABOUT THE CHERUB.
The trial interview between Lord Silverdale and Ellaline
Rand took place in the rooms of the Old Maids' Club
in the presence of the President. Lillie, encouraged by
the rush of candidates, occupied herself in embroidering
another epigrammatic antimacassar—"It is man who is
vain of woman's dress." She had deliberately placed herself
out of earshot. To Miss Rand, Lord Silverdale was
a casual visitor with whom she had drifted into conversation,
yet she behaved as prettily as if she knew she was
undergoing the viva-voce portion of the examination for
entranceship.
There are two classes of flirts—those who love to flirt,
and those who flirt to love. There is little to be said
against the latter, for they are merely experimenting. They
intend to fall in love, but they can hardly compass it without
preliminary acquaintance, and by giving themselves a
wide and varied selection, are more likely to discover the
fitting object of affection. It is easy to confound both
classes of flirts together, and heartbroken lovers generally
do so, when they do not use a stronger expression. But
so far as Lord Silverdale could tell, there was nothing in
Miss Rand's behavior to justify him in relegating her
to either class, or to make him doubt the genuineness of
the anti-hymeneal feelings provoked by her disappointment
[pg 126]
in Trepolpen. Her manner was simple and artless—she
gushed, indeed, but charmingly, like a daintily sculptured
figure on a marble fountain in a fair pleasaunce.
You could be as little offended by her gush, as by her
candid confessions of her own talents. The Lord had
given her a good conceit of herself, and given it her so
gracefully, that it was one of her chiefest charms. She
spoke with his lordship of Shakespeare and others of her
profession, and mentioned that she was about to establish
a paper called The Cherub, after her popular story The
Cherub That Sits Up Aloft.
"I want to get into closer touch with my readers," she explained,
helping herself charmingly to the chocolate creams.
"In a book, you cannot get into direct rapport with your
public. Your characters are your rivals and distract attention
from the personality of the author. In a journal I shall
be able to chat with them freely, open my heart to them and
gather them to it. There is a legitimate curiosity to learn
all about me—the same curiosity that I feel about other
authors. Why should I allow myself to be viewed in the
refracting medium of alien ink? Let me sketch myself to
my readers, tell them what I eat and drink, and how I
write, and when, what clothes I wear and how much I pay
for them, what I think of this or that book of mine, of this
or that character of my creation, what my friends think of
me, and what I think of my friends. All the features of the
paper will combine to make my face. I shall occupy all the
stories, and every column will have me at the top. In this
way I hope, not only to gratify my yearnings for sympathy,
but to stimulate the circulation of my books. Nay more,
with the eye of my admirers thus encouragingly upon me, I
shall work more zealously. You see, Lord Silverdale, we
authors are a race apart—without the public hanging upon
our words, we are like butterflies in a London fog, or
actors playing to an empty auditorium."
[pg 127]
"I have noticed that," said Lord Silverdale dryly, "before
authors succeed, it takes them a year to write a book,
after they succeed it takes them only a month."
"You see I am right," said Ellaline eagerly. "That's
what the sun of public sympathy does. It ripens work
quickly."
"Yes, and when the sun is very burning, it sometimes
takes the authors no time at all."
"Ah, now you are laughing at me. You are speaking
of 'ghosts.'"
"Yes. Ghost stories are published all the year round—not
merely at Christmas. Don't think I'm finding fault.
I look upon an author who keeps his ghost, as I do on a
tradesmen who keeps his carriage. It is a sign he has
succeeded."
"Oh, but it's very wicked, giving the public underweight
like that!" said Ellaline in her sweet, serious way. "How
can anybody write as well as yourself? But why I mentioned
about The Cherub is because it has just struck me
the paper might become the organ of the Old Maids' Club,
for I should make a point of speaking freely of my aims
and aspirations in joining it. I presume you know all
about Miss Dulcimer's scheme?"
"Oh, yes! But I don't think it feasible."
"You don't?" she said, with a little tremor of astonishment
in her voice. "And why not?" She looked anxiously
into his eyes for the reply.
"The candidates are too charming to remain single,"
he explained, smiling.
She smiled back a little at him, those sweet gray eyes
still looking into his.
"You are not a literary man?" she said irrelevantly.
"I am afraid I must plead guilty to trying to be," he
said. "The evidence is down in black and white."
The smile died away and for an instant Ellaline's brow
[pg 128]
went into black for it. She accepted an ice from Turple
the magnificent, but took her leave shortly afterwards,
Lillie promising to write to her.
"Well?" said the President when she was left alone
with the Honorary Trier.
That functionary looked dubious. "Up till the very last
she seemed single-hearted in her zeal. Then she asked
whether I was a literary man. You know her story. What
do you conclude?"
"I can hardly come to a conclusion. Do you think
there is still a danger of her marrying to get someone to
advertise her?"
"I think it depends on The Cherub. If The Cherub is
born and lives, it will be a more effectual advertising
medium than even a husband, and may replace him. A
paper of your own can puff you rather better than a husband
of your own, it has a larger circulation and more
opportunities. An authoress-editress, her worth is far
above rubies! Her correspondents praise her in the gates
and her staff shall rise up and call her blessed. It may
well be that she will arrive at that stage at which a husband
is an incubus and marriage a manacle. In that day the
honor of the Club will be safe in her hands."
"What do you suggest then?" said Lillie anxiously.
"That you wait till she is delivered of The Cherub before
deciding."
"Very well," she replied resignedly. "Only I hope
we shall be able to admit her. Her conception of the use
of man is so sublime!"
Lord Silverdale smiled. "Ah, if the truth were known,"
he said, "I daresay it would be that pretty women regard
man merely as a beast of draught and burden, a creature
to draw their checks and carry their cloaks."
Lillie answered, "And men look on pretty women
either as home pets or as drawing-room decorations."
[pg 129]
Silverdale said further, "I do not look on you as
either."
To which, Lillie, "Why do you say such obvious
things? It is unworthy of you. Have you anything
worthy of you in your pocket to-day?"
"Nothing of your hearing. Just a little poem about
another Cherub."
AN ANCIENT PASSION.
[pg 130]
Lillie put on an innocently analytical frown. "I think
you behaved very badly," she exclaimed. "You might
have waited a little longer."
"Do you think so? Then I will go and leave you to
your labors," said Lord Silverdale with his wonted irrelevancy.
Lillie sat for a long time with pen in hand, thinking
[pg 132]
without writing. As a change from writing without thinking
this was perhaps a relief.
Rejected Addresses.
"A penny for your thoughts," said the millionaire,
stealing in upon her reflections.
Lillie started.
"I am not Ellaline Rand," she said smiling. "Wait
till The Cherub comes out, and you will get hers at that
price."
"Was Ellaline the girl who has just gone?"
"Did you see her? I thought you were gardening."
"So I was, but I happened to go into the dining-room
for a moment and saw her from the window. I suppose
she will be here often."
"I suppose so," said Lillie dubiously.
The millionaire rubbed his hands.
"Miss Eustasia Pallas," announced Turple the magnificent.
"A new candidate, probably," said the President.
"Father, you must go and play in the garden."
The millionaire left the room meekly.
[pg 133]
OF WIVES AND THEIR MISTRESSES.
"No, no," said Miss Eustasia Pallas. "You misapprehend
me. It is not because it would be necessary to
have a husband and a home of one's own, that I object
to marriage, but because it would be impossible to do
without servants. While a girl lives at home, she can
cultivate her soul while her mother attends to the ménage.
But after marriage, the higher life is impossible. You
must have servants. You cannot do your own dirty work—not
merely because it is dirty, but because it is the thief
of time. You can hardly get literature, music, and
religion adequately into your life even with the whole day
at your disposal; but if you had to make your own bed,
too, I am afraid you wouldn't find time to lie on it."
"Then why object to servants?" inquired Lillie.
"Because servants are the asphyxiators of the soul.
But for them I should long since have married."
"I do not quite follow you. Surely if you had servants
to relieve you of all the grosser duties, the spiritual could
then claim your individual attention."
"Ah, that is a pretty theory. It sounds very plausible.
In practice, alas! it does not work. Like the servants. I
have kept my eyes open almost from the first day of my
life. I have observed my mother's household and other
people's—I speak of the great middle-classes, mainly—and
[pg 134]
my unalterable conviction is, that every faithful wife
who aspires to be housekeeper too, becomes the servant
of her servants. They rule not only her but all her
thoughts. Her life circles round them. She can talk of
nothing else. Whether she visits, or is visited, servants
are the staple of her conversation. Their curious habits
and customs, their love-affairs, their laches, their impertinences,
these gradually become the whole food of thought,
ousting every higher aim and idea. I have watched a girl—my
bosom-friend at Girton—deteriorate from a maiden
to a wife, from a wife to a bondswoman. First she talked
Shelley, then Charley, then Mary Ann. Gradually her
soul shrank. She lost her character. She became a mere
parasite on the servant's kitchen, a slave to the cook's
drink and the housemaid's followers. Those who knew
my mother before she was married speak of her as a
bright, bonny girl, all enthusiasm and energy, interesting
herself in all the life of her day and even taking a side in
politics. But when I knew her, she was haggard and narrow.
She never read, nor sang, nor played, nor went to
the Academy. The greatest historical occurrences left her
sympathies untouched. She did not even care whether Australia
or England conquered at cricket, or whether Browning
lived or died. You could not get her to discuss Whistler
or the relations of Greek drama to Gaiety Burlesque,
or any other subject that interests ordinary human beings.
She did not want a vote. She did not want any alteration
in the divorce laws. She did not want Russia to be a free
country or the Empire to be federated. She did not want
darkest England to be supplied with lamps. She did not
want the working classes to lead better and nobler lives.
She did not want to preserve the Commons or to abolish
the House of Lords. She did not want to do good or
even to be happy. All she wanted was a cook or a housemaid
or a coachman, as the case might be, and she was
[pg 135]
perpetually asking all her acquaintance if they knew of a
good one, or had heard of the outrageous behavior of
the last.
"In her early married days, my father's income was not
a twentieth of what it is to-day, and so she was fairly
happy, with only one servant to tyrannize over her. But
she always had hard mistresses, even in those comparatively
easy years. Poor mother! One scene remains
vividly stamped upon my mind. We had a girl named
Selina who would not get up in the morning. We had
nothing to complain of in the time of her going to bed—I
think she went about nine—but the earliest she ever rose
was eight, and my father always had to catch the eight-twenty
train to the City, so you may imagine how much
breakfast he got. My mother spoke to Selina about it
nearly every day and Selina admitted the indictment. She
said she could not help it, she seemed to dream such long
dreams and never wake up in the middle. My mother
had had such difficulty in getting Selina that she hesitated
to send her away and start hunting for a new Selina, but the
case seemed hopeless. The winter came on and we took
to sending Selina to bed at six o'clock, that my father
might be sure of a hot cup of coffee before leaving home
in the morning. But she said the mornings were so cold
and dark it was impossible to get out of bed, though she
tried very hard and did her best. I think she spent only
nine hours out of bed on the average. My father gave up
the hope of breakfast. He used to leave by an earlier
train and get something at a restaurant. This grieved my
mother very much—she calculated it cost her a bonnet a
month. She became determined to convert Selina from
the error of her ways. She told me she was going to appeal
to Selina's higher nature. Reprimand had failed, but
the soul that cannot be coerced can be touched. That
was in the days when my mother still read poetry and was
[pg 136]
semi-independent. One bleak bitter dawn my mother rose
shivering, dressed herself and went down into the kitchen,
to the entire disconcertion of the chronology of the black-beetles.
She made the fire and put the kettle on to boil
and swept the kitchen. She also swept the breakfast-room
and lighted the fire and laid the breakfast. Then she sat
down, put on a saintly expression and waited for Selina.
"An hour went by, but Selina did not make her appearance.
The first half-hour passed quickly because my
mother was busy thinking out the exact phrases in which
to touch her higher nature. It required tact—a single
clumsy turn of language—and she might offend Selina
instead of elevating her. It was really quite a literary
effort, the adequate expression of my mother's conception
of the dignity and pathos of the situation, in fact it was
that most difficult branch of literature, the dramatic, for
my mother constructed the entire dialogue, speaking for
Selina as well as for herself. Like all leading ladies,
especially when they write their own plays, my mother
allotted herself the 'tag,' and the last words of the
dialogue were:—
"'There! there! my good girl! Dry your eyes. The
past shall be forgotten. From to-morrow a new life shall
begin. Come, Selina! drink that nice hot cup of tea—don't
cry and let it get cold. That's right.
"The second half-hour was rather slower, my mother
listening eagerly for Selina's footsteps, and pricking up
her ears at every sound. The mice ran about the wainscoting,
the kettle sang blithely, the little flames leaped in
the grate, the kitchen and the breakfast-room were cheerful
and cosy and redolent of the goodly savors of breakfast.
A pile of hot toast lay upon a plate. Only Selina
was wanting.
"All at once my mother heard the hall-door bang, and
running to the window she saw a figure going out into the
[pg 137]
gray freezing fog. It was my father hurrying to catch
his train. In the excitement of the experiment my
mother had forgotten to tell him that for this morning at
least, breakfast could be had at home. He might have
had such beautiful tea and coffee, such lovely toast, such
exquisite eggs, and there he was hastening along in the
raw air on an empty stomach. My mother rapped on the
panes with her knuckles but my father was late and did
not hear. Her own soul a little ruffled, my mother sat
down again in the kitchen and waited for Selina. Gradually
she forgot her chagrin, after all it was the last time
my father would ever have to depart breakfastless. She
went over the dialogue again, polishing it up and adding
little touches.
"I think it was past nine when Selina left her bedroom,
unwashed and rubbing her eyes. By that time my mother
had thrice resisted the temptation to go up and shake her,
and it was coming on a fourth time when she heard
Selina's massive footstep on the stair. Instantly my
mother's irritation ceased. She reassumed her look
of sublime martyrdom. She had spread a nice white
cloth on the kitchen table and Selina's breakfast stood
appetizingly upon it. Tears came into her eyes as she
thought of how Selina would be shaken to her depths by
the sight.
"Selina threw open the kitchen door with a peevish
push, for she disliked having to get up early in these cold,
dark winter mornings and vented her irritation even upon
insensitive woodwork. But when she saw the deep red
glow of the fire, instead of the dusky chillness of the
normal morning kitchen, she uttered a cry of joy, and
rushing forwards warmed her hands eagerly at the flame.
"'Oh, thank you, missus,' she said with genuine gratitude.
"Selina did not seem at all surprised. But my mother
[pg 138]
did. She became confused and nervous. She forgot her
words, as if from an attack of stage-fright. There was
no prompter and so for a moment my mother remained
speechless.
"Selina, having warmed her hands sufficiently, drew her
chair to the table and lifted the cosy from the tea-pot.
"'Why, you've let it get cold,' she said reproachfully,
feeling the side of the pot.
"This was more than my mother could stand.
"'It's you that have let it get cold,' she cried hotly.
"Now this was pure impromptu 'gag,' and my mother
would have done better to confine herself to the rehearsed
dialogue.
"'Oh, missus!' cried Selina. 'How can you say that?
Why, this is the first moment I've come down.'
"'Yes,' said my mother, gladly seizing the opportunity
of slipping back into the text. 'Somebody had to do the
work, Selina. In this world no work can go undone. If
those whose duty it is do not do it, it must fall on the
shoulders of other people. That is why I got up at seven
this morning instead of you and have tidied up the place
and made the master's breakfast.'
"'That was real good of you!' exclaimed Selina, with
impulsive admiration.
"My mother began to feel that the elaborate set piece
was going off in a damp sort of way, but she kept up her
courage and her saintly expression and continued,
"'It was freezing when I got out of my warm bed, and
before I could get the fire alight here I almost perished
with cold. I shouldn't be surprised if I have laid the
seeds of consumption.'
"'Ah,' said Selina with satisfaction. 'Now you see
what I have had to put up with.' She took another
piece of toast.
"Selina's failure to give the cues extremely disconcerted
[pg 139]
my mother. Instead of being able to make the high
moral remarks she had intended, she was forced to invent
repartées on the spur of the moment. The ethical quality
of these improvisations was distinctly inferior.
"'But you are paid for it, I'm not,' she retorted sharply.
"'I know. That is why I say it is so good of you,'
replied Selina, with inextinguishable admiration. 'But
you'll reap the benefit of it. Now that I've had my breakfast
without any trouble I shall be able to go about my
work a deal better. It's such a struggle to get up,
I assure you, missus, it tires me out for the day. Might
I have another egg?'
"My mother savagely pushed her another egg.
"'I'm thinking it would be a good plan,' said Selina,
meditatively opening the egg with her fingers, 'if you would
get up instead of me every morning. But perhaps that
was what you were thinking of.'
"'Oh, you would like me to, would you?' said my
mother.
"'I should be very grateful, I should indeed,' said Selina
earnestly. 'And I'm sure the work would be better done.
There don't seem to be a speck of dust anywhere,'—she
rubbed her dirty thumb admiringly along the dresser—'and
I'm sure the tea and toast are lots nicer than any
I've ever made.'
"My mother waved her hand deprecatingly, but Selina
continued:
"'Oh yes, you know they are. You've often told me I
was no use at all in the kitchen. I don't need to be told
of my shortcomings, missus. All you say of me is quite
true. You would be ever so much more satisfied if you
cooked everything yourself. I'm sure you would.'
"'And what would you do under this beautiful scheme?'
inquired my mother with withering sarcasm.
"'I haven't thought of that yet,' said Selina simply.
[pg 140]
'But no doubt, if I looked around carefully, I should find
something to occupy me. I couldn't be long out of work,
I feel sure.'
"Well, that was how mother's attempt to elevate Selina
by moral means came to be a fiasco. The next time she
tried to elevate her, it was by physical means. My mother
left the suburb, and moved to a London flat very near the
sky. She had given up hopes of improving Selina's matutinal
habits, and made the breakfast hour later through
my father having now no train to catch, but she thought
she would cure her of followers. Selina's flirtations were
not confined to our tradespeople and the local constabulary.
She would exchange remarks about the weather
with the most casual pedestrian in trousers. My mother
thought she would remove her from danger by raising her
high above all earthly temptations. We made the tradesmen
send up their goods by lift and the only person she
could flirt with was the old lift attendant. My father
grumbled a good deal in the early days because the lift
was always at the other extreme when he wanted it, but
Selina's moral welfare came before all other considerations.
"By and by they began to renovate the exterior of the
adjoining mansion. They put up a scaffolding, which
grew higher and higher as the work advanced, and men
swarmed upon it. At first my mother contemplated them
with equanimity because they were British working-men
and we were nearest heaven. But as the months went by,
they began to get nearer and nearer. There came a time
when Selina's smile was distinctly visible to the man
engaged on the section of the scaffolding immediately
below. That smile encouraged him. It seemed to say
'Excelsior.' He was a veritable Don Juan, that laborer.
At every flat he flirted with the maid in possession. By
counting the storeys in our mansion you could calculate
[pg 141]
the number of his amours. With every rise he left a love-passage
behind him. He was a typical man—always looking
higher, and, when he had raised himself to a more
elevated position, spurning yesterday's love from beneath
his feet. He seemed to mount on broken hearts. And
now he was aspiring to the highest of all—Selina. Oh it
is cruel! My mother had secluded Selina like a virgin
Princess in an enchanted inaccessible tower and yet here
was the Prince calmly scaling the tower, without any possibility
of interference. Long before he had reached the
top the consumption of Bass in our flat went up by leaps
and bounds. Selina, my mother ultimately discovered,
used to lower the beer by strings. It appeared, moreover,
that she had two strings to her bow, for a swain in a slouch
hat had been likewise climbing the height, at an insidious
angle which had screened him from my mother's observation
hitherto. Neither of these men did much work, but
it made them very thirsty.
Lowering the Beer.
"That destroyed the last vestige of my mother's faith in
Selina's soul. Like all disappointed women, she became
crabbed and cynical. When my father's rising fortunes
brought her more and more under the dominion of servants,
the exposure and out-manœuvring of her taskmasters
came to be the only pleasure of her life. She spent a
great deal of time in the police-courts—the constant prosecution
she suffered from, curtailed the last relics of her
leisure. Everybody has heard of the law's delay, but few
know how much time prosecutors have to lose, hanging
about the Court waiting for their case to be called. When
a servant robbed her, my mother rarely got off with less
than seven days. The moment she had engaged a servant,
she became morbidly suspicious of him or her.
Often, when she had dressed for dinner, it would suddenly
strike her that if she ransacked a certain cupboard something
or other would be discovered, and off she would go
[pg 143]
to spoil her spotless silks. She had a mania for 'Spring
cleanings' once a month, so as to keep the drones busy.
Often I would bring a friend home, only to find the dining-room
in the hall and the drawing-room on the landing.
And yet to the end she retained a certain guileless, girlish
simplicity—a fresh fund of hope which was not without a
charm and pathos of its own. To the very last she believed
that, faultless, flawless servants existed somewhere
and she didn't intend to be happy till she got them; so
that it was said of her by my sister's intended that she
passed her life on the doorstep, either receiving an angel
or expelling a fiend. It showed what a fine trustful nature
had been turned to gall. She is at rest now, poor mother,
her life's long slavery ended by the soft touch of all-merciful
Death. Let us hope that she has opened her sorrow-stricken
eyes on a brighter land, where earthly distinctions
are annulled and the poor heavy-laden mistress may mix
on equal terms with the radiant parlor-maid and the
buxom cook."
The tears were in Lillie's eyes as Miss Eustasia Pallas
concluded her affecting recital.
"But don't you think," said the President, conquering
her emotion, "that with such an awful example in your
memory, you could never yourself sink into such a serfage,
even if you married?"
"I dare not trust myself," said Eustasia. "I have seen
the fall of too many other women. Why should I expect
immunity from the general fate? I think myself strong—but
who can fathom her own weakness. Why, I have
actually been talking servants to you all the time. Think
how continuous is the temptation, how subtle. Were it
not better to possess my soul in peace and to cultivate it
nobly and wisely and become a shining light of the higher
spinsterhood?"
Eustasia passed the preliminary examination and also
[pg 144]
the viva voce, and Lillie was again in high feather. But
before the election was formally confirmed, she was chagrined
to receive the following letter.
Drew up the Advertisement.
"My dear Miss Dulcimer.
"I have good news for you. Knowing your anxiety to
find for me a way out of my matrimonial dilemma, I am
pleased to be able to inform you that it has been found by
my friend and literary adviser, Percy Swinshel Spatt, the
well known philosopher and idealist. I met him writing
down his thoughts in Bond Street. In the course of a
dialogue upon the Beautiful, I put my puzzle to him and he
solved it in a moment. 'Why must you keep a servant?' he
asked, for it is his habit to question every statement he
does not make. 'Why not rather keep a mistress? Become
a servant yourself and all your difficulties vanish.'
It was like a flash of lightning. 'Yes,' I said, when I had
recovered from the dazzle, 'but that would mean separation
from my husband.' 'Why?' he replied with his usual
habit. 'In many houses they prefer to take married couples.'
'Ah, but where should I find a man of like mind, a
man to whom leisure for the cultivation of his soul was
the one great necessity of life?' 'It is a curious coincidence,
Eustasia,' he replied, 'that I was just myself contemplating
keeping a master and retiring into a hermitage
below stairs, to devote myself to philosophical contemplation.
As a butler or a footman in a really aristocratic
establishment, my duties would be nominal, and the other
servants and my employers would attend to all my wants.
Abstract speculation would naturally indue me with the
grave silence and dignity which seem to be the chief duties
of these superior creatures. It is possible, Eustasia, that
I am not the first to perceive the advantages of this way
of living and that plush is but the disguise of the philosopher.
As for you, Eustasia, you could become a parlor-maid.
[pg 145]
Thus we should live together peacefully, with no
sordid housekeeping cares, no squalid interests in rates or
taxes, devoted heart and soul to the higher life.' 'You
light up for me perspectives of Paradise,' I cried enthusiastically.
'Then let us get the key of the garden at once,'
he replied rapturously, and turning over a new leaf of his
philosophical note-book, he set to work then and there to
draw up the advertisement: 'Wanted—by a young married
couple, etc.' Of course we had to be a little previous,
because I could not consent to marry him unless we had
a situation to go to. We were only putting what the Greek
grammars call a proleptic construction upon the situation.
[pg 146]
Well, it seems good servants are so scarce we got a place
at once—the exact thing we were looking for. We are
concealing our real names (lest the profession be overrun
by jealous friends from Newnham and Girton and Oxford
and Cambridge) so that I was able to give Percy a character
and Percy to give me a character. We are going into our
place next Monday afternoon, so, to avoid obtaining the
situation by false pretences, we shall have to go before
the Registrar on the Monday morning. Our honeymoon
will be spent in the delightful and unexploited retreat of
the back kitchen.
"Yours, in the higher sisterhood,
"Eustasia Pallas."
[pg 147]
THE GOOD YOUNG MEN WHO LIVED.
"It is, indeed, a happy solution," said Lord Silverdale
enviously. "To spend your life in the service of other
men, yet to save it for yourself! It reconciles all ideals."
"Well, you can very easily try it," said Lillie. "I
have just heard from the Princess of Portman Square—she
is reorganizing her household in view of her nuptials.
Shall I write you a recommendation?"
"No, but I will read you an Address to an Egyptian
Tipcat," replied his lordship, with the irrelevancy which
was growing upon him. "You know the recent excavations
have shown that the little Egyptians used to play
'pussy-cat' five thousand years ago."
ADDRESS TO AN EGYPTIAN TIP-CAT.
"Why, did the hieroglyphists use to brag?" asked
Lillie.
"Shamefully. You can no more believe in their statements
than in epitaphs. There seems something peculiarly
mendacious about stone as a recording medium. Only
it must be admitted on behalf of the hieroglyphists that
it may be the Egyptologists who are the braggers. There
never was an ancient inscription which is not capable of
being taken in a dozen different ways, like a party-leader's
speech. Every word has six possible meanings and half
a dozen probable ones. The savants only pretend to understand
the stones."
So saying Lord Silverdale took his departure. On the
doorstep he met a young lady carrying a brown paper
parcel. She smiled so sweetly at him that he raised his
hat and wondered where he had met her.
But it was only another candidate. She faced Turple
the magnificent and smiled on, unawed. Turple ended
by relaxing his muscles a whit, then ashamed of himself
he announced gruffly, "Miss Mary Friscoe."
After the preliminary formalities, and after having
duly assured herself that there was no male ear within
earshot, Miss Friscoe delivered herself of the following
candid confession.
"I am a pretty girl, as you can see. I wear sweet frocks
[pg 149]
and smiles, and my eyes are of Heaven's own blue. Men
are fond of gazing into them. Men are so artistic. They
admire the beautiful and tell her so. Women are so different.
I have overheard my girl friends call me 'that
silly little flirt.'
"I hold that any woman can twist any man round her
little finger or his arm round her waist, therefore I consider
it no conceit to say I have attracted considerable
attention. If I had accepted all the offers I received,
my marriages could easily have filled a column of The
Times. I know there are women who think that men are
coarse, unsentimental creatures, given over to slang, tobacco,
billiards, betting, brandies and sodas, smoking-room
stories, flirtations with barmaids, dress and general depravity.
But the women who say or write that are soured
creatures, who have never been loved, have never fathomed
the depth and purity of men's souls.
"I have been loved. I have been loved much and often,
and I speak as one who knows. Man is the most maligned
animal in creation. He is the least gross and carnal of
creatures, the most exquisitely pure and refined in thought
and deed; the most capable of disinterested devotion,
self-sacrifice, chivalry, tenderness. Every man is his own
Bayard.
"If men had their deserts we women—heartless, frivolous,
venal creatures that we are—would go down on our knees
to them, and beg them to marry us. I am a woman and
again I speak as one who knows. For I am not a bad
specimen of my sex. Even my best friends admit I am
only silly. I am really a very generous and kind-hearted
little thing. I never keep my tailor waiting longer than a
year, I have made quite a number of penwipers for the
poor, and I have never told an unnecessary lie in my life.
I give a great deal of affection to my mother and even a
little assistance in the household. I do not smoke scented
[pg 150]
cigarettes. I read travels and biographies as well as novels,
play the guitar rather well, attend a Drawing Class, rise
long before noon, am good-tempered, wear my ball-dresses
more than once, turn winter dresses into spring frocks by
stripping off the fur and putting on galon, and diversify my
gowns by changing the sleeves. In short, I am a superior,
thoroughly domesticated girl. And yet I have never met
a man who has not had the advantage of me in all the
virtues.
"There was George Holly,—I regret I cannot mention
my lovers in chronological order, but my memories are so
vague, they all seem to fuse into one another. Perhaps
it is because there is a lack of distinctiveness about men—a
monotonous goodness which has its charm but is extremely
confusing. One thing I do remember though,
about George—at least, I think it was George. His moustache
was rather bristly, and the little curled tips used to
tickle one's nose comically. I was very disappointed in
George, I had heard such a lot of talk about him; but
when I got to really know him I found he was not a bit
like it. How I came to really know him was like this.
'Mary,' he said, as we sat on the stairs, high up, so as
not to be in the way of the waiters. 'Won't you say
"yes" and make me the happiest man alive? Never man
loved as I love now. Answer me. Do not torture me
with suspense.' I was silent; speechless with happiness
to think that I had won this true manly heart. I looked
down at my fan. My lips were forming the affirmative
monosyllable, when George continued passionately,
"'Ah, Mary, speak! Mary, the only woman I ever
loved.'
"I turned pale with emotion. Tears came into my eyes.
"'Is this true?' I articulated. 'Am I really the only
woman you ever loved?'
"'By my hopes of a hereafter, yes!' George was a bit
[pg 151]
slangy in his general conversation. The shallow world
never knew the poetry he could rise to. 'This is the
first time I have known what it is to love, Mary, my sweet,
my own.'
"'No, not your own,' I interrupted coldly, for my heart
was like ice within me. 'I belong to myself, and I intend
to. Will you give me your arm into the ballroom—Mr.
Daythorpe must be looking for me everywhere.'
"It sounds very wicked to say it, I know, but I cannot
delay my confession longer. I love, I adore, I doat on
wicked men, men who love not wisely but too well. When
I learnt history at school I could always answer questions
about the reign of Charles II., it was such a deliciously
wicked period. I love Burns, Lord Byron, De Musset,
Lovelace—all the nice naughty men of history or fiction.
I like Ouida's guardsman, whose love is a tornado, and
Charlotte Bronte's Rochester, and Byron's Don Juan. I
hate, I detest milksops. And a good man always seems
to me a milksop. It is a flaw—a terrible flaw in my composition,
I know—but I cannot help it. It makes me
miserable, but what can I do? Nature will out.
"That was how I came to find George out, to discover he
was not the terrible cavalier, the abandoned squire of
dames the world said he was. His reputation was purely
bogus. The gossips might buzz, but I had it on the highest
authority. I was the first woman he had ever loved.
What pleasure is there in such a conquest? It grieved
me to break his heart, but I had no option.
"Daythorpe was another fellow who taught me the same
lesson of the purity and high emotions of his cruelly
libelled sex. He, too, when driven into a corner (far from
the madding crowd) confessed that I was the only woman
he had ever loved. I have tried them all—poets and
musicians, barristers and business-men. They all had suffered
from the same incapacity for affection till they met
[pg 152]
me. It was quite pathetic to discover how truly all men
were brothers. The only difference was that while some
added I was the only woman they ever could love, others
insisted that never man had loved before as they did now.
The latter lovers always remind me of advertisers offering
a superior article to anything in the trade. Nowhere could
I meet the man I longed for—the man who had lived and
loved. Once I felt stirrings towards a handsome young
widower, but he went out of his way to assure me he had
never cared for his first wife. After that, of course, he had
no chance.
Platonic Love.
"Unable to discover any but good young men, I resigned
myself perforce to spinsterhood. I resolved to cultivate
only Platonic relations. I told young men to come to me
and tell me their troubles. I encouraged them to sit at
my feet and confide in me while I held their hands to give
them courage. But even so they would never confess anything
worth hearing, and if they did love anybody it invariably
turned out to be me and me only. Yes, I grieve to
say these Platonic young men were just as good as the
others; leaving out the audacity of their proposing to me
when I had given them no encouragement. Here again
I found men distressingly alike. They are constitutionally
unable to be girls' chums, they are always hankering
to convert the friendship into love. Time after time anticipations
of a genuine comradeship were rudely dispelled
by fatuous philandering. Yet I never ceased to be surprised,
and I never lost hope. Such, I suppose, is the
simple trustfulness of a girl's nature. In time I got to
know when the explosion was coming, and this deadened
the shock. I found it was usually preceded by suicidal
remarks of a retrospective character. My comrades would
tell me of their past lives, of the days when the world's
oyster was yet unopened by them. In those dark days
(tears of self-pity came into their eyes as they spoke of
[pg 154]
them) they were on the point of suicide—to a man. Only,
one little thing always came to save them—their first brief,
the acceptance of their first article, poem or song, the
opportune deaths of aunts, the chance hearing of an
organ-note rolling through the portal of a village church
on a Sunday afternoon, a letter from an old schoolmaster.
The obvious survival of the narrators rather spoiled the
sensational thrill for me, but they themselves were always
keenly touched by the story. And from suicide in the
past to suicide in the future was an easy transition. Alas,
I was the connecting link. They loved me—and unless
I returned their love, that early suicide would prove to
have been merely postponed. In the course of conversation
it transpired that I was the first woman they had ever
loved. I remember once rejecting on this account two
such Platonic failures, within ten minutes of each other.
One was a well-known caricaturist, and the other was the
editor of a lady's paper.
Each left me, declaring
his heart was broken,
that I had led him on
shamelessly, that I was
a heartless jilt and that
he would go and kill
himself. My brother
Tom accidentally told
me he saw them together
about an hour afterwards
at a bar in the
Strand, asking each
other what was their
poison. So I learnt
that they had spoken
the truth. I had driven them to drink. And according
to Tom the drink at this particular bar is superior
[pg 155]
to strychnine. He says men always take it in
preference."
Driven to Drink.
"And have you then finally decided to abandon Platonics?"
asked Lillie, when the flow of words came to an
end.
"Finally."
"And you have decided to enroll in our ranks?"
Miss Mary Friscoe hesitated.
"Well about that part I'm not quite so certain. To
tell the truth, there is one young man of my acquaintance
who has never yet proposed. When I started for here in
disgust at the goodness of mankind I forgot him, but in
talking he has come back to my mind. I have a strong
suspicion he is quite wicked. He is always painting
actresses. Don't you think it would be unfair to him to
take my vows without giving him a chance?"
"Well, yes," said Lillie musingly, "perhaps it would.
You would feel easier afterwards. Otherwise you might
always reproach yourself with the thought that you had
perhaps turned away from a bad man's love. You might
feel that the world was not so good as you had imagined
in your girlish cynicism, and then you might regret having
joined us."
"Quite so," said Miss Friscoe eagerly. "But he shall
be the very last man I will listen to."
"When do you propose to be proposed to by him?"
"The sooner the better. This very day, if you like. I
am going straight from here to my Drawing Class."
"Very well. Then you will come to-morrow and tell
me your final decision?"
"To-morrow."
Miss Mary Friscoe arrived at the Drawing Class late.
Her fellow students of both sexes were already at their
easels and her entry distracted everybody. It was a motley
[pg 156]
gathering, working in motley media—charcoal, chalk,
pencil, oil, water-color. One girl was modelling in clay,
and one young gentleman, opera-glass in hand, was making
enlarged colored copies of photographs. It was this young
gentleman that Mary came out for to see. His name was
Bertie Smythe. He was rich, but he would always be a
poor artist. His ambition was to paint the nude.
There were lilies of the valley in the bosom of Mary's
art-gown, and when she arrived she unfolded the brown
paper parcel she carried and took therefrom a cardboard
box containing a snow-white collar and spotless cuffs,
which she proceeded to adjust upon her person. She
then went to the drawing-board rack and stood helpless,
unable to reach down her board, which was quite two
inches above her head. There was a rush of embryo
R.A.'S. Those who failed to hand her the board got down
the cast and dusted it for her and fixed it up according to
her minute and detailed directions, and adjusted her easel,
and brought her a trestle, and lent her lead-pencils, and
cut them for her, and gave her chunks of stale bread, for
all which services she rewarded them with bewitching
smiles and profuse thanks and a thousand apologies. It
took her a long time getting to work on the charcoal
cluster of plums which had occupied her ever since the
commencement of the term, because she never ventured
to commence without holding long confabulations with
her fellow-students as to whether the light was falling in
exactly the same way as last time. She got them to cock
their heads on one side and survey the sketch, to retreat
and look at it knowingly, to measure the visual angle with
a stick of charcoal, or even to manipulate delicately the
great work itself. Meantime she fluttered about it,
chattering, alternately enraptured and dissatisfied, and
when at last she started, it was by rubbing everything out.
The best position for drawing happened to be next to
[pg 157]
Bertie Smythe. That artist was now engaged in copying
the portrait of an actress.
"Oh, Mr. Smythe," said Mary suddenly, in a confidential
whisper. "I've got such a beautiful face for you
to paint."
"I know you have!" flashed Bertie, in the same intimate
tone.
"What a tease you are, twisting my words like that,"
said Mary, rapping him playfully on the knuckles with her
mahl-stick. "You know what I mean quite well. It's a
cousin of mine in the country."
"I see—it runs in the family," said Bertie.
"What runs in the family?" asked Mary.
"Beautiful faces, of course."
"Oh, that's too bad of you," said Mary pouting. "You
know I don't like compliments." She rubbed a pellet of
bread fretfully into her drawing.
"I don't pay compliments. I tell the truth," said Bertie,
meeting her gaze unflinchingly.
"Oh, look at that funny little curl Miss Roberts is
wearing to-night!"
"Bother Miss Roberts. When are you going to let me
have your face to paint?"
"My cousin's, you mean," said Mary, rubbing away
harder than ever.
"No, I don't. I mean yours."
"I never give away photographs to gentlemen."
"Well, sit to me then."
"Sit to you! Where?"
"In my studio."
"Good gracious! What are you talking about?"
"You."
"Oh, you are too tiresome. I shall never get this
finished," grumbled Mary, concentrating herself so vigorously
on the drawing that she absent-mindedly erased the
[pg 158]
last vestiges of it. She took up her plumb-line and held
it in front of her cast and became absorbed in contemplating
it.
"You haven't answered my question, Miss Friscoe,"
whispered Bertie pertinaciously.
"What question?"
"When are you going to lend me your face?"
"Look, there's Mr. Biskett going home already!"
"Hang Mr. Biskett! I say, Mary——" he began passionately.
"How are you getting on, Mr. Smythe?" came the
creaking voice of Potts, the drawing-master, behind him.
"Pretty well, thank you; how's yourself?" mechanically
replied Bertie, greatly flustered by his inopportune
arrival.
Potts stared and Mary burst into a ringing laugh.
"Look at my drawing, Mr. Potts," she said. "It will
come so funny."
"Why, there's nothing there," said Potts.
"Dear me, no more there is," said Mary. "I—I was
entirely dissatisfied with it. You might just sketch it in
for me."
Potts was accustomed to doing the work of most of the
lady students. They used to let him do a little bit on
each of his rounds till the thing was completed. He set
to work on Mary's drawing, leaving her to finish being
proposed to.
"And you really love me?" Mary was saying, while
Potts was sketching the second plum.
"Can you doubt it?" Bertie whispered tremulously.
"Yes, I do doubt it. You have loved so many girls,
you know. Oh, I have heard all about your conquests."
She thought it was best to take the bull by the horns,
and her breath came thick and fast as she waited for the
reply that would make or mar her life.
[pg 159]
Bertie's face lit up with pleasure.
"Oh, but——" he began.
"Ah, yes, I know," she interrupted triumphantly.
"What about that actress you are painting now?"
"Oh, well," said Bertie. "If you say 'yes,' I promise
never to speak to her again."
"And you will give up your bad habits?" she continued
joyfully.
"Every one. Even my cigarettes, if you say the word.
My whole life shall be devoted to making you happy.
You shall never hear a cross word from my lips."
Mary's face fell, her lip twitched. What was the use
of marrying a milksop like that? Where would be the
fun of a union without mutual recriminations and sweet
reconciliations? She even began to doubt whether he
was wicked after all.
"Did you ever really love that actress?" she whispered
anxiously.
"No, of course I didn't," said Bertie soothingly. "To
tell the truth, I have never spoken to her in my life. I
bought her photo in the Burlington arcade and I only
talk with the fellows about ballet girls in order, not to be
behind the times. I never knew what love was till I met
you. You are the only——"
Crash! bang! went his three-legged easel, upset by
Mary's irrepressible movement of pique. The eyes of
the class were on them in a moment, but only Mary knew
that in that crash her last hope of happiness had fallen,
too.
"I do trust Miss Friscoe's last chance will not prove a
blank again," said Lord Silverdale, when Lillie had told
him of the poor girl's disappointments.
"Why?" asked the President.
"Because I shrink from the viva voce examination."
[pg 160]
"Why?" asked the President.
"I am afraid I should be so dangerous."
"Why?" asked the President.
"Because I have loved before. I shall be desperately
in love with another woman all through the interview."
"Oh, I am so sorry, but you are inadmissible," said
Lillie, when Miss Friscoe came to announce her willingness
to join the Club.
"Why?" asked the candidate.
"Because you belong to an art-class. It is forbidden
by our by-laws. How stupid of me not to think of it yesterday!"
"But I am ready to give it up."
"Oh, I couldn't dream of allowing that on any account,"
said the President. "I hear you draw so well."
So Mary never went before the Honorary Trier.
[pg 161]
ADVENTURES IN SEARCH OF THE POLE.
"Oh, by the way, Miss Friscoe will not trouble you, you
will be glad to hear," said Lillie, lightly.
"Indeed?" said Silverdale. "Then she has drawn a
prize after all! I cannot say as much for the young
man. I hardly think she is a credit to your sex. Somehow,
she reminded me of a woman I used to know, and
of some verses I wrote upon her."
("If he had given me a chance, and not gone on to
read his poetry so quickly," wrote Lillie in her diary that
night, "I might have told him that his inference about
Miss Friscoe was incorrect. But it is such a trifle—it is
not worth telling him now, especially as he practically
intimated she would have been an undesirable member,
and I only saved him the trouble of trying her.")
Lord Silverdale read his verses without the accompaniment
of the banjo, an instrument too frivolous for the
tragic muse.
LA FEMME QUE NE RIT PAS.
"I don't see where the connection with Miss Friscoe
comes in," said Lillie.
"No? Why simply if she acquired an enamelled complexion,
it might be the salvation of her, don't you see?
Like Henry I., she could never smile again."
[pg 163]
Lillie smiled. Then producing a manuscript, she said:
"I think you will be interested in this story of another of
the candidates who applied during your expedition to the
clouds. It is quite unique, and for amusement I have
written it from the man's point of view."
"May I come in?" interrupted the millionaire, popping
his head through the door. "Are there any Old Maids
here?"
"Only me," said Lillie.
"Oh, then, I'll call another time."
"No, you may come in, father. Lord Silverdale and I
have finished our business for the day. You can take
that away with you and read it at your leisure, Lord Silverdale."
The millionaire came in, but without empressement.
That night Lord Silverdale, who was suffering from
insomnia, took the manuscript to bed with him, but he
could not sleep till he had finished it.
I, Anton Mendoza, bachelor, born thirty years ago by
the grace of the Holy Virgin, on the fęte-day of San Anton,
patron of pigs and old maids, after sundry adventures
by sea and land, found myself in the autumn of
last year in the pestiferous atmosphere of London. I
had picked up bad English and a good sum of money in
South America, and by the aid of the two was enabled to
thread my way through the mazes of the metropolis. I
soon tired of the neighborhood of the Alhambra (in the
proximity of which I had with mistaken patriotism established
myself), for the wealthy quarters of all great cities
have more affinities than differences, and after a few days
of sight-seeing I resolved to fare forth in quest of the real
sights of London. Mounting the box of the first omnibus
that came along, I threw the reins of my fortunes into the
hands of the driver, and drew a little blue ticket from the
[pg 164]
lottery of fate. I scanned the slip of paper curiously and
learned therefrom that I was going fast to "The Angel,"
which I shrewdly divined to be a public-house, knowing
that these islanders display no poetry and imagination
save in connection with beer. My intuition was correct,
and though it was the forenoon I alighted amid a double
stream of pedestrians, the one branch flowing into "The
Angel," and the other issuing therefrom. Extricating
myself, I looked at my compass, and following the direction
of the needle soon found myself in a network of unlovely
streets. For an hour I paced forwards without
chancing on aught of interest, save many weary organ-grinders,
seemingly serenading their mistresses with upward
glances at their chamber-windows, and I was commencing
to fear that my blue ticket would prove a blank, when a
savory odor of garlic struck on my nostrils and apprised
me that my walk had given me an appetite. Glancing
sideways I saw a door swinging, the same bearing in
painted letters on the glass the words: "Menotti's Restaurant—Ici
on parle Francais." It looked a queer little
place, and the little back street into which I had strayed
seemed hardly auspicious of cleanly fare. Still the jewel
of good cookery harbors often in the plainest caskets,
and I set the door swinging again and passed into a narrow
room walled with cracked mirrors and furnished with
a few little tables, a rusty waiter, and a proprietorial looking
person perpetually bent over a speaking tube. As
noon was barely arrived, I was not surprised to find the
place all but empty. At the extreme end of the restaurant
I caught a glimpse of a stout dark man with iron-gray
whiskers. I thought I would go and lunch at the table of
the solitary customer and scrape acquaintance, and thus
perhaps achieve an adventure. But hardly had I seated
myself opposite him than a shock traversed his face, the
morsel he had just swallowed seemed to stick in his throat,
[pg 165]
he rose coughing violently, and clapping his palm over his
mouth with the fingers spread out almost as if he wished
to hide his face, turned his back quickly, seized his hat,
threw half-a-crown to the waiter and scuttled from the
establishment.
He scuttled from the Establishment.
I was considerably surprised at his abrupt departure, as
if I had brought some infection with me. The momentary
glimpse I had caught of his face had convinced me I had
never seen it before, that it had no place in the photograph
album of my brain, though now it would be fixed
there forever. The nose hooked itself on to my memory
at once. It must be that he had mistaken me for somebody
else, somebody whom he had reason to fear. Perhaps
he was a criminal and imagined me a detective. I
called the proprietor and inquired of him in French who
the man was and what was the matter with him. But he
shook his head and answered: "That man there puzzles
me. There is a mystery behind."
"Why, has he done anything strange before to-day?"
"No, not precisely."
"How then?"
"I will tell you. He comes here once a year."
"Once a year?" I repeated.
"No more. This has been going on for twelve years."
"What are you telling me there?" I murmured.
"It is true."
"But how have you remembered him from year to
year?"
"I was struck by his face and his air the very first
time. He seemed anxious, ill at ease, worried. He left
his chop half eaten."
"Ha!" I murmured.
"Also he looks different from most of my clients.
They are not of that type. Of course I forget him immediately—it
is not my affair. But when he comes the
[pg 167]
second time I recall him on the instant, though a year has
passed. Again he looks perturbed, restless. I say to
myself: 'Aha, thou art not a happy man, there is something
which preys on thy mind. However, thy money is
good and to the devil with the rest.' So it goes on.
After three or four visits I commence to look out for him,
and I discover that it is only once a year he does me the
honor to arrive. There are twelve years that I know him—I
have seen him twelve times."
"And he has always this nervous air?"
"Not always. That varies. Sometimes he appears
calm, sometimes even happy."
"Perhaps it is your fare," I said slily.
"Ah, no, monsieur, that does not vary. It is always of
the first excellence."
"Does he always come on the same date?"
"No, monsieur. There is the puzzle. It is never exactly
a year between his visits—sometimes it is more,
sometimes it is less."
"There is, indeed, the puzzle," I agreed. "If it were
always the same date, it would be a clue. Ah, an idea!
He comes not always on the same date of the month, but
he comes, perhaps, on the same day of the week, eh?"
Again the proprietor dashed me back into the depths
of perplexity.
"No," he said, decisively. "Monday, Wednesday,
Saturday,—it is all the same. The only thing that changes
not is the man and his dress. Always the same broadcloth
frock-coat and the same high hat and the same seals
at the heavy watch-chain. He is a rich man, that sees itself."
I wrinkled my brow and tugged the ends of my moustache
in the effort to find a solution. The proprietor
tugged the ends of his own moustache in sympathetic
silence.
[pg 168]
"Does he always slink out if anybody sits down opposite
to him?" I inquired again.
"On the contrary. He talks and chats quite freely
with his neighbors when there are any. I have seen his
countenance light up when a man has come to seat himself
next to him."
"Then to-day is the first time he has behaved so
strangely?"
"Absolutely."
Again I was silent. I looked at myself curiously in the
cracked mirror.
"Do you see anything strange in my appearance?" I
asked the proprietor.
"Nothing in the world," said the proprietor, shaking
his head vigorously.
"Nothing in the world," echoed the waiter, emphatically.
"Then why does he object to me, when he doesn't object
to anybody else?"
"Pardon," said the proprietor. "It is, after all, but
rarely that a stranger sits at his table. He comes ordinarily
so early for his lunch that my clients have not yet
arrived, and I have only the honor to serve an accidental
customer like yourself."
"Ah, then, there is some regularity about the time of
day at least?"
"Ah, yes, there is that," said the proprietor, reflectively.
"But even here there is no hard and fast line. He may
be an hour earlier, he may be an hour later."
"What a droll of a man!" I said laughing, even as I
wondered. "And you have not been able to discover anything
about him, though he has given it you in twelve?"
"It is not my affair," he repeated, shrugging his shoulders.
"You know not his name even?"
[pg 169]
"How should I know it?"
"Ah, very well, you shall see!" I said, buttoning up
my coat resolutely and rising to my feet. "You shall see
that I will find out everything in once. I, a stranger in
London, who love the oceans and the forests better than
the cities, I, who know only the secrets of Nature, behold,
I will solve you this mystery of humanity."
"As monsieur pleases," replied the proprietor. "For
me the only question is what monsieur will have for his
lunch."
"I want no lunch," I cried. Then seeing his downcast
face and remembering the man must be out of sight by
this time and nothing was to be gained by haste, I ordered
some broth and a veal and ham pie, and strode to the door
to make sure there was no immediate chance of coming
upon him. The little by-street was almost deserted, there
was not a sign of my man. I returned to my seat and
devoted myself to my inner man instead. Then I rebuttoned
my coat afresh—though with less facility—and sauntered
out joyously. Now at last I had found something
to interest me in London. The confidence born of a good
meal was strong in my bosom as I pushed those swinging
doors open and cried "Au revoir," to my host, for I
designed to return and to dazzle him with my exploits.
"Au revoir, monsieur, a thousand thanks," cried the
proprietor, popping up from his speaking-tube. "But
where are you going? Where do you hope to find this
man?"
"I go not to find the man," I replied airily.
"Comment!" he exclaimed in his astonishment.
"I go to seek the woman," I said in imposing accents.
And waving my hand amicably I sallied forth into the
dingy little street.
But alas for human anticipations! The whole of that
day I paced the dead and alive streets of North London
[pg 170]
without striking the faintest indication of a trail. After a
week's futile wanderings I began to realize the immensity
of the English metropolis—immense not only by its actual
area, but by the multiplicity of its streets and windings,
and by the indifference of each household to its neighbors,
which makes every roof the cover of manifold mysterious
existences and potentialities. To look for a needle in a
bundle of hay were child's play to the task of finding a face
in a London suburb, even assuming as I did my enigma
lived in the northern district. I dared not return to the
restaurant to inquire if perchance he had been seen. I
was ashamed to confess myself baffled. I shifted my
quarters from Leicester Square to Green Lanes and walked
every day within a four mile radius of the restaurant, but
fortune turned her face (and his) from me and I raged at
my own folly in undertaking so futile a quest. At last,
"Patience!" I cried. "Patience, and shuffle the cards!"
It was my pet proverb when off the track of anything. To
cut yourself adrift from the old plan and look at the problem
with new eyes—that was my recipe. I tried it by
going into the country for some stag hunting, which I had
ascertained from a farmer whom I met in a coffee-house,
could be obtained in some of the villages in the next county.
But English field-sports I found little to my taste, for the
deer had been unhorned and was let out of a cart, and it
was only playing at sport. The Holy Mother save me
from such bloodless make-believe! Though the hunting
season was in full swing I returned in disgust to the town,
and again confiding my fortunes to a common or garden
omnibus, I surveyed the street panorama from my seat on
the roof till the vehicle turned round for the backward
journey. This time I found myself in Canonbury, a district
within the radius I had previously explored. The
coincidence gave me fresh hope—it seemed a happy augury
of ultimate success. The saints would guide my footsteps
[pg 171]
after all; for he who wills aught intensely cajoles
Providence. The dusk had fallen and the night lamps
had been lit in the heavens and on the earth, though without
imparting cheerfulness to the rigid rows of highly respectable
houses. I walked through street after street
of gray barracks, tall narrow structures holding themselves
with the military stiffness and ranged in serried columns,
the very greenery that relieved their fronts growing sympathetically
symmetrical and sombre. I sighed for my
native orange-groves, I longed for a whiff of the blue
Mediterranean, I strove to recall the breezy expanses of the
South American Pampas whence I had come, and had it
not been for the interest of my search, I should have fled
like St. Anthony from the lady, though for very opposite
reasons. It seemed scarcely possible that romance should
brood behind those dull façades; the grosser spirit of prose
seemed to shroud them as in a fog.
Suddenly, as I paced with clogged footsteps in these
heavy regions, I heard a voice calling somebody, and looking
in the direction of the sound I could not but fancy it
was myself whose attention was sought. A gentleman
standing at the hall-door of one of the houses, at the top
of the white steps, was beckoning in my direction. I
halted, and gazing on all sides ascertained I was the sole
pedestrian. Puzzled as to what he could want of me, I
tried to scan his features by the rays of a street lamp which
faced the house and under which I stood. They revealed
a pleasant but not English-looking face, bearded and
bronzed, but they revealed nothing as to the owner's designs.
He stood there still beckoning, and the latent
hypnotism of the appeal drew me towards the gate. I
paused with my hand on the lock. What in the name of
all the saints could he possibly want with me? I had
sundry valuables about my person, but then they included
a loaded revolver, so why refuse the adventure?
[pg 172]
"Do come in," he said in English, seeing my hesitation.
"We are only waiting for you."
I accepted the strange invitation.
The mysterious language of the invitation sealed my fate.
Evidently I had again been mistaken for somebody else.
Was it that I resembled someone this man knew? If so,
it would probably be the same someone the other man had
dreaded. I seemed to feel the end of a clew at last, the
other end which was tied to him I sought. Putting my
hand to my breast pocket to make sure it held my pistol, I
drew back the handle of the gate and ascended the steps.
There was an expression of satisfaction on the face of my
inviter, and, turning his back upon me he threw the door
wide open and held it courteously as I entered. A whiff
of warm stuffy air smote my nostrils as I stepped into the
hall where an india-rubber plant stood upon a rack heavily
laden with overcoats. My host preceded me a few paces
and opened a door on the right. A confused babble of
guttural speech broke upon my ear, and over his shoulder
I caught a glimpse of a strange scene—a medley of swarthy
men, wearing their hats, a venerable-looking old man who
seemed their chief being prominent in a grim, black
skull cap; there was a strange weird wick burning in a
cup of oil on the mantelpiece, and on a sofa at the extreme
end of the room sat a beautiful young lady weeping silently.
My heart gave a great leap. Instinct told me I had
found the woman. I made the sign of the cross and
entered.
A strange look of relief passed over the faces of the
company as I entered. Instinctively I removed my hat,
but he who had summoned me deprecated the courtesy
with a gesture, remarking, "We are commencing at once."
I stared at him, more puzzled than ever, but kept silence
lest speech should betray me and snatch the solution from
me on the very eve of my arrival at it.
It was gathering in my mind that I must strikingly resemble
[pg 174]
one of the band, that the man of the restaurant had
betrayed us, and that he went in fear of our vengeance.
Only thus could I account for my reception both by him
and by the rest of the gang.
The patriarchal-looking chieftain got up and turned his
back to the company, as if surveying them through the
mirror. He then addressed them at great length with
averted face in a strange language, the others following
him attentively and accompanying his remarks with an
undercurrent of murmured sympathy, occasionally breaking
out into loud exclamations of assent in the same tongue.
I listened with all my ears, but could not form the least
idea as to what the language was. There were gutturals
in it as in German, but I can always detect German if I
cannot understand it. There was never a word which had
the faintest analogy with any of the European tongues. I
came to the conclusion it was a patter of their own. The
leader spoke hurriedly for the most part, but in his slower
passages there was a rise and fall of the voice almost
amounting to a musical inflection. Near the end, after
an emphatic speech frequently interrupted by applause,
he dropped his voice to a whisper and a hushed silence
fell upon the room. The beautiful girl on the couch got
up and, holding a richly-bound book in her hand, perused
it quietly. Her lovely eyes were heavy with tears. I
drifted upon a current of wonder into perusing her face,
and it was with a start that, at the sudden resumption of
the leader's speech, I woke from my dreams. The address
came to a final close soon after, and then another member
wound up the proceedings with a little speech, which was
received with great enthusiasm.
While he was speaking, I studied the back of the patriarch's
head. He moved it, and my eyes accidentally
lighted on something on the mantelpiece which sent a thrill
through my whole being. It was a photograph, and unless
[pg 175]
some hallucination tricked my vision, the photograph of
the man I sought. I trembled with excitement. My instinct
had been correct. I had found the woman. Saint
Antony had guided my footsteps aright. The company
was slowly dispersing, chatting as it went. Everybody
took leave of the beautiful girl, who had by this time dried
her eyes and resumed the queen. I should have to go
with them, and without an inkling of comprehension of
what had passed! What had they been plotting? What
part had I been playing in these uncanny transactions?
What had they been doing to bring suffering to this fair
girl, before whom all bowed in mock homage? Was she
the unwilling accomplice of their discreditable designs?
I could not see an inch in the bewildering fog. And was
I to depart like the rest, doomed to cudgel my brains till
they ached like caned schoolboys? No, my duty was
clear. A gentle creature was in trouble—it was my business
to stay and succor her.
Then suddenly the thought flashed upon me that she
loved the man who had betrayed us, that she had pleaded
with fear for his life, and that her petition had been granted.
The solution seemed almost complete, yet it found me no
more willing to go. Had I not still to discover for what
end we were leagued together?
As I stood motionless, thus musing, the minutes and
the company slipped away. I was left with the man of
the doorstep, the second speaker, and the beautiful
girl.
While I was wondering by what pretext to remain, the
second speaker came up to me and said cordially: "We
are so much obliged to you for coming. It was very good
of you."
His English was that of a native, as I enviously noted.
He was a young, good-looking fellow, but, as I gazed at
him, a vague resemblance to the stranger of the restaurant
[pg 176]
and to the photograph on the mantelpiece forced itself
on my attention.
"Oh, it was no trouble; no trouble at all," I remarked
cheerfully. "I will come again if you like."
"Thank you; but this is our last night, with the exception
of Saturday, when one can get together twenty quite
easily, so there is no need to trouble you, as you perhaps
do not reside in the neighborhood."
"Oh, but I do," I hastened to correct him.
"In that case we shall be very pleased to see you," he
replied readily. "I don't remember seeing you before in
the district. I presume you are a newcomer."
"Yes, that's it," I exclaimed glibly, secretly more puzzled
than ever. He did not remember seeing me before,
nor did the man of the doorstep vouchsafe any information
as to my identity. Then I could certainly not have been
mistaken for somebody else. And yet—what was the
meaning of that significant invitation: "We are waiting
only for you?"
"I thought you were a stranger," he replied. "I
haven't the pleasure of knowing your name."
This was the climax. But I concealed my astonishment,
having always found the nil admirari principle the safest
in enterprises of this nature. Should I tell him my real
name? Yes, why not? I was utterly unknown in London,
and my real name would be as effective a disguise as a
pseudonym.
"Mendoza," I replied.
"Ah," said the man of the doorstep. "Any relation to
the Mendozas of Highbury?"
"I think not," I replied, with an air of reflection.
"Ah well," said the second speaker, "we are all
brothers."
"And sisters." I remarked gallantly, bowing to the
beautiful maiden. On second thoughts it struck me the
[pg 177]
remark was rather meaningless, but second thoughts have
an awkward way of succeeding first thoughts, which sometimes
interferes with their usefulness. On third thoughts
I went on in my best English, "May I in return be
favored with the pleasure of knowing your name?"
The second speaker smiled in a melancholy way and
said, "I beg you pardon, I forgot we were as strange to
you as you to us. My name is Radowski, Philip Radowski;
this is my friend Martin, and this my sister
Fanny."
I distributed elaborate bows to the trinity.
"You will have a little refreshment before you go?"
said Fanny, with a simple charm that would have made it
impossible to refuse, even if I had been as anxious to go
as I was to stay.
"Oh no, I could not think of troubling you," I replied
warmly, and in due course I was sipping a glass of
excellent old port and crumbling a macaroon.
This seemed to me the best time for putting out a feeler,
and I remarked lightly, pointing to the photograph on the
mantelpiece, "I did not see that gentleman here to-night."
Instantly a portentous expression gathered upon all the
faces. I saw I had said the wrong thing. The beautiful
Fanny's mouth quivered, her eyes grew wistful and
pathetic.
"My father is dead," she said in a low tone.
Dead? Her father? A great shock of horror and surprise
traversed my frame. His secret had gone with him
to the grave.
"Dead?" I repeated involuntarily. "Oh, forgive me, I
did not know."
"Of course not, of course not. I understand perfectly,"
put in her brother soothingly. "You did not know whom
it was we had lost. Yes, it was our father."
"Has he been dead long?"
[pg 178]
He seemed a little surprised at the question, but answered:
"It is he we are mourning now."
I nodded my head, as if comprehending.
"Ah, he was a good man," said Martin. "I wish we
were all so sure of Heaven."
"There are very few Jews like him left," said Fanny
quietly.
"Alas, he was one of the pious old school," assented
Martin, shaking his head dolefully.
My heart was thumping violently as a great wave of
light flooded my brain. These people then were Jews—that
strange, scattered race of heretics I had often heard
of, but never before come into contact with in my wild
adventurous existence. The strange scene I had witnessed
was not, then, a meeting of conspirators, but a religious
funereal ceremonial; the sorrow of Fanny was filial
grief; the address of the venerable old man a Hebrew
prayer-reading; the short speech of Philip Radowski
probably a psalm in the ancient language all spoke so
fluently. But what had I come to do in that galley?
All these thoughts flashed upon me in the twinkling of
an eye. There was scarce a pause between Martin's observation
and Radowski's remark that followed it.
"He was, indeed, pious. It was wonderful how he withstood
the influence of his English friends. You would
never imagine he left Poland quite thirty years ago."
So I had found the Pole! But was it too late? Anyhow
I resolved to know what I had been summoned for?
The saints spared me the trouble of the search.
"Yes," returned Martin, "when you think how ready
he was to go to the houses of mourners, I think it perfectly
disgraceful that we had such difficulty in getting together
ten brother-Jews for the services in his memory. But for
the kindness of Mr. Mendoza I don't know what we
should have done to-night. In your place, Philip, I confess
[pg 179]
I should have felt tempted to violate the law altogether.
I can't see that it matters to the Almighty whether you
have nine men or ten men or five men. And I don't see
why Fanny couldn't count in quite as well as any man."
"Oh! Martin," said Fanny with a shocked look. "How
can you talk so irreligiously? Once we begin to break
the law where are we to stop? Jews and Christians may
as well intermarry at once." Her righteous indignation
was beautiful to see.
Two things were clear now. First, I had been mistaken
for a Jew, probably on account of my foreign appearance.
Secondly, Fanny would never wed a Christian. But for
the first fact I would have regretted the second. For a
third thing was clear—that I loved the glorious Jewess
with all the love of a child of the South. We are not tame
rabbits, we Andalusians: the flash from beauty's eye
fires our blood and we love instantly and dare greatly.
My heart glowed with gratitude to my patron saint for
having brought about the mistake; a Jew I was and a Jew
I would remain.
"You are quite right, Miss Radowski," I said, "Jew
and Christian might as well intermarry at once."
"I am glad to hear you say so," said Fanny, turning her
lovely orbs towards me. "Most young men nowadays
are so irreligious."
Martin darted a savage glance at me. I saw at once
how the land lay. He was either engaged to my darling
or a fiancé in the making. I surveyed him impassively
from his head to his shoes and decided to stand in them.
It was impossible to permit a man of such dubious religious
principles to link his life with a spiritually-minded
woman like Fanny. Such a union could only bring unhappiness
to both. What she needed was a good pious
Jew, one of the old school. With the help of the saints
I vowed to supply her needs.
[pg 180]
"I think modern young women are quite as irreligious
as modern young men," retorted Martin, as he left the
room.
"Yes, it is so," sighed Fanny, the arrow glancing off
unheeded. Then, uplifting her beautiful eyes heavenwards,
she murmured: "Ah, if they had been blessed with fathers
like mine."
Martin, who had only gone out for an instant, returned
with Fanny's hat and a feather boa, and observing, "You
must really take a walk at once—you have been confined
indoors a whole week," helped her to put them on. I felt
sure his zeal for her health was overbalanced by his enthusiasm
for my departure. I could not very well attach
myself to the walking party—especially as I only felt an
attachment for one member of it. Disregarding the interruption
I remarked in tones of fervent piety:
"It will be an eternal regret to me that I missed knowing
your father."
She gave me a grateful look.
"Look!" she said, seating herself on the sofa for a
moment and picking up the richly-bound book lying upon
it. "Look at the motto of exhortation he wrote in my
prayer-book before he died. Our minister says it is in
the purest Hebrew."
I went to her side and leaned over the richly-bound
book, which appeared to be printed backwards, and
scanned the inscription with an air of appreciation.
"Read it," she said. "Read it aloud! It comforts me
to hear it."
"Read it aloud," she said. "It comforts me."
I coughed violently and felt myself growing pale. The
eyes of Martin were upon me with an expression that
seemed waiting to become sardonic. I called inwardly
upon the Holy Mother. There seemed to be only a few
words and after a second's hesitation I murmured something
in my most inarticulate manner, producing some
[pg 182]
sounds approximately like those I had heard during the
service.
Fanny looked up at me, puzzled.
"I do not understand your pronunciation," she said.
I felt ready to sink into the sofa.
"Ah, I am not surprised," put in her brother. "From
Mr. Mendoza's name and appearance I should take him
to be a Sephardi like the Mendozas of Highbury. They
pronounce quite differently from us, Fanny."
I commended him to the grace of the Virgin.
"That is so," I admitted. "And I found it not at all
easy to follow your services."
"Are you an English Sephardi or a native Sephardi?"
asked Martin.
"A native!" I replied readily. "I was born there."
Where "there" was I had no idea.
"Do you know," said Fanny, looking so sweetly into
my face, "I should like to see your country. Spain has
always seemed to me so romantic, and I dote on Spanish
olives."
I was delighted to find I had spoken the truth as to my
nativity.
"I shall be charmed to escort you," I said, smiling.
She smiled in response.
"It is easy enough to go anywhere nowadays," said
Martin surlily.
"I wish you would go to the devil," I thought. "That
would certainly be easy enough."
But it would have been premature to force my own
company upon Fanny any longer. I relied upon the
presence of death and her brother to hinder Martin's suit
from developing beyond the point it had already reached.
It remained to be seen whether the damage was irreparable.
I went again on the Saturday night, following with
interest the service that had seemed a council-meeting.
[pg 183]
This time it began with singing, in which everybody joined
and in which I took part with hearty inarticulateness.
But a little experience convinced me that my course was
beset with pitfalls, that not Mary Jane aspiring to personify
a duchess could glide on thinner ice than I attempting to
behave as one of these strange people, with their endless
and all-embracing network of religious etiquette. To
my joy I discovered that I could pursue my suit without
going to synagogue, a place of dire peril, for it seems
that the Spaniards are a distinct sect, mightily proud of
their blood and their peculiar pronunciation, and the
Radowskis, being Poles, did not expect to see me worshipping
with themselves, which enabled me to continue
my devotions in the Holy Chapel of St. Vincent. It also
enabled me to skate over many awkward moments, the
Poles being indifferently informed as to the etiquette of
their Peninsular cousins. That I should have been twice
taken for one of their own race rather surprised me, for
my physiognomical relationship to it seemed of the slightest.
The dark complexion, the foreign air, doubtless gave
me a superficial resemblance, and in the face it is the surface
that tells. I read up Spanish history and learnt that
many Jews had become Christians during the persecutions
of the Holy Inquisition, and that many had escaped the
fires of the auto-da-fé by feigning conversion, the while
secretly performing their strange rites, and handing down
to their descendants the traditions of secrecy and of
Judaism, these unhappy people being styled Marranos.
Perchance I was sprung from some such source, but there
was no hint of it in my genealogy so far as known to me;
my name Mendoza was a good old Andalusian name, and
my ancestors had for generations been good sons of the
only true Church. The question has no interest for me
now.
For, although like Cćsar I am entitled to say that I
[pg 184]
came, saw, and conquered, conquering not only Fanny
but my rival, yet am I still a bachelor. I had driven
Martin on one side as easily as a steamer bearing down
upon a skiff, yet my own lips betrayed me. It was the
desire to penetrate the mystery of the restaurant that
undid me, for if a woman cannot keep a secret, a man
cannot refrain from fathoming one. The rose-gardens of
Love were open for my walking when the demon in possession
prompted me to speech that silvered the red roses
with hoar-frost and ice.
One day I sat holding her dear hand in mine. She
permitted me no more complex caresses, being still in
black. Such was the sense of duty of this beautiful,
warm-blooded Oriental creature, that she was as cold as
her father's tombstone, and equally eulogistic of his virtues.
She spoke of them now, though I would fain have
diverted the talk to hers. Failing that, I seized the
opportunity to solve the haunting puzzle.
"Do you know, I fancy I once saw your father," I said,
earnestly.
"Indeed!" she observed, with much interest. "Where?"
"In a restaurant not many miles from here. It was
before noon."
"In a restaurant?" she repeated. "Hardly very
likely. There isn't any restaurant near here he would be
likely to go to, and certainly not at the time you mention,
when he would be in the city. You must be mistaken."
I shook my head. "I don't think so. I remember
his face so well. When I saw his photograph I recognized
him at once."
"How long ago was it?"
"I can tell you exactly," I said. "The date is graven
on my heart. It was the twenty-fourth of October."
"This year?"
"This year."
[pg 185]
"The twenty-fourth of October!" she repeated musingly.
"Only a few weeks before he died. Poor father,
peace be upon him! The twenty-fourth of October, did
you say?" she added, suddenly.
"What is the matter?" I asked. "You are agitated."
"No, it is nothing. It cannot be," she added, more
calmly. "Of course not." She smiled faintly. "I
thought——" she paused.
"You thought what?"
"Oh, well, I'll show you I was mistaken." She rose,
went to the book-case, drew out a little brown-paper
covered volume, and turned over the pages scrutinizingly.
Suddenly a change came over the beautiful face; she
stood motionless, pale as a statue.
A chill shadow fell across my heart, distracted between
tense curiosity and dread of a tragic solution.
"My dear Fanny, what in Heaven's name is it?" I
breathed.
"Don't speak of Heaven," said Fanny, in strange, harsh
tones, "when you libel the dead thus."
"Libel the dead? How?"
"Why, the twenty-fourth of October was Yom Kippur."
"Well," I said, unimpressed and uncomprehending,
"and what of it?"
She stared at me, staggered and clutched at the book-case
for support.
"What of it?" she cried, in passionate emotion. "Do
you dare to say that you saw my poor father, who was
righteousness itself, breaking his fast in a restaurant on
the Day of Atonement? Perhaps you will insinuate next
that his speedy death was Heaven's punishment on him
for his blasphemy!"
In the same instant I saw the truth and my terrible
blunder. This fast-day must be of awful solemnity, and
Fanny's father must have gone systematically to a surreptitious
[pg 186]
breakfast in that queer, out-of-the-way restaurant.
His nervousness, his want of ease, his terror at
the sight of me, whom he mistook for a brother-Jew, were
all accounted for. Once a year—the discrepancy in the
date being explained by the discord between Jewish and
Christian chronology—he hied his way furtively to this
unholy meal, enjoying it and a reputation for sanctity at
the same time. But to expose her father's hypocrisy to
the trusting, innocent girl would be hardly the way to
advance love-matters. It might be difficult even to repair
the mischief I had already done.
"I beg your pardon," I said humbly. "You were
right. I was misled by some chance resemblance. If
your father was the pious Jew you paint him, it is impossible
he could have been the man I saw. Yes, and now
I think of it, the eyebrows were bushier and the chin
plumper than those of the photograph."
A sigh of satisfaction escaped her lips. Then her face
grew rigid again as she turned it upon me, and asked in
low tones that cut through me like an icy blast: "Yes,
but what were you doing in the restaurant on the Day of
Atonement?"
"I—I——?" I stammered.
Her look was terrible.
"I—I—was only having a cup of chocolate," I replied,
with a burst of inspiration.
As everybody knows, since the pronunciamento of
Pope Paul V., chocolate may be imbibed by good Catholics
without breaking the fasts of the Church. But, alas!
it seems these fanatical Eastern flagellants allow not even
a drop of cold water to pass their lips for over twenty-four
hours.
"I am glad you confess it," said Fanny, witheringly.
"It shows you have still one redeeming trait. And I am
glad you spoke ill of my poor father, for it has led to the
[pg 187]
revelation of your true character before it was too late.
You will, of course, understand, Mr. Mendoza, that our
acquaintance is at an end."
"Fanny!" I cried, frantically.
"Spare me a scene, I beg of you," she said, coldly.
"You, you the man who pretended to such ardent piety,
to such enthusiasm for our holy religion, are an apostate
from the faith into which you were born, a blasphemer, an
atheist."
I stared at her in dumb horror. I had entangled myself
inextricably. How could I now explain that it was
her father who was the renegade, not I?
"Good-bye," said Fanny. "Heaven make you a better
Jew."
I moved desperately towards her, but she waved me
back. "Don't touch me," she cried. "Go, go!"
"But is there no hope for me?" I exclaimed, looking
wildly into the cold, statue-like face, that seemed more
beautiful than ever, now it was fading from my vision.
"None," she said. Then, in a breaking voice, she
murmured, "Neither for you nor for me."
"Ah, you love me still," I cried, striving to embrace
her. "You will be my wife."
She struggled away from me. "No, no," she said, with
a gesture of horror. "It would be sacrilege to my dead
father's memory. Rather would I marry a Christian, yes,
even a Catholic, than an apostate Jew like you. Leave
me, I pray you; or, must I ring the bell?"
I went—a sadder and a wiser man. But even my wisdom
availed me not, for when I repaired to the restaurant
to impart it to the proprietor, the last consolation was
denied me. He had sold his business and returned to
Italy.
To-morrow I start for Turkestan.
[pg 188]
THE ARITHMETIC AND PHYSIOLOGY OF LOVE.
"Well, have you seen this Fanny Radowski?" said
Lord Silverdale, when he returned the manuscript to the
President of the Old Maids' Club.
"Of course. Didn't I tell you I had the story from
her own mouth, though I have put it into Mendoza's?"
"Ah, yes, I remember now. It certainly is funny, her
refusing a good Catholic on the ground that he was a bad
Jew. But then according to the story she doesn't know
he's a Catholic?"
"No, it was I who divined the joke of the situation.
Lookers-on always see more of the game. I saw at once
that if Mendoza were really a Jew, he would never have
been such an ass as to make the slip he did; and so
from this and several other things she told me about her
lover, I constructed deductively the history you have
read. She says she first met him at a mourning service
in memory of her father, and that it is a custom among
her people when they have not enough men to form a
religious quorum (the number is the mystical ten) to
invite any brother Jew who may be passing to step in,
whether he is an acquaintance or not."
"I gathered that from the narrative," said Lord Silverdale.
"And so she wishes to be an object lesson in
female celibacy, does she?"
"She is most anxious to enlist in the Cause."
[pg 189]
"Is she really beautiful, et cetera?"
"She is magnificent."
"Then I should say the very member we are looking
for. A Jewess will be an extremely valuable element of
the Club, for her race exalts marriage even above happiness,
and an old maid is even more despised than among
us. The lovely Miss Radowski will be an eloquent protest
against the prejudices of her people."
Lillie Dulcimer shook her head quietly. "The racial
accident which makes her seem a desirable member to
you, makes me regard her as impossible."
"How so?" cried Silverdale in amazement. "You
surely are not going to degrade your Club by anti-Semitism."
"Heaven forefend! But a Jewess can never be a
whole Old Maid."
"I don't understand."
"Look at it mathematically a moment."
Silverdale made a grimace.
"Consider! A Jewess, orthodox like Miss Radowski,
can only be an Old Maid fractionally. An Old Maid
must make 'the grand refusal!'—she must refuse mankind
at large. Now Miss Radowski, being cut off by her
creed from marrying into any but an insignificant percentage
of mankind, is proportionately less valuable as an
object-lesson; she is unfitted for the functions of Old
Maidenhood in their full potentiality. Already by her
religion she is condemned to almost total celibacy. She
cannot renounce what she never possessed. There are in
the world, roughly speaking, eight million Jews among a
population of a thousand millions. The force of the example,
in other words, her value as an Old Maid, may
therefore be represented by .008."
"I am glad you express her as a decimal rather than a
vulgar fraction," said Lord Silverdale laughing. "But I
[pg 190]
must own your reckoning seems correct. As a mathematical
wrangler you are terrible. So I shall not need to
try Miss Radowski?"
"No; we cannot entertain her application," said Lillie
peremptorily, the thunder-cloud no bigger than a man's
hand gathering on her brow at the suspicion that Silverdale
did not take her mathematics seriously. Considering
that in keeping him at arm's length her motive were
merely mathematical (though Lord Silverdale was not
aware of this) she was peculiarly sensitive on the point.
She changed the subject quickly by asking what poem he
had brought her.
"Do not call them poems," he answered.
"It is only between ourselves. There are no critics
about."
"Thank you so much. I have brought one suggested
by the strange farrago of religions that figured in your
last human document. It is a pćan on the growing hospitality
of the people towards the gods of other nations.
There was a time when free trade in divinities was tabu,
each nation protecting, and protected by, its own. Now
foreign gods are all the rage."
"THE END OF THE CENTURY" CATHOLIC CREDO.
"You are very hard upon the century—or rather upon
the end of it," said Lillie.
"The century is dying unshriven," said the satirist
solemnly. "Its conscience must be stirred. Truly, was
there ever an age which had so much light and so little
sweetness? In the reckless fight for gold Society has
become a mutual swindling association. Cupidity has
ousted Cupid, and everything is bought and sold."
"Except your poems, Lord Silverdale," laughed Lillie.
It was tit for the tat of his raillery of her mathematics.
Before his lordship had time to make the clever retort
the thought of next day, Turple the magnificent brought in
a card.
"Miss Winifred Woodpecker?" said Lillie queryingly.
"I suppose it's another candidate. Show her in."
Miss Woodpecker was a tall stately girl, of the kind that
pass for lilies in the flowery language of the novelists.
"Have I the pleasure of speaking to Miss Dulcimer?"
"Yes, I am Miss Dulcimer," said Lillie.
"And where is the Old Maids' Club?" further inquired
Miss Woodpecker, looking around curiously.
"Here," replied Lillie, indicating the epigrammatic
antimacassars with a sweeping gesture. "No, don't go,
Lord Silverdale. Miss Woodpecker, this is my friend
Lord Silverdale. He knows all about the Club, so you
needn't mind speaking before him."
"Well, you know, I read the leader in the Hurrygraph
about your Club this morning."
[pg 193]
"Oh, is there a leader?" said Lillie feverishly. "Have
you seen it, Lord Silverdale?"
"I am not sure. At first I fancied it referred to the
Club, but there was such a lot about Ptolemy, Rosa
Bonheur's animals and the Suez Canal that I can hardly
venture to say what the leader itself was about. And so,
Miss Woodpecker, you have thought about joining our
institution for elevating female celibacy into a fine
art?"
"I wish to join at once. Is there any entrance fee?"
"There is—experience. Have you had a desirable
proposal of marriage?"
"Eminently desirable."
"And still you do not intend to marry?"
"Not while I live."
"Ah, that is all the guarantee we want," said Lord
Silverdale smiling. "Afterwards—in heaven—there is no
marrying, nor giving in marriage."
"That is what makes it heaven," added Lillie. "But
tell us your story."
"It was in this way. I was staying at a boarding-house
in Brighton with a female cousin, and a handsome young
man in the house fell in love with me and we were engaged.
Then my mother came down. Immediately afterwards
my lover disappeared. He left a note for me containing
nothing but the following verses."
She handed a double tear-stained sheet of letter-paper
to the President, who read aloud as follows:
A VISION OF THE FUTURE.
"Well is it for man that he knoweth not what the future will bring
forth."
[pg 195]
The Present and the Future.
[pg 196]
Lillie and Silverdale looked at each other.
"Well, but," said Lillie at last, "according to this he
refused you, not you him. Our rules——"
"You mistake me," interrupted Winifred Woodpecker.
"When the first fit of anguish was over, I saw my Frank
was right, and I have refused all the offers I have had since—five
in all. It would not be fair to a lover to chain him
to a beauty so transient. In ten or twenty years from
now I shall go the way of all flesh. Under such circumstances
is not marriage a contract entered into under false
pretences? There is no chance of the law of this country
allowing a time-limit to be placed in the contract; celibacy
is the only honest policy for a woman."
Involuntarily Lillie's hand seized the candidate's and
gripped it sympathetically. She divined a sister soul.
"You teach me a new point of view," she said, "a finer
shade of ethical feeling."
Silverdale groaned inwardly; he saw a new weapon going
into the anti-hymeneal armory, and the Old Maids' Club
on the point of being strengthened by the accession of its
first member.
"The law will have to accommodate itself to these finer
shades," pursued Lillie energetically. "It is a rusty
machine out of harmony with the age. Science has discovered
that the entire physical organism is renewed every
seven years, and yet the law calmly goes on assuming that
the new man and the new woman are still bound by the
contract of their predecessors and still possess the good-will
of the original partnership. It seems to me if the
short lease principle demanded by physiology is not to be
conceded, there should at any rate be provincial and
American rights in marriage as well as London rights.
In the metropolis the matrimonial contract should hold
good with A, in the country with B, neither party infringing
[pg 197]
the other's privileges, in accordance with theatrical
analogy."
"That is a literal latitudinarianism in morals you will
never get the world to agree to," laughed Lord Silverdale.
"At least not in theory; we cannot formally sanction
theatrical practice."
"Do not laugh," said Lillie. "Law must be brought
more in touch with life."
"Isn't it rather vice versâ? Life must be brought more
in touch with law. However, if Miss Woodpecker feels
these fine ethical shades, won't she be ineligible?"
"How so?" said the President in indignant surprise.
"By our second rule every candidate must be beautiful
and undertake to continue so."
Poor little Lillie drooped her head.
And now it befalls to reveal to the world the jealously-guarded
secret of the English Shakespeare, for how else
can the tale be told of how the Old Maids' Club was
within an ace of robbing him of his bride?
[pg 198]
"THE ENGLISH SHAKESPEARE."
By a thorough knowledge of the natural laws which
govern the operations of human nature and by a careful
application of the fine properties of well-selected men, and
a judicious use of every available instrument of log-rolling,
the Mutual Depreciation Society gradually built up a
constitution strong enough to defy every tendency to disintegration.
Hundreds of subtle malcontents floated round,
ready to attack wherever there was a weak point, but
foiled by ignorance of the Society's existence, and the
members escaped many a fatal shaft by keeping themselves
entirely to themselves. The idea of the Mutual Depreciation
Society was that every member should say what he
thought of the others. The founders, who all took equal
shares in it, were
Their object in founding the Mutual Depreciation
Society was of course to achieve literary success, but they
soon perceived that their phalanx was too small for this,
and as they had no power to add to their number except
by inviting strangers from without, they took steps to induce
three other gentlemen to solicit the privileges of
membership. The second batch comprised,
[pg 199]
Tom Brown, the Supreme Thinker.
[pg 200]
These six gentlemen being all blessed with youth, health
and incompetence, resolved to capture the town. Their
tactics were very simple, though their first operations
were hampered by their ignorance of one another's. Thus,
it was some time before it was discovered that Andrew
Mackay, who had been deployed to seize the Saturday
Slasher, had no real acquaintance with the editor's fencing-master,
while Dick Jones, who had undertaken to bombard
the Acadćum, had started under the impression that
the eminent critic to whom he had dedicated his poems
(by permission) was still connected with the staff. But
these difficulties were eliminated as soon as the Society
got into working order. Everything comes to him who
will not wait, and almost before they had time to wink our
six gentlemen had secured the makings of an Influence.
Each had loyally done his best for himself and the rest,
and the first spoils of the campaign, as announced amid
applause by the Secretary at the monthly dinner, were
They were not the most influential, nor even the best
circulated, still it was not a bad beginning, though of course
only a nucleus. By putting out tentacles in every direction,
by undertaking to write even on subjects with which
they were acquainted, they gradually secured a more or
less tenacious connection with the majority of the better
journals and magazines. On taking stock they found that
the account stood thus:
It showed what could be achieved by six men, working
together shoulder to shoulder for the highest aims in a
spirit of mutual good-will and brotherhood. They were
undoubtedly greatly helped by having all been to Oxford
or Cambridge, but still much was the legitimate result of
their own manœuvres.
By the time the secret campaign had reached this stage,
many well-meaning, unsuspecting men, not included in
the above inventory, had been pressed into the service of
the Society, with the members of which they were connected
by the thousand and one ties which spring up
naturally in the intercourse of the world, so that there was
hardly any journal in the three kingdoms on which the
Society could not, by some hook or the other, fasten a paragraph,
if we except such publications as the Newgate
Calendar and Lloyds' Shipping List, which record history
rather than make it.
Indeed, the success of the Society in this department
was such as to suggest the advisability of having themselves
formally incorporated under the Companies' Acts
for the manufacture and distribution of paragraphs, for
which they had unequalled facilities, and had obtained
valuable concessions, and it was only the publicity required
by law which debarred them from enlarging their
home trade to a profitable industry for the benefit of non-members.
For, by the peculiar nature of the machinery,
it could only be worked if people were unaware of its
[pg 202]
existence. They resolved, however, that when they had
made their pile, they would start the newspaper of the
future, which any philosopher with an eye to the trend of
things can see will be a journal written by advertisers for
gentlemen, and will contain nothing calculated to bring a
blush to the cheek of the young person except cosmetics.
Contemporaneously with the execution of one side of
the Plan of Campaign, the Society was working the supplementary
side. Day and night, week-days and Sundays,
in season and out, these six gentlemen praised themselves
and one another, or got themselves and one another
praised by non-members. There are many ways in which
you can praise an author, from blame downwards. There
is the puff categorical and the puff allusive, the lie direct
and the eulogy insinuative, the downright abuse and the
subtle innuendo, the exaltation of your man or the depression
of his rival. The attacking method of log-rolling
must not be confounded with depreciation. In their outside
campaign, the members used every variety of puff,
but depreciation was strictly reserved for their private
gatherings. For this was the wisdom of the Club, and
herein lay its immense superiority over every other log-rolling
club, that whereas in those childish cliques every
man is expected to admire every other, or to say so, in
the Mutual Depreciation Society the obligation was all
the other way. Every man was bound by the rules to
sneer at the work of his fellow-members and, if he should
happen to admire any of it, at least to have the grace to
keep his feelings to himself. In practice, however, the
latter contingency never arose, and each was able honestly
to express all he thought, for it is impossible for men to
work together for a common object without discovering
that they do not deserve to get it. Needless to point out
how this sagacious provision strengthened them in their
campaign, for not having to keep up the tension of mutual
[pg 203]
admiration, and being able to relax and breathe (and
express themselves) freely at their monthly symposia, as
well as to slang one another in the street, they were able
to write one another up with a clear conscience. It is
well to found on human nature. Every other basis proves
shifting sand. The success of the Mutual Depreciation
Society justified their belief in human nature.
Not only did they depreciate one another, but they made
reparation to the non-members they were always trying to
write down during business hours, by eulogizing them in
the most generous manner in those blessed hours of leisure
when knife answers fork and soul speaks to soul. At
such times even popular authors were allowed to have a
little merit.
It was at one of these periods of soul-expansion, when
the most petty-souled feels inclined to loosen the last two
buttons of his waistcoat, that the idea of the English
Shakespeare was first mooted. But we are anticipating,
which is imprudent, as anticipations are seldom realized.
One of the worst features of prosperity is that it is cloying,
and when the first gloss of novelty and adventure had
worn off, the free lances of the Mutual Depreciation Society
began to bore one another. You can get tired even
of hearing your own dispraises; and the members were
compelled to spice their mutual adverse criticism in the
highest manner, so as to compensate for its staleness.
The jaded appetite must needs be pampered if it is to experience
anything of that relish which a natural healthy
hunger for adverse criticism can command so easily.
This was the sort of thing that went on at the dinners:
"I say, Tom," said Andrew Mackay, "what in Heaven's
name made you publish your waste-paper basket under
the name of 'Stray Thoughts?' For utter and incomprehensible
idiocy they are only surpassed by Dick's last
volume of poems. I shouldn't have thought such things
[pg 204]
could come even out of a lunatic asylum, certainly not
without a keeper. Really you fellows ought to consider
me a little——"
"We do. We consider you as little as they make them,"
they interrupted simultaneously.
"It isn't fair to throw all the work on me," he went on.
"How can I go on saying that Tom Brown is the supreme
thinker of the time, the deepest intellect since Hegel, with
a gift of style that rivals Berkeley's, if you go on turning
out twaddle that a copy-book would boggle at? How can
I keep repeating that for sure and consummate art, for
unfailing certainty of insight, for unerring visualization,
for objective subjectivity and for subjective objectivity,
for Swinburnian sweep of music and Shakespearean depth
of suggestiveness, Dick Jones can give forty in a hundred
(spot stroke barred) to all other contemporary poets, if
you continue to spue out rhymes as false as your teeth,
rhythms as musical as your voice when you read them,
and words that would drive a drawing-room composer
mad with envy to set them? I maintain, it is not sticking
to the bargain to expose me to the danger of being found
out. You ought at least to have the decency to wrap up
your fatuousness in longer words or more abstruse themes.
You're both so beastly intelligible that a child can understand
you're asses."
"Tut, tut, Andrew," said Taffy Owen, "it's all very
well of you to talk who've only got to do the criticism.
And I think it's deuced ungrateful of you after we've
written you up into the position of leading English critic
to want us to give you straw for your bricks! Do we ever
complain when you call us cataclysmic, creative, esemplastic,
or even epicene? We know it's rot, but we put
up with it. When you said that Robinson's last novel
had all the glow and genius of Dickens without his humor,
all the ripe wisdom of Thackeray without his social knowingness,
[pg 205]
all the imaginativeness of Shakespeare without
his definiteness of characterization, we all saw at once
that you were incautiously allowing the donkey's ears to
protrude too obviously from beneath the lion's skin. But
did anyone grumble? Did Robinson, though the edition
was sold out the day after? Did I, though you had just
called me a modern Buddhist with the soul of an ancient
Greek and the radiant fragrance of a Cingalese tea-planter?
I know these phrases take the public and I try to be
patient."
"Owen is right," Harry Robinson put in emphatically.
"When you said I was a cross between a Scandinavian
skald and a Dutch painter, I bore my cross in silence."
"Yes, but what else can a fellow say, when you give
the public such heterogeneous and formless balderdash
that there is nothing for it but to pretend it's a new style,
an epoch-making work, the foundation of a new era in
literary art? Really I think you others have out and
away the best of it. It's much easier to write bad books
than to eulogize their merits in an adequately plausible
manner. I think it's playing it too low upon a chap, the
way you fellows are going on. It's taking a mean advantage
of my position."
"And who put you into that position, I should like to
know?" yelled Dick Jones, becoming poetically excited.
"Didn't we lift you up into it on the point of our pens?"
"Fortunately they were not very pointed," ejaculated
the great critic, wriggling uncomfortably at the suggestion.
"I don't deny that, of course. All I say is, you're giving
me away now."
"You give yourself away," shrieked Owen vehemently,
"with a pound of that Cingalese tea. How is it Boyle
managed to crack up our plays without being driven to
any of this new-fangled nonsense?"
"Plays!" said Patrick, looking up moodily. "Anything
[pg 206]
is good enough for plays. You see I can always
fall back on the acting and crack up that. I had to do
that with Owen's thing at the Lymarket. My notice read
like a gushing account of the play, in reality it was all devoted
to the players. The trick of it is not easy. Those
who can read between the lines could see that there were
only three of them about the piece itself, and yet the outside
public would never dream I was shirking the expression
of an opinion about the merits of the play or the pinning
myself to any definite statement. The only time,
Owen, I dare say, that your plays are literature is when
they are a frost, for that both explains the failure and
justifies you. But, an you love me, Taffy, or if you have
any care for my reputation, do not, I beg of you, be enticed
into the new folly of printing your plays."
"But things have come to that stage I must do it," said
Owen, "or incur the suspicion of illiterateness."
"No, no!" pleaded Patrick in horror. "Sooner than
that I will damn all the other printed plays en bloc, and
say that the real literary playwrights, conscious of their
position, are too dignified to resort to this cheap method
of self-assertion."
"But you will not carry out your threat? Remember
how dangerously near you came to exposing me over your
Naquette."
The Club laughed. Everyone knew the incident, for it
was Patrick's stock grievance against the dramatist. Patrick
being out of town, had written his eulogy of this play
of Owen's from his inner consciousness. On the fourth
night in deference to Owen's persuasions he had gone to
see Naquette.
After the tragedy, Owen found him seated moodily in
the stalls, long after the audience had filed out.
"Knocked you, old man, this time, eh?" queried Owen
laughing complacently.
[pg 207]
"Knocked you, old man, this time, eh?"
[pg 208]
"Yes, all to pieces!" snarled Patrick savagely. "I
shall never believe in my critical judgment again. I dare
not look my notice in the face. When I wrote Naquette
was a masterpiece, I thought at least there would be some
merit in it—I didn't bargain for such rot as this."
In this wise things would have gone on—from bad to
worse—had Heaven not created Cecilia nineteen years
before.
Cecilia was a tall, fair girl, with dreamy eyes and unpronounced
opinions, who longed for the ineffable with an
unspeakable yearning.
Frank Grey loved her. He always knew he was going
to and one day he did it. After that it was impossible to
drop the habit. And at last he went so far as to propose.
He was a young lawyer, with a fondness for manly sports
and a wealth of blonde moustache.
"Cecilia," he said, "I love you. Will you be mine?"
He had a habit of using unconventional phrases.
"No, Frank," she said gently, and there was a world
and several satellites of tenderness in her tremulous tones.
"It cannot be."
"Ah, do not decide so quickly," he pleaded. "I will
not press you for an answer."
"I would press you for an answer, if I could," replied
Cecilia, "but I do not love you."
"Why not?" he demanded desperately.
"Because you are not what I should like you to be?"
"And what would you like me to be?" he demanded
eagerly.
"If I told you, you would try to become it?"
"I would," he said, enthusiastically. "Be it what it
may, I would leave no stone unturned. I would work,
strive, study, reform—anything, everything."
"I feared so," she said despondently. "That is why I
will not tell you. Don't you understand that your charm
[pg 209]
to me is your being just yourself—your simple, honest,
manly self? I will not have my enjoyment of your individuality
spoilt by your transmogrification into some unnatural
product of the forcing house. No, Frank, let us
be true to ourselves, not to each other. I shall always
remain your friend, looking up to you as to something
stanch, sturdy, stalwart, coming to consult you (unprofessionally)
in all my difficulties. I will tell you all my secrets,
Frank, so that you will know more of me than if I married
you. Dear friend, let it remain as I say. It is for the
best."
So Frank went away broken-hearted, and joined the
Mutual Depreciation Society. He did not care what became
of him. How they came to let him in was this. He
was the one man in the world outside who knew all about
them, having been engaged as the Society's legal adviser.
It was he who made their publishers and managers sit in
an erect position. In applying for a more intimate connection,
he stated that he had met with a misfortune, and
a little monthly abuse would enliven him. The Society
decided that, as he was already half one of themselves,
and as he had never written a line in his life, and so could
not diminish their takings, nothing but good could ensue
from the infusion of new blood. In fact, they wanted
it badly. Their mutual recriminations had degenerated
into mere platitudes. With a new man to insult and be
insulted by, something of the old animation would be restored
to their proceedings. The wisdom of the policy
was early seen, for the first fruit of it was the English
Shakespeare, who for a whole year daily opened out new
and exciting perspectives of sensation and amusement to
a blasé Society. Andrew Mackay had written an enthusiastic
article in the so-called Nineteenth Century on "The
Cochin-China Shakespeare," and set all tongues wagging
about the new literary phenomenon with whose verses the
[pg 210]
boatmen of the Irrawady rocked their children to sleep on
the cradle of the river, and whose dramas were played in
eight hours slices in the strolling-booths of Shanghai.
Andrew had already arranged with Anyman to bring out
a translation from the original Cochin-Chinese, for there
was no language he could not translate from, provided it
were sufficiently unknown.
"Cochin-Chinese Shakespeare, indeed!" said Dick
Jones, at the next symposium. "Why, judging from the
copious extracts you gave from his greatest drama, Baby
Bantam, it is the most tedious drivel. You might have
written it yourself. Where is the Shakespearean quality
of this, which is, you say, the whole of Act Thirteen?
"'Hang-ho: Out, Fu-sia, does your mother know you
are?
"'Fu-sia: I have no mother, but I have a child.'"
"Where is the Shakespearean quality?" repeated
Andrew. "Do you not feel the perfect pathos of those
two lines, the infiniteness of incisive significance? To
me they paint the whole scene in two strokes of matchless
simplicity, strophe and anti-strophe. Fu-sia the repentant
outcast and Hang-ho whose honest love she
rejected, stand out as in a flash of lightning. Nay,
Shakespeare himself never wrote an act of such tragic
brevity, packed so full of the sense of anagke. Why, so
far from it being tedious drivel, a lady in whose opinion
I have great confidence and to whom I sent my article,
told me afterwards that she couldn't sleep till she had
read it."
"She told me she couldn't sleep till she had read it."
The Mutual Depreciation Society burst into a roar of
laughter and Andrew realized that he had put his foot
into it.
"Don't you think it a shame," broke in Frank Grey,
"that we English are debarred from having a Shakespeare.
There's been one discovered lately in Belgium,
[pg 212]
and we have already a Dutch Shakespeare, a French
Shakespeare, a German Shakespeare, and an American
Shakespeare. English is the only language in which we
can't get one. It seems cruel that we should be just the
one nation in the world to be cut off from having a nineteenth
century Shakespeare. Every patriotic Briton must
surely desire that we could discover an English Shakespeare
to put beside these vaunted foreign phenomena."
"But an English Shakespeare is a bull," said Patrick
Boyle, who had a keen eye for such.
"Precisely. A John Bull," replied Frank.
"Peace. I would willingly look out for one," said
Andrew Mackay, thoughtfully. "But I cannot venture
to insinuate yet that Shakespeare did not write English.
The time is scarcely ripe, though it is maturing fast.
Otherwise the idea is tempting."
"But why take the words in their natural meaning?"
demanded Tom Brown, the philosopher, in astonishment.
"Is it not unapparent that an English Shakespeare would
be a great writer more saturated with Anglo-Saxon spirit
than Shakespeare, who was cosmic and for all time and
for every place? Hamlet, Othello, Lady Macbeth—these
are world-types, not English characters. Our English
Shakespeare must be more autochthonic, more chauviniste;