# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Emile Zola, Abbe Mouret's Transgression
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/14200/14200-h/14200-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

‘There, there, that will do,’ he said, escaping from her at last. ‘Take
      care of Desiree, won’t you? I will tell her I am going out.’ 
    

      But at this minute a fresh clear voice called to him: ‘Serge! Serge!’ 
    

      Desiree came flying up, her cheeks ruddy with glee, her head bare, her
      black locks twisted tightly upon her neck, and her hands and arms
      smothered up to the elbows with manure. She had been cleaning out her
      poultry house. When she caught sight of her brother just about to go out
      with his breviary under his arm, she laughed aloud, and kissed him on his
      mouth, with her arms thrown back behind her to avoid soiling him.
    

      ‘No, no,’ she hurriedly exclaimed, ‘I should dirty you. Oh! I am having
      such fun! You must see the animals when you come back.’ 
    

      Thereupon she fled away again. Abbe Mouret then said that he would be back
      about eleven for luncheon, and as he started, La Teuse, who had followed
      him to the doorstep, shouted after him her last injunctions.
    

      ‘Don’t forget to see Brother Archangias. And look in also at the
      Brichets’; the wife came again yesterday about that wedding. Just listen,
      Monsieur le Cure! I met their Rosalie. She’d ask nothing better than to
      marry big Fortune. Have a talk with old Bambousse; perhaps he will listen
      to you now. And don’t come back at twelve o’clock, like the other day.
      Come, say you’ll be back at eleven, won’t you?’ 
    

      But the priest turned round no more. So she went in again, growling
      between her teeth:
    

      ‘When does he ever listen to me? Barely twenty-six years old and does just
      as he likes. To be sure, he’s an old man of sixty for holiness; but then
      he has never known life; he knows nothing, it’s no trouble to him to be as
      good as a cherub!’ 
    

      
 
    

      When Abbe Mouret had got beyond all hearing of La Teuse he stopped,
      thankful to be alone at last. The church was built on a hillock, which
      sloped down gently to the village. With its large gaping windows and
      bright red tiles, it stretched out like a deserted sheep-cote. The priest
      turned round and glanced at the parsonage, a greyish building springing
      from the very side of the church; but as if fearful that he might again be
      overtaken by the interminable chatter that had been buzzing in his ears
      ever since morning, he turned up to the right again, and only felt safe
      when he at last stood before the great doorway, where he could not be seen
      from the parsonage. The front of the church, quite bare and worn by the
      sunshine and rain of years, was crowned by a narrow open stone belfry, in
      which a small bell showed its black silhouette, whilst its rope
      disappeared through the tiles. Six broken steps, on one side half buried
      in the earth, led up to the lofty arched door, now cracked, smothered with
      dust and rust and cobwebs, and so frailly hung upon its outwrenched hinges
      that it seemed as if the first slight puff would secure free entrance to
      the winds of heaven. Abbe Mouret, who had an affection for this
      dilapidated door, leaned against one of its leaves as he stood upon the
      steps. Thence he could survey the whole country round at a glance. And
      shading his eyes with his hands he scanned the horizon.
    

      In the month of May exuberant vegetation burst forth from that stony soil.
      Gigantic lavenders, juniper bushes, patches of rank herbage swarmed over
      the church threshold, and scattered clumps of dark greenery even to the
      very tiles. It seemed as if the first throb of shooting sap in the tough
      matted underwood might well topple the church over. At that early hour,
      amid all the travail of nature’s growth, there was a hum of vivifying
      warmth, and the very rocks quivered as with a long and silent effort. But
      the Abbe failed to comprehend the ardour of nature’s painful labour; he
      simply thought that the steps were tottering, and thereupon leant against
      the other side of the door.
    

      The countryside stretched away for a distance of six miles, bounded by a
      wall of tawny hills speckled with black pine-woods. It was a fearful
      landscape of arid wastes and rocky spurs rending the soil. The few patches
      of arable ground were like scattered pools of blood, red fields with rows
      of lean almond trees, grey-topped olive trees and long lines of vines,
      streaking the soil with their brown stems. It was as if some huge
      conflagration had swept by there, scattering the ashes of forests over the
      hill-tops, consuming all the grass of the meadow lands, and leaving its
      glare and furnace-like heat behind in the hollows. Only here and there was
      the softer note of a pale green patch of growing corn. The landscape
      generally was wild, lacking even a threadlet of water, dying of thirst,
      and flying away in clouds of dust at the least breath of wind. But at the
      farthest point where the crumbling hills on the horizon had left a breach
      one espied some distant fresh moist greenery, a stretch of the
      neighbouring valley fertilised by the Viorne, a river flowing down from
      the gorges of the Seille.
    

      The priest lowered his dazzled glance upon the village, whose few
      scattered houses straggled away below the church—wretched hovels
      they were of rubble and boards strewn along a narrow path without sign of
      streets. There were about thirty of them altogether, some squatting amidst
      muck-heaps, and black with woeful want; others roomier and more
      cheerful-looking with their roofs of pinkish tiles. Strips of garden,
      victoriously planted amidst stony soil, displayed plots of vegetables
      enclosed by quickset hedges. At this hour Les Artaud was empty, not a
      woman was at the windows, not a child was wallowing in the dust; parties
      of fowls alone went to and fro, ferreting among the straw, seeking food up
      to the very thresholds of the houses, whose open doors gaped in the
      sunlight. A big black dog seated on his haunches at the entrance to the
      village seemed to be mounting guard over it.
    

      Languor slowly stole over Abbe Mouret. The rising sun steeped him in such
      warmth that he leant back against the church door pervaded by a feeling of
      happy restfulness. His thoughts were dwelling on that hamlet of Les
      Artaud, which had sprung up there among the stones like one of the knotty
      growths of the valley. All its inhabitants were related, all bore the same
      name, so that from their very cradle they were distinguished among
      themselves by nicknames. An Artaud, their ancestor, had come hither and
      settled like a pariah in this waste. His family had grown with all the
      wild vitality of the herbage that sucked life from the rocky boulders. It
      had at last become a tribe, a rural community, in which cousin-ships were
      lost in the mists of centuries. They intermarried with shameless
      promiscuity. Not an instance could be cited of any Artaud taking himself a
      wife from any neighbouring village; only some of the girls occasionally
      went elsewhere. The others were born and died fixed to that spot,
      leisurely increasing and multiplying on their dunghills with the
      irreflectiveness of trees, and with no definite notion of the world that
      lay beyond the tawny rocks, in whose midst they vegetated. And yet there
      were already rich and poor among them; fowls having at times disappeared,
      the fowl-houses were now closed at night with stout padlocks; moreover one
      Artaud had killed another Artaud one evening behind the mill. These folk,
      begirt by that belt of desolate hills, were truly a people apart—a
      race sprung from the soil, a miniature replica of mankind, three hundred
      souls all told, beginning the centuries yet once again.
    

      Over the priest the sombre shadows of seminary life still hovered. For
      years he had never seen the sun. He perceived it not even now, his eyes
      closed and gazing inwards on his soul, and with no feeling for perishable
      nature, fated to damnation, save contempt. For a long time in his hours of
      devout thought he had dreamt of some hermit’s desert, of some mountain
      hole, where no living thing—neither being, plant, nor water—should
      distract him from the contemplation of God. It was an impulse springing
      from the purest love, from a loathing of all physical sensation. There,
      dying to self, and with his back turned to the light of day, he would have
      waited till he should cease to be, till nothing should remain of him but
      the sovereign whiteness of the soul. To him heaven seemed all white, with
      a luminous whiteness as if lilies there snowed down upon one, as if every
      form of purity, innocence, and chastity there blazed. But his confessor
      reproved him whenever he related his longings for solitude, his cravings
      for an existence of Godlike purity; and recalled him to the struggles of
      the Church, the necessary duties of the priesthood. Later on, after his
      ordination, the young priest had come to Les Artaud at his own request,
      there hoping to realise his dream of human annihilation. In that desolate
      spot, on that barren soil, he might shut his ears to all worldly sounds,
      and live the dreamy life of a saint. For some months past, in truth, his
      existence had been wholly undisturbed, rarely had any thrill of the
      village-life disturbed him; and even the sun’s heat scarcely brought him
      any glow of feeling as he walked the paths, his whole being wrapped in
      heaven, heedless of the unceasing travail of life amidst which he moved.
    

      The big black dog watching over Les Artaud had determined to come up to
      Abbe Mouret, and now sat upon its haunches at the priest’s feet; but the
      unconscious man remained absorbed amidst the sweetness of the morning. On
      the previous evening he had begun the exercises of the Rosary, and to the
      intercession of the Virgin with her Divine Son he attributed the great joy
      which filled his soul. How despicable appeared all the good things of the
      earth! How thankfully he recognised his poverty! When he entered into holy
      orders, after losing on the same day both his father and his mother
      through a tragedy the fearful details of which were even now unknown to
      him,* he had relinquished all his share of their property to an elder
      brother. His only remaining link with the world was his sister; he had
      undertaken the care of her, stirred by a kind of religious affection for
      her feeble intelligence. The dear innocent was so childish, such a very
      little girl, that she recalled to him the poor in spirit to whom the
      Gospel promises the kingdom of heaven. Of late, however, she had somewhat
      disturbed him; she was growing too lusty, too full of health and life. But
      his discomfort was yet of the slightest. His days were spent in that inner
      life he had created for himself, for which he had relinquished all else.
      He closed the portals of his senses, and sought to free himself from all
      bodily needs, so that he might be but a soul enrapt in contemplation. To
      him nature offered only snares and abominations; he gloried in maltreating
      her, in despising her, in releasing himself from his human slime. And as
      the just man must be a fool according to the world, he considered himself
      an exile on this earth; his thoughts were solely fixed upon the favours of
      Heaven, incapable as he was of understanding how an eternity of bliss
      could be weighed against a few hours of perishable enjoyment. His reason
      duped him and his senses lied; and if he advanced in virtue it was
      particularly by humility and obedience. His wish was to be the last of
      all, one subject to all, in order that the divine dew might fall upon his
      heart as upon arid sand; he considered himself overwhelmed with reproach
      and with confusion, unworthy of ever being saved from sin. He no longer
      belonged to himself—blind, deaf, dead to the world as he was. He was
      God’s thing. And from the depth of the abjectness to which he sought to
      plunge, Hosannahs suddenly bore him aloft, above the happy and the mighty
      into the splendour of never-ending bliss.
    

  * This forms the subject of M. Zola’s novel, The Conquest of
    Plassans. ED.

    
      Thus, at Les Artaud, Abbe Mouret had once more experienced, each time he
      read the ‘Imitation,’ the raptures of the cloistered life which he had
      longed for at one time so ardently. As yet he had not had to fight any
      battle. From the moment that he knelt down, he became perfect, absolutely
      oblivious of the flesh, unresisting, undisturbed, as if overpowered by the
      Divine grace. Such ecstasy at God’s approach is well known to some young
      priests: it is a blissful moment when all is hushed, and the only desire
      is but a boundless craving for purity. From no human creature had he
      sought his consolations. He who believes a certain thing to be all in all
      cannot be troubled: and he did believe that God was all in all, and that
      humility, obedience, and chastity were everything. He could remember
      having heard temptation spoken of as an abominable torture that tries the
      holiest. But he would only smile: God had never left him. He bore his
      faith about him thus like a breast-plate protecting him from the slightest
      breath of evil. He could recall how he had hidden himself and wept for
      very love; he knew not whom he loved, but he wept for love, for love of
      some one afar off. The recollection never failed to move him. Later on he
      had decided on becoming a priest in order to satisfy that craving for a
      superhuman affection which was his sole torment. He could not see where
      greater love could be. In that state of life he satisfied his being, his
      inherited predisposition, his youthful dreams, his first virile desires.
      If temptation must come, he awaited it with the calmness of the seminarist
      ignorant of the world. He felt that his manhood had been killed in him: it
      gladdened him to feel himself a creature set apart, unsexed, turned from
      the usual paths of life, and, as became a lamb of the Lord, marked with
      the tonsure.
    

      
 
    

      While the priest pondered the sun was heating the big church-door. Gilded
      flies buzzed round a large flower that was blooming between two of the
      church-door steps. Abbe Mouret, feeling slightly dazed, was at last about
      to move away, when the big black dog sprang, barking violently, towards
      the iron gate of the little graveyard on the left of the church. At the
      same time a harsh voice called out: ‘Ah! you young rascal! So you stop
      away from school, and I find you in the graveyard! Oh, don’t say no: I
      have been watching you this quarter of an hour.’ 
    

      As the priest stepped forward he saw Vincent, whom a Brother of the
      Christian Schools was clutching tightly by the ear. The lad was suspended,
      as it were, over a ravine skirting the graveyard, at the bottom of which
      flowed the Mascle, a mountain torrent whose crystal waters plunged into
      the Viorne, six miles away.
    

      ‘Brother Archangias!’ softly called the priest, as if to appease the
      fearful man.
    

      The Brother, however, did not release the boy’s ear.
    

      ‘Oh, it’s you, Monsieur le Cure?’ he growled. ‘Just fancy, this rascal is
      always poking his nose into the graveyard. I don’t know what he can be up
      to here. I ought to let go of him and let him smash his skull down there.
      It would be what he deserves.’ 
    

      The lad remained dumb, with his cunning eyes tight shut as he clung to the
      bushes.
    

      ‘Take care, Brother Archangias,’ continued the priest, ‘he might slip.’ 
    

      And he himself helped Vincent to scramble up again.
    

      ‘Come, my young friend, what were you doing there?’ he asked. ‘You must
      not go playing in graveyards.’ 
    

      The lad had opened his eyes, and crept away, fearfully, from the Brother,
      to place himself under the priest’s protection.
    

      ‘I’ll tell you,’ he said in a low voice, as he raised his bushy head.
      ‘There is a tomtit’s nest in the brambles there, under that rock. For over
      ten days I’ve been watching it, and now the little ones are hatched, so I
      came this morning after serving your mass.’ 
    

      ‘A tomtit’s nest!’ exclaimed Brother Archangias. ‘Wait a bit! wait a bit!’ 
    

      Thereupon he stepped aside, picked a clod of earth off a grave and flung
      it into the brambles. But he missed the nest. Another clod, however, more
      skilfully thrown upset the frail cradle, and precipitated the fledglings
      into the torrent below.
    

      ‘Now, perhaps,’ he continued, clapping his hands to shake off the earth
      that soiled them, ‘you won’t come roaming here any more, like a heathen;
      the dead will pull your feet at night if you go walking over them again.’ 
    

      Vincent, who had laughed at seeing the nest dive into the stream, looked
      round him and shrugged his shoulders like one of strong mind.
    

      ‘Oh, I’m not afraid,’ he said. ‘Dead folk don’t stir.’ 
    

      The graveyard, in truth, was not a place to inspire fear. It was a barren
      piece of ground whose narrow paths were smothered by rank weeds. Here and
      there the soil was bossy with mounds. A single tombstone, that of Abbe
      Caffin, brand-new and upright, could be perceived in the centre of the
      ground. Save this, all around there were only broken fragments of crosses,
      withered tufts of box, and old slabs split and moss-eaten. There were not
      two burials a year. Death seemed to make no dwelling in that waste spot,
      whither La Teuse came every evening to fill her apron with grass for
      Desiree’s rabbits. A gigantic cypress tree, standing near the gate, alone
      cast shadow upon the desert field. This cypress, a landmark visible for
      nine miles around, was known to the whole countryside as the Solitaire.
    

      ‘It’s full of lizards,’ added Vincent, looking at the cracks of the
      church-wall. ‘One could have a fine lark—’ 
    

      But he sprang out with a bound on seeing the Brother lift his foot. The
      latter proceeded to call the priest’s attention to the dilapidated state
      of the gate, which was not only eaten up with rust, but had one hinge off,
      and the lock broken.
    

      ‘It ought to be repaired,’ said he.
    

      Abbe Mouret smiled, but made no reply. Addressing Vincent, who was romping
      with the dog: ‘I say, my boy,’ he asked, ‘do you know where old Bambousse
      is at work this morning?’ 
    

      The lad glanced towards the horizon. ‘He must be at his Olivettes field
      now,’ he answered, pointing towards the left. ‘But Voriau will show your
      reverence the way. He’s sure to know where his master is.’ And he clapped
      his hands and called: ‘Hie! Voriau! hie!’ 
    

      The big black dog paused a moment, wagging his tail, and seeking to read
      the urchin’s eyes. Then, barking joyfully, he set off down the slope to
      the village. Abbe Mouret and Brother Archangias followed him, chatting. A
      hundred yards further Vincent surreptitiously bolted, and again glided up
      towards the church, keeping a watchful eye upon them, and ready to dart
      behind a bush if they should look round. With adder-like suppleness, he
      once more glided into the graveyard, that paradise full of lizards, nests,
      and flowers.
    

      Meantime, while Voriau led the way before them along the dusty road,
      Brother Archangias was angrily saying to the priest: ‘Let be! Monsieur le
      Cure, they’re spawn of damnation, those toads are! They ought to have
      their backs broken, to make them pleasing to God. They grow up in
      irreligion, like their fathers. Fifteen years have I been here, and not
      one Christian have I been able to turn out. The minute they quit my hands,
      good-bye! They think of nothing but their land, their vines, their
      olive-trees. Not one ever sets foot in church. Brute beasts they are,
      struggling with their stony fields! Guide them with the stick, Monsieur le
      Cure, yes, the stick!’ 
    

      Then, after drawing breath, he added with a terrific wave of his hands:
    

      ‘Those Artauds, look you, are like the brambles over-running these rocks.
      One stem has been enough to poison the whole district. They cling on, they
      multiply, they live in spite of everything. Nothing short of fire from
      heaven, as at Gomorrha, will clear it all away.’ 
    

      ‘We should never despair of sinners,’ said Abbe Mouret, all inward
      peacefulness, as he leisurely walked on.
    

      ‘But these are the devil’s own,’ broke in the Brother still more
      violently. ‘I’ve been a peasant, too. Up to eighteen I dug the earth; and
      later on, when I was at the Training College, I had to sweep, pare
      vegetables, do all the heavy work. It’s not their toilsome labour I find
      fault with. On the contrary, for God prefers the lowly. But the Artauds
      live like beasts! They are like their dogs, they never attend mass, and
      make a mock of the commandments of God and of the Church. They think of
      nothing but their plots of lands, so sweet they are on them!’ 
    

      Voriau, his tail wagging, kept stopping and moving on again as soon as he
      saw that they still followed him.
    

      ‘There certainly are some grievous things going on,’ said Abbe Mouret. ‘My
      predecessor, Abbe Caffin—’ 
    

      ‘A poor specimen,’ interrupted the Brother. ‘He came here to us from
      Normandy owing to some disreputable affair. Once here, his sole thought
      was good living; he let everything go to rack and ruin.’ 
    

      ‘Oh, no, Abbe Caffin certainly did what he could; but I must own that his
      efforts were all but barren in results. My own are mostly fruitless.’ 
    

      Brother Archangias shrugged his shoulders. He walked on for a minute in
      silence, swaying his tall bony frame, which looked as if it had been
      roughly fashioned with a hatchet. The sun beat down upon his neck,
      shadowing his hard, sword-edged peasant’s face.
    

      ‘Listen to me, Monsieur le Cure,’ he said at last. ‘I am too much beneath
      you to lecture you; but still, I am almost double your age, I know this
      part, and therefore I feel justified in telling you that you will gain
      nothing by gentleness. The catechism, understand, is enough. God has no
      mercy on the wicked. He burns them. Stick to that.’ 
    

      Then, as Abbe Mouret, whose head remained bowed, did not open his mouth,
      he went on: ‘Religion is leaving the country districts because it is made
      over indulgent. It was respected when it spoke out like an unforgiving
      mistress. I really don’t know what they can teach you now in the
      seminaries. The new priests weep like children with their parishioners.
      God no longer seems the same. I dare say, Monsieur le Cure, that you don’t
      even know your catechism by heart now?’ 
    

      But the priest, wounded by the imperiousness with which the Brother so
      roughly sought to dominate him, looked up and dryly rejoined:
    

      ‘That will do, your zeal is very praiseworthy. But haven’t you something
      to tell me? You came to the parsonage this morning, did you not?’ 
    

      Thereupon Brother Archangias plumply answered: ‘I had to tell you just
      what I have told you. The Artauds live like pigs. Only yesterday I learned
      that Rosalie, old Bambousse’s eldest daughter, is in the family way. It
      happens with all of them before they get married. And they simply laugh at
      reproaches, as you know.’ 
    

      ‘Yes,’ murmured Abbe Mouret, ‘it is a great scandal. I am just on my way
      to see old Bambousse to speak to him about it; it is desirable that they
      should be married as soon as possible. The child’s father, it seems, is
      Fortune, the Brichets’ eldest son. Unfortunately the Brichets are poor.’ 
    

      ‘That Rosalie, now,’ continued the Brother, ‘is just eighteen. Not four
      years since I still had her under me at school, and she was already a
      gadabout. I have now got her sister Catherine, a chit of eleven, who seems
      likely to become even worse than her elder. One comes across her in every
      corner with that little scamp, Vincent. It’s no good, you may pull their
      ears till they bleed, the woman always crops up in them. They carry
      perdition about with them and are only fit to be thrown on a muck-heap.
      What a splendid riddance if all girls were strangled at their birth!’ 
    

      His loathing, his hatred of woman made him swear like a carter. Abbe
      Mouret, who had been listening to him with unmoved countenance, smiled at
      last at his rabid utterances. He called Voriau, who had strayed into a
      field close by.
    

      ‘There, look there!’ cried Brother Archangias, pointing to a group of
      children playing at the bottom of a ravine, ‘there are my young devils,
      who play the truant under pretence of going to help their parents among
      the vines! You may be certain that jade of a Catherine is among them....
      There, didn’t I tell you! Till to-night, Monsieur le Cure. Oh, just you
      wait, you rascals!’ 
    

      Off he went at a run, his dirty neckband flying over his shoulder, and his
      big greasy cassock tearing up the thistles. Abbe Mouret watched him swoop
      down into the midst of the children, who scattered like frightened
      sparrows. But he succeeded in seizing Catherine and one boy by the ears
      and led them back towards the village, clutching them tightly with his big
      hairy fingers, and overwhelming them with abuse.
    

      The priest walked on again. Brother Archangias sometimes aroused strange
      scruples in his mind. With his vulgarity and coarseness the Brother seemed
      to him the true man of God, free from earthly ties, submissive in all to
      Heaven’s will, humble, blunt, ready to shower abuse upon sin. He, the
      priest, would then feel despair at his inability to rid himself more
      completely of his body; he regretted that he was not ugly, unclean,
      covered with vermin like some of the saints. Whenever the Brother had
      wounded him by some words of excessive coarseness, or by some over-hasty
      churlishness, he would blame himself for his refinement, his innate
      shrinking, as if these were really faults. Ought he not to be dead to all
      the weaknesses of this world? And this time also he smiled sadly as he
      thought how near he had been to losing his temper at the Brother’s roughly
      put lesson. It was pride, it seemed to him, seeking to work his perdition
      by making him despise the lowly. However, in spite of himself, he felt
      relieved at being alone again, at being able to walk on gently, reading
      his breviary, free at last from the grating voice that had disturbed his
      dream of heavenly love.
    

      
 
    

      The road wound on between fallen rocks, among which the peasants had
      succeeded here and there in reclaiming six or seven yards of chalky soil,
      planted with old olive trees. Under the priest’s feet the dust in the deep
      ruts crackled lightly like snow. At times, as he felt a warmer puff upon
      his face, he would raise his eyes from his book, as if to seek whence came
      this soft caress; but his gaze was vacant, straying without perception
      over the glowing horizon, over the twisted outlines of that
      passion-breathing landscape as it stretched out in the sun before him,
      dry, barren, despairing of the fertilisation for which it longed. And he
      would lower his hat over his forehead to protect himself against the warm
      breeze and tranquilly resume his reading, his cassock raising behind him a
      cloudlet of dust which rolled along the surface of the road.
    

      ‘Good morning, Monsieur le Cure,’ a passing peasant said to him.
    

      Sounds of digging alongside the cultivated strips of ground again roused
      him from his abstraction. He turned his head and perceived big
      knotty-limbed old men greeting him from among the vines. The Artauds were
      eagerly satisfying their passion for the soil, in the sun’s full blaze.
      Sweating brows appeared from behind the bushes, heaving chests were slowly
      raised, the whole scene was one of ardent fructification, through which he
      moved with the calm step born of ignorance. No discomfort came to him from
      the great travail of love that permeated that splendid morning.
    

      ‘Steady! Voriau, you mustn’t eat people!’ some one gaily shouted in a
      powerful voice by way of silencing the dog’s loud barks.
    

      Abbe Mouret looked up.
    

      ‘Oh! it’s you. Fortune?’ he said, approaching the edge of the field in
      which the young peasant was at work. ‘I was just on my way to speak to
      you.’ 
    

      Fortune was of the same age as the priest: a bigly built, bold-looking
      young fellow, with skin already hardened. He was clearing a small plot of
      stony heath.
    

      ‘What about, Monsieur le Cure?’ he asked.
    

      ‘About Rosalie and you,’ replied the priest.
    

      Fortune began to laugh. Perhaps he thought it droll that a priest should
      interest himself in such a matter.
    

      ‘Well,’ he muttered, ‘I’m not to blame in it nor she either. So much the
      worse if old Bambousse refuses to let me have her. You saw yourself how
      his dog was trying to bite me just now; he sets him on me.’ 
    

      Then, as Abbe Mouret was about to continue, old Artaud, called Brichet,
      whom he had not previously perceived, emerged from the shadow of a bush
      behind which he and his wife were eating. He was a little man, withered by
      age, with a cringing face.
    

      ‘Your reverence must have been told a pack of lies,’ he exclaimed. ‘The
      youngster is quite ready to marry Rosalie. What’s happened isn’t anybody’s
      fault. It has happened to others who got on all right just the same. The
      matter doesn’t rest with us. You ought to speak to Bambousse. He’s the one
      who looks down on us because he’s got money.’ 
    

      ‘Yes, we are very poor,’ whined his wife, a tall lachrymose woman, who
      also rose to her feet. ‘We’ve only this scrap of ground where the very
      devil seems to have been hailing stones. Not a bite of bread from it,
      even. Without you, your reverence, life would be impossible.’ 
    

      Brichet’s wife was the one solitary devotee of the village. Whenever she
      had been to communion, she would hang about the parsonage, well knowing
      that La Teuse always kept a couple of loaves for her from her last baking.
      At times she was even able to carry off a rabbit or a fowl given her by
      Desiree.
    

      ‘There’s no end to the scandals,’ continued the priest. ‘The marriage must
      take place without delay.’ 
    

      ‘Oh! at once! as soon as the others are agreeable,’ said the old woman,
      alarmed about her periodical presents. ‘What do you say, Brichet? we are
      not such bad Christians as to go against his reverence?’ 
    

      Fortune sniggered.
    

      ‘Oh, I’m quite ready,’ he said, ‘and so is Rosalie. I saw her yesterday at
      the back of the mill. We haven’t quarrelled. We stopped there to have a
      bit of a laugh.’ 
    

      But Abbe Mouret interrupted him: ‘Very well, I am now going to speak to
      Bambousse. He is over there, at Les Olivettes, I believe.’ 
    

      The priest was going off when the mother asked him what had become of her
      younger son Vincent, who had left in the early morning to serve mass.
      There was a lad now who badly needed his reverence’s admonitions. And she
      walked by the priest’s side for another hundred yards, bemoaning her
      poverty, the failure of the potato crop, the frost which had nipped the
      olive trees, the hot weather which threatened to scorch up the scanty
      corn. Then, as she left him, she solemnly declared that her son Fortune
      always said his prayers, both morning and evening.
    

      Voriau now ran on in front, and suddenly, at a turn in the road, he bolted
      across the fields. The priest then struck into a small path leading up a
      low hill. He was now at Les Olivettes, the most fertile spot in the
      neighbourhood, where the mayor of the commune, Artaud, otherwise
      Bambousse, owned several fields of corn, olive plantations, and vines. The
      dog was now romping round the skirts of a tall brunette, who burst into a
      loud laugh as she caught sight of the priest.
    

      ‘Is your father here, Rosalie?’ the latter asked.
    

      ‘Yes, just across there,’ she said, pointing with her hand and still
      smiling.
    

      Leaving the part of the field she had been weeding, she walked on before
      him with the vigorous springiness of a hard-working woman, her head
      unshielded from the sun, her neck all sunburnt, her hair black and coarse
      like a horse’s mane. Her green-stained hands exhaled the odour of the
      weeds she had been pulling up.
    

      ‘Father,’ she called out, ‘here’s Monsieur le Cure asking for you.’ 
    

      And there she remained, bold, unblushing, with a sly smile still hovering
      over her features. Bambousse, a stout, sweating, round-faced man, left his
      work and gaily came towards the priest.
    

      ‘I’d take my oath you are going to speak to me about the repairs of the
      church,’ he exclaimed, as he clapped his earthy hands. ‘Well, then,
      Monsieur le Cure, I can only say no, it’s impossible. The commune hasn’t
      got the coin. If the Lord provides plaster and tiles, we’ll provide the
      workmen.’ 
    

      At this jest of his the unbelieving peasant burst into a loud guffaw,
      slapped his thighs, coughed, and almost choked himself.
    

      ‘It was not for the church I came,’ replied the Abbe Mouret. ‘I wanted to
      speak to you about your daughter Rosalie.’ 
    

      ‘Rosalie? What has she done to you, then?’ inquired Bambousse, his eyes
      blinking.
    

      The girl was boldly staring at the young priest, scrutinising his white
      hands and slender, feminine neck, as if trying to make him redden. He,
      however, bluntly and with unruffled countenance, as if speaking of
      something quite indifferent, continued:
    

      ‘You know what I mean, Bambousse. She must get married.’ 
    

      ‘Oh, that’s it, is it?’ muttered the old man, with a bantering look. ‘Many
      thanks for the message. The Brichets sent you, didn’t they? Mother Brichet
      goes to mass, and so you give her a helping hand to marry her son—it’s
      all very fine. But, I’ve got nothing to do with that. It doesn’t suit me.
      That’s all.’ 
    

      Thereupon the astonished priest represented to him that the scandal must
      be stopped, and that he ought to forgive Fortune, as the latter was
      willing to make reparation for his transgression, and that, lastly, his
      daughter’s reputation demanded a speedy marriage.
    

      ‘Ta, ta, ta,’ replied Bambousse, what a lot of words! I shall keep my
      daughter, please understand it. All that’s got nothing to do with me. That
      Fortune is a beggarly pauper, without a brass farthing. What an easy job,
      if one could marry a girl like that! At that rate we should have all the
      young things marrying off morning and night. Thank Heaven! I’m not worried
      about Rosalie: everybody knows what has happened; but it makes no
      difference. She can marry any one she chooses in the neighbourhood.’ 
    

      ‘But the child?’ interrupted the priest.
    

      ‘The child indeed! There’ll be time enough to think of that when it’s
      born.’ 
    

      Rosalie, perceiving the turn the priest’s application was taking, now
      thought it proper to ram her fists into her eyes and whimper. And she even
      let herself fall upon the ground.
    

      ‘Shut up, will you, you hussy!’ howled her father in a rage. And he
      proceeded to revile her in the coarsest terms, which made her laugh
      silently behind her clenched fists.
    

      ‘You won’t shut up? won’t you? Just wait a minute then, you jade!’ 
      continued old Bambousse. And thereupon he picked up a clod of earth and
      flung it at her. It burst upon her knot of hair, crumbling down her neck
      and smothering her in dust. Dizzy from the blow, she bounded to her feet
      and fled, sheltering her head between her hands. But Bambousse had time to
      fling two more clods at her, and if the first only grazed her left
      shoulder, the next caught her full on the base of the spine, with such
      force that she fell upon her knees.
    

      ‘Bambousse!’ cried the priest, as he wrenched from the peasant’s hand a
      number of stones which he had just picked up.
    

      ‘Let be, Monsieur le Cure,’ said the other. ‘It was only soft earth. I
      ought to have thrown these stones at her. It’s easy to see that you don’t
      know girls. Hard as nails, all of them. I might duck that one in the well,
      I might break all her bones with a cudgel, and she’d still be just the
      same. But I’ve got my eye on her, and if I catch her!... Ah! well, they
      are all like that.’ 
    

      He was already comforted. He took a good pull at a big flat bottle of
      wine, encased in wicker-work, which lay warming on the hot ground. And
      breaking once more into a laugh, he said: ‘If I only had a glass, Monsieur
      le Cure, I would offer you some with pleasure.’ 
    

      ‘So then,’ again asked the priest, ‘this marriage?’ 
    

      ‘No, it can’t be; I should get laughed at. Rosalie is a stout wench. She’s
      worth a man to me. I shall have to hire a lad the day she goes off.... We
      can have another talk about it after the vintage. Besides, I don’t want to
      be robbed. Give and take, say I. That’s fair. What do you think?’ 
    

      Nevertheless for another long half-hour did the priest remain there
      preaching to Bambousse, speaking to him of God, and plying him with all
      the reasons suited to the circumstances. But the old man had resumed his
      work; he shrugged his shoulders, jested, and grew more and more obstinate.
      At last, he broke out: ‘But if you asked me for a sack of corn, you would
      give me money, wouldn’t you? So why do you want me to let my daughter go
      for nothing?’ 
    

      Much discomfited, Abbe Mouret left him. As he went down the path he saw
      Rosalie rolling about under an olive tree with Voriau, who was licking her
      face. With her arms whirling, she kept on repeating: ‘You tickle me, you
      big stupid. Leave off!’ 
    

      When she perceived the priest, she made an attempt at a blush, settled her
      clothes, and once more raised her fists to her eyes. He, on his part,
      sought to console her by promising to attempt some fresh efforts with her
      father, adding that, in the meantime, she should do nothing to aggravate
      her sin. And then, as she impudently smiled at him, he pictured hell,
      where wicked women burn in torment. And afterwards he left her, his duty
      done, his soul once more full of the serenity which enabled him to pass
      undisturbed athwart the corruptions of the world.
    

      
 
    

      The morning was becoming terribly hot. In that huge rocky amphitheatre the
      sun kindled a furnace-like glare from the moment when the first fine
      weather began. By the planet’s height in the sky Abbe Mouret now perceived
      that he had only just time to return home if he wished to get there by
      eleven o’clock and escape a scolding from La Teuse. Having finished
      reading his breviary and made his application to Bambousse, he swiftly
      retraced his steps, gazing as he went at his church, now a grey spot in
      the distance, and at the black rigid silhouette which the big
      cypress-tree, the Solitaire, set against the blue sky. Amidst the
      drowsiness fostered by the heat, he thought of how richly that evening he
      might decorate the Lady chapel for the devotions of the month of Mary.
      Before him the road offered a carpet of dust, soft to the tread and of
      dazzling whiteness.
    

      At the Croix-Verte, as the Abbe was about to cross the highway leading
      from Plassans to La Palud, a gig coming down the hill compelled him to
      step behind a heap of stones. Then, as he crossed the open space, a voice
      called to him: ‘Hallo, Serge, my boy!’ 
    

      The gig had pulled up and from it a man leant over. The priest recognised
      him—he was an uncle of his, Doctor Pascal Rougon, or Monsieur
      Pascal, as the poor folk of Plassans, whom he attended for nothing,
      briefly styled him. Although barely over fifty, he was already snowy
      white, with a big beard and abundant hair, amidst which his handsome
      regular features took an expression of shrewdness and benevolence.*
    

  * See M. Zola’s novels, Dr. Pascal and The Fortune of the
    Rougons.—ED.

    
      ‘So you potter about in the dust at this hour of the day?’ he said gaily,
      as he stooped to grasp the Abbe’s hands. ‘You’re not afraid of sunstroke?’ 
    

      ‘No more than you are, uncle,’ answered the priest, laughing.
    

      ‘Oh, I have the hood of my trap to shield me. Besides, sick folks won’t
      wait. People die at all times, my boy.’ And he went on to relate that he
      was now on his way to old Jeanbernat, the steward of the Paradou, who had
      had an apoplectic stroke the night before. A neighbour, a peasant on his
      way to Plassans market, had summoned him.
    

      ‘He must be dead by this time,’ the doctor continued. ‘However, we must
      make sure.... Those old demons are jolly tough, you know.’ 
    

      He was already raising his whip, when Abbe Mouret stopped him.
    

      ‘Stay! what o’clock do you make it, uncle?’ 
    

      ‘A quarter to eleven.’ 
    

      The Abbe hesitated; he already seemed to hear La Teuse’s terrible voice
      bawling in his ears that his luncheon was getting cold. But he plucked up
      courage and added swiftly: ‘I’ll go with you, uncle. The unhappy man may
      wish to reconcile himself to God in his last hour.’ 
    

      Doctor Pascal could not restrain a laugh.
    

      ‘What, Jeanbernat!’ he said; ‘ah, well! if ever you convert him! Never
      mind, come all the same. The sight of you is enough to cure him.’ 
    

      The priest got in. The doctor, apparently regretting his jest, displayed
      an affectionate warmth of manner, whilst from time to time clucking his
      tongue by way of encouraging his horse. And out of the corner of his eye
      he inquisitively observed his nephew with the keenness of a scientist bent
      on taking notes. In short kindly sentences he inquired about his life, his
      habits, and the peaceful happiness he enjoyed at Les Artaud. And at each
      satisfactory reply he murmured, as if to himself in a tone of reassurance:
      ‘Come, so much the better; that’s just as it should be!’ 
    

      He displayed peculiar anxiety about the young priest’s state of health.
      And Serge, greatly surprised, assured him that he was in splendid trim,
      and had neither fits of giddiness or of nausea, nor headaches whatsoever.
    

      ‘Capital, capital,’ reiterated his uncle Pascal. ‘In spring, you see, the
      blood is active. But you are sound enough. By-the-bye, I saw your brother
      Octave at Marseilles last month. He is off to Paris, where he will get a
      fine berth in a high-class business. The young beggar, a nice life he
      leads.’ 
    

      ‘What life?’ innocently inquired the priest.
    

      To avoid replying the doctor chirruped to his horse, and then went on:
      ‘Briefly, everybody is well—your aunt Felicite, your uncle Rougon,
      and the others. Still, that does not hinder our needing your prayers. You
      are the saint of the family, my lad; I rely upon you to save the whole
      lot.’ 
    

      He laughed, but in such a friendly, good-humoured way that Serge himself
      began to indulge in jocularity.
    

      ‘You see,’ continued Pascal, ‘there are some among the lot whom it won’t
      be easy to lead to Paradise. Some nice confessions you’d hear if all came
      in turn. For my part, I can do without their confessions; I watch them
      from a distance; I have got their records at home among my botanical
      specimens and medical notes. Some day I shall be able to draw up a
      wondrously interesting diagram. We shall see; we shall see!’ 
    

      He was forgetting himself, carried away by his enthusiasm for science. A
      glance at his nephew’s cassock pulled him up short.
    

      ‘As for you, you’re a parson,’ he muttered; ‘you did well; a parson’s a
      very happy man. The calling absorbs you, eh? And so you’ve taken to the
      good path. Well! you would never have been satisfied otherwise. Your
      relatives, starting like you, have done a deal of evil, and still they are
      unsatisfied. It’s all logically perfect, my lad. A priest completes the
      family. Besides, it was inevitable. Our blood was bound to run to that. So
      much the better for you; you have had the most luck.’ Correcting himself,
      however, with a strange smile, he added: ‘No, it’s your sister Desiree who
      has had the best luck of all.’ 
    

      He whistled, whipped up his horse, and changed the conversation. The gig,
      after climbing a somewhat steep slope, was threading its way through
      desolate ravines; at last it reached a tableland, where the hollow road
      skirted an interminable and lofty wall. Les Artaud had disappeared; they
      found themselves in the heart of a desert.
    

      ‘We are getting near, are we not?’ asked the priest.
    

      ‘This is the Paradou,’ replied the doctor, pointing to the wall. ‘Haven’t
      you been this way before, then? We are not three miles from Les Artaud. A
      splendid property it must have been, this Paradou. The park wall this side
      alone is quite a mile and a half long. But for over a hundred years it’s
      all been running wild.’ 
    

      ‘There are some fine trees,’ observed the Abbe, as he looked up in
      astonishment at the luxuriant mass of foliage which jutted over.
    

      ‘Yes, that part is very fertile. In fact, the park is a regular forest
      amidst the bare rocks which surround it. The Mascle, too, rises there; I
      have heard four or five springs mentioned, I fancy.’ 
    

      In short sentences, interspersed with irrelevant digressions, he then
      related the story of the Paradou, according to the current legend of the
      countryside. In the time of Louis XV., a great lord had erected a
      magnificent palace there, with vast gardens, fountains, trickling streams,
      and statues—a miniature Versailles hidden away among the stones,
      under the full blaze of the southern sun. But he had there spent but one
      season with a lady of bewitching beauty, who doubtless died there, as none
      had ever seen her leave. Next year the mansion was destroyed by fire, the
      park doors were nailed up, the very loopholes of the walls were filled
      with mould; and thus, since that remote time, not a glance had penetrated
      that vast enclosure which covered the whole of one of the plateaux of the
      Garrigue hills.
    

      ‘There can be no lack of nettles there,’ laughingly said Abbe Mouret.
      ‘Don’t you find that the whole wall reeks of damp, uncle?’ 
    

      A pause followed, and he asked:
    

      ‘And whom does the Paradou belong to now?’ 
    

      ‘Why, nobody knows,’ the doctor answered. ‘The owner did come here once,
      some twenty years ago. But he was so scared by the sight of this adders’ 
      nest that he has never turned up since. The real master is the caretaker,
      that old oddity, Jeanbernat, who has managed to find quarters in a lodge
      where the stones still hang together. There it is, see—that grey
      building yonder, with its windows all smothered in ivy.’ 
    

      The gig passed by a lordly iron gate, ruddy with rust, and lined inside
      with a layer of boards. The wide dry throats were black with brambles. A
      hundred yards further on was the lodge inhabited by Jeanbernat. It stood
      within the park, which it overlooked. But the old keeper had apparently
      blocked up that side of his dwelling, and had cleared a little garden by
      the road. And there he lived, facing southwards, with his back turned upon
      the Paradou, as if unaware of the immensity of verdure that stretched away
      behind him.
    

      The young priest jumped down, looking inquisitively around him and
      questioning the doctor, who was hurriedly fastening the horse to a ring
      fixed in the wall.
    

      ‘And the old man lives all alone in this out-of-the-way hole?’ he asked.
    

      ‘Yes, quite alone,’ replied his uncle, adding, however, the next minute:
      ‘Well, he has with him a niece whom he had to take in, a queer girl, a
      regular savage. But we must make haste. The whole place looks death-like.’ 
    

      
 
    

      The house with its shutters closed seemed wrapped in slumber as it stood
      there in the midday sun, amidst the hum of the big flies that swarmed all
      up the ivy to the roof tiles. The sunlit ruin was steeped in happy
      quietude. When the doctor had opened the gate of the narrow garden, which
      was enclosed by a lofty quickset hedge, there, in the shadow cast by a
      wall, they found Jeanbernat, tall and erect, and calmly smoking his pipe,
      as in the deep silence he watched his vegetables grow.
    

      ‘What, are you up then, you humbug?’ exclaimed the astonished doctor.
    

      ‘So you were coming to bury me, were you?’ growled the old man harshly. ‘I
      don’t want anybody. I bled myself.’ 
    

      He stopped short as he caught sight of the priest, and assumed so
      threatening an expression that the doctor hastened to intervene.
    

      ‘This is my nephew,’ he said; ‘the new Cure of Les Artaud—a good
      fellow, too. Devil take it, we haven’t been bowling over the roads at this
      hour of the day to eat you, Jeanbernat.’ 
    

      The old man calmed down a little.
    

      ‘I don’t want any shavelings here,’ he grumbled. ‘They’re enough to make
      one croak. Mind, doctor, no priests, and no physics when I go off, or we
      shall quarrel. Let him come in, however, as he is your nephew.’ 
    

      Abbe Mouret, struck dumb with amazement, could not speak a word. He stood
      there in the middle of the path scanning that strange solitaire, with
      scorched, brick-tinted face, and limbs all withered and twisted like a
      bundle of ropes, who seemed to bear the burden of his eighty years with a
      scornful contempt for life. When the doctor attempted to feel his pulse,
      his ill-humour broke out afresh.
    

      ‘Do leave me in peace! I bled myself with my knife, I tell you. It’s all
      over, now. Who was the fool of a peasant who disturbed you? The doctor
      here, and the priest as well, why not the mutes too! Well, it can’t be
      helped, people will be fools. It won’t prevent us from having a drink,
      eh?’ 
    

      He fetched a bottle and three glasses, and stood them on an old table
      which he brought out into the shade. Then, having filled the glasses to
      the brim, he insisted on clinking them. His anger had given place to
      jeering cheerfulness.
    

      ‘It won’t poison you, Monsieur le Cure,’ he said. ‘A glass of good wine
      isn’t a sin. Upon my word, however, this is the first time I ever clinked
      a glass with a cassock, but no offence to you. That poor Abbe Caffin, your
      predecessor, refused to argue with me. He was afraid.’ 
    

      Jeanbernat gave vent to a hearty laugh, and then went on: ‘Just fancy, he
      had pledged himself that he would prove to me that God exists. So,
      whenever I met him, I defied him to do it; and he sloped off crestfallen,
      I can tell you.’ 
    

      ‘What, God does not exist!’ cried Abbe Mouret, roused from his silence.
    

      ‘Oh! just as you please,’ mockingly replied Jeanbernat. ‘We’ll begin
      together all over again, if it’s any pleasure to you. But I warn you that
      I’m a tough hand at it. There are some thousands of books in one of the
      rooms upstairs, which were rescued from the fire at the Paradou: all the
      philosophers of the eighteenth century, a whole heap of old books on
      religion. I’ve learned some fine things from them. I’ve been reading them
      these twenty years. Marry! you’ll find you’ve got some one who can talk,
      Monsieur le Cure.’ 
    

      He had risen, slowly waving his hand towards the surrounding horizon, to
      the earth and to the sky, and repeating solemnly: ‘There’s nothing,
      nothing, nothing. When the sun is snuffed out, all will be at an end.’ 
    

      Doctor Pascal nudged Abbe Mouret with his elbow. With blinking eyes he was
      curiously observing the old man and nodding approvingly in order to induce
      him to talk. ‘So you are a materialist, Jeanbernat?’ he said.
    

      ‘Oh, I am only a poor man,’ replied the old fellow, relighting his pipe.
      ‘When Count de Corbiere, whose foster-brother I was, died from a fall from
      his horse, his children sent me here to look after this park of the
      Sleeping Beauty, in order to get rid of me. I was sixty years old then,
      and I thought I was about done. But death forgot me; and I had to make
      myself a burrow. If one lives all alone, look you, one gets to see things
      in rather a queer fashion. The trees are no longer trees, the earth puts
      on the ways of a living being, the stones seem to tell you tales. A parcel
      of rubbish, eh? But I know some secrets that would fairly stagger you.
      Besides, what do you think there is to do in this devilish desert? I read
      the old books; it was more amusing than shooting. The Count, who used to
      curse like a heathen, was always saying to me: “Jeanbernat, my boy, I
      fully expect to meet you again in the hot place, so that you will be able
      to serve me there as you have up here.”’ 
    

      Once more he waved his hand to the horizon and added: ‘You hear, nothing;
      there’s nothing. It’s all foolery.’ 
    

      Dr. Pascal began to laugh.
    

      ‘A pleasant piece of foolery, at any rate,’ he said. ‘Jeanbernat, you are
      a deceiver. I suspect you are in love, in spite of your affectation of
      being blase. You were speaking very tenderly of the trees and
      stones just now.’ 
    

      ‘Oh, no, I assure you,’ murmured the old man, ‘I have done with that. At
      one time, it’s true, when I first knew you and used to go herborising with
      you, I was stupid enough to love all sorts of things I came across in that
      huge liar, the country. Fortunately, the old volumes have killed all that.
      I only wish my garden was smaller; I don’t go out into the road twice a
      year. You see that bench? That’s where I spend all my time, just watching
      my lettuces grow.’ 
    

      ‘And what about your rounds in the park?’ broke in the doctor.
    

      ‘In the park!’ repeated Jeanbernat, with a look of profound surprise.
      ‘Why, it’s more than twelve years since I set foot in it! What do you
      suppose I could do inside that cemetery? It’s too big. It’s stupid, what
      with those endless trees and moss everywhere and broken statues, and holes
      in which one might break one’s neck at every step. The last time I went in
      there, it was so dark under the trees, there was such a stink of wild
      flowers, and such queer breezes blew along the paths, that I felt almost
      afraid. So I have shut myself up to prevent the park coming in here. A
      patch of sunlight, three feet of lettuce before me, and a big hedge
      shutting out all the view, why, that’s more than enough for happiness.
      Nothing, that’s what I’d like, nothing at all, something so tiny that
      nothing from outside could come to disturb me. Seven feet of earth, if you
      like, just to be able to croak on my back.’ 
    

      He struck the table with his fist, and suddenly raised his voice to call
      out to Abbe Mouret: ‘Come, just another glass, your reverence. The old
      gentleman isn’t at the bottom of the bottle, you know.’ 
    

      The priest felt ill at ease. To lead back to God that singular old man,
      whose reason seemed to him to be strangely disordered, appeared a task
      beyond his powers. He now remembered certain bits of gossip he had heard
      from La Teuse about the Philosopher, as the peasants of Les Artaud dubbed
      Jeanbernat. Scraps of scandalous stories vaguely floated in his memory. He
      rose, making a sign to the doctor that he wished to leave this house,
      where he seemed to inhale an odour of damnation. But, in spite of his
      covert fears, a strange feeling of curiosity made him linger. He simply
      walked to the end of the garden, throwing a searching glance into the
      vestibule, as if to see beyond it, behind the walls. All he could
      perceive, however, through the gaping doorway, was the black staircase. So
      he came back again, and sought for some hole, some glimpse of that sea of
      foliage which he knew was near by the mighty murmur that broke upon the
      house, like the sound of waves.
    

      ‘And is the little one well?’ asked the doctor, taking up his hat.
    

      ‘Pretty well,’ answered Jeanbernat. ‘She’s never here. She often
      disappears all day long—still, she may be in the upstair rooms.’ 
    

      He raised his head and called: ‘Albine! Albine!’ Then with a shrug of his
      shoulders, he added: ‘Yes, my word, she is a nice hussy.... Well, till
      next time, Monsieur le Cure. I’m always at your disposal.’ 
    

      Abbe Mouret, however, had no time to accept the Philosopher’s challenge. A
      door suddenly opened at the end of the vestibule; a dazzling breach was
      made in the black darkness of the wall, and through the breach came a
      vision of a virgin forest, a great depth of woodland, beneath a flood of
      sunbeams. In that sudden blaze of light the priest distinctly perceived
      certain far-away things: a large yellow flower in the middle of a lawn, a
      sheet of water falling from a lofty rock, a colossal tree filled with a
      swarm of birds; and all this steeped, lost, blazing in such a tangle of
      greenery, such riotous luxuriance of vegetation, that the whole horizon
      seemed one great burst of shooting foliage. The door banged to, and
      everything vanished.
    

      ‘Ah! the jade!’ cried Jeanbernat, ‘she was in the Paradou again!’ 
    

      Albine was now laughing on the threshold of the vestibule. She wore an
      orange-coloured skirt, with a large red kerchief fastened round her waist,
      thus looking like some gipsy in holiday garb. And she went on laughing,
      her head thrown back, her bosom swelling with mirth, delighted with her
      flowers, wild flowers which she had plaited into her fair hair, fastened
      to her neck, her bodice, and her bare slender golden arms. She seemed like
      a huge nosegay, exhaling a powerful perfume.
    

      ‘Ay, you are a beauty!’ growled the old man. ‘You smell of weeds enough to
      poison one—would any one think she was sixteen, that doll?’ 
    

      Albine remained unabashed, however, and laughed still more heartily.
      Doctor Pascal, who was her great friend, let her kiss him.
    

      ‘So you are not frightened in the Paradou?’ he asked.
    

      ‘Frightened? What of?’ she said, her eyes wide open with astonishment.
      ‘The walls are too high, no one can get in. There’s only myself. It is my
      garden, all my very own. A fine big one, too. I haven’t found out where it
      ends yet.’ 
    

      ‘And the animals?’ interrupted the doctor.
    

      ‘The animals? Oh! they don’t hurt; they all know me well.’ 
    

      ‘But it is very dark under the trees?’ 
    

      ‘Course! there’s shade: if there were none, the sun would burn my face up.
      It is very pleasant in the shade among the leaves.’ 
    

      She flitted about, filling the little garden with the rustling sweep of
      her skirts, and scattering round the pungent odour of wild flowers which
      clung to her. She had smiled at Abbe Mouret without trace of shyness,
      without heed of the astonished look with which he observed her. The priest
      had stepped aside. That fair-haired maid, with long oval face, glowing
      with life, seemed to him to be the weird mysterious offspring of the
      forest of which he had caught a glimpse in a sheet of sunlight.
    

      ‘I say, I have got some blackbird nestlings; would you like them?’ Albine
      asked the doctor.
    

      ‘No, thanks,’ he answered, laughing. ‘You should give them to the Cure’s
      sister; she is very fond of pets. Good day, Jeanbernat.’ 
    

      Albine, however, had fastened on the priest.
    

      ‘You are the vicar of Les Artaud, aren’t you? You have a sister? I’ll go
      and see her. Only you must not speak to me about God. My uncle will not
      have it.’ 
    

      ‘You bother us, be off,’ exclaimed Jeanbernat, shrugging his shoulders.
      Then bounding away like a goat, dropping a shower of flowers behind her,
      she disappeared. The slam of a door was heard, and from behind the house
      came bursts of laughter, which died away in the distance like the
      scampering rush of some mad animal let loose among the grass.
    

      ‘You’ll see, she will end by sleeping in the Paradou,’ muttered the old
      man with indifference.
    

      And as he saw his visitors off, he added: ‘If you should find me dead one
      of these fine days, doctor, just do me the favour of pitching me into the
      muck-pit there, behind my lettuces. Good evening, gentlemen.’ 
    

      He let the wooden gate which closed the hedge fall to again, and the house
      assumed once more its aspect of happy peacefulness in the noonday
      sunlight, amidst the buzzing of the big flies that swarmed all up the ivy
      even to the roof tiles.
    

      
 
    

      The gig once more rolled along the road skirting the Paradou’s
      interminable wall. Abbe Mouret, still silent, scanned with upturned eyes
      the huge boughs which stretched over that wall, like the arms of giants
      hidden there. All sorts of sounds came from the park: rustling of wings,
      quivering of leaves, furtive bounds at which branches snapped, mighty
      sighs that bowed the young shoots—a vast breath of life sweeping
      over the crests of a nation of trees. At times, as he heard a birdlike
      note that seemed like a human laugh, the priest turned his head, as if he
      felt uneasy.
    

      ‘A queer girl!’ said his uncle as he eased the reins a little. ‘She was
      nine years old when she took up her quarters with that old heathen. Some
      brother of his had ruined himself, though in what I can’t remember. The
      little one was at school somewhere when her father killed himself. She was
      even quite a little lady, up to reading, embroidery, chattering, and
      strumming on the piano. And such a coquette too! I saw her arrive with
      open-worked stockings, embroidered skirts, frills, cuffs, a heap of
      finery. Ah, well! the finery didn’t last long!’ 
    

      He laughed. A big stone nearly upset the gig.
    

      ‘It will be lucky if I don’t leave a wheel in this cursed road!’ he
      muttered. ‘Hold on, my boy.’ 
    

      The wall still stretched beside them: the priest still listened.
    

      ‘As you may well imagine,’ continued the doctor, ‘the Paradou, what with
      its sun, its stones, and its thistles, would wreck a whole outfit every
      day. Three or four mouthfuls, that’s all it made of all the little one’s
      beautiful dresses. She used to come back naked. Now she dresses like a
      savage. To-day she was rather presentable; but sometimes she has scarcely
      anything on beyond her shoes and chemise. Did you hear her? The Paradou is
      hers. The very day after she came she took possession of it. She lives in
      it; jumps out of the window when Jeanbernat locks the door, bolts off in
      spite of all, goes nobody knows whither, buries herself in some invisible
      burrows known only to herself. She must have a fine time in that
      wilderness.’ 
    

      ‘Hark, uncle!’ interrupted Abbe Mouret. ‘Isn’t that some animal running
      behind the wall?’ 
    

      Uncle Pascal listened.
    

      ‘No,’ he said after a minute’s silence, ‘it is the rattle of the trap on
      the stones. No, the child doesn’t play the piano now. I believe she has
      even forgotten how to read. Just picture to yourself a young lady gone
      back to a state of primevalness, turned out to play on a desert island. My
      word, if ever you get to know of a girl who needs proper bringing up, I
      advise you not to entrust her to Jeanbernat. He has a most primitive way
      of letting nature alone. When I ventured to speak to him about Albine he
      answered me that he must not prevent trees from growing as they pleased.
      He says he is for the normal development of temperaments.... All the same,
      they are very interesting, both of them. I never come this way without
      paying them a visit.’ 
    

      The gig was now emerging from the hollowed road. At this point the wall of
      the Paradou turned and wound along the crest of the hills as far as one
      could see. As Abbe Mouret turned to take a last look at that grey-hued
      barrier, whose impenetrable austerity had at last begun to annoy him, a
      rustling of shaken boughs was heard and a clump of young birch trees
      seemed to bow in greeting from above the wall.
    

      ‘I knew some animal was running behind,’ said the priest.
    

      But, although nobody could be seen, though nothing was visible in the air
      above save the birches rocking more and more violently, they heard a
      clear, laughing voice call out: ‘Good-bye, doctor! good-bye, Monsieur le
      Cure! I am kissing the tree, and the tree is sending you my kisses.’ 
    

      ‘Why! it is Albine,’ exclaimed Doctor Pascal. ‘She must have followed the
      trap at a run. Jumping over bushes is mere play to her, the little elf!’ 
    

      And he in his turn shouted out:
    

      ‘Good-bye, my pet! How tall you must be to bow like that.’ 
    

      The laughter grew louder, the birches bowed still lower, scattering their
      leaves around even on the hood of the gig.
    

      ‘I am as tall as the trees; all the leaves that fall are kisses,’ replied
      the voice now mellowed by distance, so musical, so merged into the
      rippling whispers of the park, that the young priest was thrilled.
    

      The road grew better. On coming down the slope Les Artaud reappeared in
      the midst of the scorched plain. When the gig reached the turning to the
      village, Abbe Mouret would not let his uncle drive him back to the
      vicarage. He jumped down, saying:
    

      ‘No, thanks, I prefer to walk: it will do me good.’ 
    

      ‘Well, just as you like,’ at last answered the doctor. And with a clasp of
      the hand, he added: ‘Well, if you only had such parishioners as that old
      brute Jeanbernat, you wouldn’t often be disturbed. However, you yourself
      wanted to come. And mind you keep well. At the slightest ache, night or
      day, send for me. You know I attend all the family gratis.... There,
      good-bye, my boy.’ 
    

      
 
    

      Abbe Mouret felt more at ease when he found himself again alone, walking
      along the dusty road. The stony fields brought him back to his dream of
      austerity, of an inner life spent in a desert. From the trees all along
      the sunken road disturbing moisture had fallen on his neck, which now the
      burning sun was drying. The sight of the lean almond trees, the scanty
      corn crops, the weak vines, on either side of the way, soothed him,
      delivered him from the perturbation into which the lusty atmosphere of the
      Paradou had thrown him. Amid the blinding glare that flowed from heaven
      over the bare land, Jeanbernat’s blasphemies no longer cast even a shadow.
      A thrill of pleasure ran through the priest as he raised his head and
      caught sight of the solitaire’s motionless bar-like silhouette and the
      pink patch of tiles on the church.
    

      But, as he walked on, fresh anxiety beset the Abbe. La Teuse would give
      him a fine reception; for his luncheon must have been waiting nearly two
      hours for him. He pictured her terrible face, the flood of words with
      which she would greet him, the angry clatter of kitchen ware which he
      would hear the whole afternoon. When he had got through Les Artaud, his
      fear became so lively that he hesitated, full of trepidation, and wondered
      if it would not be better to go round and reach the parsonage by way of
      the church. But, while he deliberated, La Teuse herself appeared on the
      doorstep of the parsonage, her cap all awry, and her hands on her hips.
      With drooping head he had perforce to climb the slope under her
      storm-laden gaze, which he could feel weighing upon his shoulders.
    

      ‘I believe I am rather late, my good Teuse,’ he stammered, as he turned
      the path’s last bend.
    

      La Teuse waited till he stood quite close before her. She then gave him a
      furious glance, and, without a word, turned and stalked before him into
      the dining-room, banging her big heels upon the floor-tiles and so rigid
      with ire that she hardly limped at all.
    

      ‘I have had so many things to do,’ began the priest, scared by this dumb
      reception. ‘I have been running about all the morning.’ 
    

      But she cut him short with another look, so fixed, so full of anger, that
      he felt his legs give way under him. He sat down, and began to eat. She
      waited on him in the sharp, mechanical manner of an automaton, all but
      breaking the plates with the violence with which she set them down. The
      silence became so awful that, choking with emotion, he was unable to
      swallow his third mouthful.
    

      ‘My sister has had her luncheon?’ he asked. ‘Quite right of her. Luncheon
      should always be served whenever I am kept out.’ 
    

      No answer came. La Teuse stood there waiting to remove his plate as soon
      as he should have emptied it. Thereupon, feeling that he could not
      possibly eat with those implacable eyes crushing him, he pushed his plate
      away. This angry gesture acted on La Teuse like a whip stroke, rousing her
      from her obstinate stiffness. She fairly jumped.
    

      ‘Ah! that’s how it is!’ she exclaimed. ‘There you are again, losing your
      temper! Very well, I am off; you can pay my fare, so that I may go back
      home. I have had enough of Les Artaud, and your church, and everything
      else!’ 
    

      She took off her apron with trembling hands.
    

      ‘You must have seen that I didn’t wish to say anything to you. A nice
      life, indeed! Only mountebanks do such things, Monsieur le Cure! This is
      eleven o’clock, ain’t it! Aren’t you ashamed of sitting at table when it’s
      almost two o’clock? It’s not like a Christian, no, it is not like a
      Christian!’ 
    

      And, taking her stand before him, she went on: ‘Well, where do you come
      from? whom have you seen? what business can have kept you? If only you
      were a child you would have the whip. It isn’t the place for a priest to
      be, on the roads in the blazing sun like a tramp without a roof to put
      over his head. A fine state you are in, with your shoes all white and your
      cassock smothered in dust! Who will brush your cassock for you? Who will
      buy you another one? Speak out, will you; tell me what you have been
      doing! My word! if everybody didn’t know you, they would end by thinking
      queer things about you. And shall I tell you? Why, I won’t say but what
      you may have been up to something wrong. When folks lunch at such hours
      they are capable of anything!’ 
    

      Abbe Mouret let the storm blow over him. At the old servant’s wrathful
      words he experienced a kind of relief.
    

      ‘Come, my good Teuse,’ he said, ‘you will first put your apron on again.’ 
    

      ‘No, no,’ she cried, ‘it’s all over, I am going.’ 
    

      But he got up and, laughing, tied her apron round her waist. She struggled
      against him and stuttered: ‘I tell you no! You are a wheedler. I can see
      through your game, I see you want to come it over me with your honeyed
      words. Where did you go? We’ll see afterwards.’ 
    

      He gaily sat down to table again like a man who has gained a victory.
    

      ‘First, I must be allowed to eat. I am dying with hunger,’ said he.
    

      ‘No doubt,’ she murmured, her pity moved. ‘Is there any common sense in
      it? Would you like me to fry you a couple of eggs? It would not take long.
      Well, if you have enough. But everything is cold! And I had taken such
      pains with your aubergines! Nice they are now! They look like old
      shoe-leather. Luckily you haven’t got a tender tooth like poor Monsieur
      Caffin. Yes, you have some good points, I don’t deny it.’ 
    

      Thus chattering, she waited on him with all a mother’s care. After he had
      finished she ran to the kitchen to see if the coffee was still warm. She
      frisked about and limped most outrageously in her delight at having made
      things up with him. As a rule Abbe Mouret fought shy of coffee, which
      always upset his nervous system; but on this occasion, to ratify the
      conclusion of peace, he took the cup she brought him. And as he lingered
      at table she sat down opposite him and repeated gently, like a woman
      tortured by curiosity:
    

      ‘Where have you been, Monsieur le Cure?’ 
    

      ‘Well,’ he answered with a smile, ‘I have seen the Brichets, I have spoken
      to Bambousse.’ 
    

      Thereupon he had to relate to her what the Brichets had said, what
      Bambousse had decided, and how they looked, and where they were at work.
      When he repeated to her the answer of Rosalie’s father, ‘Of course!’ she
      exclaimed, ‘if the child should die her mishap would go for nothing.’ And
      clasping her hands with a look of envious admiration she added, ‘How you
      must have chattered, your reverence! More than half the day spent to
      obtain such a fine result! You took it easy coming home? It must have been
      very hot on the road?’ 
    

      The Abbe, who by this time had risen, made no answer. He had been on the
      point of speaking about the Paradou, and asking for some information
      concerning it. But a fear of being flooded with eager questions, and a
      kind of vague unavowed shame, made him keep silence respecting his visit
      to Jeanbernat. He cut all further questions short by asking:
    

      ‘Where is my sister? I don’t hear her.’ 
    

      ‘Come along, sir,’ said La Teuse, beginning to laugh, and raising her
      finger to her lips.
    

      They went into the next room, a country drawing-room, hung with faded
      wall-paper showing large grey flowers, and furnished with four armchairs
      and a sofa, covered with horse-hair. On the sofa now slept Desiree,
      stretched out at full length, with her head resting on her clenched hands.
      The pronounced curve of her bosom was raised somewhat by her upstretched
      arms, bare to the elbows. She was breathing somewhat heavily, her red lips
      parted, and thus showing her teeth.
    

      ‘Lord! isn’t she sleeping sound!’ whispered La Teuse. ‘She didn’t even
      hear you pitching into me just now. Well, she must be precious tired. Just
      fancy, she was cleaning up her yard till nearly noon. And when she had
      eaten something, she came and dropped down there like a shot. She has not
      stirred since.’ 
    

      For a moment the priest gazed lovingly at her. ‘We must let her have as
      much rest as she wants,’ he said.
    

      ‘Of course. Isn’t it a pity she’s such an innocent? Just look at those big
      arms! Whenever I dress her I always think what a fine woman she would have
      made. Ay, she would have brought you some splendid nephews, sir. Don’t you
      think she is like that stone lady in Plassans corn-market?’ 
    

      She spoke thus of a Cybele stretched upon sheaves of wheat, the work of
      one of Puget’s pupils, which was carved on the frontal of the market
      building. Without replying, however, Abbe Mouret gently pushed her out of
      the room, and begged her to make as little noise as possible. Till
      evening, therefore, perfect silence settled on the parsonage. La Teuse
      finished her washing in the shed. The priest, seated at the bottom of the
      little garden, his breviary fallen on his lap, remained absorbed in pious
      thoughts, while all around him rosy petals rained from the blossoming
      peach-trees.
    

      
 
    

      About six o’clock there came a sudden wakening. A noise of doors opening
      and closing, accompanied by bursts of laughter, shook the whole house.
      Desiree appeared, her hair all down and her arms still half bare.
    

      ‘Serge! Serge!’ she called.
    

      And catching sight of her brother in the garden, she ran up to him and sat
      down for a minute on the ground at his feet, begging him to follow her:
    

      ‘Do come and see the animals! You haven’t seen the animals yet, have you?
      If you only knew how beautiful they are now!’ 
    

      She had to beg very hard, for the yard rather scared him. But when he saw
      tears in Desiree’s eyes, he yielded. She threw herself on his neck in a
      sudden puppy-like burst of glee, laughing more than ever, without
      attempting to dry her cheeks.
    

      ‘Oh! how nice you are!’ she stammered, as she dragged him off. ‘You shall
      see the hens, the rabbits, the pigeons, and my ducks which have got fresh
      water, and my goat, whose room is as clean as mine now. I have three geese
      and two turkeys, you know. Come quick. You shall see all.’ 
    

      Desiree was then twenty-two years old. Reared in the country by her nurse,
      a peasant woman of Saint-Eutrope, she had grown up anyhow. Her brain void
      of all serious thoughts, she had thriven on the fat soil and open air of
      the country, developing physically but never mentally, growing into a
      lovely animal—white, with rosy blood and firm skin. She was not
      unlike a high-bred donkey endowed with the power of laughter. Although she
      dabbled about from morning till night, her delicate hands and feet, the
      supple outlines of her hips, the bourgeois refinement of her maiden form
      remained unimpaired; so that she was in truth a creature apart—neither
      lady nor peasant—but a girl nourished by the soil, with the broad
      shoulders and narrow brow of a youthful goddess.
    

      Doubtless it was by reason of her weak intellect that she was drawn
      towards animals. She was never happy save with them; she understood their
      language far better than that of mankind, and looked after them with
      motherly affection. Her reasoning powers were deficient, but in lieu
      thereof she had an instinct which put her on a footing of intelligence
      with them. At their very first cry of pain she knew what ailed them; she
      would choose dainties upon which they would pounce greedily. A single
      gesture from her quelled their squabbles. She seemed to know their good or
      their evil character at a glance; and related such long tales about the
      tiniest chick, with such an abundance and minuteness of detail, as to
      astound those to whom one chicken was exactly like any other. Her farmyard
      had thus become a country, as it were, over which she reigned; a country
      complex in its organisation, disturbed by rebellions, peopled by the most
      diverse creatures whose records were known to her alone. So accurate was
      her instinct that she detected the unfertile eggs in a sitting, and
      foretold the number of a litter of rabbits.
    

      When, at sixteen, Desiree became a young woman, she retained all her
      wonted health; and rapidly developed, with round, free-swaying bust, broad
      hips like those of an antique statue, the full growth indeed of a vigorous
      animal. One might have thought that she had sprung from the rich soil of
      her poultry-yard, that she absorbed the sap with her sturdy legs, which
      were as firm as young trees. And nought disturbed her amidst all this
      plenitude. She found continuous satisfaction in being surrounded by birds
      and animals which ever increased and multiplied, their fruitfulness
      filling her with delight. Nothing could have been healthier. She
      innocently feasted on the odour and warmth of life, knowing no depraved
      curiosity, but retaining all the tranquillity of a beautiful animal,
      simply happy at seeing her little world thus multiply, feeling as if she
      thereby became a mother, the common natural mother of one and all.
    

      Since she had been living at Les Artaud, she had spent her days in
      complete beatitude. At last she was satisfying the dream of her life, the
      only desire which had worried her amidst her weak-minded puerility. She
      had a poultry-yard, a nook all to herself, where she could breed animals
      to her heart’s content. And she almost lived there, building
      rabbit-hutches with her own hands, digging out a pond for the ducks,
      knocking in nails, fetching straw, allowing no one to assist her. All that
      La Teuse had to do was to wash her afterwards. The poultry-yard was
      situated behind the cemetery; and Desiree often had to jump the wall, and
      run hither and thither among the graves after some fowl whom curiosity had
      led astray. Right at the end was a shed giving accommodation to the fowls
      and the rabbits; to the right was a little stable for the goat. Moreover,
      all the animals lived together; the rabbits ran about with the fowls, the
      nanny-goat would take a footbath in the midst of the ducks; the geese, the
      turkeys, the guinea-fowls, and the pigeons all fraternised in the company
      of three cats. Whenever Desiree appeared at the wooden fence which
      prevented her charges from making their way into the church, a deafening
      uproar greeted her.
    

      ‘Eh! can’t you hear them?’ she said to her brother, as they reached the
      dining-room door.
    

      But, when she had admitted him and closed the gate behind them, she was
      assailed so violently that she almost disappeared. The ducks and the
      geese, opening and shutting their beaks, tugged at her skirts; the greedy
      hens sprang up and pecked her hands; the rabbits squatted on her feet and
      then bounded up to her knees; whilst the three cats leapt upon her
      shoulders, and the goat bleated in its stable at being unable to reach
      her.
    

      ‘Leave me alone, do! all you creatures!’ she cried with a hearty sonorous
      laugh, feeling tickled by all the feathers, claws, and beaks and paws
      rubbing against her.
    

      However, she did not attempt to free herself. As she often said, she would
      have let herself be devoured; it seemed so sweet to feel all this life
      cling to her and encompass her with the warmth of eider-down. At last only
      one cat persisted in remaining on her back.
    

      ‘It’s Moumou,’ she said. ‘His paws are like velvet.’ Then, calling her
      brother’s attention to the yard, she proudly added: ‘See, how clean it
      is!’ 
    

      The yard had indeed been swept out, washed, and raked over. But the
      disturbed water and the forked-up litter exhaled so fetid and powerful an
      odour that Abbe Mouret half choked. The dung was heaped against the
      graveyard wall in a huge smoking mound.
    

      ‘What a pile, eh?’ continued Desiree, leading her brother into the pungent
      vapour, ‘I put it all there myself, nobody helped me. Go on, it isn’t
      dirty. It cleans. Look at my arms.’ 
    

      As she spoke she held out her arms, which she had merely dipped into a
      pail of water—regal arms they were, superbly rounded, blooming like
      full white roses amidst the manure.
    

      ‘Yes, yes,’ gently said the priest, ‘you have worked hard. It’s very nice
      now.’ 
    

      Then he turned towards the wicket, but she stopped him.
    

      ‘Do wait a bit. You shall see them all. You have no idea—’ And so
      saying, she dragged him to the rabbit house under the shed.
    

      ‘There are young ones in all the hutches,’ she said, clapping her hands in
      glee.
    

      Then at great length she proceeded to explain to him all about the
      litters. He had to crouch down and come close to the wire netting, whilst
      she gave him minute details. The mother does, with big restless ears, eyed
      him askance, panting and motionless with fear. Then, in one hutch, he saw
      a hairy cavity wherein crawled a living heap, an indistinct dusky mass
      heaving like a single body. Close by some young ones, with enormous heads,
      ventured to the edge of the hole. A little farther were yet stronger ones,
      who looked like young rats, ferreting and leaping about with their raised
      rumps showing their white scuts. Others, white ones with pale ruby eyes,
      and black ones with jet eyes, galloped round their hutches with playful
      grace. Now a scare would make them bolt off swiftly, revealing at every
      leap their slender reddened paws. Next they would squat down all in a
      heap, so closely packed that their heads could no longer be seen.
    

      ‘It is you they are frightened at,’ Desiree kept on saying. ‘They know me
      well.’ 
    

      She called them and drew some bread-crust from her pocket. The little
      rabbits then became more confident, and, with puckered noses, kept sidling
      up, and rearing against the netting one by one. She kept them like that
      for a minute to show her brother the rosy down upon their bellies, and
      then gave her crust to the boldest one. Upon this the whole of them
      flocked up, sliding forward and squeezing one another, but never
      quarreling. At one moment three little ones were all nibbling the same
      piece of crust, but others darted away, turning to the wall so as to eat
      in peace, while their mothers in the rear remained snuffing distrustfully
      and refused the crusts.
    

      ‘Oh! the greedy little things!’ exclaimed Desiree. ‘They would eat like
      that till to-morrow morning! At night, even, you can bear them crunching
      the leaves they have overlooked in the day-time.’ 
    

      The priest had risen as if to depart, but she never wearied of smiling on
      her dear little ones.
    

      ‘You see the big one there, that’s all white, with black ears—Well!
      he dotes on poppies. He is very clever at picking them out from the other
      weeds. The other day he got the colic. So I took him and kept him warm in
      my pocket. Since then he has been quite frisky.’ 
    

      She poked her fingers through the wire netting and stroked the rabbits’ 
      backs.
    

      ‘Wouldn’t you say it was satin?’ she continued. ‘They are dressed like
      princes. And ain’t they coquettish! Look, there’s one who is always
      cleaning himself. He wears the fur off his paws.... If only you knew how
      funny they are! I say nothing, but I see all their little games. That grey
      one looking at us, for instance, used to hate a little doe, which I had to
      put somewhere else. There were terrible scenes between them. It would take
      too long to tell you all, but the last time he gave her a drubbing, when I
      came up in a rage, what do you think I saw? Why that rascal huddled up at
      the back there as if he was just at his last gasp. He wanted to make me
      believe that it was he who had to complain of her.’ 
    

      Then Desiree paused to apostrophise the rabbit. ‘Yes, you may listen to
      me; you’re a rogue!’ And turning towards her brother, ‘He understands all
      I say,’ she added softly, with a wink.
    

      But Abbe Mouret could stand it no longer. He was perturbed by the heat
      that emanated from the litters, the life that crawled under the hair
      plucked from the does’ bellies, exhaling powerful emanations. On the other
      hand, Desiree, as if slowly intoxicated, was growing brighter and pinker.
    

      ‘But there’s nothing to take you away!’ she cried; ‘you always seem
      anxious to go off. You must see my little chicks! They were born last
      night.’ 
    

      She took some rice and threw a handful before her. The hen gravely drew
      near, clucking to the little band of chickens that followed her chirping
      and scampering as if in bewilderment. When they were fairly in the middle
      of the scattered rice the hen eagerly pecked at it, and threw down the
      grains she cracked, while her little ones hastily began to feed. All the
      charm of infancy was theirs. Half-naked as it were, with round heads, eyes
      sparkling like steel needles, beaks so queerly set, and down so quaintly
      ruffled up, they looked like penny toys. Desiree laughed with enjoyment at
      sight of them.
    

      ‘What little loves they are!’ she stammered.
    

      She took up two of them, one in each hand, and smothered them with eager
      kisses. And then the priest had to inspect them all over, while she coolly
      said to him:
    

      ‘It isn’t easy to tell the cocks. But I never make a mistake. This one is
      a hen, and this one is a hen too.’ 
    

      Then she set them on the ground again. Other hens were now coming up to
      eat the rice. A large ruddy cock with flaming plumage followed them,
      lifting his large feet with majestic caution.
    

      ‘Alexander is getting splendid,’ said the Abbe, to please his sister.
    

      Alexander was the cock’s name. He looked up at the young girl with his
      fiery eye, his head turned round, his tail outspread, and then installed
      himself close by her skirts.
    

      ‘He is very fond of me,’ she said. ‘Only I can touch him. He is a good
      bird. There are fourteen hens, and never do I find a bad egg in the nests.
      Do I, Alexander?’ 
    

      She stooped; the bird did not fly from her caress. A rush of blood seemed
      to set his comb aflame; flapping his wings, and stretching out his neck,
      he burst into a long crow which rang out like a blast from a brazen
      throat. Four times did he repeat his crow while all the cocks of Les
      Artaud answered in the distance. Desiree was greatly amused by her
      brother’s startled looks.
    

      ‘He deafens one, eh?’ she said. ‘He has a splendid voice. But he’s not
      vicious, I assure you, though the hens are—You remember the big
      speckled one, that used to lay yellow eggs? Well, the day before yesterday
      she hurt her foot. When the others saw the blood they went quite mad. They
      all followed her, pecking at her and drinking her blood, so that by the
      evening they had eaten up her foot. I found her with her head behind a
      stone, like an idiot, saying nothing, and letting herself be devoured.’ 
    

      The remembrance of the fowls’ voracity made her laugh. She calmly related
      other cruelties of theirs: young chickens devoured, of which she had only
      found the necks and wings, and a litter of kittens eaten up in the stable
      in a few hours.
    

      ‘You might give them a human being,’ she continued, ‘they’d finish him.
      And aren’t they tough livers! They get on with a broken limb even. They
      may have wounds, big holes in their bodies, and still they’ll gobble their
      victuals. That’s what I like them for; their flesh grows again in two
      days; they are always as warm as if they had a store of sunshine under
      their feathers. When I want to give them a treat, I cut them up some raw
      meat. And worms too! Wait, you’ll see how they love them.’ 
    

      She ran to the dungheap, and unhesitatingly picked up a worm she found
      there. The fowls darted at her hands; but to amuse herself with the sight
      of their greediness she held the worm high above them. At last she opened
      her fingers, and forthwith the fowls hustled one another and pounced upon
      the worm. One of them fled with it in her beak, pursued by the others; it
      was thus taken, snatched away, and retaken many times until one hen, with
      a mighty gulp, swallowed it altogether. At that they all stopped short
      with heads thrown back, and eyes on the alert for another worm. Desiree
      called them by their names, and talked pettingly to them; while Abbe
      Mouret retreated a few steps from this display of voracious life.
    

      ‘No, I am not at all comfortable,’ he said to his sister, when she tried
      to make him feel the weight of a fowl she was fattening. ‘It always makes
      me uneasy to touch live animals.’ 
    

      He tried to smile, but Desiree taxed him with cowardice.
    

      ‘Ah well, what about my ducks, and geese, and turkeys?’ said she. ‘What
      would you do if you had all those to look after? Ducks are dirty, if you
      like. Do you hear them shaking their bills in the water? And when they
      dive, you can only see their tails sticking straight up like ninepins.
      Geese and turkeys, too, are not easy to manage. Isn’t it fun to see them
      walking along with their long necks, some quite white and others quite
      black? They look like ladies and gentlemen. And I wouldn’t advise you to
      trust your finger to them. They would swallow it at a gulp. But my
      fingers, they only kiss—see!’ 
    

      Her words were cut short by a joyous bleat from the goat, which had at
      last forced the door of the stable open. Two bounds and the animal was
      close to her, bending its forelegs, and affectionately rubbing its horns
      against her. To the priest, with its pointed beard and obliquely set eyes,
      it seemed to wear a diabolical grin. But Desiree caught it round the neck,
      kissed its head, played and ran with it, and talked about how she liked to
      drink its milk. She often did so, she said, when she was thirsty in the
      stable.
    

      ‘See, it has plenty of milk,’ she added, pointing to the animal’s udder.
    

      The priest lowered his eyes. He could remember having once seen in the
      cloister of Saint-Saturnin at Plassans a horrible stone gargoyle,
      representing a goat and a monk; and ever since he had always looked on
      goats as dissolute creatures of hell. His sister had only been allowed to
      get one after weeks of begging. For his part, whenever he came to the
      yard, he shunned all contact with the animal’s long silky coat, and
      carefully guarded his cassock from the touch of its horns.
    

      ‘All right, I’ll let you go now,’ said Desiree, becoming aware of his
      growing discomfort. ‘But you must just let me show you something else
      first. Promise not to scold me, won’t you? I have not said anything to you
      about it, because you wouldn’t have allowed it.... But if you only knew
      how pleased I am!’ 
    

      As she spoke she put on an entreating expression, clasped her hands, and
      laid her head upon her brother’s shoulder.
    

      ‘Another piece of folly, no doubt,’ he murmured, unable to refrain from
      smiling.
    

      ‘You won’t mind, will you?’ she continued, her eyes glistening with
      delight. ‘You won’t be angry?—He is so pretty!’ 
    

      Thereupon she ran to open the low door under the shed, and forthwith a
      little pig bounded into the middle of the yard.
    

      ‘Oh! isn’t he a cherub?’ she exclaimed with a look of profound rapture as
      she saw him leap out.
    

      The little pig was indeed charming, quite pink, his snout washed clean by
      the greasy slops placed before him, though incessant routing in his trough
      had left a ring of dirt about his eyes. He trotted about, hustled the
      fowls, rushing to gobble up whatever was thrown them, and upsetting the
      little yard with his sudden turns and twists. His ears flapped over his
      eyes, his snout went snorting over the ground, and with his slender feet
      he resembled a toy animal on wheels. From behind, his tail looked like a
      bit of string that served to hang him up by.
    

      ‘I won’t have this beast here!’ exclaimed the priest, terribly put out.
    

      ‘Oh, Serge, dear old Serge,’ begged Desiree again, ‘don’t be so unkind.
      See, what a harmless little thing he is! I’ll wash him, I’ll keep him very
      clean. La Teuse went and had him given her for me. We can’t send him back
      now. See, he is looking at you; he wants to smell you. Don’t be afraid, he
      won’t eat you.’ 
    

      But she broke off, seized with irresistible laughter. The little pig had
      blundered in a dazed fashion between the goat’s legs, and tripped her up.
      And he was now madly careering round, squeaking, rolling, scaring all the
      denizens of the poultry-yard. To quiet him Desiree had to get him an
      earthen pan full of dish-water. In this he wallowed up to his ears,
      splashing and grunting, while quick quivers of delight coursed over his
      rosy skin. And now his uncurled tail hung limply down.
    

      The stirring of this foul water put a crowning touch to Abbe Mouret’s
      disgust. Ever since he had been there, he had choked more and more; his
      hands and chest and face were afire, and he felt quite giddy. The odour of
      the fowls and rabbits, the goat, and the pig, all mingled in one
      pestilential stench. The atmosphere, laden with the ferments of life, was
      too heavy for his maiden shoulders. And it seemed to him that Desiree had
      grown taller, expanding at the hips, waving huge arms, sweeping the ground
      with her skirts, and stirring up all that powerful odour which overpowered
      him. He had only just time to open the wicket. His feet clung to the stone
      flags still dank with manure, in such wise that it seemed as if he were
      held there by some clasp of the soil. And suddenly, despite himself, there
      came back to him a memory of the Paradou, with its huge trees, its black
      shadows, its penetrating perfumes.
    

      ‘There, you are quite red now,’ Desiree said to him as she joined him
      outside the wicket. ‘Aren’t you pleased to have seen everything? Do you
      hear the noise they are making?’ 
    

      On seeing her depart, the birds and animals had thrown themselves against
      the trellis work emitting piteous cries. The little pig, especially, gave
      vent to prolonged whines that suggested the sharpening of a saw. Desiree,
      however, curtsied to them and kissed her finger-tips to them, laughing at
      seeing them all huddled together there, like so many lovers of hers. Then,
      hugging her brother, as she accompanied him to the garden, she whispered
      into his ear with a blush: ‘I should so like a cow.’ 
    

      He looked at her, with a ready gesture of disapproval.
    

      ‘No, no, not now,’ she hurriedly went on. ‘We’ll talk about it again later
      on—— But there would be room in the stable. A lovely white cow
      with red spots. You’d soon see what nice milk we should have. A goat
      becomes too little in the end. And when the cow has a calf!’ 
    

      At the mere thought of this she skipped and clapped her hands with glee;
      and to the priest she seemed to have brought the poultry-yard away with
      her in her skirts. So he left her at the end of the garden, sitting in the
      sunlight on the ground before a hive, whence the bees buzzed like golden
      berries round her neck, along her bare arms and in her hair, without
      thought of stinging her.
    

      
 
    

      Brother Archangias dined at the parsonage every Thursday. As a rule he
      came early so as to talk over parish matters. It was he who, for the last
      three months, had kept the Abbe informed of all the affairs of the valley.
      That Thursday, while waiting till La Teuse should call them, they strolled
      about in front of the church. The priest, on relating his interview with
      Bambousse, was surprised to find that the Brother thought the peasant’s
      reply quite natural.
    

      ‘The man’s right,’ said the Ignorantin.* ‘You don’t give away chattels
      like that. Rosalie is no great bargain, but it’s always hard to see your
      own daughter throw herself away on a pauper.’ 
    

  * A popular name in France for a Christian Brother.—ED.

    
      ‘Still,’ rejoined Abbe Mouret, ‘a marriage is the only way of stopping the
      scandal.’ 
    

      The Brother shrugged his big shoulders and laughed aggravatingly. ‘Do you
      think you’ll cure the neighbourhood with that marriage?’ he exclaimed.
      ‘Before another two years Catherine will be following her sister’s
      example. They all go the same way, and as they end by marrying, they snap
      their fingers at every one. These Artauds flourish in it all, as on a
      congenial dungheap. There is only one possible remedy, as I have told you
      before: wring all the girls’ necks if you don’t want the country to be
      poisoned. No husbands, Monsieur le Cure, but a good thick stick!’ 
    

      Then calming down a bit, he added: ‘Let every one do with their own as
      they think best.’ 
    

      He went on to speak about fixing the hours for the catechism classes; but
      Abbe Mouret replied in an absent-minded way, his eyes dwelling on the
      village at his feet in the setting sun. The peasants were wending their
      way homewards, silently and slowly, with the dragging steps of wearied
      oxen returning to their sheds. Before the tumble-down houses stood women
      calling to one another, carrying on bawling conversations from door to
      door, while bands of children filled the roadway with the riot of their
      big clumsy shoes, grovelling and rolling and pushing each other about. A
      bestial odour ascended from that heap of tottering houses, and the priest
      once more fancied himself in Desiree’s poultry-yard, where life ever
      increased and multiplied. Here, too, was the same incessant travail, which
      so disturbed him. Since morning his mind had been running on that episode
      of Rosalie and Fortune, and now his thoughts returned to it, to the foul
      features of existence, the incessant, fated task of Nature, which sowed
      men broadcast like grains of wheat. The Artauds were a herd penned in
      between four ranges of hills, increasing, multiplying, spreading more and
      more thickly over the land with each successive generation.
    

      ‘See,’ cried Brother Archangias, interrupting his discourse to point to a
      tall girl who was letting her sweetheart snatch a kiss, ‘there is another
      hussy over there!’ 
    

      He shook his long black arms at the couple and made them flee. In the
      distance, over the crimson fields and the peeling rocks, the sun was dying
      in one last flare. Night gradually came on. The warm fragrance of the
      lavender became cooler on the wings of the light evening breeze which now
      arose. From time to time a deep sigh fell on the ear as if that fearful
      land, consumed by ardent passions, had at length grown calm under the soft
      grey rain of twilight. Abbe Mouret, hat in hand, delighted with the
      coolness, once more felt quietude descend upon him.
    

      ‘Monsieur le Cure! Brother Archangias!’ cried La Teuse. ‘Come quick! The
      soup is on the table.’ 
    

      It was cabbage soup, and its odoriferous steam filled the parsonage
      dining-room. The Brother seated himself and fell to, slowly emptying the
      huge plate that La Teuse had put down before him. He was a big eater, and
      clucked his tongue as each mouthful descended audibly into his stomach.
      Keeping his eyes on his spoon, he did not speak a word.
    

      ‘Isn’t my soup good, then, Monsieur le Cure?’ the old servant asked the
      priest. ‘You are only fiddling with your plate.’ 
    

      ‘I am not a bit hungry, my good Teuse,’ Serge replied, smiling.
    

      ‘Well! how can one wonder at it when you go on as you do! But you would
      have been hungry, if you hadn’t lunched at past two o’clock.’ 
    

      Brother Archangias, tilting into his spoon the last few drops of soup
      remaining in his plate, said gravely: ‘You should be regular in your
      meals, Monsieur le Cure.’ 
    

      At this moment Desiree, who also had finished her soup, sedately and in
      silence, rose and followed La Teuse to the kitchen. The Brother, then left
      alone with Abbe Mouret, cut himself some long strips of bread, which he
      ate while waiting for the next dish.
    

      ‘So you made a long round to-day?’ he asked the priest. But before the
      other could reply a noise of footsteps, exclamations, and ringing
      laughter, arose at the end of the passage, in the direction of the yard. A
      short altercation apparently took place. A flute-like voice which
      disturbed the Abbe rose in vexed and hurried accents, which finally died
      away in a burst of glee.
    

      ‘What can it be?’ said Serge, rising from his chair.
    

      But Desiree bounded in again, carrying something hidden in her gathered-up
      skirt. And she burst out excitedly: ‘Isn’t she queer? She wouldn’t come in
      at all. I caught hold of her dress; but she is awfully strong; she soon
      got away from me.’ 
    

      ‘Whom on earth is she talking about?’ asked La Teuse, running in from the
      kitchen with a dish of potatoes, across which lay a piece of bacon.
    

      The girl sat down, and with the greatest caution drew from her skirt a
      blackbird’s nest in which three wee fledglings were slumbering. She laid
      it on her plate. The moment the little birds felt the light, they
      stretched out their feeble necks and opened their crimson beaks to ask for
      food. Desiree clapped her hands, enchanted, seized with strange emotion at
      the sight of these hitherto unknown creatures.
    

      ‘It’s that Paradou girl!’ exclaimed the Abbe suddenly, remembering
      everything.
    

      La Teuse had gone to the window. ‘So it is,’ she said. ‘I might have known
      that grasshopper’s voice—— Oh! the gipsy! Look, she’s stopped
      there to spy on us.’ 
    

      Abbe Mouret drew near. He, too, thought that he could see Albine’s
      orange-coloured skirt behind a juniper bush. But Brother Archangias, in a
      towering passion, raised himself on tiptoe behind him, and, stretching out
      his fist and wagging his churlish head, thundered forth: ‘May the devil
      take you, you brigand’s daughter! I will drag you right round the church
      by your hair if ever I catch you coming and casting your evil spells
      here!’ 
    

      A peal of laughter, fresh as the breath of night, rang out from the path,
      followed by light hasty footsteps and the swish of a dress rustling
      through the grass like an adder. Abbe Mouret, standing at the window, saw
      something golden glide through the pine trees like a moonbeam. The breeze,
      wafted in from the open country, was now laden with that penetrating
      perfume of verdure, that scent of wildflowers, which Albine had scattered
      from her bare arms, unfettered bosom, and streaming tresses at the
      Paradou.
    

      ‘An accursed soul! a child of perdition!’ growled Brother Archangias, as
      he reseated himself at the dinner table. He fell greedily upon his bacon,
      and swallowed his potatoes whole instead of bread. La Teuse, however,
      could not persuade Desiree to finish her dinner. That big baby was lost in
      ecstasy over the nestlings, asking questions, wanting to know what food
      they ate, if they laid eggs, and how the cockbirds could be known.
    

      The old servant, however, was troubled by a suspicion, and taking her
      stand on her sound leg, she looked the young cure in the face.
    

      ‘So you know the Paradou people?’ she said.
    

      Thereupon he simply told the truth, relating the visit he had paid to old
      Jeanbernat. La Teuse exchanged scandalised glances with Brother
      Archangias. At first she answered nothing, but went round and round the
      table, limping frantically and stamping hard enough with her heels to
      split the flooring.
    

      ‘You might have spoken to me of those people these three months past,’ 
      said the priest at last. ‘I should have known at any rate what sort of
      people I was going to call upon.’ 
    

      La Teuse stopped short as if her legs had just broken.
    

      ‘Don’t tell falsehoods, Monsieur le Cure,’ she stuttered, ‘don’t tell
      them; you will only make your sin still worse. How dare you say I haven’t
      spoken to you of the Philosopher, that heathen who is the scandal of the
      whole neighbourhood? The truth is, you never listen to me when I talk. It
      all goes in at one ear and out at the other. Ah, if you did listen to me,
      you’d spare yourself a good deal of trouble!’ 
    

      ‘I, too, have spoken to you about those abominations,’ affirmed the
      Brother.
    

      Abbe Mouret lightly shrugged his shoulders. ‘Well, I didn’t remember it,’ 
      he said. It was only when I found myself at the Paradou that I fancied I
      recollected certain tales. Besides, I should have gone to that unhappy man
      all the same as I thought him in danger of death.’ 
    

      Brother Archangias, his mouth full, struck the table violently with his
      knife, and roared: ‘Jeanbernat is a dog; he ought to die like a dog.’ Then
      seeing the priest about to protest he cut him short: ‘No, no, for him
      there is no God, no penitence, no mercy. It would be better to throw the
      host to the pigs than carry it to that scoundrel.’ 
    

      Then he helped himself to more potatoes, and with his elbows on the table,
      his chin in his plate, began chewing furiously. La Teuse, her lips
      pinched, quite white with anger, contented herself with saying dryly: ‘Let
      it be, his reverence will have his own way. He has secrets from us now.’ 
    

      Silence reigned. For a moment one only heard the working of Brother
      Archangias’s jaws, and the extraordinary rumbling of his gullet. Desiree,
      with her bare arms round the nest in her plate, smiled to the little ones,
      talking to them slowly and softly in a chirruping of her own which they
      seemed to understand.
    

      ‘People say what they have done when they have nothing to hide,’ suddenly
      cried La Teuse.
    

      And then silence reigned again. What exasperated the old servant was the
      mystery the priest seemed to make about his visit to the Paradou. She
      deemed herself a woman who had been shamefully deceived. Her curiosity
      smarted. She again walked round the table, not looking at the Abbe, not
      addressing anybody, but comforting herself with soliloquy.
    

      ‘That’s it; that’s why we have lunch so late! We go gadding about till two
      o’clock in the afternoon. We go into such disreputable houses that we
      don’t even dare to tell what we’ve done. And then we tell lies, we deceive
      everybody.’ 
    

      ‘But nobody,’ gently interrupted Abbe Mouret, who was forcing himself to
      eat a little more, so as to prevent La Teuse from getting crosser than
      ever, ‘nobody asked me if I had been to the Paradou. I have not had to
      tell any lies.’ 
    

      La Teuse, however, went on as if she had never heard him.
    

      ‘Yes, we go ruining our cassock in the dust, we come home rigged up like a
      thief. And if some kind person takes an interest in us, and questions us
      for our own good, we push her about and treat her like a good-for-nothing
      woman, whom we can’t trust. We hide things like a slyboots, we’d rather
      die than breathe a word; we’re not even considerate enough to enliven our
      home by relating what we’ve seen.’ 
    

      She turned to the priest, and looked him full in the face.
    

      ‘Yes, you take that to yourself. You are a close one, you’re a bad man!’ 
    

      Thereupon she fell to crying and the Abbe had to soothe her.
    

      ‘Monsieur Caffin used to tell me everything,’ she moaned out.
    

      However, she soon grew calmer. Brother Archangias was finishing a big
      piece of cheese, apparently quite unruffled by the scene. In his opinion
      Abbe Mouret really needed being kept straight, and La Teuse was right in
      making him feel the reins. Having drunk a last glassful of the weak wine,
      the Brother threw himself back in his chair to digest his meal.
    

      ‘Well now,’ finally asked the old servant, ‘what did you see at the
      Paradou? Tell us, at any rate.’ 
    

      Abbe Mouret smiled and related in a few words how strangely Jeanbernat had
      received him. La Teuse, after overwhelming him with questions, broke out
      into indignant exclamations, while Brother Archangias clenched his fists
      and brandished them aloft.
    

      ‘May Heaven crush him!’ said he, ‘and burn both him and his witch!’ 
    

      In his turn the Abbe then endeavoured to elicit some fresh particulars
      about the people at the Paradou, and listened intently to the Brother’s
      monstrous narrative.
    

      ‘Yes, that little she-devil came and sat down in the school. It’s a long
      time ago now, she might then have been about ten. Of course, I let her
      come; I thought her uncle was sending her to prepare for her first
      communion. But for two months she utterly revolutionised the whole class.
      She made herself worshipped, the minx! She knew all sorts of games, and
      invented all sorts of finery with leaves and shreds of rags. And how quick
      and clever she was, too, like all those children of hell! She was the top
      one at catechism. But one fine morning the old man burst in just in the
      middle of our lessons. He was going to smash everything, and shouted that
      the priests had taken his child from him. We had to get the rural
      policeman to turn him out. As to the little one, she bolted. I could see
      her through the window, in a field opposite, laughing at her uncle’s
      frenzy. She had been coming to school for the last two months without his
      even suspecting it. He had regularly scoured the country after her.’ 
    

      ‘She’s never taken her first communion,’ exclaimed La Teuse below her
      breath with a slight shudder.
    

      ‘No, never,’ rejoined Brother Archangias. ‘She must be sixteen now. She’s
      growing up like a brute beast. I have seen her running on all fours in a
      thicket near La Palud.’ 
    

      ‘On all fours,’ muttered the servant, turning towards the window with
      superstitious anxiety.
    

      Abbe Mouret attempted to express some doubt, but the Brother burst out:
      ‘Yes, on all fours! And she jumped like a wild cat. If I had only had a
      gun I could have put a bullet in her. We kill creatures that are far more
      pleasing to God than she is. Besides, every one knows she comes
      caterwauling every night round Les Artaud. She howls like a beast. If ever
      a man should fall into her clutches, she wouldn’t leave him a scrap of
      skin on his bones, I know.’ 
    

      The Brother’s hatred of womankind was boiling over. He banged the table
      with his fist, and poured forth all his wonted abuse.
    

      ‘The devil’s in them. They reek of the devil! And that’s what bewitches
      fools.’ 
    

      The priest nodded approvingly. Brother Archangias’s outrageous violence
      and La Teuse’s loquacious tyranny were like castigation with thongs, which
      it often rejoiced him to find lashing his shoulders. He took a pious
      delight in sinking into abasement beneath their coarse speech. He seemed
      to see the peace of heaven behind contempt of the world and degradation of
      his whole being. It was delicious to inflict mortification upon his body,
      to drag his susceptible nature through a gutter.
    

      ‘There is nought but filth,’ he muttered as he folded up his napkin.
    

      La Teuse began to clear the table and wished to remove the plate on which
      Desiree had laid the blackbird’s nest. You are not going to bed here, I
      suppose, mademoiselle,’ she said. ‘Do leave those nasty things.’ 
    

      Desiree, however, defended her plate. She covered the nest with her bare
      arms, no longer gay, but cross at being disturbed.
    

      ‘I hope those birds are not going to be kept,’ exclaimed Brother
      Archangias. ‘It would bring bad luck. You must wring their necks.’ 
    

      And he already stretched out his big hands; but the girl rose and stepped
      back quivering, hugging the nest to her bosom. She stared fixedly at the
      Brother, her lips curling upwards, like those of a wolf about to bite.
    

      ‘Don’t touch the little things,’ she stammered. ‘You are ugly.’ 
    

      With such singular contempt did she emphasise that last word that Abbe
      Mouret started as if the Brother’s ugliness had just struck him for the
      first time. The latter contented himself with growling. He had always felt
      a covert hatred for Desiree, whose lusty physical development offended
      him. When she had left the room, still walking backwards, and never taking
      her eyes from him, he shrugged his shoulders and muttered between his
      teeth some coarse abuse which no one heard.
    

      ‘She had better go to bed,’ said La Teuse. ‘She would only bore us
      by-and-by in church.’ 
    

      ‘Has any one come yet?’ asked Abbe Mouret.
    

      ‘Oh, the girls have been outside a long time with armfuls of boughs. I am
      just going to light the lamps. We can begin whenever you like.’ 
    

      A few seconds later she could be heard swearing in the sacristy because
      the matches were damp. Brother Archangias, who remained alone with the
      priest, sourly inquired: ‘For the month of Mary, eh?’ 
    

      ‘Yes,’ replied Abbe Mouret. ‘The last few days the girls about here were
      hard at work and couldn’t come as usual to decorate the Lady Chapel. So
      the ceremony was postponed till to-night.’ 
    

      ‘A nice custom,’ muttered the Brother. ‘When I see them all putting up
      their boughs I feel inclined to knock them down and make them confess
      their misdeeds before touching the altar. It’s a shame to allow women to
      rustle their dresses so near the holy relics.’ 
    

      The Abbe made an apologetic gesture. He had only been at Les Artaud a
      little while, he must follow the customs.
    

      ‘Whenever you like, Monsieur le Cure, we’re ready!’ now called out La
      Teuse.
    

      But Brother Archangias detained him a minute. ‘I am off,’ he said.
      ‘Religion isn’t a prostitute that it should be decorated with flowers and
      laces.’ 
    

      He walked slowly to the door. Then once more he stopped, and lifting one
      of his hairy fingers added: ‘Beware of your devotion to the Virgin.’ 
    

      
 
    

      On entering the church Abbe Mouret found nine or ten big girls awaiting
      him with boughs of ivy, laurel, and rosemary. Few garden flowers grew on
      the rocks of Les Artaud, so the custom was to decorate the Lady altar with
      a greenery which might last throughout the month of May. Thereto La Teuse
      would add a few wallflowers whose stems were thrust into old decanters.
    

      ‘Will you let me do it, Monsieur le Cure?’ she asked. ‘You are not used to
      it—— Come, stand there in front of the altar. You can tell me
      if the decorations please you.’ 
    

      He consented, and it was she who really directed the arrangements. Having
      climbed upon a pair of steps she bullied the girls as they came up to her
      in turn with their leafy contributions.
    

      ‘Not so fast, now! You must give me time to fix the boughs. We can’t have
      all these bundles coming down on his reverence’s head—— Come
      on, Babet, it’s your turn. What’s the good of staring at me like that with
      your big eyes? Fine rosemary yours is, my word! as yellow as a thistle.
      You next, La Rousse. Ah, well, that is splendid laurel! You got that out
      of your field at Croix-Verte, I know.’ 
    

      The big girls laid their branches on the altar, which they kissed; and
      there they lingered for a while, handing up the greenery to La Teuse. The
      sly look of devotion they had assumed on stepping on to the altar steps
      was quickly set aside, and soon they were laughing, digging each other
      with their knees, swaying their hips against the altar’s edge, and
      thrusting their bosoms against the tabernacle itself. Over them the tall
      Virgin in gilded plaster bent her tinted face, and smiled with her rosy
      lips upon the naked Jesus she bore upon her left arm.
    

      ‘That’s it, Lisa!’ cried La Teuse; ‘why don’t you sit on the altar while
      you’re about it? Just pull your petticoats straight, will you? Aren’t you
      ashamed of behaving like that?—If any one of you lolls about I’ll
      lay her boughs across her face.—Can’t you hand me the things
      quietly?’ 
    

      Then turning round, she asked:
    

      ‘Do you like it, sir? Do you think it will do?’ 
    

      She had converted the space behind the Virgin’s statue into a verdant
      niche, whence leafy sprays projected on either side, forming a bower, and
      drooping over in front like palm leaves. The priest expressed his
      approval, but ventured to remark: ‘I think there ought to be a cluster of
      more delicate foliage up above.’ 
    

      ‘No doubt,’ grumbled La Teuse. ‘But they only bring me laurel and rosemary—I
      should like to know who has brought an olive branch. Not one, you bet!
      They are afraid of losing a single olive, the heathens!’ 
    

      At this, however, Catherine came up laden with an enormous olive bough
      which completely hid her.
    

      ‘Oh, you’ve got some, you minx!’ continued the old servant.
    

      ‘Of course,’ one of the other girls exclaimed, ‘she stole it. I saw
      Vincent breaking it off while she kept a look-out.’ 
    

      But Catherine flew into a rage and swore it was not true. She turned, and
      thrusting her auburn head through the greenery, which she still tightly
      held, she started lying with marvellous assurance, inventing quite a long
      story to prove that the olive bough was really hers.
    

      ‘Besides,’ she added, ‘all the trees belong to the Blessed Virgin.’ 
    

      Abbe Mouret was about to intervene, but La Teuse sharply inquired if they
      wanted to make game of her and keep her arms up there all night. At last
      she proceeded to fasten the olive bough firmly, while Catherine, holding
      on to the steps behind her, mimicked the clumsy manner in which she turned
      her huge person about with the help of her sound leg. Even the priest
      could not forbear to smile.
    

      ‘There,’ said La Teuse, as she came down and stood beside him to get a
      good view of her work, ‘there’s the top done. Now we will put some clumps
      between the candlesticks, unless you would prefer a garland all along the
      altar shelf.’ 
    

      The priest decided in favour of some big clumps.
    

      ‘Very good; come on, then,’ continued the old servant, once more
      clambering up the steps. ‘We can’t go to bed here. Just kiss the altar,
      will you, Miette? Do you fancy you are in your stable? Monsieur le Cure,
      do just see what they are up to over there! I can hear them laughing like
      lunatics.’ 
    

      On raising one of the two lamps the dark end of the church was lit up and
      three of the girls were discovered romping about under the gallery; one of
      them had stumbled and pitched head foremost into the holy water stoup,
      which mishap had so tickled the others that they were rolling on the
      ground to laugh at their ease. They all came back, however, looking at the
      priest sheepishly, with lowered eyelids, but with their hands swinging
      against their hips as if a scolding rather pleased them than otherwise.
    

      However, the measure of La Teuse’s wrath was filled when she suddenly
      perceived Rosalie coming up to the altar like the others with a bundle of
      boughs in her arms.
    

      ‘Get down, will you?’ she cried to her. ‘You are a cool one, and no
      mistake, my lass!—Hurry up, off you go with your bundle.’ 
    

      ‘What for, I’d like to know?’ said Rosalie boldly. ‘You can’t say I have
      stolen it.’ 
    

      The other girls drew closer, feigning innocence and exchanging sparkling
      glances.
    

      ‘Clear out,’ repeated La Teuse, ‘you have no business here, do you hear?’ 
    

      Then, quite losing her scanty patience, she gave vent to a very coarse
      epithet, which provoked a titter of delight among the peasant girls.
    

      ‘Well, what next?’ said Rosalie. ‘Mind your own business. Is it any
      concern of yours?’ 
    

      Then she burst into a fit of sobbing and threw down her boughs, but let
      the Abbe lead her aside and give her a severe lecture. He had already
      tried to silence La Teuse; for he was beginning to feel uneasy amidst the
      big shameless hussies who filled the church with their armfuls of foliage.
      They were pushing right up to the altar step, enclosing him with a belt of
      woodland, wafting in his face a rank perfume of aromatic shoots.
    

      ‘Let us make haste, be quick!’ he exclaimed, clapping his hands lightly.
    

      ‘Goodness knows I would rather be in my bed,’ grumbled La Teuse. ‘It’s not
      so easy as you think to fasten all these bits of stuff.’ 
    

      Finally, however, she succeeded in setting some lofty plumes of foliage
      between the candlesticks. Next she folded the steps, which were laid
      behind the high altar by Catherine. And then she only had to arrange two
      clumps of greenery at the sides of the altar table. The last boughs
      sufficed for this, and indeed there were some left which the girls strewed
      over the sanctuary floor up to the wooden rails. The Lady altar now looked
      like a grove, a shrubbery with a verdant lawn before it.
    

      At present La Teuse was willing to make way for Abbe Mouret, who ascended
      the altar steps, and, again lightly clapping his hands, exclaimed: ‘Young
      ladies, to-morrow we will continue the devotions of the month of Mary.
      Those who may be unable to come ought at least to say their Rosary at
      home.’ 
    

      He knelt, and the peasant girls, with a mighty rustle of skirts, sank down
      and settled themselves on their heels. They followed his prayer with a
      confused muttering, through which burst here and there a giggle. One of
      them, on being pinched from behind, burst into a scream, which she
      attempted to stifle with a sudden fit of coughing; and this so diverted
      the others that for a moment after the Amen they remained writhing with
      merriment, their noses close to the stone flags.
    

      La Teuse dismissed them; while the priest, after crossing himself,
      remained absorbed before the altar, no longer hearing what went on behind
      him.
    

      ‘Come, now, clear out,’ muttered the old woman. ‘You’re a pack of
      good-for-nothings, who can’t even respect God. It’s shameful, it’s unheard
      of, for girls to roll about on the floor in church like beasts in a meadow——
      What are you doing there, La Rousse? If I see you pinching any one, you’ll
      have to deal with me! Oh, yes, you may put out your tongue at me; I’ll
      tell his reverence about it. Out you get; out you get, you minxes!’ 
    

      She drove them slowly towards the door, while running and bobbling round
      them frantically. And she had succeeded, as she thought, in getting every
      one of them outside, when she caught sight of Catherine and Vincent calmly
      installed in the confessional, where they were eating something with an
      air of great enjoyment. She drove them away; and as she popped her head
      outside the church, before closing the door, she espied Rosalie throwing
      her arm over the shoulder of Fortune, who had been waiting for her. The
      pair of them vanished in the darkness amid a faint sound of kisses.
    

      ‘To think that such creatures dare to come to our Lady’s altar!’ La Teuse
      stuttered as she shot the bolts. ‘The others are no better, I am sure. If
      they came to-night with their boughs, it was only for a bit of fun and to
      get kissed by the lads on going off! Not one of them will put herself out
      of the way to-morrow; his reverence will have to say his Aves by
      himself—— We shall only see the jades who have got
      assignations.’ 
    

      Thus soliloquising, she thrust the chairs back into their places, and
      looked round to see if anything suspicious was lying about before going
      off to bed. In the confessional she picked up a handful of apple-parings,
      which she threw behind the high altar. And she also found a bit of ribbon
      torn from some cap, and a lock of black hair, which she made up into a
      small parcel, with the view of opening an inquiry into the matter. With
      these exceptions the church seemed to her tidy. There was oil enough for
      the night in the bracket-lamp of the sanctuary, and as to the flags of the
      choir, they could do without washing till Saturday.
    

      ‘It’s nearly ten o’clock, Monsieur le Cure,’ she said, drawing near the
      priest, who was still on his knees. ‘You might as well come up now.’ 
    

      He made no answer, but only bowed his head.
    

      ‘All right, I know what that means,’ continued La Teuse. ‘In another hour
      he will still be on the stones there, giving himself a stomach-ache. I’m
      off, as I shall only bore him. All the same, I can’t see much sense in it,
      eating one’s lunch when others are at dinner, and going to bed when the
      fowls get up!—— I worry you, don’t I, your reverence?
      Good-night. You’re not at all reasonable!’ 
    

      She made ready to go, but suddenly came back to put out one of the two
      lamps, muttering the while that such late prayers spelt ruination in oil.
      Then, at last, she did go off, after passing her sleeve brushwise over the
      cloth of the high altar, which seemed to her grey with dust. Abbe Mouret,
      his eyes uplifted, his arms tightly clasped against his breast, then
      remained alone.
    

      
 
    

      With only one lamp burning amid the verdure on the altar of the Virgin,
      huge floating shadows filled the church at either end. From the pulpit a
      sheet of gloom projected to the rafters of the ceiling. The confessional
      looked quite black under the gallery, showing strange outlines suggestive
      of a ruined sentry-box. All the light, softened and tinted as it were by
      the green foliage, rested slumberingly upon the tall gilded Virgin, who
      seemed to descend with queenly mien, borne upon the cloud round which
      gambolled the winged cherubim. At sight of that round lamp gleaming amid
      the boughs one might have thought the pallid moon was rising on the verge
      of a wood, casting its light upon a regal apparition, a princess of
      heaven, crowned and clothed with gold, who with her nude and Divine Infant
      had come to stroll in the mysterious woodland avenues. Between the leaves,
      along the lofty plumes of greenery, within the large ogival arbour, and
      even along the branches strewing the flagstones, star-like beams glided
      drowsily, like the milky rain of light that filters through the bushes on
      moonlit nights. Vague sounds and creakings came from the dusky ends of the
      church; the large clock on the left of the chancel throbbed slowly, with
      the heavy breathing of a machine asleep. And the radiant vision, the
      Mother with slender bands of chestnut hair, as if reassured by the
      nocturnal quiet of the nave, came lower and lower, scarce bending the
      blades of grass in the clearings beneath the gentle flight of her cloudy
      chariot.
    

      Abbe Mouret gazed at her. This was the hour when he most loved the church.
      He forgot the woeful figure on the cross, the Victim bedaubed with carmine
      and ochre, who gasped out His life behind him, in the chapel of the Dead.
      His thoughts were no longer distracted by the garish light from the
      windows, by the gayness of morning coming in with the sun, by the
      irruption of outdoor life—the sparrows and the boughs invading the
      nave through the shattered panes. At that hour of night Nature was dead;
      shadows hung the whitewashed walls with crape; a chill fell upon his
      shoulders like a salutary penance-shirt. He could now wholly surrender
      himself to the supremest love, without fear of any flickering ray of
      light, any caressing breeze or scent, any buzzing of an insect’s wing
      disturbing him amidst the delight of loving. Never had his morning mass
      afforded him the superhuman joys of his nightly prayers.
    

      With quivering lips Abbe Mouret now gazed at the tall Virgin. He could see
      her coming towards him from the depths of her green bower in
      ever-increasing splendour. No longer did a flood of moonlight seem to
      float across the tree-tops. She seemed to him clothed with the sun; she
      advanced majestically, glorious, colossal, and so all-powerful that he was
      tempted at times to cast himself face downwards to shun the flaming
      splendour of that gate opening into heaven. Then, amidst the adoration of
      his whole being, which stayed his words upon his lips, he remembered
      Brother Archangias’s final rebuke, as he might have remembered words of
      blasphemy. The Brother often reproved him for his devotion to the Virgin,
      which he declared was veritable robbery of devotion due to God. In the
      Brother’s opinion it enervated the soul, put religion into petticoats,
      created and fostered a state of sentimentalism quite unworthy of the
      strong. He bore the Virgin a grudge for her womanhood, her beauty, her
      maternity; he was ever on his guard against her, possessed by a covert
      fear of feeling tempted by her gracious mien, of succumbing to her
      seductive sweetness. ‘She will lead you far!’ he had cried one day to the
      young priest, for in her he saw the commencement of human passion. From
      contemplating her one might glide to delight in lovely chestnut hair, in
      large bright eyes, and the mystery of garments falling from neck to toes.
      His was the blunt rebellion of a saint who roughly parted the Mother from
      the Son, asking as He did: ‘Woman, what have we in common, thou and I?’ 
    

      But Abbe Mouret thrust away such thoughts, prostrated himself, endeavoured
      to forget the Brother’s harsh attacks. His rapture in the immaculate
      purity of Mary alone raised him from the depths of lowliness in which he
      sought to bury himself. Whenever, alone before the tall golden Virgin, he
      so deceived himself as to imagine that he could see her bending down for
      him to kiss her braided locks, he once more became very young, very good,
      very strong, very just, full of tenderness.
    

      Abbe Mouret’s devotion to the Virgin dated from his early youth. Already
      when he was quite a child, somewhat shy and fond of shrinking into
      corners, he took pleasure in the thought that a lovely lady was watching
      over him: that two blue eyes, so sweet, ever followed him with their
      smile. When he felt at night a breath of air glide across his hair, he
      would often say that the Virgin had come to kiss him. He had grown up
      beneath this womanly caress, in an atmosphere full of the rustle of divine
      robes. From the age of seven he had satisfied the cravings of his
      affection by expending all the pence he received as pocket money in the
      purchase of pious picture-cards, which he jealously concealed that he
      alone might feast on them. But never was he tempted by the pictures of
      Jesus and the Lamb, of Christ on the Cross, of God the Father, with a
      mighty beard, stooping over a bank of clouds; his preference was always
      for the winning portraits of Mary, with her tiny smiling mouth and
      delicate outstretched hands. By degrees he had made quite a collection of
      them all—of Mary between a lily and a distaff, Mary carrying her
      child as if she were his elder sister, Mary crowned with roses, and Mary
      crowned with stars. For him they formed a family of lovely young maidens,
      alike in their attractiveness, in the grace, kindliness, and sweetness of
      their countenances, so youthful beneath their veils, that although they
      bore the name of ‘Mother of God,’ he had felt no awe of them as he had
      often felt for grown-up persons.
    

      They seemed to him of his own age, little girls such as he wished to meet
      with, little girls of heaven such as the little boys who die when seven
      years old have for eternal playmates in some nook of Paradise. But even at
      this early age he was self-contained; and full of the exquisite
      bashfulness of adolescence he grew up without betraying the secret of his
      religious love. Mary grew up with him, being invariably a year or two
      older than himself, as should always be the case with one’s chiefest
      friend. When he was eighteen, she was twenty; she no longer kissed his
      forehead at night time, but stood a little further from him with folded
      arms, chastely smiling, ravishingly sweet. And he—he only named her
      now in a whisper, feeling as if he would faint each time the well-loved
      name passed his lips in prayer. No more did he dream of childish games
      within the garden of heaven, but of continual contemplation before that
      white figure, whose perfect purity he feared to sully with his breath.
      Even from his own mother did he conceal the fervour of his love for Mary.
    

      Then, a few years later, at the seminary, his beautiful affection for her,
      seemingly so just, so natural, was disturbed by inward qualms. Was the
      cult of Mary necessary for salvation? Was he not robbing God by giving
      Mary a part, the greater part, of his love, his thoughts, his heart, his
      entire being? Perplexing questions were these, provoking an inward
      struggle which increased his passion, riveted his bonds. For he dived into
      all the subtleties of his affection, found unknown joys in discussing the
      lawfulness of his feelings. The books treating of devotion to the Virgin
      brought him excuses, joyful raptures, a wealth of arguments which he
      repeated with prayerful fervour. From them he learned how, in Mary, to be
      the slave of Jesus. He went to Jesus through Mary. He cited all kinds of
      proofs, he discriminated, he drew inferences. Mary, whom Jesus had obeyed
      on earth, should be obeyed by all mankind; Mary still retained her
      maternal power in heaven, where she was the great dispenser of God’s
      treasures, the only one who could beseech Him, the only one who allotted
      the heavenly thrones; and thus Mary, a mere creature before God, but
      raised up to Him, became the human link between heaven and earth, the
      intermediary of every grace, of every mercy; and his conclusion always was
      that she should be loved above all else in God himself. Another time he
      was attracted by more complicated theological curiosities: the marriage of
      the celestial spouse, the Holy Ghost sealing the Vase of Election, making
      of the Virgin Mary an everlasting miracle, offering her inviolable purity
      to the devotion of mankind. She was the Virgin overcoming all heresies,
      the irreconcilable foe of Satan, the new Eve of whom it had been foretold
      that she should crush the Serpent’s head, the august Gate of Grace, by
      which the Saviour had already entered once and through which He would come
      again at the Last Day—a vague prophecy, allotting a yet larger
      future role to Mary, which threw Serge into a dreamy imagining of some
      immense expansion of divine love.
    

      This entry of woman into the jealous, cruel heaven depicted by the Old
      Testament, this figure of whiteness set at the feet of the awesome
      Trinity, appeared to him the very grace itself of religion, the one
      consolation for all the dread inspired by things of faith, the one refuge
      when he found himself lost amidst the mysteries of dogma. And when he had
      thus proved to himself, point by point, that she was the way to Jesus—easy,
      short, perfect, and certain—he surrendered himself anew to her,
      wholly and without remorse: he strove to be her true devotee, dead to self
      and steeped in submission.
    

      It was an hour of divine voluptuousness! The books treating of devotion to
      the Virgin burned his hands. They spoke to him in a language of love,
      warm, fragrant as incense. Mary no longer seemed a young maiden veiled in
      white, standing with crossed arms, a foot or two away from his pillow. She
      came surrounded by splendour, even as John saw her, clothed with the sun,
      crowned with twelve stars, and having the moon beneath her feet. She
      perfumed him with her fragrance, inflamed him with longing for heaven,
      ravished him even with the ardent glow of the planets flaming on her brow.
      He threw himself before her and called himself her slave. No word could
      have been sweeter than that word of slave, which he repeated, which he
      relished yet more and more as it trembled on his stammering tongue, whilst
      casting himself at her feet—to become her thing, her mite, the dust
      lightly scattered by the waving of her azure robe. With David he
      exclaimed: ‘Mary is made for me,’ and with the Evangelist he added: ‘I
      have taken her for my all.’ He called her his ‘beloved mistress,’ for
      words failed him, and he fell into the prattle of child or lover, his
      breath breaking with intensity of passion. She was the Blessed among
      women, the Queen of Heaven glorified by the nine Choirs of Angels, the
      Mother of Predilection, the Treasure of the Lord. All the vivid imagery of
      her cult unrolled itself before him comparing to her an earthly paradise
      of virgin soil, with beds of flowering virtues, green meadows of hope,
      impregnable towers of strength, and smiling dwellings of confidence. Again
      she was a fountain sealed by the Holy Ghost, a shrine and dwelling-place
      of the Holy Trinity, the Throne of God, the City of God, the Altar of God,
      the Temple of God, and the World of God. And he walked in that garden, in
      its shade, its sunlight, beneath its enchanting greenery; he sighed after
      the water of that Fountain; he dwelt within Mary’s beauteous precincts—resting,
      hiding, heedlessly straying there, drinking in the milk of infinite love
      that fell drop by drop from her virginal bosom.
    

      Every morning, on rising at the seminary, he greeted Mary with a hundred
      bows, his face turned towards the strip of sky visible from his window.
      And at night in like fashion he bade her farewell with his eyes fixed upon
      the stars. Often, when he thus gazed out on fine bright nights, when Venus
      gleamed golden and dreamy through the warm atmosphere, he forgot himself,
      and then, like a soft song, would fall from his lips the Ave maris
      Stella, that tender hymn which set before his eyes a distant azure
      land, and a tranquil sea, scarce wrinkled by a caressing quiver, and
      illuminated by a smiling star, a very sun in size. He recited, too, the Salve
      Regina, the Regina Coeli, the O gloriosa Domina, all the
      prayers and all the canticles. He would read the Office of the Virgin, the
      holy books written in her honour, the little Psalter of St. Bonaventura,
      with such devout tenderness, that he could not turn the leaves for tears.
      He fasted and mortified himself, that he might offer up to her his bruised
      and wounded flesh. Ever since the age of ten he had worn her livery—the
      holy scapular, the twofold image of Mary sewn on squares of cloth, whose
      warmth upon his chest and back thrilled him with delight. Later on, he
      also took to wearing the little chain in token of his loving slavery. But
      his greatest act of love was ever the Angelic Salutation, the Ave Maria,
      his heart’s perfect prayer. ‘Hail, Mary——’ and he saw her
      advancing towards him, full of grace, blessed amongst women; and he cast
      his heart at her feet for her to tread on it in sweetness. He multiplied
      and repeated that salutation in a hundred different ways, ever seeking
      some more efficacious one. He would say twelve Aves to commemorate
      the crown of twelve stars that encircled Mary’s brow; he would say
      fourteen in remembrance of her fourteen joys; at another time he would
      recite seven decades of them in honour of the years she lived on earth.
      For hours the beads of his Rosary would glide between his fingers. Then,
      again, on certain days of mystical assignation he would launch into the
      endless muttering of the Rosary.
    

      When, alone in his cell, with time to give to his love, he knelt upon the
      floor, the whole of Mary’s garden with its lofty flowers of chastity
      blossomed around him. Between his fingers glided the Rosary’s wreath of Aves,
      intersected by Paters, like a garland of white roses mingled with
      the lilies of the Annunciation, the blood-hued flowers of Calvary, and the
      stars of the Coronation. He would slowly tread those fragrant paths,
      pausing at each of the fifteen dizains of Aves, and dwelling on its
      corresponding mystery; he was beside himself with joy, or grief, or
      triumph, according as the mystery belonged to one or other of the three
      series—the joyful, the sorrowful, or the glorious. What an
      incomparable legend it was, the history of Mary, a complete human life,
      with all its smiles and tears and triumph, which he lived over again from
      end to end in a single moment! And first he entered into joy with the five
      glad Mysteries, steeped in the serene calm of dawn. First the Archangel’s
      salutation, the fertilising ray gliding down from heaven, fraught with the
      spotless union’s adorable ecstasy; then the visit to Elizabeth on a bright
      hope-laden morn, when the fruit of Mary’s womb for the first time stirred
      and thrilled her with the shock at which mothers blench; then the birth in
      a stable at Bethlehem, and the long string of shepherds coming to pay
      homage to her Divine Maternity; then the new-born babe carried into the
      Temple on the arms of his mother who smiled, still weary, but already
      happy at offering her child to God’s justice, to Simeon’s embrace, to the
      desires of the world; and lastly, Jesus at a later age revealing Himself
      before the doctors, in whose midst He is found by His anxious mother, now
      proud and comforted.
    

      But, after that tender radiant dawn, it seemed to Serge as if the sky were
      suddenly overcast. His feet now trod on brambles, the beads of the Rosary
      pricked his fingers; he cowered beneath the horror of the five Sorrowful
      Mysteries: Mary, agonising in her Son in the garden of Olives, suffering
      with Him from the scourging, feeling on her own brow the wounds made by
      the crown of thorns, bearing the fearful weight of His Cross, and dying at
      his feet on Calvary. Those inevitable sufferings, that harrowing martyrdom
      of the queen he worshipped, and for whom he would have shed his blood like
      Jesus, roused in him a feeling of shuddering repulsion which ten years’ 
      practice of the same prayers and the same devotions had failed to weaken.
      But as the beads flowed on, light suddenly burst upon the darkness of the
      Crucifixion, and the resplendent glory of the five last Mysteries shone
      forth in all the brightness of a cloudless sun. Mary was transfigured, and
      sang the hallelujah of the Resurrection, the victory over Death and the
      eternity of life. With outstretched hands, and dazed with admiration, she
      beheld the triumph of her Son ascending into heaven on golden clouds,
      fringed with purple. She gathered the Apostles round her, and, as on the
      day of her conception, participated in the glow of the Spirit of Love,
      descending now in tongues of fire. She, too, was carried up to heaven by a
      flight of angels, borne aloft on their white wings like a spotless ark,
      and tenderly set down amid the splendour of the heavenly thrones; and
      there, in her supreme glory, amidst a splendour so dazzling that the light
      of the sun was quenched, God crowned her with the stars of the firmament.
      Impassioned love has but one word. In reciting a hundred and fifty Aves
      Serge had not once repeated himself. The monotonous murmur, the ever
      recurring words, akin to the ‘I love you’ of lovers, assumed each time a
      deeper and deeper meaning; and he lingered over it all, expressed
      everything with the aid of the one solitary Latin sentence, and learned to
      know Mary through and through, until, as the last bead of his Rosary
      slipped from his hand, his heart grew faint with the thought of parting
      from her.
    

      Many a night had the young man spent in this way. Daybreak had found him
      still murmuring his prayers. It was the moon, he would say to cheat
      himself, that was making the stars wane. His superiors had to reprove him
      for those vigils, which left him languid and pale as if he had been losing
      blood. On the wall of his cell had long hung a coloured engraving of the
      Sacred Heart of Mary, an engraving which showed the Virgin smiling
      placidly, throwing open her bodice, and revealing a crimson fissure,
      wherein glowed her heart, pierced with a sword, and crowned with white
      roses. That sword tormented him beyond measure, brought him an intolerable
      horror of suffering in woman, the very thought of which scattered his
      pious submissiveness to the winds. He erased the weapon, and left only the
      crowned and flaming heart which seemed to be half torn from that exquisite
      flesh, as if tendered as an offering to himself. And it was then he felt
      beloved: Mary was giving him her heart, her living heart, even as it
      throbbed in her bosom, dripping with her rosy blood.
    

      In all this there was no longer the imagery of devout passion, but a
      material entity, a prodigy of affection which impelled him, when he was
      praying before the engraving, to open out his hands in order that he might
      reverently receive the heart that leaped from that immaculate bosom. He
      could see it, hear it beat; he was loved, that heart was beating for
      himself! His whole being quickened with rapture; he would fain have kissed
      that heart, have melted in it, have lain beside it within the depths of
      that open breast. Mary’s love for him was an active one; she desired him
      to be near her, to be wholly hers in the eternity to come; her love was
      efficacious, too, she was ever solicitous for him, watching over him
      everywhere, guarding him from the slightest breach of his fidelity. She
      loved him tenderly, more than the whole of womankind together, with a love
      as azure, as deep, as boundless as the sky itself. Where could he ever
      find so delightful a mistress? What earthly caress could be compared to
      the air in which he moved, the breath of Mary? What mundane union or
      enjoyment could be weighed against that everlasting flower of desire which
      grew unceasingly, and yet was never over-blown? At this thought the Magnificat
      would exhale from his mouth, like a cloud of incense. He sang the joyful
      song of Mary, her thrill of joy at the approach of her Divine Spouse. He
      glorified the Lord who overthrew the mighty from their thrones, and who
      sent Mary to him, poor destitute child that he was, dying of love on the
      cold tiled floor of his cell.
    

      And when he had given all up to Mary—his body, his soul, his earthly
      goods, and spiritual chattels—when he stood before her stripped,
      bare, with all his prayers exhausted, there welled from his burning lips
      the Virgin’s litanies, with their reiterated, persistent, impassioned
      appeals for heavenly succour. He fancied himself climbing a flight of
      pious yearnings, which he ascended step by step at each bound of his
      heart. First he called her ‘Holy.’ Next he called her ‘Mother,’ most pure,
      most chaste, amiable, and admirable. And with fresh ardour he six times
      proclaimed her maidenhood; his lips cooled and freshened each time that he
      pronounced that name of ‘Virgin,’ which he coupled with power, goodness,
      and fidelity. And as his heart drew him higher up the ladder of light, a
      strange voice from his veins spoke within him, bursting into dazzling
      flowers of speech. He yearned to melt away in fragrance, to be spread
      around in light, to expire in a sigh of music. As he named her ‘Mirror of
      Justice,’ ‘Seat of Wisdom,’ and ‘Source of Joy,’ he could behold himself
      pale with ecstasy in that mirror, kneeling on the warmth of the divine
      seat, quaffing intoxication in mighty draughts from the holy Source.
    

      Again he would transform her, throwing off all restraint in his frantic
      love, so as to attain to a yet closer union with her. She became a ‘Vessel
      of Honour,’ chosen of God, a ‘Bosom of Election,’ wherein he desired to
      pour his being, and slumber for ever.* She was the ‘Mystical Rose’—a
      great flower which bloomed in Paradise, with petals formed of the angels
      clustering round their queen, a flower so fresh, so fragrant, that he
      could inhale its perfume from the depths of his unworthiness with a joyful
      dilation of his sides which stretched them to bursting. She became changed
      into a ‘House of Gold,’ a ‘Tower of David,’ and a ‘Tower of Ivory,’ of
      inestimable richness, of a whiteness that swans might envy, and of lofty,
      massive, rounded form, which he would fain have encircled with his
      outstretched arms as with a girdle of submissiveness. She stood on the
      distant skyline as the ‘Gate of Heaven,’ a glimpse of which he caught
      behind her shoulders when a puff of wind threw back the folds of her veil.
      She rose in splendour from behind the mountain in the waning hour of
      night, like the ‘Morning Star’ to help all travellers astray, like the
      very dawn of Love. And when he had ascended to this height—scant of
      breath, yet still unsatiated—he could only further glorify her with
      the title of ‘Queen,’ with which he nine times hailed her, as with nine
      parting salutations from the censer of his soul. His canticle died
      joyfully away in those last ejaculations of triumph: ‘Queen of virgins,
      Queen of all saints. Queen conceived without sin!’ She, ever before him,
      shone in splendour; and he, on the topmost step, only reached by Mary’s
      intimates, remained there yet another moment, swooning amidst the subtle
      atmosphere around him; still too far away to kiss the edge of her azure
      robe, already feeling that he was about to fall, but ever possessed by a
      desire to ascend again and again, and seek that superhuman felicity.
    

  * Curiously enough I find no trace of ‘Bosom of Election’ in the
    Litany of the Blessed Virgin as printed in English Catholic
    works.—ED.

    
      How many times had not the Litany of the Virgin, recited in common in the
      seminary chapel, left the young man with broken limbs and void head, as if
      from some great fall! And since his departure from the seminary, Abbe
      Mouret had grown to love the Virgin still more. He gave to her that
      impassioned cult which to Brother Archangias savoured of heresy. In his
      opinion it was she who would save the Church by some matchless prodigy
      whose near appearance would entrance the world. She was the only miracle
      of our impious age—the blue-robed lady that showed herself to little
      shepherdesses, the whiteness that gleamed at night between two clouds, her
      veil trailing over the low thatched roofs of peasant homes. When Brother
      Archangias coarsely asked him if he had ever espied her, he simply smiled
      and tightened his lips as if to keep his secret. Truth to say, he saw her
      every night. She no longer seemed a playful sister or a lovely pious
      maiden; she wore a bridal robe, with white flowers in her hair; and from
      beneath her drooping eyelids fell moist glances of hopeful promise that
      set his cheeks aglow. He could feel that she was coming, that she was
      promising to delay no longer; that she said to him, ‘Here I am, receive
      me!’ Thrice a day when the Angelus rang out—at break of dawn,
      in the fulness of midday, and at the gentle fall of twilight—he
      bared his head and said an Ave with a glance around him as if to
      ascertain whether the bell were not at last announcing Mary’s coming. He
      was five-and-twenty. He awaited her.
    

      During the month of May the young priest’s expectation was fraught with
      joyful hope. To La Teuse’s grumblings he no longer paid the slightest
      attention. If he remained so late praying in the church, it was because he
      entertained the mad idea that the great golden Virgin would at last come
      down from her pedestal. And yet he stood in awe of that Virgin, so like a
      princess in her mien. He did not love all the Virgins alike, and this one
      inspired him with supreme respect. She was, indeed, the Mother of God, she
      showed the fertile development of form, the majestic countenance, the
      strong arms of the Divine Spouse bearing Jesus. He pictured her thus,
      standing in the midst of the heavenly court, the train of her royal mantle
      trailing among the stars; so far above him, and of such exceeding might,
      that he would be shattered into dust should she deign to cast her eyes
      upon him. She was the Virgin of his days of weakness, the austere Virgin
      who restored his inward peace by an awesome glimpse of Paradise.
    

      That night Abbe Mouret remained for over an hour on his knees in the empty
      church. With folded hands and eyes fixed on the golden Virgin rising
      planet-like amid the verdure, he sought the drowsiness of ecstasy, the
      appeasement of the strange discomfort he had felt that day. But he failed
      to find the semi-somnolence of prayer with the delightful ease he knew so
      well. However glorious and pure Mary might reveal herself, her motherhood,
      the maturity of her charms, and the bare infant she bore upon her arm,
      disquieted him. It seemed as if in heaven itself there were a repetition
      of the exuberant life, through which he had been moving since the morning.
      Like the vines of the stony slopes, like the trees of the Paradou, like
      the human troop of Artauds, Mary suggested the blossoming, the begetting
      of life. Prayer came but slowly to his lips; fancies made his mind wander.
      He perceived things he had never seen before—the gentle wave of her
      chestnut hair, the rounded swell of her rosy throat. She had to assume a
      sterner air and overwhelm him with the splendour of her sovereign power to
      bring him back to the unfinished sentences of his broken prayer. At last
      the sight of her golden crown, her golden mantle, all the golden sheen
      which made of her a mighty princess, reduced him once more to slavish
      submission, and his prayer again flowed evenly, and his mind became
      wrapped in worship.
    

      In this ecstatic trance, half asleep, half awake, he remained till eleven
      o’clock, heedless of his aching knees, fancying himself suspended in mid
      air, rocked to and fro like a child, and yielding to restful slumber,
      though conscious of some unknown weight that oppressed his heart.
      Meanwhile the church around him filled with shadows, the lamp grew dim,
      and the lofty sprays of leafage darkened the tall Virgin’s varnished face.
    

      When the clock, about to strike, gave out a rending whine, a shudder
      passed through Abbe Mouret. He had not hitherto felt the chill of the
      church upon his shoulders, but now he was shivering from head to foot. As
      he crossed himself a memory swiftly flashed through the stupor of his
      wakening—the chattering of his teeth recalled to him the nights he
      had spent on the floor of his cell before the Sacred Heart of Mary, when
      his whole frame would quiver with fever. He rose up painfully, displeased
      with himself. As a rule, he would leave the altar untroubled in his flesh
      and with Mary’s sweet breath still fresh upon his brow. That night,
      however, as he took the lamp to go up to his room he felt as if his
      throbbing temples were bursting. His prayer had not profited him; after a
      transient alleviation he still experienced the burning glow which had been
      rising in his heart and brain since morning. When he reached the sacristy
      door, he turned and mechanically raised the lamp to take a last look at
      the tall Virgin. But she was now shrouded in the deep shadows falling from
      the rafters, buried in the foliage around her whence only the golden cross
      upon her crown emerged.
    

      
 
    

      Abbe Mouret’s bedroom, which occupied a corner of the vicarage, was a
      spacious one, having two large square windows; one of which opened above
      Desiree’s farmyard, whilst the other overlooked the village, the valley
      beyond, the belt of hills, the whole landscape. The yellow-curtained bed,
      the walnut chest of drawers, and the three straw-bottomed chairs seemed
      lost below that lofty ceiling with whitewashed joists. A faint tartness,
      the somewhat musty odour of old country houses, ascended from the tiled
      and ruddled floor that glistened like a mirror. On the chest of drawers a
      tall statuette of the Immaculate Conception rose greyly between some
      porcelain vases which La Teuse had filled with white lilac.
    

      Abbe Mouret set his lamp on the edge of the chest of drawers before the
      Virgin. He felt so unwell that he determined to light the vine-stem fire
      which was laid in readiness. He stood there, tongs in hand, watching the
      kindling wood, his face illuminated by the flame. The house beneath
      slumbered in unbroken stillness. The silence filled his ears with a hum,
      which grew into a sound of whispering voices. Slowly and irresistibly
      these voices mastered him and increased the feeling of anxiety which had
      almost choked him several times that day. What could be the cause of such
      mental anguish? What could be the strange trouble which had slowly grown
      within him and had now become so unbearable? He had not fallen into sin.
      It seemed as if but yesterday he had left the seminary with all his ardent
      faith, and so fortified against the world that he moved among men
      beholding God alone. And, suddenly, he fancied himself in his cell at five
      o’clock in the morning, the hour for rising. The deacon on duty passed his
      door, striking it with his stick, and repeating the regulation summons—
    

      ‘Benedicamus Domino!’ 
    

      ‘Deo gratias!’ he answered half asleep, with his eyes still swollen
      with slumber.
    

      And he jumped out upon his strip of carpet, washed himself, made his bed,
      swept his room, and refilled his little pitcher. He enjoyed this petty
      domestic work while the morning air sent a thrilling shiver throughout his
      frame. He could hear the sparrows in the plane-trees of the court-yard,
      rising at the same time as himself with a deafening noise of wings and
      notes—their way of saying their prayers, thought he. Then he went
      down to the meditation room, and stayed there on his knees for half an
      hour after prayers, to con that reflection of St. Ignatius: ‘What profit
      be it to a man to gain the whole world if he lose his soul?’ A subject,
      this, fertile in good resolutions, which impelled him to renounce all
      earthly goods, and dwell on that fond dream of a desert life, beneath the
      solitary wealth and luxury of a vast blue sky. When ten minutes had
      passed, his bruised knees became so painful that his whole being slowly
      swooned into ecstasy, in which he pictured himself as a mighty conqueror,
      the master of an immense empire, flinging down his crown, breaking his
      sceptre, trampling under foot unheard-of wealth, chests of gold, floods of
      jewels, and rich stuffs embroidered with precious stones, before going to
      bury himself in some Thebais, clothed in rough drugget that rasped his
      back. Mass, however, snatched him from these heated fancies, upon which he
      looked back as upon some beautiful reality which might have been his lot
      in ancient times; and then, his communion made, he chanted the psalm for
      the day unconscious of any other voice than his own, which rang out with
      crystal purity, flying upward till it reached the very ear of the Lord.
    

      When he returned to his room he ascended the stairs step by step, as
      advised by St. Bonaventura and St. Thomas Aquinas. His gait was slow, his
      mien grave; he kept his head bowed as he walked along, finding ineffable
      delight in complying with the most trifling regulations. Next came
      breakfast. It was pleasant in the refectory to see the hunks of bread and
      the glasses of white wine, set out in rows. He had a good appetite, and
      was of a joyous mood. He would say, for instance, that the wine was truly
      Christian—a daring allusion to the water which the bursar was taxed
      with putting in the bottles. Still his gravity at once returned to him on
      going in to lectures. He took notes on his knees, while the professor,
      resting his hands on the edge of his desk, talked away in familiar Latin,
      interspersed with an occasional word in French, when he was at fault for a
      better. A discussion would then follow in which the students argued in a
      strange jargon, with never a smile upon their faces. Then, at ten o’clock,
      there came twenty minutes’ reading of Holy Writ. He fetched the Sacred
      Book, a volume richly bound and gilt-edged. Having kissed it with especial
      reverence, he read it out bare-headed, bowing every time he came upon the
      name of Jesus, Mary, or Joseph. And with the arrival of the second
      meditation he was ready to endure for love of God another and even longer
      spell of kneeling than the first. He avoided resting on his heels for a
      second even. He delighted in that examination of conscience which lasted
      for three-quarters of an hour. He racked his memory for sins, and at times
      even fancied himself damned for forgetting to kiss the pictures on his
      scapular the night before, or for having gone to sleep upon his left side—abominable
      faults which he would have willingly redeemed by wearing out his knees
      till night; and yet happy faults, in that they kept him busy, for without
      them he would have no occupation for his unspotted heart, steeped in a
      life of purity.
    

      He would return to the refectory, as if relieved of some great crime. The
      seminarists on duty, wearing blue linen aprons, and having their cassock
      sleeves tucked up, brought in the vermicelli soup, the boiled beef cut
      into little squares, and the helps of roast mutton and French beans. Then
      followed a terrific rattling of jaws, a gluttonous silence, a desperate
      plying of forks, only broken by envious greedy glances at the horseshoe
      table, where the heads of the seminary ate more delicate meats and drank
      ruddier wines. And all the while above the hubbub some strong-lunged
      peasant’s son, with a thick voice and utter disregard for punctuation,
      would hem and haw over the perusal of some letters from missionaries, some
      episcopal pastoral, or some article from a religious paper. To this he
      listened as he ate. Those polemical fragments, those narratives of distant
      travels, surprised, nay, even frightened him, with their revelations of
      bustling, boundless fields of action, of which he had never dreamt, beyond
      the seminary walls. Eating was still in progress when the wooden clapper
      announced the recreation hour. The recreation-ground was a sandy yard, in
      which stood eight plane-trees, which in summer cast cool shadows around.
      On the south side rose a wall, seventeen feet high, and bristling with
      broken glass, above which all that one saw of Plassans was the steeple of
      St. Mark, rising like a stony needle against the blue sky. To and fro he
      slowly paced the court with a row of fellow-students; and each time he
      faced the wall he eyed that spire which to him represented the whole town,
      the whole earth spread beneath the scudding clouds. Noisy groups waxed hot
      in disputation round the plane-trees; friends would pair off in the
      corners under the spying glance of some director concealed behind his
      window-blind. Tennis and skittle matches would be quickly organised to the
      great discomfort of quiet loto players who lounged on the ground before
      their cardboard squares, which some bowl or ball would suddenly smother
      with sand. But when the bell sounded the noise ceased, a flight of
      sparrows rose from the plane-trees, and the breathless students betook
      themselves to their lesson in plain-chant with folded arms and hanging
      heads. And thus Serge’s day closed in peacefulness; he returned to his
      work; then, at four o’clock, he partook of his afternoon snack, and
      renewed his everlasting walk in sight of St. Mark’s spire. Supper was
      marked by the same rattling of jaws and the same droning perusal as the
      midday meal. And when it was over Serge repaired to the chapel to attend
      prayers, and finally betook himself to bed at a quarter past eight, after
      first sprinkling his pallet with holy water to ward off all evil dreams.
    

      How many delightful days like these had he not spent in that ancient
      convent of old Plassans, where abode the aroma of centuries of piety! For
      five years had the days followed one another, flowing on with the
      unvarying murmur of limpid water. In this present hour he recalled a
      thousand little incidents which moved him. He remembered going with his
      mother to purchase his first outfit, his two cassocks, his two waist
      sashes, his half-dozen bands, his eight pairs of socks, his surplice, and
      his three-cornered hat. And how his heart had beaten that mild October
      evening when the seminary door had first closed behind him! He had gone
      thither at twenty, after his school years, seized with a yearning to
      believe and love. The very next day he had forgotten all, as if he had
      fallen into a long sleep in that big silent house. He once more saw the
      narrow cell in which he had lived through his two years as student of
      philosophy—a little hutch with only a bed, a table, and a chair,
      divided from the other cells by badly fitted partitions, in a vast hall
      containing about fifty similar little dens. And he again saw the cell he
      had dwelt in three years longer while in the theology class—a larger
      one, with an armchair, a dressing-table, and a bookcase—a happy room
      full of the dreams which his faith had evoked. Down those endless
      passages, up those stairs of stone, in all sorts of nooks, sudden
      inspirations, unexpected aid had come to him. From the lofty ceilings fell
      the voices of guardian angels. There was not a flagstone in the halls, not
      an ashlar of the walls, not a bough of the plane-trees, but it spoke to
      him of the delights of his contemplative life, his lispings of tenderness,
      his gradual initiation, the favours vouchsafed him in return for
      self-bestowal, all that happiness of divine first love.
    

      On such and such a day, on awaking, he had beheld a bright flood of light
      which had steeped him in joy. On such and such an evening as he closed the
      door of his cell he had felt warm hands clasping his neck so lovingly that
      he had lost consciousness, and had afterwards found himself on the floor
      weeping and choked by sobs. Again, at other times, especially in the
      little archway leading to the chapel, he had surrendered himself to supple
      arms which raised him from the ground. All heaven had then been concerned
      in him, had moved round him, and imparted to his slightest actions a
      peculiar sense, an astonishing perfume, which seemed to cling faintly to
      his clothes, to his very skin. And again, he remembered the Thursday
      walks. They started at two o’clock for some verdant nook about three miles
      from Plassans. Often they sought a meadow on the banks of the Viorne,
      where the gnarled willows steeped their leaves in the stream. But he saw
      nothing—neither the big yellow flowers in the meadow, nor the
      swallows sipping as they flew by, with wings lightly touching the surface
      of the little river. Till six o’clock, seated in groups beneath the
      willows, his comrades and himself recited the Office of the Virgin in
      common, or read in pairs the ‘Little Hours,’ the book of prayers
      recommended to young seminarists, but not enjoined on them.
    

      Abbe Mouret smiled as he stirred the burning embers of his vine-stock
      fire. In all that past he only found great purity and perfect obedience.
      He had been a lily whose sweet scent had charmed his masters. He could not
      recall a single bad action. He had never taken advantage of the absolute
      freedom of those walks, when the two prefects in charge would go off to
      have a chat with a parish priest in the neighbourhood, or to have a smoke
      behind a hedge, or to drink beer with a friend. Never had he hidden a
      novel under his mattress, nor a bottle of anisette in a cupboard.
      For a long time, even, he had had no suspicion of the sinfulness around
      him—of the wings of chicken and the cakes smuggled into the seminary
      in Lent, of the guilty letters brought in by servers, of the abominable
      conversations carried on in whispers in certain corners of the courtyard.
      He had wept hot tears when he first perceived that few among his fellows
      loved God for His own sake. There were peasants’ sons there who had taken
      orders simply through their terror of conscription, sluggards who dreamed
      of a career of idleness, and ambitious youths already agitated by a vision
      of the staff and the mitre. And when he found the world’s wickedness
      reappearing at the altar’s very foot, he had withdrawn still further into
      himself, giving himself still more to God, to console Him for being
      forsaken.
    

      He did recollect, however, that he had crossed his legs one day in class,
      and that, when the professor reproved him for it, his face had become
      fiery red, as if he had committed some abominable action. He was one of
      the best students, never arguing, but learning his texts by heart. He
      established the existence and eternity of God by proofs drawn from Holy
      Writ, the opinions of the fathers of the Church, the universal consensus
      of all mankind. This kind of reasoning filled him with an unshakeable
      certainty. During his first year of philosophy, he had worked at his logic
      so earnestly that his professor had checked him, remarking that the most
      learned were not the holiest. In his second year, therefore, he had
      carried out his study of metaphysics as a regulation task, constituting
      but a small fraction of his daily duties. He felt a growing contempt for
      science; he wished to remain ignorant, in order to preserve the humility
      of his faith. Later on, he only followed the course of Rohrbacher’s
      ‘Ecclesiastical History’ from submission; he ventured as far as Gousset’s
      arguments, and Bouvier’s ‘Theological Course,’ without daring to take up
      Bellarmin, Liguori, Suarez, or St. Thomas Aquinas. Holy Writ alone
      impassioned him. Therein he found all desirable knowledge, a tale of
      infinite love which should be sufficient instruction for all men of
      good-will. He simply adopted the dicta of his teachers, casting on them
      the care of inquiry, needing nought of such rubbish to know how to love,
      and accusing books of stealing away the time which should be devoted to
      prayer. He even succeeded in forgetting his years of college life. He no
      longer knew anything, but was simplicity itself, a child brought back to
      the lispings of his catechism.
    

      Such was the manner in which he had ascended step by step to the
      priesthood. And here his recollections thronged more quickly on him,
      softer, still warm with heavenly joy. Each year he had drawn nearer to
      God. His vacations had been spent in holy fashion at an uncle’s, in
      confessions every day and communions twice a week. He would lay fasts upon
      himself, hide rock-salt inside his trunk, and kneel on it with bared knees
      for hours together. At recreation time he remained in chapel, or went up
      to the room of one of the directors, who told him pious and extraordinary
      stories. Then, as the fast of the Holy Trinity drew nigh, he was rewarded
      beyond all measure, overwhelmed by the stirring emotion which pervades all
      seminaries on the eve of ordinations. This was the great festival of all,
      when the sky opened to allow the elect to rise another step nearer unto
      God. For a fortnight in advance he imposed a bread and water diet on
      himself. He closed his window blinds so that he might not see the daylight
      at all, and he prostrated himself in the gloom to implore Jesus to accept
      his sacrifice. During the last four days he suffered torturing pangs,
      terrible scruples, which would force him from his bed in the middle of the
      night to knock at the door of some strange priest giving the Retreat—some
      barefooted Carmelite, or often a converted Protestant respecting whom some
      wonderful story was current. To him he would make at great length a
      general confession of his whole life in a voice choking with sobs.
      Absolution alone quieted him, refreshed him, as if he had enjoyed a bath
      of grace.
    

      On the morning of the great day he felt wholly white; and so vividly was
      he conscious of his whiteness that he seemed to himself to shed light
      around him. The seminary bell rang out in clear notes, while all the
      scents of June—the perfume of blossoming stocks, of mignonette and
      of heliotropes—came over the lofty courtyard wall. In the chapel
      relatives were waiting in their best attire, so deeply moved that the
      women sobbed behind their veils. Next came the procession—the
      deacons about to receive their priesthood in golden chasubles, the
      sub-deacons in dalmatics, those in minor orders and the tonsured with
      their surplices floating on their shoulders and their black birettas in
      their hands. The organ rolled diffusing the flutelike notes of a canticle
      of joy. At the altar, the bishop officiated, staff in hand, assisted by
      two canons. All the Chapter were there, the priests of all the parishes
      thronged thick amid a dazzling wealth of apparel, a flaring of gold
      beneath a broad ray of sunlight falling from a window in the nave. The
      epistle over, the ordination began.
    

      At this very hour Abbe Mouret could remember the chill of the scissors
      when he was marked with the tonsure at the beginning of his first year of
      theology. It had made him shudder slightly. But the tonsure had then been
      very small, hardly larger than a penny. Later, with each fresh order
      conferred on him, it had grown and grown until it crowned him with a white
      spot as large as a big Host. The organ’s hum grew softer, and the censers
      swung with a silvery tinkling of their slender chains, releasing a
      cloudlet of white smoke, which unrolled in lacelike folds. He could see
      himself, a tonsured youth in a surplice, led to the altar by the master of
      ceremonies; there he knelt and bowed his head down low, while the bishop
      with golden scissors snipped off three locks—one over his forehead,
      and the other two near his ears. Yet another twelvemonth, and he could
      again see himself in the chapel amid the incense, receiving the four minor
      orders. Led by an archdeacon, he went to the main doorway, closed the door
      with a bang, and opened it again, to show that to him was entrusted the
      care of churches; next he rang a small bell with his right hand, in token
      that it was his duty to call the faithful to the divine offices; then he
      returned to the altar, where fresh privileges were conferred upon him by
      the bishop—those of singing the lessons, of blessing the bread, of
      catechising children, of exorcising evil spirits, of serving the deacons,
      of lighting and extinguishing the candles of the altars.
    

      Next came back the memory of the ensuing ordination, more solemn and more
      dread, amid the same organ strains which sounded now like God’s own
      thunder: this time he wore a sub-deacon’s dalmatic upon his shoulders, he
      bound himself for ever by the vow of chastity, he trembled in every pore,
      despite his faith, at the terrible Accedite from the bishop, which
      put to flight two of his companions, blanching by his side. His new duties
      were to serve the priest at the altar, to prepare the cruets, sing the
      epistle, wipe the chalice, and carry the cross in processions. And, at
      last, he passed once more, and for the last time, into the chapel, in the
      radiance of a June sun: but this time he walked at the very head of the
      procession, with alb girdled about his waist, with stole crossed over his
      breast, and chasuble falling from his neck. All but fainting from emotion,
      he could perceive the pallid face of the bishop giving him the priesthood,
      the fulness of the ministry, by the threefold laying of his hands. And
      after taking the oath of ecclesiastical obedience, he felt himself
      uplifted from the stone flags, when the prelate in a full voice repeated
      the Latin words: ‘Accipe Spiritum Sanctum.... Quorum remiseris peccata,
      remittuntur eis, et quorum retinueris, retenta sunt.’—‘Receive
      the Holy Ghost.... Whose sins thou dost forgive they are forgiven; and
      whose sins thou dost retain, they are retained.’ 
    

      
 
    

      This evocation of the deep joys of his youth had given Abbe Mouret a touch
      of feverishness. He no longer felt the cold. He put down the tongs and
      walked towards the bedstead as if about to go to bed, but turned back and
      pressed his forehead to a window-pane, looking out into the night with
      sightless eyes. Could he be ill? Why did he feel such languor in all his
      limbs, why did his blood burn in every vein? On two occasions, while at
      the seminary, he had experienced similar attacks—a sort of physical
      discomfort which made him most unhappy; one day, indeed, he had gone to
      bed in raving delirium. Then he bethought himself of a young girl
      possessed by evil spirits, whom Brother Archangias asserted he had cured
      with a simple sign of the cross, one day when she fell down before him.
      This reminded him of the spiritual exorcisms which one of his teachers had
      formerly recommended to him: prayer, a general confession, frequent
      communion, the choosing of a wise confessor who should have great
      authority on his mind. And then, without any transition, with a suddenness
      which astonished himself, he saw in the depths of his memory the round
      face of one of his old friends, a peasant, who had been a choir boy at
      eight years old, and whose expenses at the seminary were defrayed by a
      lady who watched over him. He was always laughing, he rejoiced beforehand
      at the anticipated emoluments of his career; twelve hundred francs of
      stipend, a vicarage at the end of a garden, presents, invitations to
      dinners, little profits from weddings, and baptismal and burial fees. That
      young fellow must indeed be happy in his parish.
    

      The feeling of melancholy regret evoked by this recollection surprised
      Abbe Mouret extremely. Was he not happy, too? Until that day he had
      regretted nothing, wished for nothing, envied nothing. Even as he searched
      himself at that very moment he failed to find any cause for bitterness. He
      believed himself the same as in the early days of his deaconship, when the
      obligatory perusal of his breviary at certain stated hours had filled his
      days with continuous prayer. No doubts had tormented him; he had
      prostrated himself before the mysteries he could not understand; he had
      sacrificed his reason, which he despised, with the greatest ease. When he
      left the seminary, he had rejoiced at finding himself a stranger among his
      fellowmen, no longer walking like them, carrying his head differently,
      possessed of the gestures, words, and opinions of a being apart. He had
      felt emasculated, nearer to the angels, cleansed of sexuality. It had
      almost made him proud to belong no longer to his species, to have been
      brought up for God and carefully purged of all human grossness by a
      jealously watchful training. Again, it had seemed to him as if for years
      he had been dwelling in holy oil, prepared with all due rites, which had
      steeped his flesh in beatification. His limbs, his brain, had lost
      material substance to gain in soulfulness, impregnated with a subtle
      vapour which, at times, intoxicated him and dizzied him as if the earth
      had suddenly failed beneath his feet. He displayed the fears, the
      unwittingness, the open candour of a cloistered maiden. He sometimes
      remarked with a smile that he was prolonging his childhood, under the
      impression that he was still quite little, retaining the same sensations,
      the same ideas, the same opinions as in the past. At six years old, for
      instance, he had known as much of God as he knew at twenty-five; in prayer
      the inflexions of his voice were still the same, and he yet took a
      childish pleasure in folding his hands quite correctly. The world too
      seemed to him the same as he had seen in former days when his mother led
      him by the hand. He had been born a priest, and a priest he had grown up.
      Whenever he displayed before La Teuse some particularly gross ignorance of
      life, she would stare him in the face, astounded, and remark with a
      strange smile that ‘he was Mademoiselle Desiree’s brother all over.’ 
    

      In all his existence he could only recall one shock of shame. It had
      happened during his last six months at the seminary, between his
      deaconship and priesthood. He had been ordered to read the work of Abbe
      Craisson, the superior of the great seminary at Valence: ‘De rebus
      Veneris ad usum confessariorum.’ And he had risen from this book
      terrified and choking with sobs. That learned casuistry, dealing so fully
      with the abominations of mankind, descending to the most monstrous
      examples of vice, violated, as it were, all his virginity of body and
      mind. He felt himself for ever befouled. Yet every time he heard
      confessions he inevitably recurred to that catechism of shame. And though
      the obscurities of dogma, the duties of his ministry, and the death of all
      free will within him left him calm and happy at being nought but the child
      of God, he retained, in spite of himself, a carnal taint of the horrors he
      must needs stir up; he was conscious of an ineffaceable stain, deep down
      somewhere in his being, which might some day grow larger and cover him
      with mud.
    

      The moon was rising behind the Garrigue hills. Abbe Mouret, still more and
      more feverish, opened the window and leaned out upon his elbows, that he
      might feel upon his face the coolness of the night. He could no longer
      remember at what time exactly this illness had come upon him. He
      recollected, however, that in the morning, while saying mass, he had been
      quite calm and restful. It must have been later, perhaps during his long
      walk in the sun, or while he shivered under the trees of the Paradou, or
      while stifling in Desiree’s poultry-yard. And then he lived through the
      day again.
    

      Before him stretched the vast plain, more direful still beneath the pallid
      light of the oblique moonbeams. The olive and almond trees showed like
      grey spots amid the chaos of rocks spreading to the sombre row of hills on
      the horizon. There were big splotches of gloom, bumpy ridges, blood-hued
      earthy pools in which red stars seemed to contemplate one another, patches
      of chalky light, suggestive of women’s garments cast off and disclosing
      shadowy forms which slumbered in the hollow folds of ground. At night that
      glowing landscape weltered there strangely, passionately, slumbering with
      uncovered bosom, and outspread twisted limbs, whilst heaving mighty sighs,
      and exhaling the strong aroma of a sweating sleeper. It was as if some
      mighty Cybele had fallen there beneath the moon, intoxicated with the
      embraces of the sun. Far away, Abbe Mouret’s eyes followed the path to Les
      Olivettes, a narrow pale ribbon stretching along like a wavy stay-lace. He
      could hear Brother Archangias whipping the truant schoolgirls, and
      spitting in the faces of their elder sisters. He could see Rosalie slyly
      laughing in her hands while old Bambousse hurled clods of earth after her
      and smote her on her hips. Then, too, he thought, he had still been well,
      his neck barely heated by the lovely morning sunshine. He had felt but a
      quivering behind him, that confused hum of life, which he had faintly
      heard since morning when the sun, in the midst of his mass, had entered
      the church by the shattered windows. Never, then, had the country
      disturbed him, as it did at this hour of night, with its giant bosom, its
      yielding shadows, its gleams of ambery skin, its lavish goddess-like
      nudity, scarce hidden by the silvery gauze of moonlight.
    

      The young priest lowered his eyes, and gazed upon the village of Les
      Artaud. It had sunk into the heavy slumber of weariness, the soundness of
      peasants’ sleep. Not a light: the battered hovels showed like dusky mounds
      intersected by the white stripes of cross lanes which the moonbeams swept.
      Even the dogs were surely snoring on the thresholds of the closed doors.
      Had the Artauds poisoned the air of the parsonage with some abominable
      plague? Behind him gathered and swept the gust whose approach filled him
      with so much anguish. Now he could detect a sound like the tramping of a
      flock, a whiff of dusty air, which reached him laden with the emanations
      of beasts. Again came back his thoughts of a handful of men beginning the
      centuries over again, springing up between those naked rocks like thistles
      sown by the winds. In his childhood nothing had amazed and frightened him
      more than those myriads of insects which gushed forth when he raised
      certain damp stones. The Artauds disturbed him even in their slumber; he
      could recognise their breath in the air he inhaled. He would have liked to
      have had the rocks alone below his window. The hamlet was not dead enough;
      the thatched roofs bulged like bosoms; through the gaping cracks in the
      doors came low faint sounds which spoke of all the swarming life within.
      Nausea came upon him. Yet he had often faced it all without feeling any
      other need than that of refreshing himself in prayer.
    

      His brow perspiring, he proceeded to open the other window, as if to seek
      cooler air. Below him, to his left, lay the graveyard with the Solitaire
      erect like a bar, unstirred by the faintest breeze. From the empty field
      arose an odour like that of a newly mown meadow. The grey wall of the
      church, that wall full of lizards and planted with wall-flowers, gleamed
      coldly in the moonlight, and the panes of one of the windows glistened
      like plates of steel. The sleeping church could now have no other life
      within it than the extra-human life of the Divinity embodied in the Host
      enclosed in the tabernacle. He thought of the bracket lamp’s yellow glow
      peeping out of the gloom, and was tempted to go down once more to try to
      ease his ailing head amid those deep shadows. But a strange feeling of
      terror held him back; he suddenly fancied, while his eyes were fixed upon
      the moonlit panes, that he saw the church illumined by a furnace-like
      glare, the blaze of a festival of hell, in which whirled the Month of May,
      the plants, the animals, and the girls of Les Artaud, who wildly encircled
      trees with their bare arms. Then, as he leaned over, he saw beneath him
      Desiree’s poultry-yard, black and steaming. He could not clearly
      distinguish the rabbit-hutches, the fowls’ roosting-places, or the ducks’ 
      house. The place was all one big mass heaped up in stench, still exhaling
      in its sleep a pestiferous odour. From under the stable-door came the
      acrid smell of the nanny-goat; while the little pig, stretched upon his
      back, snorted near an empty porringer. And suddenly with his brazen throat
      Alexander, the big yellow cock, raised a crow, which awoke in the distance
      impassioned calls from all the cocks of the village.
    

      Then all at once Abbe Mouret remembered: The fever had struck him in
      Desiree’s farmyard, while he was looking at the hens still warm from
      laying, the rabbit-does plucking the down from under them. And now the
      feeling that some one was breathing on his neck became so distinct that he
      turned at last to see who was behind him. And then he recalled Albine
      bounding out of the Paradou, and the door slamming upon the vision of an
      enchanted garden; he recalled the girl racing alongside the interminable
      wall, following the gig at a run, and throwing birch leaves to the breeze
      as kisses; he recalled her, again, in the twilight, laughing at the oaths
      of Brother Archangias, her skirts skimming over the path like a cloudlet
      of dust bowled along by the evening breeze. She was sixteen; how strange
      she looked, with her rather elongated face! she savoured of the open air,
      of the grass, of mother earth. And so accurate was his recollection of her
      that he could once more see a scratch upon one of her supple wrists, a
      rosy scar on her white skin. Why did she laugh like that when she looked
      at him with her blue eyes? He was engulfed in her laugh as in a sonorous
      wave which resounded and pressed close to him on every side; he inhaled
      it, he felt it vibrate within him. Yes, all his evil came from that laugh
      of hers which he had quaffed.
    

      Standing in the middle of the room, with both windows open, he remained
      shivering, seized with a fright which made him hide his face in his hands.
      So this was the ending of the whole day; this evocation of a fair girl,
      with a somewhat long face and eyes of blue. And the whole day came in
      through the open windows. In the distance—the glow of those red
      lands, the ardent passion of the big rocks, of the olive-trees springing
      up amid the stones, of the vines twisting their arms by the roadside.
      Nearer—the steam of human sweat borne in upon the air from Les
      Artaud, the musty odour of the cemetery, the fragrance of incense from the
      church, tainted by the scent of greasy-haired wenches. And there was also
      the steaming muck-heap, the fumes of the poultry-yard, the oppressing
      ferment of animal germs. And all these vapours poured in at once, in one
      asphyxiating gust, so offensive, so violent, as to choke him. He tried to
      close his senses, to subdue and annihilate them. But Albine reappeared
      before him like a tall flower that had sprung and grown beautiful in that
      soil. She was the natural blossom of that corruption, delicate in the
      sunshine, her white shoulders expanding in youthfulness, her whole being
      so fraught with the gladness of life, that she leaped from her stem and
      darted upon his mouth, scenting him with her long ripple of laughter.
    

      A cry burst from the priest. He had felt a burning touch upon his lips. A
      stream as of fire coursed through his veins. And then, in search of
      refuge, he threw himself on his knees before the statuette of the
      Immaculate Conception, exclaiming, with folded hands:
    

      ‘Holy Virgin of Virgins, pray for me!’ 
    

      
 
    

      The Immaculate Conception, set on the walnut chest of drawers, was smiling
      softly, with her slender lips, marked by a dash of carmine. Her form was
      small and wholly white. Her long white veil, falling from head to foot,
      had but an imperceptible thread of gold around its edge. Her gown, draped
      in long straight folds over a sexless figure, was fastened around her
      flexible neck. Not a single lock of her chestnut hair peeped forth. Her
      countenance was rosy, with clear eyes upturned to heaven: her hands were
      clasped—rosy, childlike hands, whose finger-tips appeared beneath
      the folds of her veil, above the azure scarf which seemed to girdle her
      waist with two streaming ends of the firmament. Of all her womanly charms
      not one was bared, except her feet, adorable feet which trod the mystical
      eglantine. And from those nude feet sprang golden roses, like the natural
      efflorescence of her twofold purity of flesh.
    

      ‘Virgin most faithful, pray for me,’ the priest despairingly pleaded.
    

      This Virgin had never distressed him. She was not a mother yet; she did
      not offer Jesus to him, her figure did not yet present the rounded
      outlines of maternity. She was not the Queen of Heaven descending, crowned
      with gold and clothed in gold like a princess of the earth, borne in
      triumph by a flight of cherubim. She had never assumed an awesome mien;
      had never spoken to him with the austere severity of an all-powerful
      mistress, the very sight of whom must bow all foreheads to the dust. He
      could dare to look on her and love her, without fear of being moved by the
      gentle wave of her chestnut hair; her bare feet alone excited his
      affection, those feet of love which blossomed like a garden of chastity in
      too miraculous a manner for him to seek to cover them with kisses. She
      scented his room with lily-like fragrance. She was indeed the silver lily
      planted in a golden vase, she was precious, eternal, impeccable purity.
      Within the white veil, so closely drawn round her, there could be nothing
      human—only a virgin flame, burning with ever even glow. At night
      when he went to bed, in the morning when he woke, he could see her there,
      still and ever wearing that same ecstatic smile.
    

      ‘Mother most pure, Mother most chaste, Mother ever-virgin, pray for me!’ 
      he stammered in his fear, pressing close to the Virgin’s feet, as if he
      could hear Albine’s sonorous footfalls behind him. ‘You are my refuge, the
      source of my joy, the seat of my wisdom, the tower of ivory in which I
      have shut up my purity. I place myself in your spotless hands, I beseech
      you to take me, to cover me with a corner of your veil, to hide me beneath
      your innocence, behind the hallowed rampart of your garment—so that
      no fleshly breath may reach me. I need you, I die without you, I shall
      feel for ever parted from you, if you do not bear me away in your helpful
      arms, far hence into the glowing whiteness wherein you dwell. O Mary,
      conceived without sin, annihilate me in the depths of the immaculate snow
      that falls from your every limb. You are the miracle of eternal chastity.
      Your race has sprung from a very beam of grace, like some wondrous tree
      unsown by any germ. Your son, Jesus, was born of the breath of God; you
      yourself were born without defilement of your mother’s womb, and I would
      believe that this virginity goes back thus from age to age in endless
      unwittingness of flesh. Oh! to live, to grow up outside the pale of the
      senses! Oh! to perpetuate life solely by the contact of a celestial kiss!’ 
    

      This despairing appeal, this cry of purified longing, calmed the young
      priest’s fears. The Virgin—wholly white, with eyes turned
      heavenward, appeared to smile more tenderly with her thin red lips. And in
      a softened voice he went on:
    

      ‘I should like to be a child once more. I should like to be always a
      child, walking in the shadow of your gown. When I was quite little, I
      clasped my hands when I uttered the name of Mary. My cradle was white, my
      body was white, my every thought was white. I could see you distinctly, I
      could hear you calling me, I went towards you in the light of a smile over
      scattered rose-petals. And nought else did I feel or think, I lived but
      just enough to be a flower at your feet. No one should grow up. You would
      have around you none but fair young heads, a crowd of children who would
      love you with pure hands, unsullied lips, tender limbs, stainless as if
      fresh from a bath of milk. To kiss a child’s cheek is to kiss its soul. A
      child alone can say your name without befouling it. In later years our
      lips grow tainted and reek of our passions. Even I, who love you so much,
      and have given myself to you, I dare not at all times call on you, for I
      would not let you come in contact with the impurities of my manhood. I
      have prayed and chastised my flesh, I have slept in your keeping, and
      lived in chastity; and yet I weep to see that I am not yet dead enough to
      this world to be your betrothed. O Mary! adorable Virgin, why can I not be
      only five years old—why could I not remain the child who pressed his
      lips to your pictures? I would take you to my heart, I would lay you by my
      side, I would clasp and kiss you like a friend—like a girl of my own
      age. Your close hanging garments, your childish veil, your blue scarf—all
      that youthfulness which makes you like an elder sister would be mine. I
      would not try to kiss your locks, for hair is a naked thing which should
      not be seen; but I would kiss your bare feet, one after the other, for
      nights and nights together, until my lips should have shred the petals of
      those golden roses, those mystical roses of our veins.’ 
    

      He stopped, waiting for the Virgin to look down upon him and touch his
      forehead with the edges of her veil. But she remained enwrapped in muslin
      to her neck and finger-nails and ankles, so slim, so etherealised, that
      she already seemed to be above earth, to be wholly heaven’s own.
    

      ‘Well, then,’ he went on more wildly still, ‘grant that I become a child
      again, O kindly Virgin! Virgin most powerful. Grant that I may be only
      five years old. Rid me of my senses, rid me of my manhood. Let a miracle
      sweep away all the man that has grown up within me. You reign in heaven,
      nothing is easier to you than to change me, to rid me of all my strength
      so that evermore I may be unable to raise my little finger without your
      leave. I wish never more to feel either nerve, or muscle, or the beating
      of my heart. I long to be simply a thing—a white stone at your feet,
      on which you will leave but a perfume; a stone that will not move from
      where you cast it, but will remain earless and eyeless, content to lie
      beneath your heel, unable to think of foulness! Oh! then what bliss for
      me! I shall reach without an effort and at a bound my dream of perfection.
      I shall at last proclaim myself your true priest. I shall become what all
      my studies, my prayers, my five years of initiation have been unable to
      make me. Yes, I reject life; I say that the death of mankind is better
      than abomination. Everything is stained; everywhere is love tainted. Earth
      is steeped in impurity, whose slightest drops yield growths of shame. But
      that I may be perfect, O Queen of angels, hearken to my prayer, and grant
      it! Make me one of those angels that have only two great wings behind
      their cheeks; I shall then no longer have a body, no longer have any
      limbs; I will fly to you if you call me. I shall be but a mouth to sing
      your praises, a pair of spotless wings to cradle you in your journeys
      through the heavens. O death! death! Virgin, most venerable, grant me the
      death of all! I will love you for the death of my body, the death of all
      that lives and multiplies. I will consummate with you the sole marriage
      that my heart desires. I will ascend, ever higher and higher, till I have
      reached the brasier in which you shine in splendour. There one beholds a
      mighty planet, an immense white rose, whose every petal glows like a moon,
      a silver throne whence you beam with such a blaze of innocence that heaven
      itself is all illumined by the gleam of your veil alone. All that is
      white, the early dawns, the snow on inaccessible peaks, the lilies barely
      opening, the water of hidden, unknown springs, the milky sap of the plants
      untouched by the sun, the smiles of maidens, the souls of children dead in
      their cradles—all rains upon your white feet. And I will rise to
      your mouth like a subtle flame; I will enter into you by your parted lips,
      and the bridal will be fulfilled, while the archangels are thrilled by our
      joyfulness. Oh, to be maiden, to love in maidenhood, to preserve amid the
      sweetest kisses one’s maiden whiteness! To possess all love, stretched on
      the wings of swans, in a sky of purity, in the arms of a mistress of
      light, whose caresses are but raptures of the soul! Oh, there lies the
      perfection, the super-human dream, the yearning which shatters my very
      bones, the joy which bears me up to heaven! O Mary, Vessel of Election,
      rid me of all that is human in me, so that you may fearlessly surrender to
      me the treasure of your maidenhood!’ 
    

      And then Abbe Mouret, felled by fever, his teeth chattering, swooned away
      on the floor.
    

      
 

 
    

      Through calico curtains, carefully drawn across the two large windows, a
      pale white light like that of breaking day filtered into the room. It was
      a lofty and spacious room, fitted up with old Louis XV. furniture, the
      woodwork painted white, the upholstery showing a pattern of red flowers on
      a leafy ground. On the piers above the doors on either side of the alcove
      were faded paintings still displaying the rosy flesh of flying Cupids,
      whose games it was now impossible to follow. The wainscoting with oval
      panels, the folding doors, the rounded ceiling (once sky-blue and framed
      with scrolls, medallions, and bows of flesh-coloured ribbons), had all
      faded to the softest grey. Opposite the windows the large alcove opened
      beneath banks of clouds which plaster Cupids drew aside, leaning over, and
      peeping saucily towards the bed. And like the windows, the alcove was
      curtained with coarsely hemmed calico, whose simplicity seemed strange in
      this room where lingered a perfume of whilom luxury and voluptuousness.
    

      Seated near a pier table, on which a little kettle bubbled over a
      spirit-lamp, Albine intently watched the alcove curtains. She was gowned
      in white, her hair gathered up in an old lace kerchief, her hands drooping
      wearily, as she kept watch with the serious mien of youthful womanhood. A
      faint breathing, like that of a slumbering child, could be heard in the
      deep silence. But she grew restless after a few minutes, and could not
      restrain herself from stepping lightly towards the alcove and raising one
      of the curtains. On the edge of the big bed lay Serge, apparently asleep,
      with his head resting on his bent arm. During his illness his hair had
      lengthened, and his beard had grown. He looked very white, with sunken
      eyes and pallid lips.
    

      Moved by the sight Albine was about to let the curtain fall again. But
      Serge faintly murmured, ‘I am not asleep.’ 
    

      He lay perfectly still with his head on his arm, without stirring even a
      finger, as if overwhelmed by delightful weariness. His eyes had slowly
      opened, and his breath blew lightly on one of his hands, raising the
      golden down on his fair skin.
    

      ‘I heard you,’ he murmured again. ‘You were walking very gently.‘*
    

  * From this point in the original Serge and Albine thee and thou
    one another; but although this tutoiement has some bearing on
    the development of the story, it was impossible to preserve it
    in an English translation.—ED.

    
      His voice enchanted her. She went up to his bed and crouched beside it to
      bring her face on a level with his own. ‘How are you?’ she asked, and then
      continued: ‘Oh! you are well now. Do you know, I used to cry the whole way
      home when I came back from over yonder with bad news of you. They told me
      you were delirious, and that if your dreadful fever did spare your life,
      it would destroy your reason. Oh, didn’t I kiss your uncle Pascal when he
      brought you here to recruit your health!’ 
    

      Then she tucked in his bed-clothes like a young mother.
    

      ‘Those burnt-up rocks over yonder, you see, were no good to you. You need
      trees, and coolness, and quiet. The doctor hasn’t even told a soul that he
      was hiding you away here. That’s a secret between himself and those who
      love you. He thought you were lost. Nobody will ever disturb you, you may
      be sure of that! Uncle Jeanbernat is smoking his pipe by his lettuce bed.
      The others will get news of you on the sly. Even the doctor isn’t coming
      back any more. I am to be your doctor now. You don’t want any more physic,
      it seems. What you now want is to be loved; do you see?’ 
    

      He did not seem to hear her, his brain as yet was void. His eyes, although
      his head remained motionless, wandered inquiringly round the room, and it
      struck her that he was wondering where he might be.
    

      ‘This is my room,’ she said. ‘I have given it to you. Isn’t it a pretty
      one? I took the finest pieces of furniture out of the lumber attic, and
      then I made those calico curtains to prevent the daylight from dazzling
      me. And you’re not putting me out a bit. I shall sleep on the second
      floor. There are three or four empty rooms there.’ 
    

      Still he looked anxious.
    

      ‘You’re alone?’ he asked.
    

      ‘Yes; why do you ask that?’ 
    

      He made no answer, but muttered wearily: ‘I have been dreaming, I am
      always dreaming. I hear bells ringing, and they tire me.’ 
    

      And after a pause he went on: ‘Go and shut the door, bolt it; I want you
      to be alone, quite alone.’ 
    

      When she came back, bringing a chair with her, and sat down by his pillow,
      he looked as gleeful as a child, and kept on saying: ‘Nobody can come in
      now. I shall not hear those bells any more. When you are talking to me, it
      rests me.’ 
    

      ‘Would you like something to drink?’ she asked.
    

      He made a sign that he was not thirsty. He looked at Albine’s hands as if
      so astonished, so delighted to see them, that with a smile she laid one on
      the edge of his pillow. Then he let his head glide down, and rested his
      cheek against that small, cool hand, saying, with a light laugh: ‘Ah! it’s
      as soft as silk. It is just as if it were sending a cool breeze through my
      hair. Don’t take it away, please.’ 
    

      Then came another long spell of silence. They gazed on one another with
      loving kindliness—Albine calmly scanning herself in the
      convalescent’s eyes, Serge apparently listening to some faint whisper from
      the small, cool hand.
    

      ‘Your hand is so nice,’ he said once more. ‘You can’t fancy what good it
      does me. It seems to steal inside me, and take away all the pain in my
      limbs. It’s as if I were being soothed all over, relieved, cured.’ 
    

      He gently rubbed his cheek against it, with growing animation, as if he
      were at last coming back to life.
    

      ‘You won’t give me anything nasty to drink, will you? You won’t worry me
      with all sorts of physic? Your hand is quite enough for me. I have come
      here for you to put it there under my head.’ 
    

      ‘Dear Serge,’ said Albine softly, ‘how you must have suffered.’ 
    

      ‘Suffered! yes, yes; but it’s a long time ago. I slept badly, I had such
      frightful dreams. If I could, I would tell you all about it.’ 
    

      He closed his eyes for a moment and strove hard to remember.
    

      ‘I can see nothing but darkness,’ he stammered. ‘It is very odd, I have
      just come back from a long journey. I don’t even know now where I started
      from. I had fever, I know, a fever that raced through my veins like a wild
      beast. That was it—now I remember. The whole time I had a nightmare,
      in which I seemed to be crawling along an endless underground passage; and
      every now and then I had an attack of intolerable pain, and then the
      passage would be suddenly walled up. A shower of stones fell from
      overhead, the side walls closed in, and there I stuck, panting, mad to get
      on; and then I bored into the obstacle and battered away with feet and
      fists, and skull, despairing of ever being able to get through the ever
      increasing mound of rubbish. At other times, I only had to touch it with
      my finger and it vanished: I could then walk freely along the widened
      gallery, weary only from the pangs of my attack.’ 
    

      Albine tried to lay a hand upon his lips.
    

      ‘No,’ said he, ‘it doesn’t tire me to talk. I can whisper to you here, you
      see. I feel as if I were thinking and you could hear me. The queerest
      point about that underground journey of mine was that I hadn’t the
      faintest idea of turning back again; I got obstinate, although I had the
      thought before me that it would take me thousands of years to clear away a
      single heap of wreckage. It seemed a fated task, which I had to fulfil
      under pain of the greatest misfortunes. So, with my knees all bruised, and
      my forehead bumping against the hard rock, I set myself to work with all
      my might, so that I might get to the end as quickly as possible. The end?
      What was it?... Ah! I do not know, I do not know.’ 
    

      He closed his eyes and pondered dreamily. Then, with a careless pout, he
      again sank upon Albine’s hand and said laughing: ‘How silly of me! I am a
      child.’ 
    

      But the girl, to ascertain if he were wholly hers, questioned him and led
      him back to the confused recollections he had tried to summon up. He could
      remember nothing, however; he was truly in a happy state of childhood. He
      fancied that he had been born the day before.
    

      ‘Oh! I am not strong enough yet,’ he said. ‘My furthest recollection is of
      a bed which burned me all over, my head rolled about on a pillow like a
      pan of live coals, and my feet wore away with perpetual rubbing against
      each other. I was very bad, I know. It seemed as if I were having my body
      changed, as if I were being taken all to pieces, and put together again
      like some broken machine.’ 
    

      He laughed at this simile, and continued: ‘I shall be all new again. My
      illness has given me a fine cleaning. But what was it you were asking me?
      No, nobody was there. I was suffering all by myself at the bottom of a
      black hole. Nobody, nobody. And beyond that, nothing—I can see
      nothing.... Let me be your child, will you? You shall teach me to walk. I
      can see nothing else but you now. I care for nothing but you.... I can’t
      remember, I tell you. I came, you took me, and that is all.’ 
    

      And restfully, pettingly, he said once more: ‘How warm your hand is now!
      it is as nice as the sun. Don’t let us talk any more. It makes me hot.’ 
    

      A quivering silence fell from the blue ceiling of the large room. The
      spirit lamp had just gone out, and from the kettle came a finer and finer
      thread of steam. Albine and Serge, their heads side by side upon the
      pillow, gazed at the large calico curtains drawn across the windows.
      Serge’s eyes, especially, were attracted to them as to the very source of
      light, in which he sought to steep himself, as in diluted sunshine fitted
      to his weakness. He could tell that the sun lay behind that yellower gleam
      upon one corner of the curtain, and that sufficed to make him feel himself
      again. Meanwhile a far-off rustle of leaves came upon his listening ear,
      and against the right-hand window the clean-cut greenish shadow of a lofty
      bough brought him disturbing thoughts of the forest which he could feel to
      be near him.
    

      ‘Would you like me to open the curtains?’ asked Albine, misunderstanding
      his steady gaze.
    

      ‘No, no,’ he hastily replied.
    

      ‘It’s a fine day; you would see the sunlight and the trees.’ 
    

      ‘No, please don’t.... I don’t want to see anything outside. That bough
      there tires me with its waving and its rising, as if it was alive. Leave
      your hand here, I will go to sleep. All is white now. It’s so nice.’ 
    

      And then he calmly fell asleep, while Albine watched beside him and
      breathed upon his face to make his slumber cool.
    

      
 
    

      The fine weather broke up on the morrow, and it rained heavily. Serge’s
      fever returned, and he spent a day of suffering, with his eyes
      despairingly fixed upon the curtains through which the light now fell dim
      and ashy grey as in a cellar. He could no longer see a trace of sunshine,
      and he looked in vain for the shadow that had scared him, the shadow of
      that lofty bough which had disappeared amid the mist and the pouring rain,
      and seemed to have carried away with it the whole forest. Towards evening
      he became slightly delirious and cried out to Albine that the sun was
      dead, that he could hear all the sky, all the country bewailing the death
      of the sun. She had to soothe him like a child, promising him the sun,
      telling him that it would come back again, that she would give it to him.
      But he also grieved for the plants. The seeds, he said, must be suffering
      underground, waiting for the return of light; they had nightmares, they
      also dreamed that they were crawling along an underground passage,
      hindered by mounds of ruins, struggling madly to reach the sunshine. And
      he began to weep and sob out in low tones that winter was a disease of the
      earth, and that he should die with the earth, unless the springtide healed
      them both.
    

      For three days more the weather was truly frightful. The downpour burst
      over the trees with the awful clamour of an overflowing river. Gusts of
      wind rolled by and beat against the windows with the violence of enormous
      waves. Serge had insisted on Albine closing the shutters. By lamplight he
      was no longer troubled by the gloom of the pallid curtains, he no longer
      felt the greyness of the sky glide in through the smallest chinks, and
      flow up to him like a cloud of dust intent on burying him. However,
      increasing apathy crept upon him as he lay there with shrunken arms and
      pallid features; his weakness augmented as the earth grew more ailing. At
      times, when the clouds were inky black, when the bending trees cracked,
      and the grass lay limp beneath the downpour like the hair of a drowned
      woman, he all but ceased to breathe, and seemed to be passing away,
      shattered by the hurricane. But at the first gleam of light, at the
      tiniest speck of blue between two clouds, he breathed once more and drank
      in the soothing calm of the drying leaves, the whitening paths, the fields
      quaffing their last draught of water. Albine now also longed for the sun;
      twenty times a day would she go to the window on the landing to scan the
      sky, delighted at the smallest scrap of white that she espied, but
      perturbed when she perceived any dusky, copper-tinted, hail-laden masses,
      and ever dreading lest some sable cloud should kill her dear patient. She
      talked of sending for Doctor Pascal, but Serge would not have it.
    

      ‘To-morrow there will be sunlight on the curtains,’ he said, ‘and then I
      shall be well again.’ 
    

      One evening when his condition was most alarming, Albine again gave him
      her hand to rest his cheek upon. But when she saw that it brought him no
      relief she wept to find herself powerless. Since he had fallen into the
      lethargy of winter she had felt too weak to drag him unaided from the
      nightmare in which he was struggling. She needed the assistance of spring.
      She herself was fading away, her arms grew cold, her breath scant; she no
      longer knew how to breathe life into him. For hours together she would
      roam about the spacious dismal room, and as she passed before the mirror
      and saw herself darkening in it, she thought she had become hideous.
    

      One morning, however, as she raised his pillows, not daring to try again
      the broken spell of her hands, she fancied that she once more caught the
      first day’s smile on Serge’s lips.
    

      ‘Open the shutters,’ he said faintly.
    

      She thought him still delirious, for only an hour previously she had seen
      but a gloomy sky on looking out from the landing.
    

      ‘Hush, go to sleep,’ she answered sadly; ‘I have promised to wake you at
      the very first ray—— Sleep on, there’s no sun out yet.’ 
    

      ‘Yes, I can feel it, its light is there.... Open the shutters.’ 
    

      
 
    

      And there, indeed, the sunlight was. When Albine had opened the shutters,
      behind the large curtains, the genial yellow glow once more warmed a patch
      of the white calico. But that which impelled Serge to sit up in bed was
      the sight of the shadowy bough, the branch that for him heralded the
      return of life. All the resuscitated earth, with its wealth of greenery,
      its waters, and its belts of hills, was in that greenish blur that
      quivered with the faintest breath of air. It no longer disturbed him; he
      greedily watched it rocking, and hungered for the fortified powers of the
      vivifying sap which to him it symbolised. Albine, happy once more,
      exclaimed, as she supported him in her arms: ‘Ah! my dear Serge, the
      winter is over. Now we are saved.’ 
    

      He lay down again, his eyes already brighter, and his voice clearer.
      ‘To-morrow I shall be very strong,’ he said. ‘You shall draw back the
      curtains. I want to see everything.’ 
    

      But on the morrow he was seized with childish fear. He would not hear of
      the windows being opened wide. ‘By-and-by,’ he muttered, ‘later on.’ He
      was fearful, he dreaded the first beam of light that would flash upon his
      eyes. Evening came on, and still he had been unable to make up his mind to
      look upon the sun. He remained thus all day long, his face turned towards
      the curtains, watching on their transparent tissue the pallor of morn, the
      glow of noon, the violet tint of twilight, all the hues, all the emotions
      of the sky. There were pictured even the quiverings of the warm air at the
      light stroke of a bird’s wing, even the delight of earth’s odours
      throbbing in a sunbeam. Behind that veil, behind that softened phantasm of
      the mighty life without, he could hear the rise of spring. He even felt
      stifled at times when in spite of the curtains’ barrier the rush of the
      earth’s new blood came upon him too strongly.
    

      The following morning he was still asleep when Albine, to hasten his
      recovery, cried out to him:
    

      ‘Serge! Serge! here’s the sun!’ 
    

      She swiftly drew back the curtains and threw the windows wide open. He
      raised himself and knelt upon his bed, oppressed, swooning, his hands
      tightly pressed against his breast to keep his heart from breaking. Before
      him stretched the broad sky, all blue, a boundless blue; and in it he
      washed away his sufferings, surrendering himself to it, and drinking from
      it sweetness and purity and youth. The bough whose shadow he had noted
      jutted across the window and alone set against the azure sea its vigorous
      growth of green; but even this was too much for his sickly fastidiousness;
      it seemed to him that the very swallows flying past besmeared the purity
      of the azure. He was being born anew. He raised little involuntary cries,
      as he felt himself flooded with light, assailed by waves of warm air,
      while a whirling, whelming torrent of life flowed within him. As last with
      outstretched hands he sank back upon his pillow in a swoon of joy.
    

      What a happy, delicious day that was! The sun came in from the right, far
      away from the alcove. Throughout the morning Serge watched it creeping
      onward. He could see it coming towards him, yellow as gold, perching here
      and there on the old furniture, frolicking in corners, at times gliding
      along the ground like a strip of ribbon. It was a slow deliberate march,
      the approach of a fond mistress stretching her golden limbs, drawing nigh
      to the alcove with rhythmic motion, with voluptuous lingering, which
      roused intense desire. At length, towards two o’clock, the sheet of
      sunlight left the last armchair, climbed along the coverlet, and spread
      over the bed like loosened locks of hair. To its glowing fondling Serge
      surrendered his wasted hands: with his eyes half-closed, he could feel
      fiery kisses thrilling each of his fingers; he lay in a bath of light, in
      the embrace of a glowing orb. And when Albine leaned over smiling, ‘Let me
      be,’ he stammered, his eyes now shut; ‘don’t hold me so tightly. How do
      you manage to hold me like this in your arms?’ 
    

      But the sun crept down the bed again and slowly retreated to the left; and
      as Serge watched it bend once more and settle on chair after chair, he
      bitterly regretted that he had not kept it to his breast. Albine still sat
      upon the side of the bed, and the pair of them, an arm round each other’s
      neck, watched the slow paling of the sky. At times a mighty thrill seemed
      to make it blanch. Serge’s languid eyes now wandered over it more freely
      and detected in it exquisite tints of which he had never dreamed. It was
      not all blue, but rosy blue, lilac blue, tawny blue, living flesh, vast
      and spotless nudity heaving like a woman’s bosom in the breeze. At every
      glance into space he found a fresh surprise—unknown nooks, coy
      smiles, bewitching rounded outlines, gauzy veils which were cast over the
      mighty, glorious forms of goddesses in the depths of peeping paradises.
      And with his limbs lightened by suffering he winged his way amid that
      shimmering silk, that stainless down of azure. The sun sank lower and
      lower, the blue melted into purest gold, the sky’s living flesh gleamed
      fairer still, and then was slowly steeped in all the hues of gloom. Not a
      cloud—nought but gradual disappearance, a disrobing which left
      behind it but a gleam of modesty on the horizon. And at last the broad sky
      slumbered.
    

      ‘Oh, the dear baby!’ exclaimed Albine, as she looked at Serge, who had
      fallen asleep upon her neck at the same time as the heavens.
    

      She laid him down in bed and shut the windows. Next morning, however, they
      were opened at break of day. Serge could no longer live without the
      sunlight. His strength was growing, he was becoming accustomed to the
      gusts of air which sent the alcove curtains flying. Even the azure, the
      everlasting azure, began to pall upon him. He grew weary of being white
      and swanlike, of ever swimming on heaven’s limpid lake. He came to wish
      for a pack of black clouds, some crumbling of the skies, that would break
      upon the monotony of all that purity. And as his health returned, he
      hungered for keener sensations. He now spent hours in gazing at the
      verdant bough: he would have liked to see it grow, expand, and throw out
      its branches to his very bed. It no longer satisfied him, but only roused
      desires, speaking to him as it did of all the trees whose deep-sounding
      call he could hear although their crests were hidden from his sight. An
      endless whispering of leaves, a chattering as of running water, a
      fluttering as of wings, all blended in one mighty, long-drawn, quivering
      voice, resounded in his ears.
    

      ‘When you are able to get up,’ said Albine, ‘you shall sit at the window.
      You will see the lovely garden!’ 
    

      He closed his eyes and murmured gently:
    

      ‘Oh! I can see it, I hear it; I know where the trees are, where the water
      runs, where the violets grow.’ 
    

      And then he added: ‘But I can’t see it clearly, I see it without any
      light. I must be very strong before I shall be able to get as far as the
      window.’ 
    

      At times when Albine thought him asleep, she would vanish for hours. And
      on coming in again, she would find him burning with impatience, his eyes
      gleaming with curiosity.
    

      ‘Where have you been?’ he would call to her, taking hold of her arms, and
      feeling her skirts, her bodice, and her cheeks. ‘You smell of all sorts of
      nice things. Ah! you have been walking on the grass?’ 
    

      At this she would laugh and show him her shoes wet with dew.
    

      ‘You have been in the garden! you have been in the garden!’ he then
      exclaimed delightedly. ‘I knew it. When you came in you seemed like a
      large flower. You have brought the whole garden in your skirt.’ 
    

      He would keep her by him, inhaling her like a nosegay. Sometimes she came
      back with briars, leaves, or bits of wood entangled in her clothes. These
      he would remove and hide under his pillow like relics. One day she brought
      him a bunch of roses. At the sight of them he was so affected that he
      wept. He kissed them and went to sleep with them in his arms. But when
      they faded, he felt so keenly grieved that he forbade Albine to gather any
      more. He preferred her, said he, for she was as fresh and as balmy; and
      she never faded, her hands, her hair, her cheeks were always fragrant. At
      last he himself would send her into the garden, telling her not to come
      back before an hour.
    

      ‘In that way,’ he said, ‘I shall get sunlight, fresh air, and roses till
      to-morrow.’ 
    

      Often, when he saw her coming in out of breath, he would cross-examine
      her. Which path had she taken? Had she wandered among the trees, or had
      she gone round the meadow side? Had she seen any nests? Had she sat down
      behind a bush of sweetbriar, or under an oak, or in the shade of a clump
      of poplars? But when she answered him and tried to describe the garden to
      him, he would put his hand to her lips.
    

      ‘No, no,’ he said gently. ‘It is wrong of me. I don’t want to know. I
      would rather see it myself.’ 
    

      Then he would relapse into his favourite dream of all the greenery which
      he could feel only a step away. For several days he lived on that dream
      alone. At first, he said, he had perceived the garden much more
      distinctly. As he gained strength, the surging blood that warmed his veins
      seemed to blur his dreamy imaginings. His uncertainties multiplied. He
      could no longer tell whether the trees were on the right, whether the
      water flowed at the bottom of the garden, or whether some great rocks were
      not piled below his windows. He talked softly of all this to himself. On
      the slightest indication he would rear wondrous plans, which the song of a
      bird, the creaking of a bough, the scent of a flower, would suddenly make
      him modify, impelling him to plant a thicket of lilac in one spot, and in
      another to place flower-beds where formerly there had been a lawn. Every
      hour he designed some new garden, much to the amusement of Albine, who,
      whenever she surprised him at it, would exclaim with a burst of laughter:
      ‘That’s not it, I assure you. You can’t have any idea of it. It’s more
      beautiful than all the beautiful things you ever saw. So don’t go racking
      your head about it. The garden’s mine, and I will give it to you. Be easy,
      it won’t run away.’ 
    

      Serge, who had already been so afraid of the light, felt considerable
      trepidation when he found himself strong enough to go and rest his elbows
      on the window-sill. Every evening he once more repeated, ‘To-morrow,’ and
      ‘To-morrow.’ He would turn away in his bed with a shudder when Albine came
      in, and would cry out that she smelt of hawthorn, that she had scratched
      her hands in burrowing a hole through a hedge to bring him all its odour.
      One morning, however, she suddenly took him up in her arms, and almost
      carrying him to the window, held him there and forced him to look out and
      see.
    

      ‘What a coward you are!’ she exclaimed with her fine ringing laugh.
    

      And waving one hand all round the landscape, she repeated with an air of
      triumph, full of tender promise: ‘The Paradou! The Paradou!’ 
    

      Serge looked out upon it, speechless.
    

      
 
    

      A sea of verdure, in front, to right, to left, everywhere. A sea rolling
      its surging billows of leaves as far as the horizon, unhindered by house,
      or screen of wall, or dusty road. A desert, virgin, hallowed sea,
      displaying its wild sweetness in the innocence of solitude. The sun alone
      came thither, weltering in the meadows in a sheet of gold, threading the
      paths with the frolicsome scamper of its beams, letting its fine-spun,
      flaming locks droop through the trees, sipping from the springs with amber
      lips that thrilled the water. Beneath that flaming dust the vast garden
      ran riot like some delighted beast let loose at the world’s very end, far
      from everything and free from everything. So prodigal was the luxuriance
      of foliage, so overflowing the tide of herbage, that from end to end it
      all seemed hidden, flooded, submerged. Nought could be seen but slopes of
      green, stems springing up like fountains, billowy masses, woodland
      curtains closely drawn, mantles of creepers trailing over the ground, and
      flights of giant boughs swooping down upon every side.
    

      Amidst that tremendous luxuriance of vegetation even lengthy scrutiny
      could barely make out the bygone plan of the Paradou. In the foreground,
      in a sort of immense amphitheatre, must have lain the flower garden, whose
      fountains were now sunken and dry, its stone balustrades shattered, its
      flight of steps all warped, and its statues overthrown, patches of their
      whiteness gleaming amidst the dusky stretches of turf. Farther back,
      behind the blue line of a sheet of water, stretched a maze of fruit-trees;
      farther still rose towering woodland, its dusky, violet depths streaked
      with bands of light. It was a forest which had regained virginity, an
      endless stretch of tree-tops rising one above the other, tinged with
      yellowish green and pale green and vivid green, according to the variety
      of the species.
    

      On the right, the forest scaled some hills, dotting them with little
      clumps of pine-trees, and dying away in straggling brushwood, while a huge
      barrier of barren rock, heaped together like the fallen wreckage of a
      mountain, shut out all view beyond. Flaming growths there cleaved the
      rugged soil, monstrous plants lay motionless in the heat, like drowsing
      reptiles; a silvery streak, a foamy splash that glistened in the distance
      like a cloud of pearls, revealed the presence of a waterfall, the source
      of those tranquil streams that lazily skirted the flower-garden. Lastly,
      on the left the river flowed through a vast stretch of meadowland, where
      it parted into four streamlets which winded fitfully beneath the rushes,
      between the willows, behind the taller trees. And far away into the
      distance grassy patches prolonged the lowland freshness, forming a
      landscape steeped in bluish haze, where a gleam of daylight slowly melted
      into the verdant blue of sunset. The Paradou—its flower-garden,
      forest, rocks, streams, and meadows—filled the whole breadth of sky.
    

      ‘The Paradou!’ stammered Serge, stretching out his arms as if to clasp the
      entire garden to his breast.
    

      He tottered, and Albine had to seat him in an armchair. There he sat for
      two whole hours intently gazing, without opening his lips, his chin
      resting on his hands. At times his eyelids fluttered and a flush rose to
      his cheeks. Slowly he looked, profoundly amazed. It was all too vast, too
      complex, too overpowering.
    

      ‘I cannot see, I cannot understand,’ he cried, stretching out his hands to
      Albine with a gesture of uttermost weariness.
    

      The girl came and leant over the back of his armchair. Taking his head
      between her hands, she compelled him to look again, and softly said:
    

      ‘It’s all our own. Nobody will ever come in. When you are well again, we
      will go for walks there. We shall have room enough for walking all our
      lives. We’ll go wherever you like. Where would you like to go?’ 
    

      He smiled.
    

      ‘Oh! not far,’ he murmured. ‘The first day only two steps or so beyond the
      door. I should surely fall—— See, I’ll go over there, under
      that tree close to the window.’ 
    

      But she resumed: ‘Would you like to go into the flower-garden, the
      parterre? You shall see the roses—they have over-run everything,
      even the old paths are all covered with them. Or would you like the
      orchard better? I can only crawl into it on my hands and knees, the boughs
      are so bowed down with fruit. But we’ll go even farther if you feel strong
      enough. We’ll go as far as the forest, right into the depths of shade,
      far, far away; so far that we’ll sleep out there when night steals over
      us. Or else, some morning, we can climb up yonder to the summit of those
      rocks. You’ll see the plants which make me quake; you’ll see the springs,
      such a shower of water! What fun it will be to feel the spray all over our
      faces!... But if you prefer to walk along the hedges, beside a brook, we
      must go round by the meadows. It is so nice under the willows in the
      evening, at sunset. One can lie down on the grass and watch the little
      green frogs hopping about on the rushes.’ 
    

      ‘No, no,’ said Serge, ‘you weary me, I don’t want to go so far.... I will
      only go a couple of steps, that will be more than enough.’ 
    

      ‘Even I,’ she still continued, ‘even I have not yet been able to go
      everywhere. There are many nooks I don’t know. I have walked and walked in
      it for years, and still I feel sure there are unknown spots around, places
      where the shade must be cooler and the turf softer. Listen, I have always
      fancied there must be one especially in which I should like to live for
      ever. I know it’s somewhere; I must have passed it by, or perhaps it’s
      hidden so far away that I have never even got as far, with all my rambles.
      But we’ll look for it together, Serge, won’t we? and live there.’ 
    

      ‘No, no, be quiet,’ stammered the young man. ‘I don’t understand what you
      are saying. You’re killing me.’ 
    

      For a moment she let him sob in her arms. It troubled and grieved her that
      she could find no words to soothe him.
    

      ‘Isn’t the Paradou as beautiful, then, as you fancied it?’ she asked at
      last.
    

      He raised his face and answered:
    

      ‘I don’t know. It was quite little, and now it is ever growing bigger and
      bigger—— Take me away, hide me.’ 
    

      She led him back to bed, soothing him like a child, lulling him with a
      fib.
    

      ‘There, there! it’s not true, there is no garden. It was only a story that
      I told you. Go, sleep in peace.’ 
    

      
 
    

      Every day in this wise she made him sit at the window during the cool
      hours of morning. He would now attempt to take a few steps, leaning the
      while on the furniture. A rosy tint appeared upon his cheeks, and his
      hands began to lose their waxy transparency. But, while he thus regained
      health, his senses remained in a state of stupor which reduced him to the
      vegetative life of some poor creature born only the day before. Indeed, he
      was nothing but a plant; his sole perception was that of the air which
      floated round him. He lacked the blood necessary for the efforts of life,
      and remained, as it were, clinging to the soil, imbibing all the sap he
      could. It was like a slow hatching in the warm egg of springtide. Albine,
      remembering certain remarks of Doctor Pascal, felt terrified at seeing him
      remain in this state, ‘innocent,’ dull-witted like a little boy. She had
      heard it said that certain maladies left insanity behind them. And she
      spent hours in gazing at him and trying her utmost, as mothers do, to make
      him smile. But as yet he had not laughed. When she passed her hand across
      his eyes, he never saw, he never followed the shadow. Even when she spoke
      to him, he barely turned his head in the direction whence the sound came.
      She had but one consolation: he thrived splendidly, he was quite a
      handsome child.
    

      For another whole week she lavished the tenderest care on him. She
      patiently waited for him to grow. And as she marked various symptoms of
      awakening perception, her fears subsided and she began to think that time
      might make a man of him. When she touched him now he started slightly.
      Another time, one night, he broke into a feeble laugh. On the morrow, when
      she had seated him at the window, she went down into the garden, and ran
      about in it, calling to him the while. She vanished under the trees,
      flitted across the sunny patches, and came back breathless and clapping
      her hands. At first his wavering eyes failed to perceive her. But as she
      started off again, perpetually playing at hide-and-seek, reappearing
      behind every other bush, he was at last able to follow the white gleam of
      her skirt; and when she suddenly came forward and stood with upraised face
      below his window, he stretched out his arms and seemed anxious to go down
      to her. But she came upstairs again, and embraced him proudly: ‘Ah! you
      saw me, you saw me!’ she cried. ‘You would like to come into the garden
      with me, would you not?—— If you only knew how wretched you
      have made me these last few days, with your stupid ways, never seeing me
      or hearing me!’ 
    

      He listened to her, but apparently with some slight sensation of pain that
      made him bend his neck in a shrinking way.
    

      ‘You are better now, however,’ she went on. ‘Well enough to come down
      whenever you like—— Why don’t you say anything? Have you lost
      your tongue? Oh, what a baby! Why, I shall have to teach him how to talk!’ 
    

      And thereupon she really did amuse herself by telling him the names of the
      things he touched. He could only stammer, reiterating the syllables, and
      failing to utter a single word plainly. However, she began to walk him
      about the room, holding him up and leading him from the bed to the window—quite
      a long journey. Two or three times he almost fell on the way, at which she
      laughed. One day he fairly sat down on the floor, and she had all the
      trouble in the world to get him up on his feet again. Then she made him
      undertake the round of the room, letting him rest by the way on the sofa
      and the chairs—a tour round a little world which took up a good
      hour. At last he was able to venture on a few steps alone. She would stand
      before him with outstretched hands, and move backwards, calling him, so
      that he should cross the room in search of her supporting arms. If he
      sulked and refused to walk, she would take the comb from her hair and hold
      it out to him like a toy. Then he would come to her and sit still in a
      corner for hours, playing with her comb, and gently scratching his hands
      with its teeth.
    

      At last one morning she found him up. He had already succeeded in opening
      one of the shutters, and was attempting to walk about without leaning on
      the furniture.
    

      ‘Good gracious, we are active this morning!’ she exclaimed gleefully.
      ‘Why, he will be jumping out of the window to-morrow if he has his own way——
      So you are quite strong now, eh?’ 
    

      Serge’s answer was a childish laugh. His limbs were regaining the strength
      of adolescence, but more perceptive sensations remained unroused. He spent
      whole afternoons in gazing out on the Paradou, pouting like a child that
      sees nought but whiteness and hears but the vibration of sounds. He still
      retained the ignorance of urchinhood—his sense of touch as yet so
      innocent that he failed to tell Albine’s gown from the covers of the old
      armchairs. His eyes still stared wonderingly; his movements still
      displayed the wavering hesitation of limbs which scarce knew how to reach
      their goal; his state was one of incipient, purely instinctive existence
      into which entered no knowledge of surroundings. The man was not yet born
      within him.
    

      ‘That’s right, you’ll act the silly, will you?’ muttered Albine. ‘We’ll
      see.’ 
    

      She took off her comb, and held it out to him.
    

      ‘Will you have my comb?’ she said. ‘Come and fetch it.’ 
    

      When she had got him out of the room, by retreating before him all the
      way, she put her arm round his waist and helped him down each stair,
      amusing him while she put her comb back, even tickling his neck with a
      lock of her hair, so that he remained unaware that he was going
      downstairs. But when he was in the hall, he became frightened at the
      darkness of the passage.
    

      ‘Just look!’ she cried, throwing the door wide open.
    

      It was like a sudden dawn, a curtain of shadow snatched aside, revealing
      the joyousness of early day. The park spread out before them verdantly
      limpid, freshly cool and deep as a spring. Serge, entranced, lingered upon
      the threshold, with a hesitating desire to feel that luminous lake with
      his foot.
    

      ‘One would think you were afraid of wetting yourself,’ said Albine. ‘Don’t
      be frightened, the ground is safe enough.’ 
    

      He had ventured to take one step, and was astonished at encountering the
      soft resistance of the gravel. The first touch of the soil gave him a
      shock; life seemed to rebound within him and to set him for a moment
      erect, with expanding frame, while he drew long breaths.
    

      ‘Come now, be brave,’ insisted Albine. ‘You know you promised me to take
      five steps. We’ll go as far as the mulberry tree there under the window——
      There you can rest.’ 
    

      It took him a quarter of an hour to make those five steps. After each
      effort he stopped as if he had been obliged to tear up roots that held him
      to the ground.
    

      The girl, pushing him along, said with a laugh: ‘You look just like a
      walking tree.’ 
    

      Having placed him with his back leaning against the mulberry tree, in the
      rain of sunlight falling from its boughs, she bounded off and left him,
      calling out to him that he must not stir. Serge, standing there with
      drooping hands, slowly turned his head towards the park. Terrestrial
      childhood met his gaze. The pale greenery was steeped in the very milk of
      youth, flooded with golden brightness. The trees were still in infancy,
      the flowers were as tender-fleshed as babes, the streams were blue with
      the artless blue of lovely infantile eyes. Beneath every leaf was some
      token of a delightful awakening.
    

      Serge had fixed his eyes upon a yellow breach which a wide path made in
      front of him amidst a dense mass of foliage. At the very end, eastward,
      some meadows, steeped in gold, looked like the luminous field upon which
      the sun would descend, and he waited for the morn to take that path and
      flow towards him. He could feel it coming in a warm breeze, so faint at
      first that it barely brushed across his skin, but rising little by little,
      and growing ever brisker till he was thrilled all over. He could also
      taste it coming with a more and more pronounced savour, bringing the
      healthful acridity of the open air, holding to his lips a feast of sugary
      aromatics, sour fruits, and milky shoots. Further, he could smell it
      coming with the perfumes which it culled upon its way—the scent of
      earth, the scent of the shady woods, the scent of the warm plants, the
      scent of living animals, a whole posy of scents, powerful enough to bring
      on dizziness. He could likewise hear it coming with the rapid flight of a
      bird skimming over the grass, waking the whole garden from silence, giving
      voice to all it touched, and filling his ears with the music of things and
      beings. Finally, he could see it coming from the end of the path, from the
      meadows steeped in gold—yes, he could see that rosy air, so bright
      that it lighted the way it took with a gleaming smile, no bigger in the
      distance than a spot of daylight, but in a few swift bounds transformed
      into the very splendour of the sun. And the morn flowed up and beat
      against the mulberry tree against which Serge was leaning. And he himself
      resuscitated amidst the childhood of the morn.
    

      ‘Serge! Serge!’ cried Albine, lost to sight behind the high shrubs of the
      flower garden. ‘Don’t be afraid, I am here.’ 
    

      But Serge no longer felt frightened. He was being born anew in the
      sunshine, in that pure bath of light which streamed upon him. He was being
      born anew at five-and-twenty, his senses hurriedly unclosing, enraptured
      with the mighty sky, the joyful earth, the prodigy of loveliness spread
      out around him. This garden, which he knew not only the day before, now
      afforded him boundless delight. Everything filled him with ecstasy, even
      the blades of grass, the pebbles in the paths, the invisible puffs of air
      that flitted over his cheeks. His whole body entered into possession of
      this stretch of nature; he embraced it with his limbs, he drank it in with
      his lips, he inhaled it with his nostrils, he carried it in his ears and
      hid it in the depths of his eyes. It was his own. The roses of the flower
      garden, the lofty boughs of the forest, the resounding rocks of the
      waterfall, the meadows which the sun planted with blades of light, were
      his. Then he closed his eyes and slowly reopened them that he might enjoy
      the dazzle of a second wakening.
    

      ‘The birds have eaten all the strawberries,’ said Albine disconsolately,
      as she ran up to him. ‘See, I have only been able to find these two!’ 
    

      But she stopped short a few steps away, heart-struck and gazing at Serge
      with rapturous astonishment. ‘How handsome you are!’ she cried.
    

      She drew a little nearer; then stood there, absorbed in her contemplation,
      and murmuring: ‘I had never, never seen you before.’ 
    

      He had certainly grown taller. Clothed in a loose garment, he stood erect,
      still somewhat slender, with finely moulded limbs, square chest, and
      rounded shoulders. His head, slightly thrown back, was poised upon a
      flexible and snowy neck, rimmed with brown behind. Health and strength and
      power were on his face. He did not smile, his expression was that of
      repose, with grave and tender mouth, firm cheeks, large nose, and grey,
      clear, commanding eyes. The long locks that thickly covered his head fell
      upon his shoulders in jetty curls; while a slender growth of hair, through
      which gleamed his white skin, curled upon his upper lip and chin.
    

      ‘Oh! how handsome, how handsome you are!’ lingeringly repeated Albine,
      crouching at his feet and gazing up at him with loving eyes. ‘But why are
      you sulking with me? Why don’t you speak to me?’ 
    

      Still he stood there and made no answer. His eyes were far away; he never
      even saw that child at his feet. He spoke to himself in the sunlight, and
      said: ‘How good the light is!’ 
    

      That utterance sounded like a vibration of the sunlight itself. It fell
      amid the silence in the faintest of whispers like a musical sigh, a quiver
      of warmth and of life. For several days Albine had never heard his voice,
      and now, like himself, it had altered. It seemed to her to course through
      the park more sweetly than the melody of birds, more imperiously than the
      wind that bends the boughs. It reigned, it ruled. The whole garden heard
      it, though it had been but a faint and passing breath, and the whole
      garden was thrilled with the joyousness it brought.
    

      ‘Speak to me,’ implored Albine. ‘You have never spoken to me like that.
      When you were upstairs in your room, when you were not dumb, you talked
      the silly prattle of a child. How is it I no longer know your voice? Just
      now I thought it had come down from the trees, that it reached me from
      every part of the garden, that it was one of those deep sighs that used to
      worry me at night before you came. Listen, everything is keeping silence
      to hear you speak again.’ 
    

      But still he failed to recognise her presence. Tenderer grew her tones.
      ‘No, don’t speak if it tires you. Sit down beside me, and we will remain
      here on the grass till the sun wanes. And look, I have found two
      strawberries. Such trouble I had too! The birds eat up everything. One’s
      for you, both if you like; or we can halve them, and taste each of them.
      You’ll thank me, and then I shall hear you.’ 
    

      But he would not sit down, he refused the strawberries, which Albine
      pettishly threw away. She did not open her lips again. She would rather
      have seen him ill, as in those earlier days when she had given him her
      hand for a pillow, and had felt him coming back to life beneath the
      cooling breath she blew upon his face. She cursed the returning health
      which now made him stand in the light like a young unheeding god. Would he
      be ever thus then, with never a glance for her? Would he never be further
      healed, and at last see her and love her? And she dreamed of once again
      being his healer, of accomplishing by the sole power of her little hands
      the cure of the second childhood in which he remained. She could clearly
      see that there was no spark in the depths of his grey eyes, that his was
      but a pallid beauty like that of the statues which had fallen among the
      nettles of the flower-garden. She rose and clasped him, breathing on his
      neck to rouse him. But that morning Serge never even felt the breath that
      lifted his silky beard. The sun got low, it was time to go indoors. On
      reaching his room, Albine burst into tears.
    

      From that morning forward the invalid took a short walk in the garden
      every day. He went past the mulberry tree, as far as the edge of the
      terrace, where a wide flight of broken steps descended to the flowery
      parterre. He grew accustomed to the open air, each bath of sunlight
      brought him fresh vigour. A young chestnut tree, which had sprung from
      some fallen nut between two stones of the balustrade, burst the resin of
      its buds, and unfolded its leafy fans with far less vigour than he
      progressed. One day, indeed, he even attempted to descend the steps, but
      in this his strength failed him, and he sat down among the dane-wort which
      had grown up between the cracks in the stone flags. Below, to the left, he
      could see a small wood of roses. It was thither that he dreamt of going.
    

      ‘Wait a little longer,’ said Albine. ‘The scent of the roses is too strong
      for you yet. I have never been able to sit long under the rose-trees
      without feeling exhausted, light-headed, with a longing to cry. Don’t be
      afraid, I will some day lead you to the rose-trees, and I shall surely
      weep among them, for you make me very sad.’ 
    

      
 
    

      One morning she at last succeeded in helping him to the foot of the steps,
      trampling down the grass before him with her feet, and clearing a way for
      him through the briars, whose supple arms barred the last few yards. Then
      they slowly entered the wood of roses. It was indeed a very wood, with
      thickets of tall standard roses throwing out leafy clumps as big as trees,
      and enormous rose bushes impenetrable as copses of young oaks. Here,
      formerly, there had been a most marvellous collection of plants. But since
      the flower garden had been left in abandonment, everything had run wild,
      and a virgin forest had arisen, a forest of roses over-running the paths,
      crowded with wild offshoots, so mingled, so blended, that roses of every
      scent and hue seemed to blossom on the same stem. Creeping roses formed
      mossy carpets on the ground, while climbing roses clung to others like
      greedy ivy plants, and ascended in spindles of verdure, letting a shower
      of their loosened petals fall at the lightest breeze. Natural paths
      coursed through the wood—narrow footways, broad avenues, enchanting
      covered walks in which one strolled in the shade and scent. These led to
      glades and clearings, under bowers of small red roses, and between walls
      hung with tiny yellow ones. Some sunny nooks gleamed like green silken
      stuff embroidered with bright patterns; other shadier corners offered the
      seclusion of alcoves and an aroma of love, the balmy warmth, as it were,
      of a posy languishing on a woman’s bosom. The rose bushes had whispering
      voices too. And the rose bushes were full of songbirds’ nests.
    

      ‘We must take care not to lose ourselves,’ said Albine, as she entered the
      wood. ‘I did lose myself once, and the sun had set before I was able to
      free myself from the rose bushes which caught me by the skirt at every
      step.’ 
    

      They had barely walked a few minutes, however, before Serge, worn out with
      fatigue, wished to sit down. He stretched himself upon the ground, and
      fell into deep slumber. Albine sat musing by his side. They were on the
      edge of a glade, near a narrow path which stretched away through the wood,
      streaked with flashes of sunlight, and, through a small round blue gap at
      its far end, revealed the sky. Other little paths led from the clearing
      into leafy recesses. The glade was formed of tall rose bushes rising one
      above the other with such a wealth of branches, such a tangle of thorny
      shoots, that big patches of foliage were caught aloft, and hung there
      tent-like, stretching out from bush to bush. Through the tiny apertures in
      the patches of leaves, which were suggestive of fine lace, the light
      filtered like impalpable sunny dust. And from the vaulted roof hung stray
      branches, chandeliers, as it were, thick clusters suspended from green
      thread-like stems, armfuls of flowers that reached to the ground, athwart
      some rent in the leafy ceiling, which trailed around like a tattered
      curtain.
    

      Albine meanwhile was gazing at Serge asleep. She had never seen him so
      utterly prostrated in body as now, his hands lying open on the turf, his
      face deathly. So dead indeed he was to her that she thought she could kiss
      his face without his even feeling it. And sadly, absently, she busied her
      hands with shredding all the roses within her reach. Above her head
      drooped an enormous cluster which brushed against her hair, set roses on
      her twisted locks, her ears, her neck, and even threw a mantle of the
      fragrant flowers across her shoulders. Higher up, under her fingers, other
      roses rained down with large and tender petals exquisitely formed, which
      in hue suggested the faintly flushing purity of a maiden’s bosom. Like a
      living snowfall these roses already hid her feet in the grass. And they
      climbed her knees, covered her skirt, and smothered her to her waist;
      while three stray petals, which had fluttered on to her bodice, just above
      her bosom, there looked like three glimpses of her bewitching skin.
    

      ‘Oh! the lazy fellow!’ she murmured, feeling bored and picking up two
      handfuls of roses, which she flung in Serge’s face to wake him.
    

      He did not stir, however, but still lay there with the roses on his eyes
      and mouth. This made Albine laugh. She stooped down, and with her whole
      heart kissed both his eyes and his mouth, blowing as she kissed to drive
      the rose petals away; but they remained upon his lips, and she broke into
      still louder laughter, intensely amused at this flowery caressing.
    

      Serge slowly raised himself. He gazed at her with amazement, as if
      startled at finding her there.
    

      ‘Who are you? where do you come from? what are you doing here beside me?’ 
      he asked her. And still she smiled, transported with delight at marking
      this awakening of his senses. Then he seemed to remember something, and
      continued with a gesture of happy confidence:
    

      ‘I know, you are my love, flesh of my flesh, you are waiting for me that
      we may be one for ever. I was dreaming of you. You were in my breast, and
      I gave you my blood, my muscles, my bones. I felt no pain. You took half
      my heart so tenderly that I experienced keen inward delight at thus
      dividing myself. I sought all that was best and most beautiful within me
      to give it to you. You might have carried off everything, and still I
      should have thanked you. And I woke when you went out of me. You left
      through my eyes and mouth; ay, I felt it. You were all warm, all fragrant,
      so sweet that it was the thrill from you that has made me awake.’ 
    

      Albine listened to his words with ecstasy. At last he saw her; at last his
      birth was accomplished, his cure begun. With outstretched hands she begged
      him to go on.
    

      ‘How have I managed to live without you?’ he murmured. ‘No, I did not
      live, I was like a slumbering animal. And now you are mine! and you are no
      one but myself! Listen, you must never leave me; for you are my very
      breath, and in leaving me you would rob me of my life. We will remain
      within ourselves. You will be mine even as I shall be yours. Should I ever
      forsake you, may I be accursed, may my body wither like a useless and
      noxious weed!’ 
    

      He caught hold of her hands, and exclaimed in a voice quivering with
      admiration: ‘How beautiful you are!’ 
    

      In the falling dust of sunshine Albine’s skin looked milky white, scarce
      gilded here and there by the sunny sheen. The shower of roses around and
      on her steeped her in pinkness.
    

      Her fair hair, loosely held together by her comb, decked her head as with
      a setting planet whose last bright sparks shone upon the nape of her neck.
      She wore a white gown; her arms, her throat, her stainless skin bloomed
      unabashed as a flower, musky with a goodly fragrance. Her figure was
      slender, not too tall, but supple as a snake’s, with softly rounded,
      voluptuously expanding outlines, in which the freshness of childhood
      mingled with womanhood’s nascent charms. Her oval face, with its narrow
      brow and rather full mouth, beamed with the tender living light of her
      blue eyes. And yet she was grave, too, her cheeks unruffled, her chin
      plump—as naturally lovely as are the trees.
    

      ‘And how I love you!’ said Serge, drawing her to himself.
    

      They were wholly one another’s now, clasped in each other’s arms! They did
      not kiss, but held each other round the waist, cheek to cheek, united,
      dumb, delighted with their oneness. Around them bloomed the roses with a
      mad, amorous blossoming, full of crimson and rosy and white laughter. The
      living, opening flowers seemed to bare their very bosoms. Yellow roses
      were there showing the golden skin of barbarian maidens: straw-coloured
      roses, lemon-coloured roses, sun-coloured roses—every shade of the
      necks which are ambered by glowing skies. Then there was skin of softer
      hue: among the tea roses, bewitchingly moist and cool, one caught glimpses
      of modest, bashful charms, with skin as fine as silk tinged faintly with a
      blue network of veins. Farther on all the smiling life of the rose
      expanded: there was the blush white rose, barely tinged with a dash of
      carmine, snowy as the foot of a maid dabbling in a spring; there was the
      silvery pink, more subdued than even the glow with which a youthful arm
      irradiates a wide sleeve; there was the clear, fresh rose, in which blood
      seemed to gleam under satin as in the bare shoulders of a woman bathed in
      light; and there was the bright pink rose with its buds like the nipples
      of virgin bosoms, and its opening flowers that suggested parted lips,
      exhaling warm and perfumed breath. And the climbing roses, the tall
      cluster roses with their showers of white flowers, clothed all these
      others with the lacework of their bunches, the innocence of their flimsy
      muslin; while, here and there, roses dark as the lees of wine,
      sanguineous, almost black, showed amidst the bridal purity like passion’s
      wounds. Verily, it was like a bridal—the bridal of the fragrant
      wood, the virginity of May led to the fertility of July and August; the
      first unknowing kiss culled like a nosegay on the wedding morn. Even in
      the grass, moss roses, clad in close-fitting garments of green wool,
      seemed to be awaiting the advent of love. Flowers rambled all along the
      sun-streaked path, faces peeped out everywhere to court the passing
      breezes. Bright were the smiles under the spreading tent of the glade. Not
      a flower that bloomed the same: the roses differed in the fashion of their
      wooing. Some, shy and blushing, would show but a glimpse of bud, while
      others, panting and wide open, seemed consumed with infatuation for their
      persons. There were pert, gay little things that filed off, cockade in
      cap; there were huge ones, bursting with sensuous charms, like portly,
      fattened-up sultanas; there were impudent hussies, too, in coquettish
      disarray, on whose petals the white traces of the powder-puff could be
      espied; there were virtuous maids who had donned low-necked garb like
      demure bourgeoises; and aristocratic ladies, graceful and original,
      who contrived attractive deshabilles. And the cup-like roses offered their
      perfume as in precious crystal; the drooping, urn-shaped roses let it drip
      drop by drop; the round, cabbage-like roses exhaled it with the even
      breath of slumbering flowers; while the budding roses tightly locked their
      petals and only sent forth as yet the faint sigh of maidenhood.
    

      ‘I love you, I love you,’ softly repeated Serge.
    

      Albine, too, was a large rose, a pallid rose that had opened since the
      morning. Her feet were white, her arms were rosy pink, her neck was fair
      of skin, her throat bewitchingly veined, pale and exquisite. She was
      fragrant, she proffered lips which offered as in a coral cup a perfume
      that was yet faint and cool. Serge inhaled that perfume, and pressed her
      to his breast. Albine laughed.
    

      The ring of that laugh, which sounded like a bird’s rhythmic notes,
      enraptured Serge.
    

      ‘What, that lovely song is yours?’ he said. ‘It is the sweetest I ever
      heard. You are indeed my joy.’ 
    

      Then she laughed yet more sonorously, pouring forth rippling scales of
      high-pitched, flute-like notes that melted into deeper ones. It was an
      endless laugh, a long-drawn cooing, then a burst of triumphant music
      celebrating the delight of awakening love. And everything—the roses,
      the fragrant wood, the whole of the Paradou—laughed in that laugh of
      woman just born to beauty and to love. Till now the vast garden had lacked
      one charm—a winning voice which should prove the living mirth of the
      trees, the streams, and the sunlight. Now the vast garden was endowed with
      that charm of laughter.
    

      ‘How old are you?’ asked Albine, when her song had ended in a faint
      expiring note.
    

      ‘Nearly twenty-six,’ Serge answered.
    

      She was amazed. What! he was twenty-six! He, too, was astonished at having
      made that answer so glibly, for it seemed to him that he had not yet lived
      a day—an hour.
    

      ‘And how old are you?’ he asked in his turn.
    

      ‘Oh, I am sixteen.’ 
    

      Then she broke into laughter again, quivering from head to foot, repeating
      and singing her age. She laughed at her sixteen years with a fine-drawn
      laugh that flowed on with rhythmic trilling like a streamlet. Serge
      scanned her closely, amazed at the laughing life that transfigured her
      face. He scarcely knew her now with those dimples in her cheeks, those
      bow-shaped lips between which peeped the rosy moistness of her mouth, and
      those eyes blue like bits of sky kindling with the rising of the sun. As
      she threw back her head, she sent a glow of warmth through him.
    

      He put out his hand, and fumbled mechanically behind her neck.
    

      ‘What do you want?’ she asked. And suddenly remembering, she exclaimed:
      ‘My comb! my comb! that’s it.’ 
    

      She gave him her comb, and let fall her heavy tresses. A cloth of gold
      suddenly unrolled and clothed her to her hips. Some locks which flowed
      down upon her breast gave, as it were a finishing touch to her regal
      raiment. At the sight of that sudden blaze, Serge uttered an exclamation;
      he kissed each lock, and burned his lips amidst that sunset-like
      refulgence.
    

      But Albine now relieved herself of her long silence, and chatted and
      questioned unceasingly.
    

      ‘Oh, how wretched you made me! You no longer took any notice of me, and
      day after day I found myself useless and powerless, worried out of my wits
      like a good-for-nothing.... And yet the first few days I had done you
      good. You saw me and spoke to me.... Do you remember when you were lying
      down, and went to sleep on my shoulder, and murmured that I did you good?’ 
    

      ‘No!’ said Serge, ‘no, I don’t remember it. I had never seen you before. I
      have only just seen you for the first time—lovely, radiant, never to
      be forgotten.’ 
    

      She clapped her hands impatiently, exclaiming: ‘And my comb? You must
      remember how I used to give you my comb to keep you quiet when you were a
      little child? Why, you were looking for it just now.’ 
    

      ‘No, I don’t remember. Your hair is like fine silk. I have never kissed
      your hair before.’ 
    

      At this, with some vexation, she recounted certain particulars of his
      convalescence in the room with the blue ceiling. But he only laughed at
      her, and at last closed her lips with his hand, saying with anxious
      weariness: ‘No, be quiet, I don’t know; I don’t want to know any more....
      I have only just woke up, and found you there, covered with roses. That is
      enough.’ 
    

      And he drew her once more towards him and held her there, dreaming aloud,
      and murmuring: ‘Perhaps I have lived before. It must have been a long,
      long time ago.... I loved you in a painful dream. You had the same blue
      eyes, the same rather long face, the same youthful mien. But your hair was
      carefully hidden under a linen cloth, and I never dared to remove that
      cloth, because your locks seemed to me fearsome and would have made me
      die. But to-day your hair is the very sweetness of yourself. It preserves
      your scent, and when I kiss it, when I bury my face in it like this, I
      drink in your very life.’ 
    

      He kept on passing the long curls through his hands, and pressing them to
      his lips, as if to squeeze from them all Albine’s blood. And after an
      interval of silence, he continued: ‘It’s strange, before one’s birth, one
      dreams of being born.... I was buried somewhere. I was very cold. I could
      hear all the life of the world outside buzzing above me. But I shut my
      ears despairingly, for I was used to my gloomy den, and enjoyed some
      fearful delights in it, so that I never sought to free myself from all the
      earth weighing upon my chest. Where could I have been then? Who was it
      gave me light?’ 
    

      He struggled to remember, while Albine now waited in fear and trembling
      lest he should really do so. Smiling, she took a handful of her hair and
      wound it round the young man’s neck, thus fastening him to herself. This
      playful act roused him from his musings.
    

      ‘You’re right,’ he said, ‘I am yours, what does the rest matter? It was
      you, was it not, who drew me out of the earth? I must have been under this
      garden. What I heard were your steps rattling the little pebbles in the
      path. You were looking for me, you brought down upon my head the songs of
      the birds, the scent of the pinks, the warmth of the sun. I fancied that
      you would find me at last. I waited a long time for you. But I never
      expected that you would give yourself to me without your veil, with your
      hair undone—the terrible hair which has become so soft.’ 
    

      He sat her on his lap, placing his face beside hers.
    

      ‘Do not let us talk any more. We are alone for ever. We love each other.’ 
    

      And thus in all innocence they lingered in each other’s arms; for a long,
      long time did they remain there forgetfully. The sun rose higher; and the
      dust of light fell hotter from the lofty boughs. The yellow and white and
      crimson roses were now only a ray of their delight, a sign of their smiles
      to one another. They had certainly caused buds to open around them. The
      roses crowned their heads and threw garlands about their waists. And the
      scent of the roses became so penetrating, so strong with amorous emotion,
      that it seemed to be the scent of their own breath.
    

      At last Serge put up Albine’s hair. He raised it in handfuls with
      delightful awkwardness, and stuck her comb askew in the enormous knot that
      he had heaped upon her head. And as it happened she looked bewitching
      thus. Then, rising from the ground, he held out his hands to her, and
      supported her waist as she got up. They still smiled without speaking a
      word, and slowly they went down the path.
    

      
 
    

      Albine and Serge entered the flower garden. She was watching him with
      tender anxiety, fearing lest he should overtire himself; but he reassured
      her with a light laugh. He felt strong enough indeed to carry her
      whithersoever she listed. When he found himself once more in the full
      sunlight, he drew a sigh of content. At last he lived; he was no longer a
      plant subject to the terrible sufferings of winter. And how he was moved
      with loving gratitude! Had it been within his power, he would have spared
      Albine’s tiny feet even the roughness of the paths; he dreamed of carrying
      her, clinging round his neck, like a child lulled to sleep by her mother.
      He already watched over her with a guardian’s watchful care, thrusting
      aside the stones and brambles, jealous lest the breeze should waft a
      fleeting kiss upon those darling locks which were his alone. She on her
      side nestled against his shoulder and serenely yielded to his guidance.
    

      Thus Albine and Serge strolled on together in the sunlight for the first
      time. A balmy fragrance floated in their wake, the very path on which the
      sun had unrolled a golden carpet thrilled with delight under their feet.
      Between the tall flowering shrubs they passed like a vision of such
      wondrous charm that the distant paths seemed to entreat their presence and
      hail them with a murmur of admiration, even as crowds hail long-expected
      sovereigns. They formed one sole, supremely lovely being. Albine’s snowy
      skin was but the whiteness of Serge’s browner skin. And slowly they passed
      along clothed with sunlight—nay, they were themselves the sun—worshipped
      by the low bending flowers.
    

      A tide of emotion now stirred the Paradou to its depths. The old flower
      garden escorted them—that vast field bearing a century’s
      untrammelled growth, that nook of Paradise sown by the breeze with the
      choicest flowers. The blissful peace of the Paradou, slumbering in the
      broad sunlight, prevented the degeneration of species. It could boast of a
      temperature ever equable, and a soil which every plant had long enriched
      to thrive therein in the silence of its vigour. Its vegetation was mighty,
      magnificent, luxuriantly untended, full of erratic growths decked with
      monstrous blossoming, unknown to the spade and watering-pot of gardeners.
      Nature left to herself, free to grow as she listed, in the depths of that
      solitude protected by natural shelters, threw restraint aside more
      heartily at each return of spring, indulged in mighty gambols, delighted
      in offering herself at all seasons strange nosegays not meant for any hand
      to pluck. A rabid fury seemed to impel her to overthrow whatever the
      effort of man had created; she rebelliously cast a straggling multitude of
      flowers over the paths, attacked the rockeries with an ever-rising tide of
      moss, and knotted round the necks of marble statues the flexible cords of
      creepers with which she threw them down; she shattered the stonework of
      the fountains, steps, and terraces with shrubs which burst through them;
      she slowly, creepingly, spread over the smallest cultivated plots,
      moulding them to her fancy, and planting on them, as ensign of rebellion,
      some wayside spore, some lowly weed which she transformed into a gigantic
      growth of verdure. In days gone by the parterre, tended by a master
      passionately fond of flowers, had displayed in its trim beds and borders a
      wondrous wealth of choice blossoms. And the same plants could still be
      found; but perpetuated, grown into such numberless families, and
      scampering in such mad fashion throughout the whole garden, that the place
      was now all helter-skelter riot to its very walls, a very den of
      debauchery, where intoxicated nature had hiccups of verbena and pinks.
    

      Though to outward seeming Albine had yielded her weaker self to the
      guidance of Serge, to whose shoulder she clung, it was she who really led
      him. She took him first to the grotto. Deep within a clump of poplars and
      willows gaped a cavern, formed by rugged bits of rocks which had fallen
      over a basin where tiny rills of water trickled between the stones. The
      grotto was completely lost to sight beneath the onslaught of vegetation.
      Below, row upon row of hollyhocks seemed to bar all entrance with a
      trellis-work of red, yellow, mauve, and white-hued flowers, whose stems
      were hidden among colossal bronze-green nettles, which calmly exuded
      blistering poison. Above them was a mighty swarm of creepers which leaped
      aloft in a few bounds; jasmines starred with balmy flowers; wistarias with
      delicate lacelike leaves; dense ivy, dentated and resembling varnished
      metal; lithe honeysuckle, laden with pale coral sprays; amorous
      clematideae, reaching out arms all tufted with white aigrettes. And among
      them twined yet slenderer plants, binding them more and more closely
      together, weaving them into a fragrant woof. Nasturtium, bare and green of
      skin, showed open mouths of ruddy gold; scarlet runners, tough as
      whipcord, kindled here and there a fire of gleaming sparks; convolvuli
      opened their heart-shaped leaves, and with thousands of little bells rang
      a silent peal of exquisite colours; sweetpeas, like swarms of settling
      butterflies, folded tawny or rosy wings, ready to be borne yet farther
      away by the first breeze. It was all a wealth of leafy locks, sprinkled
      with a shower of flowers, straying away in wild dishevelment, and
      suggesting the head of some giantess thrown back in a spasm of passion,
      with a streaming of magnificent hair, which spread into a pool of perfume.
    

      ‘I have never dared to venture into all that darkness,’ Albine whispered
      to Serge.
    

      He urged her on, carried her over the nettles; and as a great boulder
      barred the way into the grotto, he held her up for a moment in his arms so
      that she might be able to peer through the opening that yawned at a few
      feet from the ground.
    

      ‘A marble woman,’ she whispered, ‘has fallen full length into the stream.
      The water has eaten her face away.’ 
    

      Then he, too, in his turn wanted to look, and pulled himself up. A cold
      breeze played upon his cheeks. In the pale light that glided through the
      hole, he saw the marble woman lying amidst the reeds and the duckweed. She
      was naked to the waist. She must have been drowning there for the last
      hundred years. Some grief had probably flung her into that spring where
      she was slowly committing suicide. The clear water which flowed over her
      had worn her face into a smooth expanse of marble, a mere white surface
      without a feature; but her breasts, raised out of the water by what
      appeared an effort of her neck, were still perfect and lifelike, throbbing
      even yet with the joys of some old delight.
    

      ‘She isn’t dead yet,’ said Serge, getting down again. ‘One day we will
      come and get her out of there.’ 
    

      But Albine shuddered and led him away. They passed out again into the
      sunlight and the rank luxuriance of beds and borders. They wandered
      through a field of flowers capriciously, at random. Their feet trod a
      carpet of lovely dwarf plants, which had once neatly fringed the walks,
      and now spread about in wild profusion. In succession they passed
      ankle-deep through the spotted silk of soft rose catchflies, through the
      tufted satin of feathered pinks, and the blue velvet of forget-me-nots,
      studded with melancholy little eyes. Further on they forced their way
      through giant mignonette, which rose to their knees like a bath of
      perfume; then they turned through a patch of lilies of the valley in order
      that they might spare an expanse of violets, so delicate-looking that they
      feared to hurt them. But soon they found themselves surrounded on all
      sides by violets, and so with wary, gentle steps they passed over their
      fresh fragrance inhaling the very breath of springtide. Beyond the
      violets, a mass of lobelias spread out like green wool gemmed with pale
      mauve. The softly shaded stars of globularia, the blue cups of nemophila,
      the yellow crosses of saponaria, the white and purple ones of sweet
      rocket, wove patches of rich tapestry, stretching onward and onward, a
      fabric of royal luxury, so that the young couple might enjoy the delights
      of that first walk together without fatigue. But the violets ever
      reappeared; real seas of violets that rolled all round them, shedding the
      sweetest perfumes beneath their feet and wafting in their wake the breath
      of their leaf-hidden flowerets.
    

      Albine and Serge quite lost themselves. Thousands of loftier plants
      towered up in hedges around them, enclosing narrow paths which they found
      it delightful to thread. These paths twisted and turned, wandered
      maze-like through dense thickets. There were ageratums with sky-blue tufts
      of bloom; woodruffs with soft musky perfume; brazen-throated mimuluses,
      blotched with bright vermilion; lofty phloxes, crimson and violet,
      throwing up distaffs of flowers for the breezes to spin; red flax with
      sprays as fine as hair; chrysanthemums like full golden moons, casting
      short faint rays, white and violet and rose, around them. The young couple
      surmounted all the obstacles that lay in their path and continued their
      way betwixt the walls of verdure. To the right of them sprang up the slim
      fraxinella, the centranthus draped with snowy blossoms, and the greyish
      hounds-tongue, in each of whose tiny flowercups gleamed a dewdrop. To
      their left was a long row of columbines of every variety; white ones, pale
      rose ones, and some of deep violet hues, almost black, that seemed to be
      in mourning, the blossoms that drooped from their lofty, branching stems
      being plaited and goffered like crape. Then, as they advanced further on,
      the character of the hedges changed. Giant larkspurs thrust up their
      flower-rods, between the dentated foliage of which gaped the mouths of
      tawny snapdragons, while the schizanthus reared its scanty leaves and
      fluttering blooms, that looked like butterflies’ wings of sulphur hue
      splashed with soft lake. The blue bells of campanulae swayed aloft, some
      of them even over the tall asphodels, whose golden stems served as their
      steeples. In one corner was a giant fennel that reminded one of a
      lace-dressed lady spreading out a sunshade of sea-green satin. Then the
      pair suddenly found their way blocked. It was impossible to advance any
      further; a mass of flowers, a huge sheaf of plants stopped all progress.
      Down below, a mass of brank-ursine formed as it were a pedestal, from the
      midst of which sprang scarlet geum, rhodanthe with stiff petals, and
      clarkia with great white carved crosses, that looked like the insignia of
      some barbarous order. Higher up still, bloomed the rosy viscaria, the
      yellow leptosiphon, the white colinsia, and the lagurus, whose dusty green
      bloom contrasted with the glowing colours around it. Towering over all
      these growths scarlet foxgloves and blue lupins, rising in slender
      columns, formed a sort of oriental rotunda gleaming vividly with crimson
      and azure; while at the very summit, like a surmounting dome of dusky
      copper, were the ruddy leaves of a colossal castor-bean.
    

      As Serge reached out his hands to try to force a passage, Albine stopped
      him and begged him not to injure the flowers. ‘You will break the stems
      and crush the leaves,’ she said. ‘Ever since I have been here, I have
      always taken care to hurt none of them. Come, and I will show you the
      pansies.’ 
    

      She made him turn and led him from the narrow paths to the centre of the
      parterre, where, once upon a time, great basins had been hollowed out. But
      these had now fallen into ruin, and were nothing but gigantic jardinieres,
      fringed with stained and cracked marble. In one of the largest of them,
      the wind had sown a wonderful basketful of pansies. The velvety blooms
      seemed almost like living faces, with bands of violet hair, yellow eyes,
      paler tinted mouths, and chins of a delicate flesh colour.
    

      When I was younger they used to make me quite afraid,’ murmured Albine.
      ‘Look at them. Wouldn’t you think that they were thousands of little faces
      looking up at you from the ground? And they turn, too, all in the same
      direction. They might be a lot of buried dolls thrusting their heads out
      of the ground.’ 
    

      She led him still further on. They went the round of all the other basins.
      In the next one a number of amaranthuses had sprung up, raising monstrous
      crests which Albine had always shrunk from touching, such was their
      resemblance to big bleeding caterpillars. Balsams of all colours, now
      straw-coloured, now the hue of peach-blossom, now blush-white, now grey
      like flax, filled another basin where their seed pods split with little
      snaps. Then in the midst of a ruined fountain, there flourished a colony
      of splendid carnations. White ones hung over the moss-covered rims, and
      flaked ones thrust a bright medley of blossom between the chinks of the
      marble; while from the mouth of the lion, whence formerly the water-jets
      had spurted, a huge crimson clove now shot out so vigorously that the
      decrepit beast seemed to be spouting blood. Near by, the principal piece
      of ornamental water, a lake, on whose surface swans had glided, had now
      become a thicket of lilacs, beneath whose shade stocks and verbenas and
      day-lilies screened their delicate tints, and dozed away, all redolent of
      perfume.
    

      ‘But we haven’t seen half the flowers yet,’ said Albine, proudly. ‘Over
      yonder there are such huge ones that I can quite bury myself amongst them
      like a partridge in a corn-field.’ 
    

      They went thither. They tripped down some broad steps, from whose fallen
      urns still flickered the violet fires of the iris. All down the steps
      streamed gilliflowers, like liquid gold. The sides were flanked with
      thistles, that shot up like candelabra, of green bronze, twisted and
      curved into the semblance of birds’ heads, with all the fantastic elegance
      of Chinese incense-burners. Between the broken balustrades drooped tresses
      of stonecrop, light greenish locks, spotted as with mouldiness. Then at
      the foot of the steps another parterre spread out, dotted over with
      box-trees that were vigorous as oaks; box-trees which had once been
      carefully pruned and clipped into balls and pyramids and octagonal
      columns, but which were now revelling in unrestrained freedom of
      untidiness, breaking out into ragged masses of greenery, through which
      blue patches of sky were visible.
    

      And Albine led Serge straight on to a spot that seemed to be the graveyard
      of the flower-garden. There the scabious mourned, and processions of
      poppies stretched out in line, with deathly odour, unfolding heavy blooms
      of feverish brilliance. Sad anemones clustered in weary throngs, pallid as
      if infected by some epidemic. Thick-set daturas spread out purplish horns,
      from which insects, weary of life, sucked fatal poison. Marigolds buried
      with choking foliage their writhing starry flowers, that already reeked of
      putrefaction. And there were other melancholy flowers also: fleshy
      ranunculi with rusty tints, hyacinths and tuberoses that exhaled asphyxia
      and died from their own perfume. But the cinerarias were most conspicuous,
      crowding thickly in half-mourning robes of violet and white. In the middle
      of this gloomy spot a mutilated marble Cupid still remained standing,
      smiling beneath the lichens which overspread his youthful nakedness, while
      the arm with which he had once held his bow lay low amongst the nettles.
    

      Then Albine and Serge passed on through a rank growth of peonies, reaching
      to their waists. The white flowers fell to pieces as they passed, with a
      rain of snowy petals which was as refreshing to their hands as the heavy
      drops of a thunder shower. And the red ones grinned with apoplectical
      faces which perturbed them. Next they passed through a field of fuchsias,
      forming dense, vigorous shrubs that delighted them with their countless
      bells. Then they went on through fields of purple veronicas and others of
      geraniums, blazing with all the fiery tints of a brasier, which the wind
      seemed to be ever fanning into fresh heat. And they forced their way
      through a jungle of gladioli, tall as reeds, which threw up spikes of
      flowers that gleamed in the full daylight with all the brilliance of
      burning torches. They lost themselves too in a forest of sunflowers, with
      stalks as thick as Albine’s wrist, a forest darkened by rough leaves large
      enough to form an infant’s bed, and peopled with giant starry faces that
      shone like so many suns. And thence they passed into another forest, a
      forest of rhododendrons so teeming with blossom that the branches and
      leaves were completely hidden, and nothing but huge nosegays, masses of
      soft calyces, could be seen as far as the eye could reach.
    

      ‘Come along; we have not got to the end yet,’ cried Albine. ‘Let us push
      on.’ 
    

      But Serge stopped. They were now in the midst of an old ruined colonnade.
      Some of the columns offered inviting seats as they lay prostrate amongst
      primroses and periwinkles. Further away, among the columns that still
      remained upright, other flowers were growing in profusion. There were
      expanses of tulips showing brilliant streaks like painted china; expanses
      of calceolarias dotted with crimson and gold; expanses of zinnias like
      great daisies; expanses of petunias with petals like soft cambric through
      which rosy flesh tints gleamed; and other fields, with flowers they could
      not recognise spreading in carpets beneath the sun, in a motley brilliance
      that was softened by the green of their leaves.
    

      ‘We shall never be able to see it all,’ said Serge, smiling and waving his
      hand. ‘It would be very nice to sit down here, amongst all this perfume.’ 
    

      Near them there was a large patch of heliotropes, whose vanilla-like
      breath permeated the air with velvety softness. They sat down upon one of
      the fallen columns, in the midst of a cluster of magnificent lilies which
      had shot up there. They had been walking for more than an hour. They had
      wandered on through the flowers from the roses to the lilies. These
      offered them a calm, quiet haven after their lovers’ ramble amid the
      perfumed solicitations of luscious honeysuckle, musky violets, verbenas
      that breathed out the warm scent of kisses, and tuberoses that panted with
      voluptuous passion. The lilies, with their tall slim stems, shot up round
      them like a white pavilion and sheltered them with snowy cups, gleaming
      only with the gold of their slender pistils. And there they rested, like
      betrothed children in a tower of purity; an impregnable ivory tower, where
      all their love was yet perfect innocence.
    

      Albine and Serge lingered amongst the lilies till evening. They felt so
      happy there, and seemed to break out into a new life. Serge felt the last
      trace of fever leave his hands, while Albine grew quite white, with a
      milky whiteness untinted by any rosy hue. They were unconscious that their
      arms and necks and shoulders were bare, and their straying unconfined hair
      in nowise troubled them. They laughed merrily one at the other, with frank
      open laughter. The expression of their eyes retained the limpid calmness
      of clear spring water. When they quitted the lilies, their feelings were
      but those of children ten years old; it seemed to them that they had just
      met each other in that garden so that they might be friends for ever and
      amuse themselves with perpetual play. And as they returned through the
      parterre, the very flowers bore themselves discreetly, as though they were
      glad to see their childishness, and would do nothing that might corrupt
      them. The forests of peonies, the masses of carnations, the carpets of
      forget-me-nots, the curtains of clematis now steeped in the atmosphere of
      evening, slumbering in childlike purity akin to their own, no longer
      spread suggestions of voluptuousness around them. The pansies looked up at
      them with their little candid faces, like playfellows; and the languid
      mignonette, as Albine’s white skirt brushed by it, seemed full of
      compassion, and held its breath lest it should fan their love prematurely
      into life.
    

      
 
    

      At dawn the next day it was Serge who called Albine. She slept in a room
      on the upper floor. He looked up at her window and saw her throw open the
      shutters just as she had sprung out of bed. They laughed merrily as their
      eyes met.
    

      ‘You must not go out to-day,’ said Albine, when she came down. ‘We must
      stay indoors and rest. To-morrow I will take you a long, long way off, to
      a spot where we can have a very jolly time.’ 
    

      ‘But sha’n’t we grow tired of stopping here?’ muttered Serge.
    

      ‘Oh, dear no! I will tell you stories.’ 
    

      They passed a delightful day. The windows were thrown wide open, and all
      the beauty of the Paradou came in and rejoiced with them in the room.
      Serge now really took possession of that delightful room, where he
      imagined he had been born. He insisted upon seeing everything, and upon
      having everything explained to him. The plaster Cupids who sported round
      the alcove amused him so much that he mounted upon a chair to tie Albine’s
      sash round the neck of the smallest of them, a little bit of a man who was