# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2011
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    Pierre Louÿs, Ancient Manners
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/36378/36378-h/36378-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

    “Dress my hair.”


In the level rays of evening her hair, still heavy and humid, shone like rain
illuminated by the sun: The slave took it in handfuls and entwined it. She
rolled it into a spiral and picked it out with slim golden pins, like a great
metal serpent bristling with arrows. She wound the whole around a triple fillet
of green in order that its reflections might be heightened by the silk.


Chrysis held a mirror of polished copper at arm’s length. She watched the
slave’s darting hands with a distracted eye, as she passed them through
the heavy hair, rounded off the clusters, captured the stray locks, and built
up her head-dress like a spiral rhytium of clay. When all was finished, Djala
knelt down on her knees before her mistress and shaved her rounded flesh to the
skin, in order that she might have the nudity of a statue in her lovers’
eyes.


Chrysis became graver and said in a low voice:


“Paint me.”


A little pink box from the island of Dioscoris contained cosmetics of all
colours. With a camel-hair brush, the slave took a little of a certain black
paste which she laid upon the long curves of the beautiful eye-lashes, in order
to heighten the blueness of the eyes. Two firm lines put on with a pencil
imparted increased length and softness to them; a bluish powder tinted the
eye-lids the colour of lead; two touches of bright vermilion accentuated the
tear-corners. In order to fix the cosmetics, it was necessary to anoint the
face and breast with fresh cerate. With a soft feather dipped in ceruse, Djala
painted trails of white along the arms and on the neck; with a little brush
swollen with carmine she reddened the mouth and touched up the nipples of the
breasts; with her fingers she spread a fine layer of red powder over the
cheeks, marked three deep lines between the waist and the belly, and in the
rounded haunches two dimples that sometimes moved; then with a plug of leather
dipped in cosmetics she gave a indefinable tint to the elbows and polished up
the ten nails. The toilette was finished.


The Chrysis began to smile, and said to the Hindoo woman:


“Sing to me.”


She sat erect in her marble chair. Her pins gleamed with a golden glint behind
her head. Her painted finger-nails, pressed to her neck from shoulder to
shoulder, broke the red line of her necklace, and her white feet rested close
together upon the stone.


Huddled against the wall, Djala bethought her of the love-songs of India.


“Chrysis . . .”


She sang in a monotonous chant.


“Chrysis, thy hair is like a swarm of bees hanging on a tree. The hot
wind of the south penetrates it with the dew of love-battles and the wet
perfume of night-flowers.”


The young woman alternated, in a softer, lower voice:


“My hair is like an endless river in the plain when the flame-lit evening
fades.”


And they sang, one after the other:


“Thine eyes are like blue water-lilies without stalks, motionless upon
the pools.”


“Mine eyes rest in the shadow of my lashes like deep lakes under dark
branches.”




“Thy lips are two delicate flowers stained with the blood of a
roe.”


“My lips are the edges of a burning wound.”




“Thy tongue is the bloody dagger that has made the wound of thy
mouth.”


“My tongue is inlaid with precious stones. It is red with the sheen of my
lips.”




“Thine arms are tapering as two ivory tusks, and thy armpits are two
mouths.”


“Mine arms are tapering as two lily-stalks and my fingers hang therefrom
like five petals.”


“Thy thighs are two white elephants’ trunks. They bear thy feet
like two red flowers.”


“My feet are two nenuphar-leaves upon the water: My thighs are two
bursting nenuphar buds.”




“Thy breasts are two silver bucklers with cusps steeped in blood.”


“My breasts are the moon and the reflection of the moon and the
water.”

Huddled against the wall, Djala bethought
herself of the love-songs of India.




“Thy navel is a deep pit in a desert of red sand, and thy belly a young
kid lying on its mother’s breast.”


“My navel is a round pearl on an inverted cup, and the curve of my belly
is the clear crescent of Phœbe in the forests.”




There was a silence. The slave raised her hands and bowed to the ground.


The courtesan proceeded:


“It is like a purple flower, full of perfumes and honey.”


“It is like a sea-serpent, soft and living, open at night.”


“It is the humid grotto, the ever-warm lodging, the Refuge where man
reposes from his march to death.”


The prostrate one murmured very low: “It is appalling. It is the face of
Medusa.”




Chrysis planted her foot upon the slave’s neck and said with trembling:


“Djala.”


The night had come on little by little, but the moon was so luminous that the
room was filled with blue light.


Chrysis looked at the motionless reflections of her naked body where the
shadows fell very black.


She rose brusquely:


“Djala, what are we thinking of? It is night, and I have not yet gone
out. There will be nothing left upon the heptastadion but sleeping sailors.
Tell me, Djala, I am beautiful?


“Tell me, Djala, I am more beautiful than ever to-night? I am the most
beautiful of the Alexandrian women, and you know it? Will not he who shall
presently pass within the sidelong glance of my eyes follow me like a dog?
Shall I not perform my pleasure upon him, and make a slave of him according to
my whim, and can I not expect the most abject obedience from the first man whom
I shall meet? Dress me, Djala.”


Djala twined two silver serpents about her arms. On her feet she fixed sandals
and attached them to her brown legs with crossed leather straps. Over her warm
belly Chrysis herself buckled a maiden’s girdle, which sloped down from
the upper part of the loins along the hollow line of the groins; in her ears
she hung great circular rings, on her neck three golden phallus-bracelets
enchased at Paphos by the hierodules. She contemplated herself for some time,
standing naked in her jewels; then, drawing from the coffer in which she had
folded it, a vast transparent stuff of yellow linen, she twisted it about her
and draped herself in it to the ground. Diagonal folds intersected the little
that one saw of her body through the light tissue; one of her elbows stood out
under the light tunic, and the other arm, which she had left bare, carried the
long train high out of reach of the dust.


She took her feather fan in her hand, and carelessly sauntered forth.


Standing upon the steps of the threshold, with her hand leaning on the white
wall, Djala watched the courtesan’s retreating form.


She walked slowly past the houses, in the deserted street bathed in moonlight.
A little flickering shadow danced behind her.


On the quay at Alexandria a singing-girl was standing singing. By her side were
two flute-girls, seated on the white parapet.


The satyrs pursue in the woods
    The light-footed oreads.
They chase the nymphs upon the mountains,
    They fill their eyes with affright,
They seize their hair in the wind,
    They grasp their breasts in the chase,
And throw their warm bodies backwards
    Upon the green dew-covered moss,
And the beautiful bodies, their beautiful bodies half divine,
    Writhe with the agony . . .
O women! Eros makes your lips cry aloud
    With dolorous, sweet Desire.


The flute-players repeated


“Eros
Eros!”


and wailed in their twin reeds.


Cybele pursues across the plain
    Attys, beautiful as Apollo.
Eros has smitten her to the heart, and for him,
    O Totoi! but not him for her,
Instead of love, cruel god, wicked Eros,
    Thou counsellest but hatred . . .
Across the meads, the vast distant plains,
    Cybele chases Attys;
And because she adores the scorned,
    She infuses into his veins
The great cold breath, the breath of death.
    O dolorous, sweet Desire!




“Eros!
Eros!”


Shrill wailings poured from the flutes.


The Goat-foot pursues to the river
    Syrinx, the daughter of the fountain;
Pale Eros, that loves the taste of tears,
    Kissed her as she ran, cheek to cheek;
And the frail shadow of the drowned maiden
    Shivers, reeds, upon the waters.
But Eros kings it over the world and the gods.
    He kings it over death itself.
On the watery tomb he gathered for us
    All the reeds, and with them made the flute,
’Tis a dead soul that weeps here, women,
    Dolorous, sweet Desire.




Whilst the flute prolonged the slow chant of the last line, the singer held out
her hand to the passers-by standing around her in a circle, and collected four
obols, which she slipped into her shoe.


Groups formed in places, and women wandered amongst them


The crowd gradually melted away, innumerable, curious of itself and watching
its own movements. The noise of footsteps and voices drowned even the sound of
the sea. Sailors hauled their boats upon the quay with bowed shoulders.
Fruit-sellers passed to and fro with teeming baskets upon their arms. Beggars
begged for alms with trembling hand. Asses, laden with leathern bottles,
trotted in front of the goads of their drivers. But it was the hour of sunset;
and the crowd of idlers, more numerous than the crowd bent on affairs, covered
the quay. Groups formed in places, and women wandered amongst them. The names
of well-known characters passed from mouth to mouth. The young men looked at
the philosophers, and the philosophers looked at the courtesans.


The latter were of every kind and condition, from the most celebrated, dressed
in fine silks and wearing shoes of gilded leather, to the most miserable, who
walked barefooted. The poor ones were no less beautiful than the others, but
less fortunate only, and the attention of the sages was fixed by preference
upon those whose natural grace was not disfigured by the artifice of girdles
and weighty jewels. As it was the day before the Aphrodisiæ, these women had
every license to choose the dress which suited them the best, and some of the
youngest had even ventured to wear nothing at all. But their nudity shocked
nobody, for they would not thus have exposed all the details of their bodies to
the sun if they had possessed the slightest defect which might have rendered
them the laughing-stock of the married women.


“Tryphera! Tryphera!”


And a young courtesan of joyful mien elbowed her way through the crowd to join
a friend of whom she had just caught sight.


“Tryphera! are you invited?”


“Where, Seso?”


“To Bacchis’s.”


“Not yet. She is giving a dinner?”


“A dinner? A banquet, my dear. She is to liberate her most beautiful
slave, Aphrodisia, on the second day of the feast.”


“At last! She has perceived at last that people came to see her only for
the sake of her slave.”


“I think she has seen nothing. It is a whim of old Cheres, the ship-owner
on the quay. He wanted to buy the girl for ten minæ. Bacchis refused. Twenty
minæ; she refused again.”


“She must be crazy.”


“Why, pray? It was her ambition to have a freed-woman. Besides, she was
quite right to bargain. Cheres will give thirty-five minæ, and at that price
the girl becomes a freed-woman.”


“Thirty-five minæ? Three thousand five hundred drachmæ? Three thousand
five hundred drachmæ for a negress?”


“She is a white man’s daughter.”


“But her mother is black.”


“Bacchis declared that she would not part with her for less, and old
Cheres is so amorous that he consented.”


“I hope he is invited at any rate.”


“No! Aphrodisia is to be served up at the banquet as the last dish, after
the fruit. Everybody will taste of it at pleasure, and it is only on the morrow
that she is to be handed over to Cheres; but I am much afraid she will be tired
. . .”


“Don’t pity her. With him she will have time to recover. I know
him, Seso. I have watched him sleep.”


They laughed together at Cheres. Then they complimented one another. “You
have a pretty robe,” said Seso. “Did you have it trimmed at
home?”


Tryphera’s robe was of fine sea-green stuff entirely trimmed with
flowering iris. A carbuncle set in gold gathered it up into a spindle-shaped
pleat over the left shoulder; the robe fell slantingly between the two breasts,
leaving the entire right side of her body naked down to the metal girdle; a
narrow slit, that opened and closed at every step, alone revealed the whiteness
of the leg.


“Seso!” said another voice. “Seso and Tryphera, come with me
if you don’t know what to do. I am going to the Ceramic Wall to see
whether my name is written up.”


“Mousarion! Where have you come from, my dear?”


“From Pharos. There is nobody there.”


“What do you mean? There is nothing to do but fish, it is so full.”


“No turbots for me. I am off to the wall. Come.”


On the way, Seso told them about the projected banquet at Bacchis’s over
again.


“Ah! at Bacchis’s!” cried Mousarion. “You remember the
last dinner, Tryphera, and all the stories about Chrysis?”


“You must not repeat them. Seso is her friend.”


Mousarion bit her lips; but Seso had already taken the alarm.


“What did they say about her?”


“Oh! various ill-natured things.”


“Let people talk,” declared Seso. “We three together are not
worth Chrysis. The day she decides to leave her quarter and shew herself at
Brouchion, I know of some of our lovers whom we shall never see again.”


“Oh! Oh!”


“Certainly. I would commit any folly for that woman. Be sure that there
is none here more beautiful than she.”


The three girls had now arrived in front of the Ceramic Wall. Inscriptions
written in black succeeded one another along the whole length of its immense
white surface. When a lover desired to present himself to a courtesan, he had
merely to write up their two names, with the price he offered; if the man and
the money were approved of, the woman remained standing under the notice until
the lover re-appeared.


“Look, Seso,” said Tryphera, laughing.


“Who is the practical joker who has written that?”


And they read in huge letters:


BACCHIS
THERSIES
2 OBOLS


“It ought not to be allowed to make fun of the women like that. If I were
the rhymarch, I should already have held an enquiry.”


But further on, Seso stopped before an inscription more to the point:


SESO OF CNIDOS
TIMON THE SON OF LYSIAS
1 MINA


She turned slightly pale.


“I stay,” she said.


And she leaned her back against the wall under the envious glances of the women
that passed by.


A few steps further on Mousarion found an acceptable offer, if not as generous
an one. Tryphera returned to the quay alone.


As the hour was advanced, the crowd had become less compact. But the three
musicians were still singing and playing the flute.


Catching sight of a stranger whose clothes and rotundity were slightly
ridiculous, Tryphera tapped him on the shoulder.


“I say! Papa! I wager that you are not an Alexandrian, eh?”


“No indeed, my girl,” answered the honest fellow. “And you
have guessed rightly. I am quite astounded at the town and the people.”


“You are from Boubastis?”


“No. From Cabasa. I came here to sell grain, and I am going back again
to-morrow, richer by fifty-two minæ. Thanks be to the gods! it has been a good
year.”


Tryphera suddenly began to take an great interest in this merchant.


“My child,” he resumed timidly, “you can give me a great joy.
I don’t want to return to Cabasa to-morrow without being able to tell my
wife and three daughters that I have seen some celebrated men, You probably
know some celebrated men?”


“Some few,” she said, laughing.


“Good. Name them to me when they pass. I am sure that during the last two
days I have met the most influential functionaries. I am in despair at not
knowing them by sight.”


“You shall have your wish. This is Naucrates.”


“Who is Naucrates?”


“A philosopher.”


“And what does he teach?”


“Silence.”


“By Zeus, that is a doctrine that does not require much genius, and this
philosopher does not please me at all.”


“That is Phrasilas.”


“Who is Phrasilas?”


“A fool.”


“Then why do you mention him?”


“Because others consider him to be eminent.”


“And what does he say?”


“He says everything with a smile, and that enables him to pass off his
errors as international and common-places as subtile. He has all the advantage.
People have allowed themselves to be duped.”


“All this is beyond me, and I don’t quite understand. Besides, the
face of this Phrasilas is marked by hypocrisy.”


“This is Philodemos.”


“The strategist?”


“No. A Latin poet who writes in Greek.”


“My dear, he is an enemy. I am sorry to have seen him.”


At this point a flutter of excitement ran through the crowd and a murmur of
voices pronounced the same name:


“Demetrios . . . Demetrios . . .”


Tryphera mounted upon a street post, and she too said to the merchant:


“Demetrios . . . That is Demetrios. You were anxious to see celebrated
men.”


Tryphera mounted upon a street post.


“Demetrios? the Queen’s lover? Is it possible?”


“Yes, you are in luck. He never leaves his house. This is the first time
I have seen him on the quay since I have been at Alexandria.”


“Where is he?”


“That’s he, bending over to look at the harbour.”


“There are two men leaning over.”


“It is the one in blue.”


“I cannot see him very well. His back is turned to me.”


“Know you not? he is the sculptor to whom the queen offered herself for a
model when he carved the Aphrodite in the temple.”


“They say he is the royal lover. They say he is the master of
Egypt.”


“And he is as beautiful as Apollo.”


“Ah! he has turned round. I am very glad that I came. I shall say that I
have seen him. I have heard so much about him. It seems that no woman has ever
resisted him. He has had many love adventures, has he not? How is it that the
queen has not heard of them?”


“The queen knows of them as well as we do. She loves him too much to
speak of them. She is afraid of his returning to Rhodes, to his master,
Pherecrates. He is as powerful as she is, and it is she who desired him.”


“He does not look happy. Why does he look so sad? I think I should be
happy if I were in his place. I should like to be he, were it only for an
evening.”


The sun had set. The women gazed at this man, their common dream. He, without
appearing to be conscious of the stir he created, remained leaning over the
parapet, listening to the flute-girls.


The little musicians made another collection; then, they softly threw their
light flutes over their backs. The singing-girl placed her arms round their
necks and all three returned to the town.


At night-fall, the other women went back into immense Alexandria in little
groups, and the herd of men followed them; but all turned round as they walked,
and looked at Demetrios.


The last girl who passed softly cast her yellow flowers at him, and laughed.


Night fell upon the quays.


Demetrios remained alone, leaning on his elbow, at the spot vacated by the
flute-girls. He listened to the murmur of the sea, to the slow creaking of the
ships, to the wind passing beneath the stars.


The town was illumined by a dazzling little cloud which lingered upon the moon,
and the sky was bathed in soft light.


The young man looked around him. The flute-girls’ tunics had left two
marks in the dust. He remembered their faces: they were two Ephesians. He had
thought the elder one pretty; but the younger was without charm, and, as
ugliness was a torture to him, he avoided thinking about her.


An ivory object gleamed at his feet. He picked it up: it was a writing-tablet,
with a silver style attached to it. The wax was almost worn away and it had
been necessary to go over the words several times in order to make them
legible. They were even scratched into the ivory.


There were only these words:


Myrtis Loves Rhodocleia


and he did not know to which of the two women this belonged, and whether the
other was the loved one, or whether it was some unknown girl left behind in
Ephesos. Then he thought for a moment of overtaking the two musicians in order
to restore them what was perhaps the souvenir of a cherished dead friend; but
he could not have found them without difficulty, and as he was already
beginning to lose interest in them, he turned round languidly and threw the
little object into the sea.


It fell rapidly, with a gliding motion like a white bird, and he heard the
splash it made away out in the black water. This little noise enhanced the
immense silence of the harbour. Leaning against the cold parapet, he tried to
drive away all thought, and began to look at the things around him.


He had a horror of life. He only left his house when the life of the day was
dying down, and he returned home when the dawn began to draw the fishermen and
market-gardeners to the town. The pleasure of seeing nought in the world but
the ghost of the town and his own stature had become a voluptuous passion with
him, and he did not remember having seen the mid-day sun for months.


He was wearied. The queen was tedious.


He could hardly understand, that night, the joy and pride that had possessed
him three years before, when the queen, bewitched perhaps by the stories of his
beauty and genius, had sent for him to the palace, and had heralded him to the
Evening Gate with the sound of the silver salpinx.


His arrival at the palace sometimes lighted up his memory with one of those
souvenirs which, through excess of sweetness, become gradually embittered in
the soul and then intolerable . . . The queen had received him alone, in her
private apartments, consisting of three rooms of incomparable luxury, where
every sound was muffled by cushions. She lay upon her left side, embedded, at
it were, in a litter of greenish silks which, by reflection, bathed the black
locks of her hair in purple. Her youthful body was arrayed in a daring
open-worked costume which she had had made before her eyes by a Phrygian
courtesan, and which exposed the twenty-two places where caresses are
irresistible. One had no need to take off that costume during a whole night,
even though one exhausted one’s amorous imagination beyond the most
extravagant dreams.


Demetrios fell respectfully on his knees, and took Queen Berenice’s naked
little foot in his hand, in order to kiss it, as one kisses an object delicate
and rare.


Then she rose.


Simply, like a beautiful slave posing, she undid her corselet, her bandelettes,
her open drawers, took off the very bracelets from her arms, the rings from her
ankles, and stood up erect, with her hands open before her shoulders, her head
slightly thrown back, and her coral coif trembling upon her cheeks.


She was the daughter of a Ptolemy and a Syrian princess descended from all the
gods, through Astarte, whom the Greeks call Aphrodite. Demetrios knew this, and
that she was proud of her Olympian lineage. Accordingly he was not disconcerted
when the queen said to him without moving: “I am Astarte. Take a block of
marble and your chisel and reveal me to the men of Egypt. I desire them to
worship my image.”


“I am Astarte. Take a block of marble and your chisel and
reveal me to the men of Egypt. I desire them to worship my image.”


Demetrios looked at her, and divined, unerringly, the artless, novel sensuality
with which this young girl’s body was animated. He said, “I am the
first to worship it,” and he took her in his arms. The queen was not
angry at this brusquerie, but stepped back a pace and asked, “You think
yourself Adonis, that you dare to lay hands on the goddess?” He answered,
“Yes.” She looked at him, smiled a little, and concluded.


“You are right.”


Thus was why he became insupportable, and his best friends left him; but he
ravished the hearts of all women.


When he entered one of the apartments of the palace, the women of the court
ceased talking, and the other women listened to him too, for the sound of his
voice was an ecstasy. If he took refuge with the queen, their persecution
followed him even there, under pretexts ever new. Did he wander through the
streets, the folds of his tunic became filled with little papyri on which the
women wrote their names with words of anguish. But he crumpled them up without
reading them. He was tired of all that. When his handiwork was set up in the
temple of Aphrodite, the sacred enclosure was invaded at every hour of the
night by the crowd of his feminine adorers, who came to read his name chiselled
in the stone and offer a wealth of doves and roses to their living god.


His house was soon encumbered with gifts, which he accepted at first out of
negligence, but ended by refusing all, when he understood what was desired of
him, and that he was being treated like a prostitute. His very slave-women
offered themselves. He had them whipped, and sold them to the little porneion
at Rhacotis. Then his men-slaves, seduced by presents, opened his door to
unknown women whom he found at his bed-side when he came home, and whose
attitude left no doubt as to their passionate intentions. The trinkets of his
toilet-table disappeared one after the other; more than one of the women of the
town had a sandal or a belt of his, a cup from which he had drunk, even the
stones of the fruit he had eaten. If he dropped a flower as he walked, he did
not find it again. The women would have picked up the very dust upon which his
shoes had trampled.


In addition to the fact that this persecution was becoming dangerous and
threatened to kill all his sensibility, he had reached the stage of manhood at
which a thinking man perceives the urgency of dividing his life into two parts,
and of ceasing to confound the things of the intellect with the exigencies of
the senses. The statue of Aphrodite was for him the sublime pretext of this
moral conversion. The highest realization of the queen’s beauty, all the
idealism it was possible to read into the supple lines of her body, Demetrios
had evoked it all from the marble, and from that day onward he imagined that no
other woman on earth would ever attain to the level of his dream. His statue
became the object of his passion. He adored it only, and madly divorced from
the flesh the supreme idea of the goddess, all the more immaterial because he
had attached it to life.


When he again saw the queen herself, she seemed to him destitute of everything
which had constituted her charm. She served for a certain time to hoodwink his
aimless desires, but she was at once too different from the Other, and too like
her. When she sank down in exhaustion after his embraces, and incontinently
went to sleep, he looked at her as if she were an intruder who had adopted the
semblance of the beloved one and usurped her place in his bed. The arms of the
Other were more slender, her breast more finely cut, her hips narrower than
those of the Real one. The latter did not possess the three furrows of the
groins, thin as lines, that he had graved upon the marble. He finally wearied
of her.


His feminine adorers were aware of it, and though he continued his daily visits
it was known that he ceased to be amorous of Berenice. And the enthusiasm on
his account doubled. He paid no attention to it. In point of fact, he had need
of a change of quite other importance.


It often happens that in the interval between two mistresses a man is tempted
and satisfied by vulgar dissipation. Demetrios succumbed to it. When the
necessity of going to the palace was more distasteful to him than usual, he
went off at night to the garden of the sacred courtesans. This garden
surrounded the temple on every side.


The women who frequented it did not know him. Moreover, they were so wearied by
the superfluity of their loves that they had neither exclamations nor tears,
and the satisfaction he was in search of was not dashed, in that quarter at
least, by those frenzied cat-cries with which the queen exasperated him.


His conversation with these fair, self-possessed ladies was idle and
unaffected. The day’s visitors, the probable weather on the morrow, the
softness of the grass, the mildness of the night—these were the charming
topics. They did not beg him to express his theories in statuary, and they did
not give their opinion upon the Achilleus of Scopas. If it befell that they
dismissed the lover who had chosen them, and that they thought him handsome and
told him so, he was quite at liberty not to believe in their disinterestedness.


When freed from the embrace of their religious arms, he mounted the temple
steps and fell to an ecstatic contemplation of the statue.


Between the slim columns crowned with Ionian volutes, the goddess stood
instinct with life upon a pedestal of rose-coloured stone laden with rich
votive offerings. She was naked and fully sexed, tinted vaguely and like a
woman. In one hand she held her mirror, the handle of which was a priapus, and
with the other she adorned her beauty with a pearl necklace of seven strings. A
pearl larger than the others, long and silvery, gleamed between her two
breasts, like the moon’s crescent between two round clouds.


Demetrios contemplated her tenderly, and would fain have believed, like the
common people, that they were real sacred pearls, born of the drops of water
which had rolled in the shell of Anadyomene.


“O divine sister!” he would say. “O flowered one! O
transfigured one! You are no longer the little Asiatic woman whom I made your
unworthy model. You are her immortal Idea, the terrestrial soul of Astarte, the
mother of her race. You shone in her blazing eyes, you burned in her sombre
lips, you swooned in her soft hands, you gaped in her great breasts, you
strained in entwining legs, long ago, before your birth; and the food which the
daughter of a sinner hungers for is your tyrant also, you, a goddess, the
mother of gods and men, the joy and anguish of the world. But I have seen you,
evolved you, caught you, O marvelous Cytherea! It is not to your image, it is
to yourself that I have given your mirror, and yourself that I have covered
with pearls, as on the day when you were born of the fiery heaven and the
laughing foam of the sea, like the dew-steeped dawn, and escorted with
acclamations by blue tritons to the shores of Cyprus.”


He had been adoring her after this fashion when he entered the quay, at the
hour when the crowd was melting away, and he heard the anguish and tears of the
flute-girls’ chant.


But he had spurned the courtesans of the temple that evening, because a glimpse
of a couple beneath the branches had stirred him with disgust and revolted him
to the soul.


The kindly influence of the night penetrated him little by little. He turned
his face of the wind, the wind that had passed over the sea and seemed to carry
to Egypt the lingering scent of the sweet-smelling roses of Amathus.


Beautiful feminine forms took shape in his brain. He had been asked for a group
of the three Charites, enclasping one another, for the garden of the goddess,
but it was distasteful to his youthful genius to copy conventions, and he
dreamed of bringing together on the same block of marble the three graceful
motions of woman. Two of the Charites were to be dressed, one holding a fan and
half closing her eyelids to the gently-swaying feathers; the other dancing in
the folds of her robe. The third should be standing naked behind her sisters,
and, with her uplifted arms, would be twisting the thick mass of her hair upon
her neck.


His mind conceived still other projects, as, for example, to erect, upon the
rocks of Pharos, an Andromeda of black marble confronting the tumultuous
monster of the sea, or to enclose the agora of Brouchion between the four
horses of the rising sun, like wrathful Pegasi; and what was not his exultant
rapture at the idea, which began to germinate within him, of a Zagreus
terror-stricken by the approaching Titans? Ah! how beauty had once more taken
him for its own! how he was escaping from the clutches of love! how he was
separating from the flesh the supreme idea of the goddess! In a word, how free
he felt!


Now, he turned his head towards the quays, and, in the distance, saw the yellow
shimmer of a woman’s veil.


She carried slowly along the deserted quay, which was bathed in moonlight. Her
head leaned over one shoulder. A little shadow danced and flickered before her
footsteps.


Demetrios watched her as she drew near.


Diagonal folds intersected the little one saw of her body through the thin
tissue; one of her elbows stood out in relief under the tight tunic, and the
other arm, which she had left bare, carried the long train, holding it high out
of the dust.


He recognised by her jewels that she was a courtesan. In order to avoid her
salutation he crossed the road rapidly.


He did not want to look at her. He obstinately centered his thoughts upon the
rough plan of his Zagreus. Nevertheless his eyes turned in the direction of the
passer-by.


Then he saw that she did not stop, that she paid no attention to him, that she
did not even affect to look at the sea, or to raise the front of her veil, or
to absorb herself in her reflections; but that she was merely taking a walk by
herself and was in search of nothing but the freshness of the breeze, solitude,
abandonment, the subtle thrill of silence.


Demetrios did not take his eyes off her, and fell into a singular astonishment.


She continued to walk like a yellow shadow in the distance, nonchalant, and
preceded by the little black shadow.


He heard at each step the slight creak of her shoe in the dust.


She walked on as far as the island of Pharos and went up into the rocks.


Suddenly, and as if he had loved this unknown woman for a long time, Demetrios
ran after her, then stopped, retraced his steps, trembled, got angry with
himself, tried to leave the quay; but he had never utilised his will except in
the service of his pleasure, and when it was time to set it in motion for the
salvation of his character and the ordering of his life, he felt completely
powerless and nailed to the spot on which he stood.


As he could not throw off the thought of this woman, he tried to find excuses
in his own eyes for the preoccupation which was so violently distracting him.
He imagined that his admiration for the graceful apparition was due to a purely
æsthetic sentiment, and he said to himself that she would make a perfect model
for the Charis with the fan which he intended to design on the morrow.


Then, suddenly, all his thoughts became confused, and a crowd of anxious
questions surged up into his mind about this woman in yellow.


What was she doing in the island at this hour of the night? Why, for whom had
she left home so late? Why had she not addressed him? She had seen him,
certainly she had seen him while he was crossing the quay. Why had she gone her
way without a word of salutation? It was rumoured that certain women sometimes
chose the fresh hours before the dawn to bathe in the sea. But there was no
bathing at Pharos. The sea was too deep. Besides, how unlikely that a woman
would be covered with all those jewels for no other object than to go bathing!
Then what took her so far from Rhacotis? A rendezvous perhaps? Some young rake,
avid of variety, who had chosen for a temporary bed the great rocks polished by
the waves?


Demetrios wished to be certain. But the young woman was already returning, with
the same calm and indolent step. The sluggish radiance of the moon shone full
upon her face as she advanced, brushing the dust of the parapet with the end of
her fan.


She had a special beauty of her own. Her hair seemed two masses of gold, but it
was too abundant, and it padded her low forehead with two heavy waves charged
with amber, which swallowed up the ears and twisted themselves into a
seven-fold coil upon the nape of the neck. The nose was delicate, with
expressive nostrils which palpitated sometimes, surmounting a thick and painted
mouth, with rounded mobile corners. The supple line of the body undulated at
every stop, receiving animation from the harmonious motion of her unfettered
breasts, or from the swing of the beautiful hips that supported her lissom
waist.


When she was within ten paces of the young man, she turned her eyes upon him.
Demetrios was seized with trembling. They were extraordinary eyes; blue, but
deep and brilliant at the same time, humid, weary, bathed in tears and flashing
fire, almost closed under the weight of the eyelids and eyelashes. The glance
of these eyes was like the siren’s song. Whosoever crossed their path was
inevitably a captive. She knew it well, and cunningly she used their virtue;
but she counted still more upon affected indifference as a weapon of attack
against the man whom so much sincere love had been incapable of touching
deeply.


The navigators who have sailed over the purple seas, beyond the Ganges, relate
that they have seen, beneath the water, rocks of magnetic stone. When ships
pass near them, the nails and iron fittings are wrenched down to the submarine
cliff and remain fixed to it for ever. And what was once a swift craft, a
habitation, a living being, becomes nought but a flotsam of planks, scattered
by the winds, tossed by the waves. Thus did Demetrios, in the presence of the
spell of two great eyes, lose his very self, and all his strength ebbed away.


She lowered her eyes and passed by close to him. He could have shouted with
impatience. He clenched his fists. He was afraid of not being able to recover a
calm attitude, for speak to her he must. Nevertheless he approached her with
the formula of convention.


“I salute you,” said he.


“I salute you,” said he. “I salute you also,”
answered the woman


“I salute you also,” answered the woman.


Demetrios continued:


“Where are you going to in so leisurely a fashion?”


“I am going home.”


“Alone?”


“Alone.”


And she made a movement as if to resume her walk.


Then Demetrios thought that perhaps he had made a mistake in taking her for a
courtesan. For some time past, the wives of the magistrates and functionaries
had taken to dressing and painting themselves like the women of pleasure. She
was probably a woman of honourable reputation, and it was not without irony
that he finished his question thus:


“To your husband?”


She put her two hands to her sides and began to laugh.


“I haven’t one this evening.”


Demetrios bit his lip and suggested, almost timidly:


“Don’t look for one. You have set to work too late. There is no one
about now.”


“Who told you that I was looking for one? I am taking a walk by myself,
and am looking for nothing.”


“Where have you come from then? You certainly have not put on all those
jewels for your own pleasure, and that silken veil. . .”


“Would you have me go out naked, or dressed in wool like a slave-woman? I
dress for my own benefit. I like to know that I am beautiful, and I look at my
fingers as I walk in order to recognise all my rings. . . . .”


“You ought to have a mirror in your hand and look at nothing but your
eyes. Those eyes did not see the light at Alexandria. You are a Jewess. I
recognise it by your voice, which is softer than ours.”


“No, I am not a Jewess. I am a Galilæn.”


“What is your name, Miriam or Noëmi?”


“My Syriac name you shall not know. It is a royal name which is not home
here. My friends call me Chrysis, and it is a compliment that you might have
paid me.”


He put his hand on her arm.


“Oh! no, no,” she said mockingly. “It is much too late for
this kind of trifling. Let me go home quickly. I have been up for nearly three
hours. I am dying of hunger.”


Bending down, she took her foot in her hand:


Bending down, she took her foot in her hand.


“See how my little thongs hurt me. They are too tightly strapped. If I do
not loose them in a moment, I shall have a mark on my foot, and that will be a
pretty object to kiss. Leave me quickly. Ah! what an ado! If I had known, I
would not have stopped. My yellow veil is all crumpled at the waist,
look.”


Demetrios passed his hand over his forehead; then, with the careless air of a
man who condescends to make his choice, he murmured:


“Show me the way.”


“I shall do nothing of the kind,” said Chrysis with a stupefied
air. “You do not even ask me whether it is my pleasure.


“Show me the way! Listen to him! Do you take me for a porneion-girl, who
puts herself on her back for three obols without looking to see who is
possessing her? Do you even know whether I am free? Do you know what
appointments I may have? Have you followed me in the street? Have you noted the
doors that open for me? Have you counted the men who think they are loved by
Chrysis? Show me the way! I shall not show it you, if you please. Stay here or
go away, but you shall not go home with me!”


“You do not know who I am.”


“You? Of course I do! You are Demetrios of Saïs; you made the statue of
my goddess; you are the lover of my queen and the lord of my town. But for me
you are nothing but a handsome slave, because you have seen me and you love
me.”


She came a little nearer to him, and went on in a caressing voice:


“Yes, you love me. Oh! don’t interrupt me. I know what you are
going to say: you love no one, you are loved. You are the Well-beloved, the
Darling, the Idol. You refused Glycera, who had refused Antiochus. Demonassa
the Lesbian, who had sworn to die a virgin, entered your bed during your sleep,
and would have taken you by force if your two Lybian slaves had not put her
naked into the street. Callistion, the well-named, despairing of approaching
you, has bought the house opposite yours, and shows herself at the open window
in the morning, as scantily dressed as Artemis in the bath. You think that I do
not know all that? But we courtesans hear of everything. I heard of you the
night of your arrival at Alexandria; and since then not a single day has passed
without your name being mentioned. I even know things you have forgotten. I
even know things that you do not yet know yourself. Poor little Phyllis hanged
herself the day before yesterday on your door-post, did she not? well, the
fashion is catching. Lyde has done like Phyllis: I saw her this evening as I
passed, she was quite blue, but the tears were not yet dry upon her cheeks. You
don’t know who Lyde is? a child, a little fifteen-year-old courtesan whom
her mother sold last month to a Samian shipwright who was passing the night at
Alexandria before going up the river to Thebes. She came to see me. I gave her
some advice; she knew absolutely nothing, not even how to play at dice. I often
took her in my bed, because, when she had no lover, she did not know where to
sleep. And she loved you! If you had seen her hug me to her and call me by your
name. She wanted to write to you. Do you understand? I told her it was not
worth while . . .”


Demetrios gazed at her without understanding.


“Yes, all that is a pure matter of indifference to you, is it not?”
continued Chrysis. “You did not love her. It is I that you love. You have
not even listened to what I have just told you. I am sure you could not repeat
a single word. You are absorbed in wondering how my eyelids are made up,
speculating on the sweetness of my mouth, on the softness of my hair. Ah! how
many others know all this! All who have desired me have had their pleasure upon
me: men, young men, old men, children, women, young girls. I have refused
nobody, do you understand? For seven years, Demetrios, I have only slept alone
three nights. Count how many lovers that makes. Two thousand five hundred and
more. I do not include those that came in the daytime. Last year I danced naked
before twenty thousand persons, and I know that you were not one of them. Do
you think that I hide myself? Ah! for what, pray? All the women have seen me in
the bath. All the men have seen me in bed. You alone, you shall never see me. I
refuse you. I refuse you. You shall never know anything of what I am, of what I
feel, of my beauty, of my love! You are an abominable man, fatuous, cruel,
insensible, cowardly! I don’t know why one of us has not had enough
hatred to kill you both in one another’s arms, first you, and afterwards
the queen.”


Demetrios quietly took her by the two arms, and, without answering a word, bent
her backwards with violence.


She had a moment’s anguish; but suddenly she stiffened her knees,
stiffened her elbows, backed a little, and said in a low voice:


“Ah! I am not afraid of that, Demetrios! you shall never take me by
force, were I as feeble as an amorous virgin and you as strong as a son of
Atlas. You desire not only the satisfaction of your own senses, but chiefly of
mine. Moreover, you want to see me from head to foot, because you believe that
I am beautiful, and I am beautiful indeed. Now the moon gives less light than
my twelve waxen torches. It is almost dark here. And then it is not customary
to undress upon the quay. I could not dress myself again without the help of my
slave. Let me free, you hurt my arms.”


They were silent for a few minutes; then Demetrios answered:


“We must have done with this, Chrysis. You know well that I shall not
force you. But let me follow you. However proud you are, you would pay dearly
for the glory of refusing Demetrios.”


Chrysis still kept silence. He continued more gently:


“What are you afraid of?”


“You are accustomed to the love of others. Do you know what ought to be
given to a courtesan who does not love?”


He became impatient.


“I do not ask you to love me. I am tired of being loved. I do not want to
be loved. I ask you to abandon yourself. For that, I will give you all the gold
in the world. I have it in Egypt.”


“I have it in my hair. I am tired of gold. I don’t want gold. I
want but three things. Will you give them to me?”


Demetrios felt that she was going to ask for the impossible. He looked at her
anxiously. But she began to smile, and said in slow tones:


“I want a silver mirror to gaze at my eyes within my eyes.”


“You shall have it. What else do you want? Quickly.”


“I want a carved ivory comb to plunge into my hair like a net into water
that sparkles in the sun.”


“And then?”


“You will give me my comb?”


“Yes, yes. Go on.”


“I want a pearl necklace to hang on my breast, when I dance you the
nuptial dances of my country in my chamber.”


He raised his eyebrows;


“Is that all?”


“You will give me my necklace?”


“Any you please.”


Her voice became very tender.


“Any I please? Ah! that is exactly what I wanted to ask you. Will you let
me choose my presents?”


“Of course.”


“You swear?”


“I swear.”


“What oath will you swear?”


“Dictate it to me.”


“By the Aphrodite you carved.”


“I swear by the Aphrodite. But why these precautions?”


“Ah! . . . I was uneasy; but now I am reassured”.


She raised her head.


“I have chosen my presents.”


Demetrios suddenly became anxious and asked:


“Already?”


“Yes. Do you think I shall accept any sort of silver mirror, bought of a
merchant of Smyrna, or some stray courtesan. I want the mirror of my friend
Bacchis, who stole a lover from me last week and jeered at me spitefully in a
little orgie she had with Tryphera, Mousarion, and some young fools who
repeated everything to me. It is a mirror she prizes greatly because it
belonged to Ithodopis, who was fellow-slave with æsop and was redeemed by
Sappho’s brother. You know that she is a very celebrated courtesan. Her
mirror is magnificent. It is said that Sappho used it, and it is for this
reason that Bacchis lays store on it. She has nothing more precious in the
world; but I know where you will find it. She told me one night, when she was
intoxicated. It is under the third stone of the altar. She puts it there every
evening when she leaves her house at sunset. Go to-morrow to her house at that
hour and fear nothing: she takes her slaves with her.”


“This is pure madness,” cried Demetrios. “Do you expect me to
steal?”


“Do you not love me? I thought that you loved me. And then, have you not
sworn? I thought you had sworn. If I am mistaken, let us say no more about
it.”


He understood that she was ruining him, but he yielded without a struggle,
almost willingly.


“I will do what you say,” he answered.


“Oh! I know well that you will. But you hesitate at first. I understand
that. It is not an ordinary present. I would not ask it of a philosopher. I ask
you for it. I know well that you will give it me.”


She toyed a moment with the peacock feathers of her round fan, and suddenly:


“Ah! . . . Neither do I wish for a common ivory comb bought at a
tradesman’s in the town. You told me I might choose, did you not? Well, I
want . . . I want the carved ivory comb in the hair of the wife of the high
priest. It is much more valuable than the mirror of Rhodopis. It came from a
queen of Egypt who lived a long time ago, and whose name is so difficult that I
cannot pronounce it. Consequently the ivory is very old, and as yellow as if it
were gilded. It has a carved figure of a young girl walking in a lotus-marsh.
The lotus is higher than she is, and she is stepping on tiptoe in order not to
get wet. . . . . It is really a beautiful comb. I am glad you are going to give
it to me. I have also some little grievances against its present possessor. I
had offered a blue veil to Aphrodite last month; I saw it on this woman’s
head next day. It was a little hasty, and I bore her a grudge for it. Her comb
will avenge me for my veil.”


“And how am I to get it?” asked Demetrios.


“Ah! that will be a little more difficult. She is an Egyptian, you know,
and she makes up her two hundred plaits only once a year, like the other women
of her race. But I want my comb to-morrow, and you must kill her to get it. You
have sworn an oath.”


She pouted at Demetrios, who was looking on the ground. Then she concluded very
quickly:


“I have chosen my necklace also. I want the seven-stringed pearl necklace
on the neck of Aphrodite.”


Demetrios started violently.


“Ah! this time, it is too much! You shall not have the laugh of me to the
end! Nothing, do you understand? neither the mirror, nor the comb, nor the
collar.”


But she closed his mouth with her hand and resumed her caressing tone:


But she closed his mouth with her hand.


“Don’t say that. You know well that you will give me this too. I am
sure of it. I shall have the three gifts. You will come to see me to-morrow
evening, and the day after to-morrow if you like, and every evening. I shall be
at home at any hour, in the costume you prefer, painted according to your
taste, with my hair dressed after your pleasure, ready for your most
extravagant caprices. If you desire but tender love, I will cherish you like a
child. If you thirst after rare sensations, I will not refuse you the most
agonising. If you wish for silence, I will hold my peace, when you want me to
sing, ah! you will see, Well-Beloved! I know songs of all countries. I know
some that are soft as the murmur of springs, others that are terrible as the
coming of thunder. I know some so simple and fresh that a young girl might sing
them to her mother; and I know some that could not be sung at Lampsacos. I know
some that Elephantis would have blushed to hear, and that I dare not sing above
a whisper. The nights you want me to dance, I will dance till morning. I will
dance fully dressed, with my trailing tunic, or in a transparent veil, or in
open drawers and a corselet with two openings to allow the breasts to peep
through. But have I promised you to dance naked? I will dance naked if you
prefer. Naked and with flowers on my head, or naked with my hair loose, painted
like a divine image. I can balance my hands, circle my arms, vibrate my breast,
heave my belly, contort my croup, you will see! I dance on the tips of my toes
or lying down in the carpets. I know all the dances of Aphrodite, that are
danced before Ourania, and those that are danced before Astarte. I even know
some they dare not dance. I will dance you all the loves. When this is finished
we shall be only at the beginning. You will see! The queen is richer than I am,
but there is not in all the palace a chamber as amorous as mine. I don’t
tell you what you will find there. There are things too beautiful for me to be
able to give you an idea of them, and others so strange that I do not know the
words to describe them. And then, do you know what you will see, something
which transcends all the rest? You will see Chrysis whom you love, and whom you
do not yet know. Yes, you have only seen my face, you do not know how beautiful
I am. Ah! Ah! . . . Ah! Ah! You will have surprises. Ah! how you will play with
my nipples, how you will bend my little waist as it lies upon your arm, how you
will tremble in the grasp of my knees, how you will faint away on my moving
body! And how excellent my mouth! Ah! my kisses!”


Demetrios looked at her with a frenzied eye.


She continued tenderly:


“What! You will not give me a poor old silver mirror when you may have
all my hair like a golden forest in your hands?”


Demetrios tried to touch it . . . She recoiled and said:


“To-morrow!”


“You shall have it,” he murmured.


“And you will not take for me a little ivory comb which pleases me, when
you can have my two arms like two branches of ivory around your neck?”


He tried to stroke them. She drew them behind her back and repeated:
“To-morrow!”


“I will bring it,” he said very low. “Ah! I knew it!”
cried the courtesan; “and you will also give me the seven-stringed
necklace of pearls on the neck of Aphrodite, and for that I will sell you all
my body, which is like a half-opened shell of mother-of-pearl, and more kisses
in your mouth than there are pearls in the sea!”


Demetrios held out his head, supplicatingly.


She shot him a brilliant glance and gave him her sensual lips . . .


When he opened his eyes she was already afar off. A little pale shadow danced
before her floating veil.


He returned vaguely towards the town, with his forehead bent under the weight
of an inexpressible shame.


The dim dawn rose on the sea. All things were tinted with lilac. The furnace
blazing on the summit of the tower of Pharos died down with the moon. Fugitive
yellow gleams appeared in the violet waves like sirens’ faces under the
hair of purple sea-weed. Daylight came all at once.


The quay was deserted. The town was dead. It was the grey light before the
first day blush that illumines the world’s sleep and brings the feverish
dreams of morning.


Nothing existed, except silence.


The long boats anchored in line near the quays, with their rows of parallel
oars hanging in the water, looked like sleeping birds. The perspective of the
architectural line of the streets was unbroken by vehicle, horse, or slave.
Alexandria was but a solitude, the unreal phantom of some antique city
abandoned for centuries.


But the sound of light footsteps fell tremulously upon the ground, and two
young girls appeared, one dressed in yellow, the other in blue.


They both wore maidens’ girdles, which circled round the hips and buckled
low down upon the body below the navel. They were the musicians of the night,
the singing-girl and one of the flute-girls.


The flute-girl was younger and prettier than her friend. Her eyes smiled
faintly, pale as the blue of her robe, half hidden under her eyelids. Her two
slender flutes hung dangling from her flowered shoulder-knot along her back. A
double iris-garland, fastened to the ankles by two silver anklets, undulated
beneath the gauzy robe and encircled the rounded legs.


She said:


“Myrtocleia, do not be sad because you have lost our tablets. Would you
ever have forgotten that you possess the love of Rhodis, and can you think,
naughty girl, you would ever have read in solitude the line written by my hand?
Am I one of those faithless friends who engrave their bed-sister’s name
upon their nail and unite themselves to another girl as soon as the nail has
grown to the limit? Do you need a souvenir of me when you have my living body?
I am barely of nubile age, and yet I was not half so old on the day I saw you
for the first time. You remember it well. It was at the bath. Our mothers took
us in their arms and held us towards one another. We played for a long time on
the marble before putting on our clothes again. We have never left one another
since that day, and, five years afterward, we loved each other.”


Myrtocleia answered:


“There is another first day, Rhodis, and you know it. It is the day you
linked our two names together in writing upon the tablets. That was the first
day! It will never come back again. But never mind. Each day is new for me, and
when you awake towards evening, it is as if I saw you for the first time, You
are not a girl at all: you are a little Arcadian nymph that has left her
forests because Phoibos has dried up her fountain. Your body is supple as an
olive branch, your skin is soft as water in summer, the iris circles about your
legs, and you wear the lotus-flower like Astarte the open fig. In what wood
haunted by immortals did your mother betake her to sleep before your
thrice-blessed birth? and what roaming ægipan, or what river-god united himself
with her in the grass? When we have left this terrible African soil, you shall
take me to your fountain, far beyond Psophis and Phenens, to vast shady forests
where, upon the soft earth, one may see the double footprints of satyrs and
light-treading nymphs. There you shall search out a smooth rock, and you shall
engrave upon the stone the words you wrote upon the wax: the words that are our
joy. Listen, listen, Rhodis! By the girdle of Aphrodite upon which all desires
are embroidered, all desires are unknown to me; for you are more than my dream!
By the horn of Amaltheia whence flow all the good things of the world, the
world is a matter of indifference to me; for you are the only good I have found
in it! When I look at you and when I see myself, I know not why you love me in
return. Your hair is as fair as ears of corn; mine is black as a ram’s
fleece. Your skin is as white as shepherd’s cheese; mine is brown as the
sand upon the beach. Your tender breast is as flowered as the orange tree in
autumn; mine is meagre and barren as the rock pine. If my face has gained in
beauty, it is because I have loved you. O Rhodis! well you know that my
singular virginity is like the lips of Pan eating a sprig of myrtle; yours is
the colour of roses, and dainty as the mouth of a little child. I do not know
why you love me; but if you ceased to love me for a day; if, like your sister
Theano who plays the flute by your side, you ever stayed to sleep in the houses
that employ us, then I should never even think of sleeping alone in our bed,
and when you came in you would find me strangled with my girdle.”


The very idea was so wild and cruel that Rhodis’s long eyes filled with
smiles and tears. She placed her foot upon a street-post:


“My flowers between my legs hamper me. Undo them, adored Myrto. I have
finished dancing for to-night.”


The singing-girl started.


“Oh! it is true. I had already forgotten them, those men and women. They
made both of you dance, you in this Cossian robe, transparent as water, and
your sister naked with you. If I had not protected you, they would have
possessed you like a prostitute, as they did your sister before our eyes in the
same room. Oh, what an abomination! Did you hear her cries and wailings? How
dolorous is the love of man!”


She knelt down beside Rhodis and unclasped the two garlands, and then the three
higher up, imprinting a kiss on the place of each. When she rose to her feet,
the child took her by the neck and swooned under her mouth.


“Myrto, you are not jealous of all those debauchees? What does it matter
that they should have seen me? Theano suffices them, and I have relinquished
her to them. They shall not have me, darling Myrto. Do not be jealous of
them.”


“Jealous! I am jealous of everything that approaches you. In order that
your robes may not have you alone, I put them on when you have worn them. In
order that the flowers in your hair may not remain amorous of you, I give them
to mean courtesans who will defile them in their orgies. I have given you
nothing, in order that nothing may possess you. I am afraid of everything you
touch, and I hate everything you look at. I should like to pass my whole life
between the four walls of a prison alone with myself and you, and unite myself
with you so profoundly, hide you so well between my arms, that no eye would
suspect your presence. I would I were the fruit that you eat, the perfume that
delights you, the sleep that glides beneath your eyelids, the love that strains
your limbs. I am jealous of the happiness I give you, and I would I could give
you the very happiness I derive from you. That is what I am jealous of; but I
do not fear your mistresses of a night when they help me to satisfy your
girlish desires. As for lovers, I know well that you will never be theirs; I
know well that you cannot love man, intermittent and brutal man.”


Rhodis exclaimed with conviction:


“I would rather go, like Nausithoe, and sacrifice my virginity to the god
Priapos adored at Thasos. But not this morning, darling. I have danced a long
time, and I am very tired. I wish I were at home, sleeping on your arm.”


She smiled, and continued:


“We must tell Theano that our bed is no longer hers. We will make her up
another one beside the door. After what I have seen this night I cannot embrace
her again. Myrto, it is really horrible. Is it possible to love like that? Is
that what they call love?”


“Yes, it is that.”


“They deceive themselves, Myrto. They do not know.”


Myrtocleia took her in her arms, and both kept silence together.


The wind mingled their hair.


“Look,” said Rhodis, “look! I see some one.”


The singing-girl looked. A woman, in the distance, was walking rapidly along
the quay.


“I recognise her.” resumed the child.


“It is Chrysis. She is wearing her yellow robe.”


“What! is she dressed already?”


“I can’t understand it. Usually she does not go out before mid-day,
and the sun is hardly up. Something must have happened to her: something
fortunate no doubt: she is so lucky.”


They advanced to meet her, and said:


“Hail, Chrysis.”


“Hail. How long have you been here?”


“I don’t know. It was daylight when we arrived.”


“There was nobody on the quay?”


“It is Chrysis. She is wearing her yellow robe.”


“Nobody.”


“Not a man! are you sure?”


“Oh, quite sure. Why do you ask?”


Chrysis did not answer. Rhodis went on:


“You wanted to see somebody?”


“Yes . . . perhaps . . . I think perhaps it is as well I have not seen
him. Yes, it is as well. I was wrong to come back; I could not restrain
myself.”


“But what is the matter? Do tell us, Chrysis.”


“Oh, no.”


“Not even us? Not even us, your little friends?”


“You shall know later on, together with the whole town.”


“It is very amiable of you.”


“You shall know a little before, if you really want to; but this morning
it is impossible. Extraordinary things are happening, my dears. I am dying to
tell you, but I must hold my tongue. You were going home? Come and sleep with
me, I am quite alone.”


“Oh, Chrysis, Chrysidion, we are so tired! We are going home certainly,
but to have a good sleep.”


“Well, you can sleep afterwards. To-day is the eve of the Aphrodisiæ. Is
it a day for rest? If you want the goddess to protect you and to make you happy
next year you must enter her temple with eyelids dark as violets and cheeks
white as lilies. We will see to that; come with me.”


She put her arms round their waists, and closing her caressing hands upon their
little half naked breasts, bore them hurriedly off.


Rhodis, however, remained preoccupied.


“And when we are in your bed,” she said, “will you not tell
us what is happening; what you expect?”


“I will tell you many things, everything you please; but about that
subject I shall say nothing.”


“Even when we are in your arms, naked, with the lamp extinguished?”


“Do not insist, Rhodis: you shall know to-morrow. Wait till
to-morrow.”


“You are going to be very happy? or very powerful?”


“Very powerful.”


Rhodis opened her eyes wide and exclaimed:


“You are going to sleep with the queen!”


“No,” said Chrysis laughing; “but I am going to be as
powerful as she is. Do you desire anything?”


“Oh, yes.”


And the little girl became thoughtful.


“Well, what is it?” asked Chrysis.


“It is something impossible. Why should I ask?”


Myrtocleia spoke for her:


“At Ephesos, in our country, when two virgins of nubile age like Rhodis
and me love one another, the law allows them to be united in marriage. They
both go to the temple of Athena and sacrifice their double girdle; thence to
the sanctuary of Iphinoë, where they offer a lock of their hair,
interwined; and finally to the peristyle of Dionysios, where the more male of
the two receives a little knife of sharp-edged gold, and a white linen cloth to
stanch the blood. In the evening, the “fiancee” is conducted to her
new home in a flowered chariot between her husband and the paranymph, escorted
by torch-bearers and flute-girls. And thenceforth they have the rights of
married people; they may adopt little girls and associate them in their
intimate life. They are respected. They have a family. That is the dream of
Rhodis. But it is not the custom here.”


“We will change the law,” said Chrysis.


“But leave it to me, you shall marry one another.”


“Oh, is it true?” cried the little girl, flushing with joy.


“Yes; and I don’t ask which of you is to be the husband. I know
that Myrto possesses everything necessary to create that illusion. You are
fortunate, Rhodis, to have such a friend. They are rare, whatever people
say.”


They reached the door, where Djala was sitting on the steps weaving a towel of
flax. The slave-woman rose to allow them to pass, and then followed them.


The two flute-girls took off their simple clothing in an instant. They
performed minute ablutions upon each other in a green marble bowl communicating
with the bath. Then they rolled upon the bed.


Chrysis looked at them without seeing them. The words spoken by Demetrios, even
the most trivial, ran in her memory unceasingly. She was not conscious of the
presence of Djala, who silently untied and unwound her long saffron veil,
unbuckled the girdle, took off the rings, the seals, the armlets, the silver
serpents, the golden pins; but the gentle titillation of her hair falling over
her shoulders woke her vaguely.


She asked for her mirror.


She was not conscious of the presence of Djala, who silently
untied and unwound her long saffron veil.


Was she beginning to feel afraid that she was not beautiful enough to keep this
new lover—for keep him she must—after the mad exploits she had
demanded of him? Or was it that, by a detailed examination of each one of her
physical beauties, she wanted to calm her alarms and justify her confidence?


She brought the mirror close to every part of her body, touching each in
succession. She appraised the whiteness of her skin, estimated its softness by
long caresses, its warmth by embraces. She tested the fullness of her breasts,
the firmness of her belly, the tension of her flesh. She measured her hair and
considered its glossiness. She tried the strength of her regard, the expression
of her mouth, the fire of her breath; and she bestowed a long, slow kiss along
her naked arm from the region of the armpit down to the bend of the elbow.


An extraordinary emotion, compounded of astonishment and pride, of certainty
and impatience, took possession of her at this contact with her own lips. She
turned round as if she were looking for somebody; but catching sight of the two
forgotten Ephesian girls upon her bed, she leaped into their midst, separated
them, hugged them with a sort of amorous fury, and her long golden hair
enveloped the three young heads.


The temple of Aphrodite-Astarte stood outside the gates of the town, in an
immense park, full of flowers and shade. The Nile water, conveyed by seven
aqueducts, induced an extraordinary verdure all the year round.


This flowering forest on the sea’s verge, these deep streams, these
lakes, these darkling meadows, had been created in the desert more than two
centuries previously by the first of the Ptolemies. Since then, the sycamores
planted by his orders had grown to gigantic size; under the influence of the
fertilising waters, the lawns had grown into meads, the basins had widened into
ponds, nature had turned a park into a champaign.


The gardens were more than a valley, more than a country; they were a complete
world enclosed by bounds of stone and governed by a goddess, the soul and
centre of this universe. All around it stood a circular terrace, eighty stades
long and thirty-two feet high. This was not a wall, it was a colossal
“cité,” composed of fourteen hundred houses. A corresponding number
of prostitutes inhabited this sacred town, and in this unique spot were
represented seventy different nationalities.


The plan of the sacred houses was uniform and as follows: the door, of red
copper (a metal consecrated to the goddess), bore a phallos-shaped knocker
which fell upon a receiving-plate in relief, the image of the cteis; and
beneath was graved the courtesan’s name, with the initials of the usual
formula:


Ω.Ξ.Ε.
ΚΟΧΛΙΣ
Π.Π.Π


Two rooms contrived like shops opened out on either side of the door, that is
to say, there was no wall on the side facing the gardens. The one on the right,
the “chambre exposée,” was the place where the courtesan sat
bedecked with her adornments upon a lofty cathedra at the hour when the men
arrived. The one on the left was at the disposal of suitors who wished to pass
the night in the open air, without, however, sleeping on the grass.


When the door was opened, a corridor gave access to a vast court-yard paved
with marble, the centre of which was occupied by an oval basin. A peristyle
cast a circle of shadow round this patch of light, and interposed a zone of
coolness between it and the entries to the seven chambers of the house. At the
further end rose the altar of red granite.


Each woman had brought a little idol of the goddess from her native country,
and each adored it in her own tongue, as it stood upon the altar, without
understanding the other women. Lachmi, Ashtaroth, Venus, Ischtar, Freia,
Mylitta, Cypris, such were the religious names of their deified VOLUPTAS. Some
venerated her under a symbolic form: a red pebble, a conical stone, a great
knotted shell. Most of them had a little statuette on a pedestal of green wood,
usually a rudely-carved figure with thin arms, heavy breasts, and excessive
hips. The hand pointed to the delta-shaped locks of the belly. They laid a
myrtle-branch at its feet, scattered the altar with rose leaves, and burned a
little grain of incense for every prayer granted. It was the confidant of all
their troubles, the witness of all their undertakings, the supposed cause of
all their pleasures. At their death, it was placed in their fragile little
coffin, to watch over their sepulture.


The most beautiful of these women came from the kingdoms of Asia. Every year,
the vessels which carried the presents of the tributaries or allies to
Alexandria landed, together with the bales and leathern bottles, a cargo of a
hundred virgins chosen by the priests for the service of the sacred garden.
They were Mysians and Jewesses, Phrygians and Cretans, daughters of Ecbatana
and Babylon, maidens from the Bay of Pearls and from the sacred banks of the
Ganges. Some were white-skinned with medallion-like faces and inflexible
bosoms; others, brown as the earth under rain, wore silver rings in their
noses. Their hair fell short and dark upon their shoulders.


Some came from a still greater distance: dainty, deliberate little beings,
whose language nobody understood, and who resembled yellow monkeys.


Their long eyes pointed towards their temples; they dressed their straight
black hair in the quaintest fashion. These girls remained all their lives as
timid as strayed animals. They knew the movements of love, but refused the kiss
upon the mouth. Between two passing unions they were to be seen sitting on
their little feet, and playing with one another, and amusing themselves like
infants.


In a solitary meadow, the pink and pale daughters of the North lived together,
lying upon the grass. They were Sarmatians with triple tresses, robust legs,
square shoulders, who made garlands for themselves with the branches of trees,
and wrestled for a pastime. There were big-breasted, flat-nosed, hairy
Scythians, who paired in the attitude of beasts; gigantic Teutons who terrified
the Egyptians with their hair pale as that of old men and their flesh softer
than that of children; Gauls, sandy-hued like cows, and who laughed without a
motive; young Celts with sea-green eyes, who never went out naked.


Elsewhere, the brown-breasted Iberians assembled together during the day. They
had heavy hair that they dressed with extreme care, and nervous bellies which
they did not depilate. Their firm skins and powerful croups were held in great
esteem by the Alexandrians. They were chosen for dancing-girls as often as for
mistresses. Under the large shadow of the palm-trees lived the daughters of
Africa: Numidians veiled in white, Carthaginians apparelled in black gauze,
Negresses enveloped in many-coloured costumes.


They were fourteen hundred.


When once a woman had entered the garden, she never left it till the first day
of her old age. She gave the half of her gains to the temple, and the remainder
went to defray the cost of her meals and perfumes.


The poorer tradesman . . . preferred to address themselves
to the women who slept thus in the open air.


They were not slaves, and each was the real owner of one of the houses of the
Terrace; but all were not equally beloved, and the most fortunate often found
the opportunity of buying the neighbouring houses, which their owners were
willing to sell in order to escape the ravages of hunger. These girls carried
off their obscene statuettes to the park and searched out a flat stone to serve
as an altar, in a corner which henceforth they did not leave. The poorer
tradesmen were aware of this. and preferred to address themselves to the women
who slept thus in the open air upon the moss near their sanctuaries; but
occasionally even these suitors were not forthcoming, and then the poor
creatures took to themselves a partner in distress. These passionate
friendships developed almost into conjugal love. The couple shared everything
down to the last scrap of wool. They consoled one another for their long
periods of chastity by alternate complaisances.


Those who had no girl friends offered themselves of their own accord as slaves
to their more prosperous colleagues.


The latter were forbidden to have more than a dozen of these poor creatures in
their service; but twenty-two courtesans were quoted as having attained the
maximum. These had chosen a motley staff of domestics from all the
nationalities.


If, in the course of their stray amours, they conceived a son, he was brought
up in the temple-enclosure in the contemplation of the perfect form and in the
service of its divinity. If they were brought to bed of a daughter, the child
was consecrated to the goddess.


On the first day of its life, they celebrated its symbolic marriage with the
son of Dionysos, and the Hierophant deflowered it herself with a little golden
knife; for virginity is displeasing to Aphrodite. Later on, the little girl
entered the Didascalion, a great monumental school situated behind the temple,
and where the theory and practice of all the erotic arts were taught in seven
stages: the use of the eyes, the embrace, the motions of the body, the secrets
of the bite, of the kiss, and of glottism.


The pupil chose the day of her first experiment at her own good pleasure,
because desire is ordained by the goddess, whose will must be obeyed. On that
day, she was allotted one of the houses of the Terrace, and some of these
children, who were not even nubile, counted amongst the most zealous and the
most esteemed.


The interior of the Didascalion, the seven class-rooms, the little theatre, and
the peristyle of the court, were decorated with ninety-two frescoes designed to
sum up the whole of amatory teaching. It was the life-work of one man.
Cleochares of Alexandria, the natural son and disciple of Apelles, had
terminated them on the eve of his death. Recently, Queen Berenice, who was
greatly interested in the celebrated school and sent her young sisters to it,
had ordered a series of marble groups from Demetrios in order to complete the
decoration; but as yet only one of them had been erected, in the
children’s class-room.


At the end of each year, in the presence of the entire body of courtesans, a
great competition took place, which excited an extraordinary emulation amongst
this crowd of women, for the twelve prizes which were offered conferred the
right to the most exalted glory it was possible to dream of: the right to enter
the Cotytteion.


This last monument was shrouded in so much mystery, that it is impossible for
us to give a detailed description of it. We know merely that it was comprised
in the peribola and that it had the form of a triangle of which the base was a
temple of the goddess Cotytto, in whose name fearful unknown debauches took
place. The other two sides of the monument were composed of eighteen houses;
they were inhabited by thirty-six courtesans, so sought after by rich lovers
that they did not give themselves for less than two minæ: they were the Baptes
of Alexandria. Once a month, at full moon, they assembled in the temple
enclosure, maddened by aphrodisiacs, and girt with the canonical phallos. The
oldest of the thirty-six was required to take a mortal dose of the terrible
erotogenous philter. The certainty of a speedy death impelled her to attempt
without hesitation all the dangerous feats of sensual passion before which the
living recoil. Her body, covered with foam, became the centre and model of the
whirling orgie; in the midst of prolonged shriekings, cries, tears, and dances,
the other naked women embraced her with frenzy, bathed their hair in her sweat,
fastened on her burning flesh, and drew fresh ardors from the uninterrupted
spasm of this furious agony. Three years these women lived thus, and such was
the wild madness of their end at the close of the thirty-sixth month.


Other less venerated sanctuaries had been erected by the women, in honour of
the other names of the multiform Aphrodite. There was an altar sacred to the
Ouranian Aphrodite, which received the chaste vows of sentimental courtesans:
another to the Apostrophian Aphrodite, who granted forgetfulness of unrequited
loves; another to the Chrysean Aphrodite, who attracted rich lovers; another to
Genetyllis, the patron goddess of women in child-birth; another to Aphrodite of
Colias, who presided over gross passions, for everything which related to love
fell within the pious cult of the goddess. But these special altars possessed
no efficacy or virtue except in the case of unimportant desires. Their service
was haphazard, their favours were a matter of daily occurrence, and their
votaries were on terms of familiarity with them. Suppliants whose prayers had
been granted made simple offerings of flowers; those who were not content
defiled them with their excrements. They were neither consecrated nor kept up
by the priests, and their profanation incurred no punishment.


Far different was the discipline of the temple.


The temple, the Great Temple of the Great Goddess, the most sacred spot in all
Egypt, the inviolable Astarteïon, was a colossal edifice one hundred and thirty
six feet in length, standing on the summit of the gardens and approached on all
sides by seventeen steps. The golden gates were guarded by twelve hermaphrodite
hierodules, symbolising the two objects of love and the twelve hours of the
night.


The entrance did not face towards the east, but in the direction of Paphos,
that is to say, towards the north-east. The sun’s rays never penetrated
directly into the sanctuary of the Great Goddess of the Night. Eighty-six
columns upheld the architrave: they were tinted purple as far as their
mid-height, and all the upper part stood out from these gaudy trappings with an
unspeakable whiteness, like the busts of standing women.


Between the epistyle and the coronis, the long belt-shaped Zophora unfolded its
bestial sculptures, erotic and fabulous. There were centauresses mounted by
stallions, goats tumbled by meagre satyrs, virgins served by monstrous bulls,
naïads covered by stags, bacchantes loved by tigers, lionesses seized by
griffins. All this great wallowing multitude of beings was exalted by the
irresistible divine passion. The male strained, the female opened, and the
fusion of the creative forces produced the first thrill of life. The crowd of
obscure couples sometimes, by chance, left a clear space round some immortal
scene: Europa on hands and knees bearing the weight of the glorious Olympian
beast; Leda guiding the hardy swan between her beautiful arched thighs. Farther
on, the insatiable Siren exhausting expiring Glaucos; the god Pan standing
upright and possessing an hamadryad with flying hair; the Sphinx raising her
croup to the level of the horse Pegasos. At the end of the frieze, the sculptor
had carved a figure of himself facing the goddess Aphrodite. He stood there
modelling the contours of a perfect cteis in soft wax, with the goddess herself
as his model, as if his whole ideal of beauty, joy, and virtue had long since
taken refuge in this precious fragile flower.


“Purify thyself, stranger.”


“I shall enter pure,” said Demetrios.


Dipping the end of her hair in water, the young gate-keeper moistened first his
eyelids, then his lips and fingers, in order that his glance might be
sanctified, as also the kiss of his mouth and the caress of his hands.


And then he pressed forward into the wood of Aphrodite.


Through the dark branches, he perceived a setting sun of sombre purple,
powerless to dazzle the eyes. It was the evening of the day on which his life
had been convulsed by the meeting with Chrysis.


The feminine soul is of a simplicity incredible to men. Where there is nothing
but a straight line, they obstinately search for the complexity of a web; they
find emptiness and go astray in it. Thus it was that the soul of Chrysis,
limpid as a little child’s, appeared to Demetrios more mysterious than a
problem in metaphysics. After leaving this woman upon the quay, he went back to
his house like a man in a dream, incapable of answering all the questions which
tormented him. What did she want with these three gifts? It was impossible for
her either to wear or to sell a celebrated mirror, acquired by theft, the comb
of an assassinated woman, the pearl necklace of the goddess. If she kept them
at home, she would expose herself every day to the possibility of a fatal
discovery. Then why ask for them? To destroy them? He knew only too well that
women are incapable of enjoying things in secret and that good fortune brings
them happiness only as soon as it is noised abroad. And then, what divination,
what profound clairvoyance had led her to judge him capable of accomplishing
three such extraordinary actions for her sake?


Assuredly, if he had liked, he might have carried off Chrysis from her home,
held her at his mercy, and made her his mistress, his wife, or his slave, at
choice. He had even the right to do away with her, simply. Former revolutions
had accustomed the citizens to violent deaths, and no one would have troubled
about the disappearance of a courtesan. Chrysis must know this, and yet she had
dared . . .


The young gate-keeper moistened first his eyelids.


The more he thought about her, the more grateful he was to her for having
varied the usual routine of bargaining in so charming a manner. How many women
of equal worth with Chrysis had offered themselves clumsily! But what did this
one ask for? Neither love, nor gold, nor jewels, but three unheard-of crimes!
She interested him keenly. He had offered her all the treasures of Egypt: he
felt distinctly, now, that if she had accepted them she would not have received
two obols, and that he would have tired of her even before knowing her. Three
crimes were certainly an unusual salary; but she was worthy to receive it since
she was a woman capable of exacting it, and he promised himself to go on with
the adventure.


In order not to give himself the time to repent of his firm resolve, he went
the very same day to the house of Bacchis, found the house empty, took the
silver mirror and went off to the gardens.


Was it necessary to make a direct call on Chrysis’s second victim?
Demetrios thought not. The priestess Touni, who owned the famous ivory comb,
was so charming and so weak that he was afraid of repenting if he went straight
to her house without any preliminary precautions. He retraced his steps and
went along the Grand Terrace.


The courtesans were on show in their “chambres exposées” like
flowers in a shop window.


Their attitudes and their costumes had no less diversity than their ages,
types, and races. The most beautiful, according to the tradition of Phryne,
leaving exposed nothing but the oval of their faces, sat enveloped from head to
foot in their great garment of fine wool. Others had adopted the fashion of
transparent robes, under which one distinguished their beauties mysteriously,
just as, through limpid water, one discerns the green mosses lying in splashes
of shade upon the bottom. Those whose sole charm consisted in their
youthfulness sat naked to the waist, stiffening out their busts in order to
display to the best advantage the firmness of their breasts. But the most
mature, knowing that the features of the feminine visage age more quickly than
the skin of the body, sat quite naked, holding their breasts in their hands,
and stretching their clumsy thighs apart, as if they wished to prove that they
were still women.


Demetrios passed slowly before them.


Demetrios passed slowly before them, with unflagging admiration. He had never
yet succeeded in contemplating a woman’s nudity without intense emotion.
He understood neither disgust before the corpse of a young woman nor
insensibility to the body of a little girl. That evening any woman could have
charmed him. Provided she remained silent and did not display more ardour than
the minimum required by the etiquette of the bed, he was quite ready to forgive
her for her lack of beauty. And what is more, he even preferred that she should
have a coarse body, for the more his intelligence considered faultless forms,
the less room was there for his sensual desires. The agitation which he felt
upon contact with living beauty was due to a sensualism exclusively cerebral,
which annihilated mere sexual excitation. He remembered with anguish having
remained all night as impotent as an old man, by the side of the most admirable
woman he had ever held in his arms. And since that night he had learnt to
choose mistresses of less purity.


“Friend,” said a voice, “you don’t recognise me?”


He turned round with a negative sign, and went on his way, for he never
undressed the same woman twice. It was the principle that guided his visits to
the gardens. A woman one has not yet possessed retains something of the virgin;
but what good result, what surprise can one expect from a second rendez-vous?
It is almost marriage. Demetrios did not expose himself to the illusions of the
second night. Queen Berenice sufficed for his rare conjugal impulses, and with
that exception he was careful to choose a new accomplice for every
evening’s indispensable adultery.


“Clonarion!


Gnatene!


Plango!


Mnaïs!


Crobyle!


Ioessa.”


They cried their names as he passed, and some added protestations of their
ardent natures or proposed an abnormal vice. Demetrios followed the road. He
was preparing to choose at a venture, according to his habit, when a little
girl entirely dressed in blue leaned her head upon her shoulder and said to him
softly, without rising:


“Is it quite out of the question?”


The novelty of this mode of address made him smile. He stopped.


“Open the door,” he said. “I choose you.”


The little girl gleefully jumped to her feet and gave two raps with the
phallus-shaped knocker. The door was opened by an old slave woman.


“Gorgo,” said the little girl, “I have got somebody; quickly,
get some cakes and Cretan wine, and make the bed.”


She turned round to Demetrios.


“You don’t want any satyrion?”


“No,” said the young man laughing. “You have some?”


“I have to keep it,” said the child. “I am asked for it
oftener than you think. Come this way; be careful of the steps, one of them is
worn. Go into my room. I shall be back in a moment.”


The room was quite simple, like those of the novices. A great bed, a couch, a
few seats and carpets composed all the scanty furniture; but through a large
open bay there was a view over the gardens, the sea, the double harbour of
Alexandria. Demetrios remained standing and looked at the distant city.


Suns setting behind harbours! Incomparable glories of maritime cities, calm
skies, purple waters! Upon what soul vociferous with joy or sorrow would you
not cast a shroud of silence? What feet have not halted, what passions have not
withered, what voices have not died away before you? . . . Demetrios looked; a
swell of torrential flame seemed to issue from the sun, half dipping into the
sea, and to flow straight to the left bend of the wood of Aphrodite. From
horizon to horizon, the Mediterranean was flooded by the sumptuous purple
spectrum which lay in sharply-defined bands of colour, golden red and dull
violet side by side. Between this ever-shifting splendour and the peaty mirror
of Lake Mareotis, stood the white mass of the town, bathed in red and violet
reflexions. Its twenty thousand flat houses spreading in different directions
picked it out marvellously with twenty thousand dashes of colour that underwent
a perpetual metamorphosis according to the various phases of the setting
luminary. The flaming sun shot forth rapid shafts, then was swallowed up,
almost suddenly, in the sea, and with the first reflux of the night, there
floated over the whole earth a thrill, a muffled breeze, uniform and
transparent.


“Here are figs, cakes, a piece of honeycomb, wine, a woman. Eat the figs
while it is daylight and the woman when it is dark.”


It was the little girl, laughing as she entered. She bade the young man sit
down, mounted astride on his knees, and stretching her two arms behind her
head, made fast a rose which was on the point of slipping down from her auburn
hair.


In spite of himself Demetrios could not restrain an exclamation of surprise.
She was completely naked, and when divested of her ample robe, her little body
was seen to be so young, so infantine in the breast, so narrow at the hips, so
visibly immature, that Demetrios felt a sense of pity, like a horseman on the
point of throwing his man’s weight upon an over-delicate mare.


“But you are not a woman!” he exclaimed.


“I am not a woman! By the two goddesses, what am I, then? A Thracian, a
porter, or an old philosopher?”


“How old are you?”


“Ten and a half. Eleven. One may say eleven. I was born in the gardens.
My mother is a Milesian. She is called Pythias, but she goes by the name of
‘The Goat.’ Shall I send for her, if you think me too little? Her
house is not far from mine.”


“You have been to the Didascalion?”


“I am still there in the sixth class. I shall have finished next year;
and not too soon either.”


“Aren’t you happy?”


“Ah! if only you knew how difficult the mistresses are to please! They
make you recommence the same lesson twenty times! Things perfectly useless that
men never ask for. And then one is tired out, all for nothing. I don’t
like that at all. Come, take a fig; not that one, it is not ripe. I will show
you a new way to eat. Look!”


“I know it. It is longer and no better than the other way. I see that you
are a good pupil.”


“Oh! I have learnt everything I know by myself. The mistresses would have
us believe that they are cleverer than we are. They have more style, that may
be, but they have invented nothing.”


“You have many lovers?”


“They are all too old: it is inevitable. Young men are so foolish! They
only like women forty years old. Now and again I see young men pretty as Eros
pass by, and if you were to see what they choose! Hippopotami! It is enough to
make one turn pale. I hope sincerely that I shall never reach these
women’s age: I should be too ashamed to undress. I am so glad to be still
quite young. The breasts always develop too soon. I think that the first month
I see my blood flow I shall feel ready to die. Let me give you a kiss. I like
you very much.”


Here the conversation took a less serious if not a more silent turn, and
Demetrios rapidly perceived that his scruples were beside the mark in the case
of so expert a young lady. She seemed to realise that she was somewhat meagre
pasturage for a young man’s appetite, and she battled her lover by a
prodigious activity of furtive finger-touches, which he could neither foresee
nor elude, nor direct, and which never left him the leisure for a loving
embrace. She multiplied her agile, firm little body around him, offered
herself, refused herself, slipped and turned and struggled. Finally they
grasped one another. But this half hour was merely a long game.


She jumped out of bed the first, dipped her finger in the honey-bowl and
moistened her lips; then, making a thousand efforts not to laugh, she bent over
Demetrios and rubbed her mouth against his. Her round curls danced on either
side of their cheeks. The young man smiled and leaned upon his elbow.


“What is your name?” he asked.


“Melitta. Did you not see my name upon the door?”


“I did not look.”


“You can see it in my room. They have written it all over the walls. I
shall soon be forced to have them repainted.”


Demetrios raised his head: the four panels of the chamber were covered with
inscriptions.


“That is very curious, indeed.” said he. “May one
read?”


“Oh, if you like. I have no secrets.”


He read. Melitta’s name was there several times repeated, coupled with
various men’s names and barbaric drawings. Tender, obscene, or comic
sentences jostled oddly with one another. Lovers boasted of their vigour, or
detailed the charms of the little courtesan, or poked fun at her girl-friends.
All this was interesting merely as a written proof of a general degradation.
But, looking towards the bottom of the right-hand panel, Demetrios gave a
start.


“What is that? What is that? Speak!”


“Who? What? Where?” said the child. “What is the matter with
you?”


“Here. That name. Who wrote that?”


And his finger stopped under this double line.


ΜΕΛΙΤΤΑ .Λ. ΧΡΥΣΙΔΑ
ΧΡΥΣΙΣ .Λ. ΜΕΛΙΤΤΑΝ


“Ah!” she answered, “that’s me. I wrote that.”


“Who is she, Chrysis?”


“My great friend.”


“I dare say. That is not what I ask you. Which Chrysis? There are
many.”


“Mine, the most beautiful. Chrysis of Galilee.”


“You know her! you know her! But speak, speak! Where does she come from?
where does she live? who is her lover? tell me everything!”


He sat down upon the couch and took the little girl upon his knees.


“You are in love, then?” she said.


“That matters little to you. Tell me what you know; I am in a hurry to
hear everything.”


“Oh! I know nothing at all. It is quite short. She has been to see me
twice, and you may imagine that I have not asked her for details about her
family. I was too happy to have her, and I did not lose time in
conversation.”


“How is she made?”


“Like a pretty girl, what do you expect me to say? Do you want me to name
all the parts of her body, adding that everything is beautiful? And then, she
is a woman, a real woman . . . Every time I think about her I desire
somebody.”


And she put her arm round the neck of Demetrios.


“Don’t you know anything about her?” he began again.


“I know—I know that she comes from Galilee, that she is nearly
twenty years old, and that she lives in the Jews’ quarter, in the east
end, near the gardens. But that is all.”


“And about her life, her tastes? can you tell me nothing? She is fond of
women, since she came to see you. But is she altogether Lesbian?”


“Certainly not. The first night she passed here, she brought a lover, and
I swear to you there was no make-believe about her. When a woman is sincere, I
can see it by her eyes. That did not prevent her from returning once quite
alone. And she has promised me a third night.”


“You don’t know whether she has any other amie in the
gardens? Nobody?”


“Yes, one of her countrywomen, Chimairis. She is very poor.”


“Where does she live? I must see her.”


“She has slept in the wood for upwards of a year. She has sold her house.
But I know where her den is. I can take you to it if you wish. Put on my
sandals, will you?”


Demetrios rapidly buckled the plaited leather straps round Melitta’s
slender ankles. Then he handed her her short robe, which she merely threw over
her arm, and they departed in haste.




They walked far. The park was immense. From time to time, a girl under a tree
proffered her name and opened her robe, then lay down again and leaned her face
upon her hand. Melitta knew some of them: they embraced her without stopping
her. Passing before a rustic altar, she gathered three great flowers and placed
them upon the stone.


“My little girl! my little love! how are you?”


It was not yet dusk. The intense light of summer days has something permanent
about it which lingers vaguely in the slow twilight.


The faint, humid stars, hardly brighter than the body of the sky, twinkled and
throbbed gently, and the shadows of the branches remained indecisive.


“Mamma! There’s mamma,” cried Melitta suddenly.


A woman, dressed in a garment of triple muslin striped with blue, was seen
advancing with a tranquil step, alone. As soon as she caught sight of the child
she ran up to her, raised her off the ground, lifted her up in her arms, and
kissed her energetically on the cheek.


“My little girl! my little love! how are you?”


“I am guiding somebody who wants to see Chimairis. And you? Are you out
for a walk?”


“Corinna is accouchée. I have been to see her. I have dined by her
bedside.”


“And what has she given birth to? A boy?”


“Two twin girls, my dear, as pink as wax dolls. You can go and see them
tonight; she will show them to you.”


“Oh! how lovely! Two little courtesans. What are their names?”


“They are both called Pannychis, because they were born on the day before
the Aphrodisiæ. It is a divine presage. They will be pretty.”


She replaced the child upon her feet, and turning to Demetrios:


“What do you think of my daughter? Have I the right to be proud of
her?”


“You have the right to be satisfied with one another,” he answered
gravely.


“Kiss mamma,” said Melitta.


He silently imprinted a kiss between her breasts. Pythias returned it to him
upon the mouth, and they separated.


Demetrios and the child advanced a few more paces beneath the trees, whilst the
courtesan receded into the distance, turning her head as she walked. At last
they reached their goal, and Melitta said:


“It is here.”


Chimairis was sitting crouching upon her left heel, on a little grass-plot
between two trees and a bust. A sort of red rag, her last remaining day
garment, lay spread out beneath her. At night, she slept upon it naked, at the
hour the men passed. Demetrios contemplated her with growing interest. She had
the feverish aspect of certain emaciated dark women whose tawny bodies seem
consumed by an ever-throbbing ardour. Her powerful lips, the excessive
brilliancy of her glance, her livid eyelids combined to produce a double
expression of sensual lustfulness and physical exhaustion. The curve of her
hollow belly and her nervous thighs formed a natural cavity, designed as if to
receive; and as she had sold everything, even her combs and pins, even her
depilatory tweezers, her hair was tangled together in inextricable disorder. A
black pubescence invested her nudity with a certain savage and shaggy
effrontery.


A great he-goat stood stiffly on its four legs beside her. It was tethered to a
tree by a gold chain which had formerly glittered in a quadruple coil upon its
mistress’s breast.


“Chimairis,” said Melitta, “get up. Here is somebody who
wishes to speak to you.”


The Jewess looked, but did not move.


Demetrios advanced.


“Do you know Chrysis?” he said.


“Yes.”


“Do you see her often?”


“Yes.”


“Will you talk to me about her?”


“No.”


“What? No? What? you cannot?”


“No.”


Melitta was stupefied.


“Speak to him,” she said. “Have confidence. He loves her, he
wishes her well.”


“I see clearly that he loves her.” answered Chimairis. “If he
loves her, he wishes her ill. If he loves her, I shall not speak.”


Demetrios tingled with rage, but said nothing.


“Give me your hand,” said the Jewess. “It will tell me
whether I am mistaken.”


She took the young man’s left hand and turned it towards the moonlight.
Melitta leaned forward to see, although she could not read the mysterious
lines, but their fatality attracted her.


“What do you see?” said Demetrios.


“I see . . . Can I tell what I see? will you be obliged to me? First I
see happiness, but it is all in the past. I also see love, but it is drowned in
blood . . .”


“In my blood?”


“In a woman’s blood. And then the blood of another woman. And then
yours, a little later on.”


Demetrios shrugged his shoulders, and when he turned, he perceived Melitta
fleeing down the alley at full speed.


“It has given her a fright,” said Chimairis.


“But there is no question of Melitta or of me. Let things take their
course, since nothing can be prevented. Your destiny was certain even before
your birth. Go. I shall say no more.” And she dropped his hand.


“A woman’s blood. Afterwards another woman’s blood.
Afterwards yours, but a little later on.”


Demetrios repeated these words to himself as he walked, and in spite of
himself, his belief in them weighed upon him. He had never had any faith in
oracles drawn from the bodies of victims or the movements of planets. These
affinities seemed too problematical. But the complex lines of the hand have, in
themselves, an exclusively personal horoscopic aspect which he considered with
uneasiness. The fortune-teller’s prediction haunted his mind.


In his turn, he examined the palm of his left hand, on which his life was
summed up in secret and indelible signs.


In the first place he saw, at the summit, a sort of regular crescent, the ends
of which pointed towards the base of the fingers. Below this, a deep quadruple
line, knotted and roseale, marked in two places by very red spots. Another
line, but thinner, ran parallel to this at first, and then swerved brusquely
round towards the wrist. Finally, a third line, short and clear, turned round
the base of the thumb, which was entirely covered with thread-like markings. He
saw all that; but, not being able to read the hidden symbol, he passed his hand
over his eyes and changed the subject of his meditations.


Chrysis! Chrysis! Chrysis! This name throbbed within him like a fever. Satisfy
her, vanquish her, clasp her in his arms, fly with her elsewhere, to Syria, to
Greece, to Rome, no matter where, provided it was a place where he had no
mistress and she no lovers: that was the thing, and immediately, immediately.


Of the three presents she had asked for, one was already in his possession.
Remained the other two: the comb and the necklace.


“The comb first,” he said to himself.


Every evening at sunset, the high priest’s wife went forth and sat upon a
marble seat, with her back turned to the forest and her face set to the great
expanse of sea in front of her. Demetrios knew this well, for this woman, like
so many others, had been in love with him, and she had told him that the day he
chose to possess her it was there he would find her.


It was to that spot, then, that he directed his steps. And there indeed she
was; but she did not see him coming. She was sitting with her eyes shut, with
her body thrown back upon the seat, and her arms hanging negligently by her
sides.


She was an Egyptian. Her name was Touni. She wore a light tunic of bright
purple, without clasp or girdle, and without other adornments than two black
stars to mark the points of her breasts. The thin tissue, ironed into pleats,
terminated at the curve of the delicate knees, and little shoes of blue
leather, fitting like gloves, covered her dainty round feet. Her skin was very
swarthy, her lips very thick, her shoulders very small, and her fragile, supple
waist seemed to bend under the weight of her full throat. She was asleep with
her mouth open, dreaming peacefully.


Demetrios, noiselessly, sat down on the bench, by her side.


He slowly drew nearer and nearer, leaning over her, appreciating the delicate
lines of her smooth, dark-skinned shoulders, slender at the summit, muscular
near the armpit and joined to the bust by the shading of the bush beneath.


Lower down, the long, loose slit of the purple muslin tunic was open as far as
the hips. Through the gaping drapery, Demetrios slowly passed his hand, and his
united finger-tips touched the curves of her left breast, damp with
perspiration. Its nipple rose erect in the palm of his hand. Notwithstanding,
Touni slept on.


Her dream gradually changed, but did not fade. Her breath came quicker through
her half open lips and she murmured a long, unintelligible sentence, as her
fevered head fell back once more.


With the same stealthy tenderness, Demetrios withdrew his hot hand, to let it
be refreshed by the light breeze.


She was asleep.... dreaming peacefully.


From the vague outline of the blue garden slopes as far as the immense
scintillation of the night, shuddered the eternal sea. Like unto another bosom
of some fresh priestess, its undulations were swelling heavenwards, uplifted by
the dreams of antiquity that still cause it to thrill in the sight of our
belated glances. When the end of all things is nigh, the last living beings
will try before they disappear to fathom the mysteries of the moving ocean.


The moon inclined her great goblet of blood over the waters. Far away, in the
purest atmosphere that had ever united heaven and earth, a slight red trail,
where black veins meandered, trembled on the surface of the waves beneath the
rising orb of night, as when the agitation of a caress on a rounded breast, in
the dead of night, remains long after the hand that caused it has been lifted.


Touni still slumbered, her head leaning backwards, her body well-nigh naked,
enshrouded in tinted muslin folds.


The purple glare of the moon, as yet on the horizon, came over the sea towards
the sleeping woman. The fatal, vivid rays lit her up with a flame that seemed
immobile. Little by little, their brilliancy mounted, encircling the Egyptian
girl. Her black curls appeared one by one, and finally the Comb flashed out of
the darkness: the royal Comb that Chrysis coveted. The ivory diadem was now
bathed in the glory of the crimson moonbeams.


It was then that the sculptor took Touni’s sweet face in both his hands,
turning her features towards his own. Her eyes opened and became dilated.


“Demetrios! Demetrios! Is it you? Oh! You have come at last! You are
here!” she murmured, clasping him in her arms, as her voice rang with the
accents of happiness. “Is it really you, Demetrios, whose hands awake me?
Is it you, son of my goddess; God of my body and my life?”


Demetrios made as if to retreat. With one bound, she was close to him again.


“What do you fear?” she said. “For you I am not the woman
before whom all tremble, because she is surrounded by the might of the High
Priest. Forget my name, Demetrios. In their lovers’ arms, women have no
name. I am no longer what you think. I am nothing but a woman who loves and
whose yearning for you fills her frame as far as the points of her
breasts.”


Demetrios did not open his lips.


“Listen to me a little while longer,” she went on. “I know
who enthrals you. I will not even be your mistress, nor make the least attempt
to rival the queen. No, Demetrios. Do with me as you will. Take me like some
little slave-wench that a man possesses for a few minutes, leaving her
afterwards with a remembrance that becomes oblivion. Take me like the lowest
poverty-stricken harlot who, crouching by the roadside, awaits the charity of
some furtive and brutal attack of lust. After all, what am I to place myself
above those women? Have the Immortals given me anything more than that with
which they have endowed the most servile of all my slaves? You, at least, are
Beauty incarnate, with its out spreading emanations of the Gods.”


Demetrios, more steadfastly serious than before, pierced her with his glance.


“Wretched creature, what do you suppose emanates from the Gods, if it be
not. — ”


“Love!”


“Or Death!”


“What mean you?” she exclaimed, starting to her feet. “Death!
Yes, Death indeed! But it is so far off for me! In sixty years’ time,
I’ll think of my end. Why speak to me of Death, Demetrios?”


“Death this very night!” he said quietly.


She laughed outright, in sheer fright.


“Tonight? No, no! Who says so? Why should I die? Answer me! Speak! What
means this vile mockery?”


“You are condemned.”


“By whom?”


“By your destiny.”


“How know you that?”


“Because my destiny is interwoven with yours, Touni.”


“Is it my fate to die now?”


“It is your lot to die by my hand, on that bench.”


He seized her wrist.


“Demetrios!” she stammered, affrighted. “I’ll not
shriek! I’ll not call for aid! Only let me speak first!” She wiped
the sweat from her brow. “If death—should come from you—death
will be sweet—for me. I accept it; I desire it, but hearken!”


Staggering from stone to stone, she led him away in the dark night of the
woods.


“Since in your hands are all the gifts of the Gods,” she continued,
“the first thrill of life and the final throb of agony, let both your
palms, bestowing all they hold, be opened to my eyes, Demetrios. Give me the
hand of Love as well as that of Death. If you do this, I die without
regret.”


There was no reply in the vague look he gave her, but she thought she read the
“Yes” he had not uttered.


Transfigured a second time, she lifted towards him a new face, where desire,
born again, drove, with the strength of desperation, all terror away.


“Demetrios!” she stammered, affrighted.


She spoke no more, but already between her lips that were never to close again,
each breath she drew sang a soft song, as if she was beginning to feel the
deepest voluptuousness of love before even being gripped in the conjunction she
craved.


Nevertheless, she gained this supreme victory.


With one movement, she tore off her light tunic and rolled it up into a ball of
muslin that she threw behind her, smiling with scarce a vestige of sadness. Her
young and slender body was outstretched in such great and lively felicity that
it was impossible for it not to be eternal, and as her preoccupied lover, who
perhaps was merely anxiously hesitating, terminated the work of Love without
beginning that of Death, she suddenly exclaimed:


“Ah! Kill me! Kill me, I say, Demetrios! Why do you tarry?”


He rose up a little, resting on his hands; looked once more at Touni, whose
great eyes peered ecstatically in his face, from beneath him, and drawing out
one of the long, golden hairpins that glittered behind her ears, he drove it
deliberately home under her left breast.


Nevertheless, this woman would have given him her comb and her hair also, for
love’s sake.


If he did not ask for it, it was because he had scruples. Chrysis had very
categorically demanded a crime, and not such or such old jewel stuck in a young
woman’s hair. That is why he considered it his duty to consent to
bloodshed.


He might have reflected, too, that the vows one makes to women during the first
heat of passion may be forgotten in the interval without any great detriment to
the moral worth of the lover who has sworn them, and that if ever this
involuntary forgetfulness deserved to be excused it was certainly in a case
where the life of another woman, assuredly innocent, was also in the scales.
But Demetrios did not trouble himself with this method of reasoning. The
adventure upon which he was engaged seemed to him too curious to allow of his
juggling away its violent incidents. He was afraid that, later on, he might
regret having cut out of the plot a scene which, though short, was
indispensable for the beauty of the ensemble. A feeble truckling to
virtue is often all that is required to reduce a tragedy to the common-places
of everyday existence. The death of Cassandra, he mused, is not absolutely
necessary for the development of Agamemnon; but if it had not taken place, the
whole Orestes Trilogy would have been spoilt.


And so, after cutting the storied comb out of Touni’s hair, he stowed it
away in his garments, and, without further reflection thereon, undertook the
third of the labours ordained by Chrysis: the seizing of Aphrodite’s
necklace.


It was useless to dream of entering the temple by the main door. The twelve
hermaphrodites who guarded the entrance would certainly have allowed Demetrios
to pass, in spite of the order directing the exclusion of every profane person
in the absence of the priests; but he had no need to prove his future guilt in
this ingenuous manner, since a secret entrance led to the sanctuary.


Demetrios betook himself to a part of the wood which sheltered the Necropolis
of the high priests of the goddess. He counted the first tombs, opened the door
of the seventh, and closed it again behind him.


With great difficulty, for the stone was heavy, he raised the burial-slab under
which a marble staircase plunged down into the earth, and he descended step by
step.


He knew that sixty paces were to be made in a straight line, and that
afterwards it would be necessary to feel one’s way along the wall in
order not to knock against the subterranean staircase of the temple.


The exceeding freshness of the deep earth calmed him little by little.


In a few minutes he arrived at the limit.


He mounted the stairs, and pushed open the trap-door.




The night was clear without, and pitch dark within the divine enclosure. When
he had softly and carefully closed the resounding door, a chill fell upon him,
and he felt as though hemmed in by the coldness of the stones. He dared not
raise his eyes. This black silence terrified him: the darkness became alive
with the unknown. He put his hand to his forehead like a man who does not want
to awake for fear of finding himself among the living. At last he looked.


He saw, in a glory of moonbeams, the dazzling figure of the goddess. She stood
upon a pedestal of pink stone laden with pendent treasures. She was naked and
fully sexed, vaguely tinted with the natural colours of woman. With one hand,
she held a mirror with a priapus handle, and with the other she adorned her
beauty with a seven-stringed pearl necklace. One pearl larger than the others,
long and silvery, shone between her two nipples like a nocturnal crescent
between two rounded clouds. And they were the real sacred pearls born of the
water-drops which had rolled into the shell of Anadyomene.


Demetrios lost himself in ineffable adoration.


Demetrios lost himself in ineffable adoration. He believed in very truth that
Aphrodite herself was there. He did not recognise his handiwork, for the abyss
between what he had been and what he had become was profound. He stretched out
his arms and murmured the mysterious words of prayer which are used in the
Phrygian ceremonies.


Supernatural, luminous, impalpable, naked, and pure, the vision floated upon
the stone, palpitated gently. He fixed his eyes upon it, dreading lest the
caress of his glance should cause this frail hallucination to dissolve into
thin air. He advanced very softly, touched the pink heel with his finger, as if
to make sure of the statue’s existence, and, incapable of resisting the
powerful attraction it exercised upon him, mounted to its side, laid his hands
upon the white shoulders, and gazed into its eyes.


He trembled, he grew faint, he began to laugh with joy. His hands wandered over
the naked arms, pressed the hard, cold bust, descended along the legs, caressed
the globe of the belly. He hugged this immortality to his breast with all his
might. He looked at himself in the mirror, he lifted up the pearl necklace, he
took it off, he made it glitter in the moonlight, and put it back again,
fearfully. He kissed the bended hand, the round neck, the wave-like throat, the
parted marble lips. Then he stepped back to the edge of the pedestal, and,
taking the divine arms in his hands, tenderly gazed at the adorable head.


The hair was dressed in the Oriental style, and veiled the forehead slightly.
The half-closed eyes prolonged themselves in a smile. The lips were parted, as
in the swoon of a kiss. He silently arranged the seven rows of pearls upon the
glittering breast, and descended to the ground to contemplate the idol at a
distance.


Then he became conscious of an awakening. He remembered what he had come to do,
what he had wished to accomplish, what he had barely escaped accomplishing: a
monstrous deed. He flushed to the temples.


The recollection of Chrysis passed before his memory like a vision of
grossness. He enumerated all the flaws in her beauty: the thick lips, the heavy
knees, the loose gait. He had forgotten what her hands were like; but he
imagined them large, to add an odious detail to the image he abhorred. His
mental state became similar to that of a man surprised at dawn by his mistress
in the bed of an ignoble prostitute, and unable to explain to himself how he
had allowed himself to be tempted the night before. He could find neither an
excuse nor a serious reason. Evidently, throughout one day, he had been the
victim of a sort of temporary madness, a physical perturbation, a disease. He
felt that he was cured, though still drunk with giddiness.


In order to complete his recovery, he planted himself against the temple wall
and remained standing for a long time before the statue. The light of the moon
continued to descend through the square opening in the roof; Aphrodite was
resplendent; and, as the eyes were veiled in shade, he sought to meet their
glance.


The whole night passed thus. Then daylight came and the statue took on in
succession the rosy lividness of the dawn and the gilded reflection of the sun.


Demetrios had ceased to think. The ivory comb and the silver mirror which he
carried in his tunic had slipped from his memory. He abandoned himself
voluptuously to serene contemplation.


Outside, a tempest of bird-songs twittered, whistled, sang in the garden.
Women’s voices were heard, talking and laughing at the foot of the walls.
The bustle of the early morning arose from the awakened earth. Demetrios
experienced nothing but feelings of bliss.


The sun was already high, and the shadow of the roof had already shifted when
he heard a confused sound of light feet upon the outer flight of steps.


It was doubtless a sacrifice to be offered to the goddess, a procession of
young women coming to carry out or utter vows before the statue, for the first
day of the Aphrodisiæ.


Demetrios resolved to fly.


The sacred pedestal opened at the back, in a way known only to the priests and
the sculptor. It was there that the hierophant stood to dictate to a young girl
whose voice was clear and high the miraculous discourses which issued from the
statue on the third day of the fête. Thence one might reach the gardens.
Demetrios entered, and stopped before the bronze-plated openings which pierced
the massive stone.


The two golden doors swung heavily open. Then the procession entered.


Towards the middle of the night, Chrysis was awakened by three knocks at the
door.


She had slept all day between the two Ephesians, and, but for the disorder of
their bed, they might have been taken for three sisters together. The
Galilæan’s thigh, bathed in perspiration, rested heavily upon Rhodis
nestling up against her hostess. Myrtocleia was asleep upon her breast, with
her face in her arm and her back uncovered.


A sound of voices was heard in the entrance.


Chrysis disengaged herself with great care, stepping over her companions, and
getting down from the couch, held the door ajar.


“Who is it, Djala? Who is it?” she asked.


“It is Naukrates who wants to see you. I have told him you are not at
liberty.”


“What nonsense! Certainly I am at liberty! Enter, Naukrates, I am in my
room.”


And she went back to bed.


Naukrates remained for some time on the threshold, as if fearing to commit an
indiscretion. The two music-girls opened their sleep-laden eyes and made
efforts to tear themselves away from their dreams.


“Sit down,” said Chrysis. “There is no need for coquetry
between us. I know that you do not come for me. What do you want of me?”


Naukrates was a philosopher of repute, who had been Bacchis’s lover for
more than twenty years, and did not deceive her, more from indolence than
fidelity. His grey hair was cut short, his beard pointed à la Demosthenes, and
his moustache cropped so as not to hide his lips. He wore a large white garment
made of simple wool with a plain stripe.


“I am the bearer of an invitation,” he said. “Bacchis is
giving a dinner to-morrow, to be followed by a fête. We shall be seven, with
you. Don’t fail to come.”


“A fête? A propos of what?”


“She is to liberate her most beautiful slave, Aphrodisia. There will be
dancing-girls and flute-girls. I think that your two friends are engaged to be
there, and, as a matter of fact, they ought not to be here now. The rehearsal
is going on at Bacchis’s at this very moment.”


“Oh! it is true,” cried Rhodis, “we had forgotten about it.
Get up, Myrto, we are very late.”


But Chrysis protested.


“No, not yet! how disagreeable of you to steal away my women. If I had
suspected that, I would not have let you in. Why, they are actually
ready!”


“Our robes are not complicated,” said the child. “And we are
not beautiful enough to spend much time in dressing.”


“I shall see you at the temple, of course?”


“Yes, to-morrow morning, we are going to offer doves. I am taking a
drachma out of your purse, Chrysis, otherwise we should have nothing to buy
them with. Good-bye till to-morrow.”


They ran out. Naucrates considered for a short time the door that had just
closed upon them; then he folded his arms and, turning round to Chrysis, said
in a low voice:


“Good. Your behaviour is charming.”


“What do you mean?”


“One woman is not enough for you. You must have two, now. You even pick
them up in the street. It is a noble example you are setting. But kindly tell
me what is to become of us men? You have all got little amies, and after
quitting their insatiable arms, you have just as much passion to offer as they
are willing to leave you. Do you think this can go on indefinitely? If things
continue like this, we shall be forced to apply to Bathyllos . . .”


“Ah! no!” cried Chrysis. “You will never get me to admit
that! I know well that people make the comparison, but it is entirely absurd;
and I am astonished that you, who pretend to be a thinker, do not understand
how ridiculous it is.”


“And what difference do you see?”


“It is not a question of difference. There is no connection between the
one and the other: that’s clear!”


“I do not say you are wrong. I want to know your reasons.”


“Oh! I can tell them you in two words: listen carefully. From the point
of view of love, woman is a perfect instrument. From head to foot she is
constructed, solely, marvellously, for love. She alone knows how to love.
She alone knows how to be loved. Consequently, if a couple of lovers is
composed of two women, it is perfect; if there is only one woman, it is only
half as good; if there is no woman at all, it is purely idiotic. That is all I
have to say.”


“You are hard on Plato, my girl.”


“Great men are not, any more than the gods, great under all
circumstances. Pallas understands nothing about painting; Plato did not know
how to love. Philosophers, poets, or rhetoricians, all who follow him, are as
worthless as their master, and however admirable they may be in their art, in
love they are devoid of knowledge. Believe me, Naukrates, I feel that I am
right.”


The philosopher made a gesture.


“I can tell Bacchis that she may count on you?” he said.


“You are somewhat wanting in reverence,” he said; “but I do
not by any means think you are wrong. My indignation was not real. There is
something charming in the union of two young women, on condition that they both
consent to remain feminine, keep their hair long, uncover their breasts, and
refrain from arming themselves with adventitious instruments, as if they were
illogically envious of the gross sex for which they profess such a pretty
contempt. Yes, their liaison is remarkable because their caresses are entirely
superficial, and the quality of their sensual satisfaction is all the more
refined. They do not clasp one another in a violent embrace, they touch one
another lightly in order to taste of the supreme joy. Their wedding-night is
not defiled with blood. They are virgins, Chrysis. They are ignorant of the
brutal action; this constitutes their superiority over Bathyllos, who maintains
that he offers the equivalent, forgetting that you also, even in this sorry
respect, could enter into competition with him. Human love is to be
distinguished from the rut of animals only by two divine functions: the caress
and the kiss. Now these are the only two functions known to the women in
question. They have even brought them to perfection.”


“Excellent,” said Chrysis in astonishment. “But then what
have you to reproach me with?”


“My grievance is that there are a hundred thousand of you. Already a
great number of women only derive perfect pleasure from their own sex. Soon you
will refuse to receive us altogether, even as a makeshift. It is from jealousy
that I blame you.”


At this point Naukrates considered that the conversation had lasted long
enough, and he rose to his feet, simply.


“I can tell Bacchis that she may count on you?” he said.


“I will go,” answered Chrysis.


The philosopher kissed her knees and slowly went out.




Then she joined her hands together and spoke aloud though she was alone.


“Bacchis . . . Bacchis . . . he comes from her house and he does not
know! The mirror is still there, then! . . . Demetrios has forgotten me . . .
If he has hesitated the first day, I am lost, he will do nothing. But is it
possible that all is finished? Bacchis has other mirrors which she uses more
often. Doubtless she does not know yet. Gods! Gods! no means of having news,
and perhaps . . . Ah! Djala! Djala!”


The slave-woman entered.


“Give me my knuckle-bones,” said Chrysis. “I want to tell my
own fortune.”


She tossed the four little bones into the air.


“Oh . . . Oh . . . Djala, look! the Aphrodite throw!”


This was the name given to a very rare throw whereby all the knuckle-bones
presented a different face. The odds against this combination were exactly
thirty-five to one. It was the best throw in the game.


Djala remarked coldly:


“What did you ask for?”


“It is true,” said Chrysis, disappointed. “I forgot to wish.
I certainly had something in my mind, but I said nothing. Does that count all
the same?”


“I think not; you must begin again.”


Chrysis cast the bones again.


“The Midas throw, this time. What do you think of that?”


“One cannot tell. Good or bad. It is a throw which is interpreted by the
next one. Now start with a single bone.”


Chrysis consulted the game a third time; but as soon as the bone fell, she
stammered:


“The . . . the Chian ace!”


And she burst into sobs.


Djala too was uneasy, and said nothing. Chrysis wept upon the bed, with her
hair lying in confusion about her head. At last she turned round angrily.


“Why did you make me begin again? I am sure the first throw
counted.”


“If you wished, yes. If not, no. You alone know,” said Djala.


“Besides, the bones prove nothing. It is a Greek game. I don’t
believe in it. I shall try something else.”


She dried her tears and crossed the room. She took a box of white counters from
a shelf, counted out twenty-two, then with the point of a pearl clasp, engraved
in succession the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. They were the
arcana of the Cabbala she had learnt in Galilee.


“I have confidence in this. This does not deceive”, she said.
“Lift up the skirt of your robe; I will use it as a bag.”


She cast the twenty-two counters into the slave’s tunic, repeating
mentally:


“Shall I wear Aphrodite’s necklace? Shall I wear Aphrodite’s
necklace? Shall I wear Aphrodite’s necklace?”


And she drew the tenth arcanam, and this signified plainly:


“Yes.”


An old white-bearded priest preceded the youthful band.


It was a procession, white and blue and yellow and pink and green.


Thirty courtesans advanced, bearing baskets of flowers, snow-white doves with
red feet, veils of the most fragile azure, and precious ornaments.


An old white-bearded priest, swathed to the head in stiff unbleached cloth,
preceded the youthful band and guided the line of bending worshippers to the
altar of stone.


They sang, and their song languished like the sea, sighed like a southern
breeze, panted like an amorous mouth. The first two carried harps which they
rested upon the hollow of their left hand and which curved forward like sickles
of slender wood.




One of them advanced and said:


“Tryphera, O beloved Cypris, offers thee this blue veil which she has
woven herself, that thou mayest continue to deal gently with her.”




Another:


“Mousarion places at thy feet, O goddess of the beautiful coronal, these
wreaths of wall-flowers and this bouquet of drooping daffodils. She has borne
them in the orgie and has invoked thy name in the wild ecstasy of their
perfumes, O! victorious one! have respect to these spoils of love.”




Yet another:


“As an offering to thee, golden Cytherea, Timo consecrates this spiral
bracelet. Mayest thou entwine vengeance round the throat of her thou wottest
of, even as this silver serpent entwined itself around her naked arms.”




Myrtocleia and Rhodis advanced, holding one another by the hand.


“Here are two doves of Smyrna, with wings white as caresses, with feet
red as kisses.


“O! double goddess of Amathontis, accept them of our joined hands, if it
be true that the tender Adonis is not alone sufficient for thee and that
sometimes thy sleep is retarded by a yet sweeter embrace.”




A very young courtesan followed:


“Aphrodite Peribasia, receive my virginity with this blood-stained tunic.
I am Pannychis of Pharos: I have dedicated myself to thee since last
night.”




Another:


“Dorothea conjures thee, O charitable Epistrophia to remove far from her
spirit the desire that Eros has implanted in it, or else to inflame for her the
eyes of him that says her nay. She offers thee this branch of myrtle, because
it is the tree thou lovest best.”




Another:


“On thine altar, O Paphia, Callistion places sixty silver drachmæ, the
balance of four minæ she received from Cleomenos. Give her a lover still more
generous if thou thinkest it a goodly offering.”




There remained before the altar only a blushing little child who had occupied
the last place in the procession. She held nothing in her hand but a little
crocus wreath, and the priest scorned her for the poverty of her offering.


She said:


“I am not rich enough to give you silver coins, O glittering Olympian
goddess. Besides, what could I give thee that thou lackest? Here are flowers,
yellow and green, pleated into a wreath for thy feet. And now . . .”


She unbuckled the clasps of her tunic; the tissue slipped down to the ground
and she stood revealed quite naked.


. . . “I dedicate myself to thee body and soul, beloved goddess. I desire
to enter thy gardens and die a courtesan of the temple. I swear to desire
naught but love, I swear to love but to love, I renounce the world and I shut
myself up in thee.”




Then the priest covered her with perfumes and enveloped her nudity in the veil
woven by Tryphera. They left the nave together by the door opening into the
gardens.


The procession seemed at an end, and the other courtesans were about to retrace
their steps when another woman, a belated arrival, was seen upon the threshold.
She had nothing in her hand, and it seemed as if she also had naught but her
beauty to offer. Her hair appeared as two streams of gold, two deep waves full
of shade, which engulfed the ears and were twisted in seven rolls over the back
of the neck. The nose was delicate, with expressive nostrils which palpitated
at times over a thick painted mouth, the corners rounded and throbbing. The
flexible line of the body undulated at every step, animated by the rolling of
the hips or the oscillation of the breasts, under which bent the supple waist.


Her eyes were extraordinary: blue but dark and bright at the same time,
changing and glinting like moonstones, half closed under drooping lashes. Those
eyes looked, as sirens sing . . .


The priest turned towards her, waiting for her to speak.


She said:




“Chrysis, O Chryseia, supplicates thee. Accept the poor gifts she lays at
thy feet. Hear, love, and solace her that lives after thine example and for the
cult of thy name, and grant her her prayers.”


She held out her hands gilded with rings, and bent low with her legs close
together.


The vague canticle began again. The murmur of the harps rose up towards the
statue with the swirling fumes of crackling incense from the priest’s
censer.


“To thee, O Hetaira! . . . Chrysis consecrates her
necklace.”


She drew herself up slowly to her full height and offered a bronze mirror which
hung from her girdle.




“To thee, Astarte of the Night, that joinest hand to hand and lip to lip,
and whose symbol is like to the footprint of the deer upon the pale soil of
Syria, Chrysis consecrates her mirror. It has seen the haggard darkness of the
eyelids and the glitter of the eyes after love, the hair glued to the temples
by the sweat of thy battles, O! warrior-queen of ruthless hand, thou that
joinest body to body and mouth to mouth.”




The priest laid the mirror at the feet of the statue. Chrysis drew from her
golden hair a long comb of red copper, the planetary metal of the goddess.


“To thee,” she said, “Anadyomene, born of the rosy dawn and
the sea-foam’s smile; to thee. O nudity shimmering with tremulous pearls,
that didst bind thy dripping hair with ribbons of green seaweed, Chrysis
consecrates her comb. It has plunged into her hair tossed by thy convulsions, O
furiously-panting mistress of Adonis, that furrowest the camber of the loins
and racks the stiffening knee!”




She gave the comb to the old man and inclined her head to the right in order to
take off her emerald necklace.




“To thee”, she said, “O! Hetaira, that drivest away the
blushes of shamefaced maidens and promptest the lewd laugh, for whom we sell
the love that streams from our entrails, Chrysis consecrates her necklace. It
was given to her for her fee by a man whose name she knows not, and each
emerald is a kiss on which thou hast lived an instant.”




She made a last and more prolonged reverence, put the collar into the
priest’s hand and took a step as if to depart.


The priest stayed her:


“What do you ask of the goddess for these precious offerings?”


She shook her head, smiled, and said:


“I ask nothing.”


Then she passed along the procession, stole a rose from a basket, and put it in
her mouth as she went out.


One by one all the women followed. The door closed upon the empty temple.




Demetrios remained alone, concealed in the bronze pedestal.


He had not lost a gesture or a word of all this scene, and when everything was
over, he remained motionless for a long time, harassed by new torments,
passionate, irresolute.


He had thought himself quite cured of his madness of the night before, and had
believed that henceforth nothing could throw him a second time into the ardent
shadow of this strange woman.


But he had counted without her.


Women! O women! if you wish to be loved, show yourselves, return, present
yourselves! The emotion he had felt on her entrance was so entire and
overwhelming that it was out of the question to dream of struggling against it
by a violent effort of the will. Demetrios was bound like a barbarian slave to
a triumphal car. The idea of escape was an illusion. Without knowing it, and
quite naturally, she had made him her captive.


He had seen her coming in the distance, for she wore the same yellow robe she
had had on the quay. She walked with low, supple steps and with languid
undulations of the hips. She had come straight to him, as if she had divined
him behind the stone.


He realised from the first instant that he was ready once more to fall at her
feet. When she drew the mirror of polished bronze from her girdle, she looked
at herself in it for the last time before giving it to the priest, and the
brilliancy of her eyes became stupefying. When, in order to take her copper
comb, she laid her hand upon her hair and raised her bended arm, in conformity
with the gesture of the Graces, the beautiful line of her body revealed itself
under the tissue, and the sun illumined a tiny dew of brilliant sweat under her
armpit. Finally, when, in order to lift up and unbuckle her necklace of heavy
emeralds, she parted the pleated silk that veiled her double bosom down to the
sweet shade-hidden place that admits of nothing more than a bouquet being
slipped into it, Demetrios was seized with such a frenzied desire to put his
lips upon it and tear off the whole dress that . . . But Chrysis began to
speak.


She spoke, and every one of her words was torture to him. She seemed wantonly
to insist and enlarge upon the prostitution of the vase of beauty that she was,
white as the statue itself, and full of overflowing gold streaming down in a
shower of hair. She told how her door was open to the lounging passer-by, how
her body was delivered over to the contemplation of the unworthy, how the task
of firing her cheeks with the flush of passion was committed to clumsy
children. She spoke of the venal fatigue of her eyes, of her lips hired by the
night, of her hair entrusted to brutal hands, of her divinity crucified.


Even the exceeding facility of her access was a charm in Demetrios’s
eyes, though he was resolved to use it solely for his own benefit and to close
the door behind him. For it is profoundly true that a woman only reaches the
utmost limit of her seductiveness when she gives occasion for jealousy.


And so, having given the goddess her green necklace in exchange for the one she
hoped for. Chrysis returned to the town carrying a human will in her mouth,
like the little stolen rose whose stalk she was nibbling.


Demetrios waited until he was left alone in the temple; then he issued forth
from his retreat.


He looked at the statue apprehensively, expecting an infernal inward struggle.
But, being incapable of renewing a violent emotion at so short an interval of
time, he once more became astonishingly calm, without premature remorse.


Negligently, tranquilly, he climbed close up to the statue, took the necklace
of true pearls from off Anadyomene’s neck, and slipped it into his
raiment.


He walked very rapidly, hoping to overtake Chrysis in the road which led to the
town. He was afraid that if he delayed any further he might once again lose his
courage and his power of will.


The white, hot road was so luminous that Demetrios closed his eyes as if the
midday sun was shining. He was walking in this way without looking in front of
him, when he narrowly escaped colliding with four black slaves who were
marching at the head of a fresh procession. Suddenly a musical little voice
said softly:


“Well-beloved, how glad I am!”


He raised his head: it was Queen Berenice leaning on her elbow in her litter.


She gave the order:


“Stop, porters!”


And held out her arms to her lover.


Demetrios was greatly put out, but he could not refuse, and he got in sulkily.


Then Queen Berenice, beside herself with joy, crawled on her hands and knees to
the far end, and rolled in the cushions like a playful kitten.


For this litter was a chamber carried by four and twenty slaves. It afforded
ample room for twelve women to recline in it at random, upon a thick blue
carpet strewn with stuffs and cushions; and its height was so great that one
could not touch the roof, even with the tip of one’s fan. Its length was
greater than its width, and it was closed in front and on the three sides by
very fine yellow curtains which scintillated with light. The back was of
cedar-wood, draped in a long veil of orange-coloured silk. At the top of this
splendid wall, the great golden hawk of Egypt hung grimly with its two wings
extended to their full extent. Lower down, carved in ivory and silver, the
antique symbol of Astarte gaped above a lighted lamp whose rays strove with the
daylight in elusive reflections. Underneath, lay Queen Berenice, fanned on
either side by two Persian slave women, waving two tufts of peacock’s
feathers.


She beckoned the young sculptor to her side with her eyes, and repeated:


“Well-beloved, I am happy!” She stroked his cheek.


“I was looking for you, Well-beloved. Where were you? I have not seen you
since the day before yesterday. If I had not met you I should soon have died of
grief. I was so unhappy all alone in this great litter. I have thrown all my
jewels over the bridge of Hermes, to make circles in the water. You see I have
neither rings nor necklace. I look like a little pauper at your feet.”


She turned round to him and kissed him on the mouth.


The two fan-bearers sat down upon their haunches a little further off, and when
Queen Berenice began to speak in a low tone, they put their fingers close to
their ears in order to make a semblance of not hearing. But Demetrios did not
answer, barely listened, remained like one bewildered. He saw of the young
queen nothing but the red smile of her mouth and the black cushion of her hair
which she always wore loosely bound in order to be able to rest her weary head
upon it.


But Demetrios did not answer.


She said:


“Well-beloved, I have wept during the night. My bed was cold. When I
awoke, I stretched my naked arms to my two sides and I did not find you, and my
hand nowhere met the hand I embrace to-day. I waited for you in the morning,
and you had not been since the full moon. I sent slaves into all the quarters
of the town and I had them executed when they came back without you. Where were
you? were you at the temple? you were not in the garden with those strange
women? No, I see by your eyes that you have not loved. Then what were you doing
far away from me? You were before the statue? Yes, I am sure you were there.
You love it more than me now. It is exactly like me, it has my eyes, my mouth,
my breasts, but it is the statue that you treasure. I am a poor deserted woman.
I weary you, and I see it well. You think of your marble and your ugly statues
as if I were not more beautiful than all of them, and, in addition, alive,
amorous, and tender, ready to grant you whatever you are willing to accept,
resigned whenever you refuse. But you want nothing. You have refused to be a
king, you have refused to be a god and be adored in a temple of your own. You
almost refuse to love me now.”


She gathered her feet under her and leaned upon her hand.


“I would do anything to see you at the palace, Well-beloved. If you do
not want me any longer, tell me who it is that attracts you, she shall be my
friend. The . . . the women of my court . . . are beautiful. I have a dozen
also who have been kept in ignorance of the very existence of men. They shall
all be your mistresses if you will come to see me after them. . . And I have
others with me who have had more lovers than the sacred courtesans and are
expert in love. Choose which you will, I have also a thousand foreign
slave-women; you shall have any of them you please. I will dress them like
myself, in yellow silk and silver.


“But no, you are the most beautiful and the coldest of men. You love no
one, you suffer yourself to be loved, you lend yourself, out of charity, to
those who are captured by your eyes. You permit me to have my pleasure of you,
but as an animal allows itself to be milked, looking somewhere else all the
time. Ah! Gods! Ah! Gods! I shall end by being able to do without you, young
coxcomb that the whole town adores, and from whom no woman can draw tears. I
have other than women at the palace; I have sturdy Ethiopians with chests of
bronze and arms bulging out with muscles. In their embrace, I shall soon forget
your womanish legs and your pretty beard. The spectacle of their passion will
doubtless be a new one for me, and I shall give my amorousness a rest. But the
day I am certain that your eyes have ceased to trouble me by their absence, and
that I can replace your mouth, then I shall despatch you from the top of the
bridge of Hermes to join my necklace and my rings like a jewel I have worn too
long. Ah! what it is to be a queen!”


She sat up and seemed as if waiting. But Demetrios remained impassive, and did
not move a muscle, as if he had not heard her. She resumed angrily:


“You have not understood?”


He leaned carelessly upon his elbow and said quietly and unmovedly:


“I have thought of a tale.




“Long ago, long before the conquest of Thrace by your father’s
ancestors, it was inhabited by wild beasts and a few timorous men.


“The animals were very beautiful: there were lions tawny as the sun,
tigers striped like the evening, and bears black as night.


“The men were little and flat-nosed, covered with old, worn skins, armed
with rude lances and bows without beauty. They shut themselves up in mountain
holes, behind huge stones which they moved with difficulty. They passed their
lives at the chase. There was blood in the forests.


“The country was so forlorn that the gods had deserted it. When Artemis
left Olympus in the whiteness of the morning, she never took the path which
would have led her to the North. The wars which were waged there did not
disturb Ares. The absence of pipes and flutes repelled Apollo. The triple
Hecate alone shone in solitude, like the face of a Medusa upon a petrified
land.


“Now, there came to live in that country a man of more favoured race, one
who did not dress in skin like the mountain savages.


“He wore a long white robe which trailed behind him a little. He loved to
wander at night in the calm forest-glades by the light of the moon, holding in
his hand a little tortoise-shell in which were fixed two auroch-horns. Between
these horns were stretched three silver strings.


“When his fingers touched the strings, delicious music passed over them,
much sweeter than the sound of fountains, or the murmur of the wind in the
trees, or the swaying of the barley. The first time he played, three sleepy
tigers awoke, so prodigiously charmed that they did him no harm, but approached
as near as they could and retired when he ceased. On the morrow there were many
more, and wolves also, and hyenas, and snakes poised upright on their tails.


“After a very short time the animals came of their own accord, and begged
him to play to them. A bear would often come quite alone to him and go away
enchanted on hearing three marvellous chords. In return for his favours, the
wild beasts provided him with food and protected him against the men.


“But he tired of this tedious life. He became so certain of his genius,
and of the pleasure he afforded to the beasts, that he ceased to care to play
well. The animals were always satisfied, so long as it was he who played. Soon
he refused even to give them this satisfaction, and stopped playing altogether,
from indifference. The whole forest mourned, but for all that the
musician’s threshold did not lack savoury meats and fruits. They
continued to nourish him, and loved him all the more. The hearts of beasts are
so constructed.


“Now one day, he was leaning against his open door, looking at the sunset
behind the motionless trees, when a lioness happened to pass by. He took a step
inside as if he feared tiresome solicitations. The lioness did not trouble
about him, and simply passed by.


“Then he asked her in astonishment; ‘Why do you not beg me to
play?’ She answered that she cared nothing about it. He said to her:
‘Do you not know me?’ She answered: ‘You are Orpheus.’
He answered: ‘And you don’t want to hear Me?’ She repeated,
‘No.’ ‘Oh!’ he cried, ‘oh! how I am to be pitied!
It is just for you that I should have liked to play. You are much more
beautiful than the others, and you must understand so much better. If you will
listen to me one little hour, I will give you everything you can dream
of.’ She answered: ‘Steal the fresh meats that belong to the men of
the plain. Assassinate the first person you meet. Take the victims they have
offered to your gods, and lay all at my feet.’ He thanked her for the
moderation of her demands, and did what she required.


“For one hour he played before her: but afterwards he broke his lyre and
lived as if he were dead.”


The queen sighed:


“I never understand allegories. Explain it to me, Well-beloved. What does
it mean?”


He rose.


“I do not tell you this in order that you may understand. I have told you
a tale to calm you a little. It is late. Good-bye, Berenice.”


She began to weep.


“I was sure of it! I was sure of it!”


He laid her like a child upon her soft bed of luxurious stuffs, imprinted a
smiling kiss upon her unhappy eyes, and tranquilly descended from the great
litter without stopping it.


Bacchis had been a courtesan for more than twenty-five years. That is
equivalent to saying that she was nearly forty, and that her beauty had changed
its character several times.


Her mother, who had long been the directress of the house and her general
adviser, had given her principles of conduct and economy which had enabled her
gradually to acquire a great fortune, which she was in a position to spend
freely, at an age when the magnificence of the bed supplies the place of
physical splendour.


Thus it was that instead of buying adult slaves at the market at a high rate,
an expense which so many others considered necessary, and which ruined the
young courtesans, she had been content for ten years with a single negress, and
had provided for the future by making her beget a child every year, in order to
create for herself, for nothing, a numerous staff of domestics who should be a
source of riches later on.


As she had chosen the father with care, seven very beautiful mulatto girls had
been born of her slave, and also three boys whom she had killed, because male
slaves give useless suspicions to jealous lovers. She had named the seven
daughters after the seven planets, and had chosen them diverse functions, in
harmony, as far as possible, with the names they bore. Heliope was the slave
for the day-time, Selene for the night, Aretias guarded the door, Aphrodisia
tended the bed, Hermione did the buying, and Cronomagira, the cooking. Finally,
Diomeda, the housekeeper, kept the books and superintended the staff.


Aphrodisia was the favourite slave, the prettiest and best-loved. She often
shared her mistress’s bed at the request of lovers who took a fancy to
her. Consequently, she was dispensed from all servile work in order that her
arms might be kept delicate and her hands soft. By an exceptional favour, her
hair was not covered, so that she was often taken for a free woman, and that
very night she was to be freed in reality at the enormous price of thirty-five
minæ.


Bacchis’s seven slaves, all tall and admirably trained, were such a
source of pride to her that she never went out without having them in her
train, at the risk of leaving her house empty. Thanks to this imprudence,
Demetrios had been able to enter her house without difficulty; but when she
gave the festival to which Chrysis was invited she was still in ignorance of
the calamity.




That evening Chrysis was the first arrival.


She was dressed in a green robe worked with enormous rose-branches which
flowered over her breasts.


Aretias opened the door for her without her having to knock, and, according to
the Greek custom, took her aside into a little room, untied her red shoes, and
gently washed her naked feet. Then, raising the robe, or parting it, according
to the place, she perfumed wherever there was necessity for it: for the guests
were spared every kind of trouble, even that of making their toilette before
going in to dinner. Then she offered a comb and pins to restore the lines of
her head-dress, together with cosmetics, both dry and moist, for her lips and
cheeks.


At last, when Chrysis was ready:


“Where are the shades?” she said to the slave.


This was the term applied to all the diners, except to one alone, the guest par
excellence. The guest in honour of whom the dinner was given brought whomsoever
he pleased with him, and the “shades” had nothing to do but to
bring their bed-cushions and prove themselves people of breeding.


Aretias answered:


“Naukrates has invited Philodemos with his mistress, Faustina, whom he
has brought back from Italy. He has also invited Phrasilas and Timon, and your
friend Seso of Cuidos.”


Aretias opened the door for her.


Seso entered at this precise moment.


“Chrysis!”


“My darling!”


The two women embraced, and enlarged with many an exclamation upon the happy
chance which had brought them together.


“I was afraid of being late,” said Seso. “That poor Archytas
has kept me. . .”


“What, Archytas again?”


“It is always the same thing. Whenever I go out to dine, he imagines that
my body is to be at everybody’s disposal in turn. Then he insists on
having his revenge beforehand, and that takes such a time! Ah! my dear, if he
knew me better! I am far from wanting to deceive my lovers. I have quite enough
of them as it is.”


“And the baby that is coming? It does not show yet, however.”


“I hope not indeed. It is the third month. It is growing, the little
wretch. But it does not bother me yet. In six weeks I shall begin to dance. I
hope that will prove very unpleasant to it, and that it will disappear
quickly.”


“You are right,” said Chrysis. “Don’t let your shape
get disfigured. I saw Philemation yesterday, our former little friend, who
lived three years at Boubaste with a grain merchant. Do you know the first
thing she said to me? ‘Ah! if you saw my breasts!’ and she had
tears in her eyes. I told her she was still pretty, but she repeated: ‘If
you saw my breasts! ah! ah! if you saw my breasts!’ weeping like a
Byblis. Then I saw that she was almost anxious to show them, and I asked to see
them. My dear, two empty bags! And you know what beauties she had. They were so
white that the points were invisible. Don’t spoil yours, my Seso. Leave
them fresh and firm as they are. A courtesan’s two breasts are worth more
than her necklace.”


During this conversation, the two women were making their toilette. Finally
they entered the banqueting-room together, where Bacchis was standing waiting,
with her waist encircled by breast-bands and her neck loaded with rows of gold
necklaces reaching up to the chin.


“Ah, my pretty dears, what a good idea on the part of Naukrates to invite
you both together this evening!”


“We congratulate ourselves on its being to your house that we are
invited,” answered Chrysis without appearing to understand the innuendo.
And, in order to say something venomous immediately, she added:


“How is Doryclos?”


Doryclos was a young and extremely rich lover who had just deserted Bacchis to
marry a Sicilian woman.


“Ah, my pretty dears, what a good idea . . .”


“I . . . I have turned him away,” said Bacchis, brazenly.


“Is it possible?”


“Yes; they say he is going to marry out of spite. But I expect him the
day after his marriage. He is madly in love with me.”


While asking: “How is Doryclos?” Chrysis had thought: “Where
is your mirror?” But Bacchis did not look one in the face, and the only
expression to be read in her eyes was a vague embarrassment devoid of meaning.
Besides, there was time for Chrysis to elucidate this question, and, in spite
of her impatience, she knew how to wait with resignation for a more favourable
opportunity.


She was about to continue the conversation, when she was prevented by the
arrival of Philodemos, Faustina, and Naukrates, which involved Bacchis in fresh
interchanges of politeness. They fell into ecstasies over the poet’s
embroidered garment and the diaphanous robe of his mistress. This young girl,
being unfamiliar with Alexandrian usage, had thought to Hellenize herself in
this manner, not knowing that a dress of the kind was inadmissible at a
festival where hired dancing-women, similarly unclothed, were to appear.


Bacchis affected not to notice this error, and in a few amiable phrases
complimented Faustina on her heavy blue hair swimming in brilliant perfumes.
She wore her hair raised high above the neck in order to avoid staining her
light silken stuffs with myrrh.


They were about to sit down to table when the seventh guest arrived; it was
Timon, a young man whose want of principle was a natural gift, but who had
discovered in the teaching of the philosophers of his time some superior
reasons for self-satisfaction.


“I have brought someone with me,” he said laughing.


“Whom?” asked Bacchis.


“A certain Demo, a girl from Mendes.”


“Demo! What can you be thinking of, my dear fellow? She is a street girl.
She can be had for a fig.”


“Good, good. We won’t insist on it.” said the young man.
“I have just made her acquaintance at the corner of the Canopic way. She
asked me to give her a dinner, and I brought her to you. If you don’t
want her. . .”


“Timon is really extraordinary,” declared Bacchis.


She called a slave:


“Heliope, go and tell your sister that she will find a woman at the door
and that she is to drive her away with a stick. Off you go!”


She turned and looked round:


“Has not Phrasilas come yet?”


At these words, a sickly little man, with a grey forehead, grey eyes, and a
small, grey beard, advanced with little steps and said smiling:


“I was there.”


Phrasilas was a polygraph of repute of whom it would have been difficult to say
exactly whether he was a philosopher, a grammarian, a historian, or a
mythologist. He undertook the most weighty studies with timid ardour and
ephemeral curiosity. Write a treatise he dare not. Construct a drama he could
not. His style had something hypocritical, finniking, and vain. For thinkers he
was a poet; for poets he was a sage: for society he was a great man.


“Come! to table!” said Bacchis. And she lay down with her lover
upon the bed which stood at the head of the banqueting board. On her right,
reclined Philodemos and Faustina with Phrasilas. On Naukrates’s left,
Seso, then Chrysis and young Timon. Each one of the guests reclined in a
diagonal position, leaning upon silken cushions and wearing wreaths of flowers
upon their heads. A slave-girl brought the garlands of red roses and blue
lotus-flowers, then the banquet began.


Timon felt that his freak had chilled the women. He therefore did not speak to
them at first, but, addressing Philodemos, said gravely:


“They say you are the devoted friend of Cicero. What do you think of him,
Philodemos? Is he an enlightened philosopher or a mere compiler, without
discernment and without taste? for I have heard both opinions put
forward.”


“It is precisely because I am his friend that I cannot answer your
question,” said Philodemos. “I know him too well; consequently I
know him ill. Ask Phrasilas, who, having read him but little, will judge him
without error.”


“Well, what does Phrasilas think about it?”


“He is an admirable writer,” said the little man.


“In what sense?”


“In the sense that all writers, Timon, are admirable in something, like
all landscapes and all souls. I cannot prefer the spectacle of the sea itself
to the most monotonous plain. And so I am unable to classify in the order of my
sympathies a treatise by Cicero, an ode of Pindar, and a letter written by
Chrysis, even if I knew the style of our excellent little friend. When I put
down a book, I am content if I carry away in my memory a single line which has
given me food for thought. Hitherto, all the books I have opened have contained
that line: but no book has ever given me a second. Perhaps each of us has only
one thing to say in his life, and those who have attempted to speak at greater
length have done so because they were inflated by ambition. How much more do I
regret the irreparable silence of the millions of souls who have said
nothing.”


“I am not of your opinion,” said Naukrates, without lifting his
eyes. “The universe was created for the expression of three verities, and
to our misfortune, their certitude was proved five centuries before this
evening. Heraclitos has solved the riddle of the world; Parmenides has unmasked
the soul; Pythagoras has measured God; we have nothing left us but to hold our
tongues. I consider the chickpea very rash.”


Seso lightly tapped the table with the handle of her fan.


“Timon, my friend,” she said.


“What is it?”


“Why do you propound questions without any interest either for me who am
ignorant of Latin, or for yourself who want to forget it? Do you fancy you can
dazzle Faustina with your foreign erudition? My poor fellow, I am not the woman
to be duped by your words. I undressed your great soul last night under my
bed-clothes, and I know the chickpea it concerns itself with.”


“Do you think so?” said the young man, simply.


But Phrasilas began a second little couplet, with a suave, ironical intonation.


“Seso, when you think fit to give us the pleasure of judging Timon,
whether to applaud him, as he deserves, or to blame him, unjustly in my
opinion, remember that he is an invisible being and that the nature of his soul
is hidden from us. It has no existence in itself, or at least we cannot know
it; but it reflects the souls of those that mirror themselves in it, and
changes its aspect when it changes its place. Last night it resembled you
exactly; I am not astonished you were pleased with it. Just now it took the
image of Philodemos; that is why you have just said it belied itself. Now it
certainly does not belie itself, because it does not affirm itself. You see my
dear, that we ought to beware of rash judgments.”


Timon shot a glance of irritation at Phrasilas, but he reserved his reply.


“However that may be,” answered Seso, “there are four of us
courtesans here, and we intend to direct the conversation, in order that we may
not resemble pink children who only open their mouths to drink milk. Faustina,
you arrived the last, please begin.”


“Very good,” said Naukrates. “Choose for us, Faustina. What
shall we talk about?”


The young Italian woman turned her head, raised her eyes, blushed, and with an
undulation of her whole body, sighed:


“Love.”


“A very pretty subject,” said Seso, trying not to laugh.


But no one took it up.




The table was covered with wreaths, flowers, tankards, and jugs. Slaves brought
wicker baskets, containing bread as light as snow. On terra-cotta plates were
to be seen fat eels sprinkled with seasoning, wax-coloured alphests, and sacred
beauty-fish.


There was also a pompilus, a purple fish which was supposed to have sprung from
the same foam as Aphrodite, bebradons, a grey mullet served up with calmars,
multi-coloured scorpenas. Some were brought in their little sauce-pans, in
order that they might be eaten foaming hot; fat tunnyfish, hot devil-fish with
tender tentacles, slices of lamprey; finally the belly of a white electric eel,
round as that of a beautiful woman.


Such was the first course. The guests chose little tit-bits from each fish, and
left the rest to the slaves.


“Love,” began Phrasilas, “is a word which has no meaning, or
rather too much, for it designates in turn two irreconcilable feelings: sensual
gratification and passion. I do not know in what sense Faustina takes
it.”


“I like to have the sensual gratification.”


“For my part,” interrupted Chrysis, “I like to have the
sensual gratification, and to leave passion to my lovers. We must speak both of
one and the other, or my interest will only be partial.”


“Love,” murmured Philodemos, “is neither passion nor sensual
gratification. Love is something quite different.”


“Oh, for Heaven’s sake,” exclaimed Timon, “let us have
a banquet for once without philosophies. We are aware, Phrasilas, that you can
uphold with graceful eloquence and honeyed persuasiveness the superiority of
multiple pleasure over exclusive passion. We are aware also that after having
spoken for a full hour on such a thorny question, you would be ready, during
the next hour, with the same graceful eloquence and the same honeyed
persuasiveness, to defend the arguments of your adversary. I do not. . . .
.”


“Allow me . . .” said Phrasilas.


“I do not deny,” continued Timon, “the charm of this little
sport, or even the wit you bring to bear on it. I have my doubts as to its
difficulty, and consequently as to its interest. The Banquet you
published some time ago and incorporated in a story of lighter tone, and also
the reflexions you placed recently in the mouth of a mythical personage who
resembles your ideal, seemed new and rare in the reign of Ptolemy Auletes. But
for three years we have been living under the young Queen Berenice, and I know
not by what transformation the method of thought you had adopted, that of an
illustrious exegetical critic, harmonious and smiling, has suddenly grown a
century older under your pen, like the fashion of tight sleeves and yellow
hair. Excellent master, I deplore it, for if your stories lack fire, if your
experience of the female heart is not worth serious consideration, on the other
hand you are gifted with the comic spirit, and I am grateful to you for having
made me smile.”


“Timon!” cried Bacchis in indignation.


Phrasilas motioned to her to be silent.


“Let him alone, my dear. Unlike most men, I retain only the eulogistic
portion of the judgments people pass upon me. Timon has given me his; others
will praise me on other points. It would be impossible to live in the midst of
unanimous approbation, and I regard the very variety of the sentiments I
provoke as a charming flower-bed in which I desire to breathe the scent of the
roses without tearing up the spurge.”


Chrysis moved her lips in a way which showed clearly how slight was the value
she set on this man and his cleverness at terminating disputes. She turned
towards Timon, who shared her bed with her, and put her hand on his neck.
“What is the aim of life?” she asked him.


It was the question she usually asked when she was at a loss what to say to a
philosopher; but this time she introduced a tender note into her voice, and
Timon fancied he detected a declaration of love.


Nevertheless he answered with a certain calm:


“Each one has his own object in life, my Chrysis. There is no object
universal and common to all beings. For my part, I am the son of a banker whose
clientèle is composed of all the great courtesans of Egypt, and, my father
having amassed an enormous fortune by ingenious methods, I restore it
honourably to the victims of his favours by sleeping with them as often as the
strength the Gods have given me allows me to do so. I have decided that my
energy is only susceptible of performing one duty in life. I have chosen this
duty because it combines the exigencies of the rarest virtue with contrary
satisfactions that another ideal would support less easily.”


During this speech he had slipped his right leg behind those of Chrysis, who
was lying on her side, and he tried to part the closed knees of the courtesan
as if to give a precise object to existence for that evening. But Chrysis did
not humour him.


There was a silence for several minutes; then Seso began to speak.


“Timon, it is very annoying of you to interrupt at the very beginning the
only serious conversation of which the subject is capable of interesting us. At
any rate, let Naukretes speak, since you are so spiteful.”


“What shall I say about love?” answered the Guest par excellence.
“It is the name given to sorrow to console those who suffer. There are
only two ways of being unhappy: either we desire what we have not, or we
possess what we desired. Love begins with the first, and comes to an end with
the second, in the most lamentable state, that is to say, as soon as it
succeeds. May the gods preserve us from love!”


“But to possess unexpectedly,” said Philodemos, smiling; “is
not that true felicity?”


“What a rarity!”


“Not at all, if one is careful. Listen to me, Naukrates: not to desire,
but to act in such a way that the opportunity offers itself; not to love, but
to cherish from a distance certain well-chosen women for whom one feels one
might have a taste in the long run, if chance and circumstances combined to
throw them into one’s arms; never to adorn a woman with qualities one
wants her to have, or with beauties of which she makes a mystery, but always to
take the insipid for granted in order to be astonished by the exquisite. Is not
this the best advice a sage can give to lovers? They only have lived happily
who, in the course of their dear existences, have been wise enough occasionally
to reserve for themselves the priceless purity of unforeseen joys.”




The second course was drawing to a close. There had been pheasants, attagas, a
magnificent blue and red porphyris, and a swan with all its feathers, the
cooking of which had been spread over forty-eight hours so as not to burn its
wings. Upon curved plates one saw phlexids, pelicans, a white peacock which
seemed to be sitting on a dozen and a half of roast and stuffed spermologues;
in a word, enough food to feed a hundred persons on the fragments left behind
after the choice pieces had been set aside. But all this was nothing compared
with the last dish.


This chef-d’œuvre (such a work of art had not been seen for many a long
day at Alexandria) was a young pig, of which one half had been roasted and the
other boiled. It was impossible to distinguish the wound which had provoked its
death, or by what means its belly had been stuffed with everything it
contained. It was stuffed with round quails, chicken breasts, field-larks,
succulent sauces, and slices of vulva and mince-meat. The presence of all these
things in an animal apparently intact seemed inexplicable.


The guests uttered an unanimous cry of admiration, and Faustina asked for the
recipe. Phrasilas smilingly delivered himself of sententious metaphorical
maxims; Philodemos improvised a distich in which the word
χοῖρος was taken alternately in both senses.
This made Seso, already drunk, laugh till the tears flowed, but Bacchis having
given the order to pour seven rare wines into seven cups for the use of each
guest, the conversation strayed.


Timon turned to Bacchis:


“Why,” he asked, “should you have been so hard on the poor
girl I wanted to bring with me? She was a colleague, nevertheless. If I were in
your place, I should respect a poor courtesan more highly than a rich
matron.”


“You are mad,” said Bacchis, without discussing the question.


“Yes, I have often noticed that those who, once in a way, venture to
utter striking truths, are taken for lunatics. Paradoxes find everybody
agreed.”


“Nonsense, my friend; ask your neighbours, where is the man of birth who
would choose a girl without jewels as his mistress.”


“I have done it,” said Philodemos with simplicity.


And the women despised him.


“Last year,” he went on, “at the end of spring,
Cicero’s exile gave me good reason to fear for my own safety, and I took
a little journey. I retired lo the foot of the Alps, to a charming place named
Orobia, on the borders of the little lake Clisius. It was a simple village with
barely three hundred women, and one of them had become a courtesan in order to
protect the virtue of the others. Her house was to be recognised by a bouquet
of flowers hanging over the door, but she herself was indistinguishable from
her sisters or cousins. She was ignorant of the very existence of paint,
perfumes, cosmetics, transparent veils and curling-tongs. She did not know how
to preserve her beauty, and depilitated herself with pitchy resin just as one
pulls up weeds from a courtyard of white marble. One shudders at the thought
that she walked without boots, so that it was impossible to kiss her naked feet
as one kisses Faustina’s, softer than one’s hand. And yet I
discovered so many charms in her that beside her brown body I forgot Rome for a
whole month and blessed Tyre and Alexandria.”


Naukrates nodded approval, took a draught of wine, and said:


“The great event in love is the instant when nudity is revealed.
Courtesans should know this and spare us surprises. Now, it would seem on the
contrary that they devote all their efforts to disillusioning us. Is there
anything more painful than a mass of hair bearing traces of the curling irons?
Is there anything more disagreeable than painted cheeks that leave the marks of
the cosmetics on the mouth that kisses them! Is there anything more pitiable
than a pencilled eye with the charcoal half rubbed off? Strictly speaking, I
can understand chaste women using these illusory devices: every woman likes to
surround herself with a circle of male adorers, and the chaste ones amongst
them do not run the risk of familiarities which would unmask the secrets of
their physique. But that courtesans whose end and resource is the bed, should
venture to show themselves less beautiful in it than in the street is really
inconceivable.”


“You know nothing about it, Naukrates,” said Chrysis with a smile.
“I know that one does not keep one lover out of twenty; but one does not
seduce one man out of five hundred, and before pleasing in the bed one must
please in the street. No one would notice us if we did not rouge our faces and
darken our eyes. The little peasant-girl Philodemos speaks of, attracted him
without difficulty because she was alone in her village. There are fifteen
thousand courtesans here. The competition is quite another thing.”


“Don’t you know that pure beauty has no need of adornment, and
suffices for itself?”


“Yes. Well, institute a competition between a pure beauty, as you say,
and Gnathène, who is old and plain. Dress the former in a tunic covered with
holes and set her in the last row at the theatre, and put the latter in her
star-embroidered robe in the places reserved by her slaves, and note their
prices at the end of the performance: the pure beauty will get eight obols and
Gnathène two minæ.”


“Men are stupid,” Seso concluded.


“No, simply lazy. They do not take the trouble to choose their
mistresses. The best-loved women are the most mendacious.”


“But if,” suggested Phrasilas, “but if, on the one hand, I
should willingly applaud . . .”


And he delivered himself, with great charm, of two set discourses entirely
devoid of interest.


One by one, twelve dancing girls appeared, the two first playing the flute and
the last the timbrel, the others manipulating castanets. They arranged their
bandelets, rubbed their little sandals with white resin, and waited with
extended arms for the music to begin . . . A note . . . two notes . . . a
Lydian scale, and the twelve young girls shot forward to the accompaniment of a
light rhythm.


Their dance was voluptuous, languorous, and without apparent order, although
all the figures had been settled beforehand. They confined their evolutions to
a small space: they intermingled like waves. Soon they formed in couples, and
without interrupting the step, unfastened their girdles and let their pink
tunics glide to the ground. An odour of naked women spread about the men,
dominating the perfume of the flowers and the steam of the gaping viands. They
threw themselves backwards with brusque movements, with their bellies tightly
drawn, and their arms over their eyes. Then they straightened themselves up
again and hollowed their loins, and touched one another, as they passed, with
the points of their dancing breasts. Timon’s hand received the fugitive
caress of a hot thigh.


Soon they formed in couples.


“What does our friend think about it?” said Phrasilas with his
piping voice.


“I feel perfectly happy,” answered Timon. “I have never
before so clearly understood the supreme mission of women.”


“And what is it?”


“Prostitution, either with or without art.”


“That is only an opinion.”


“Phrasilas, once again, we know that nothing can be proved: worse still,
we know that nothing exists, and that even that is not certain. This being
conceded and in order to satisfy your celebrated mania, permit me to hold a
theory at once contestable and antiquated, as all of them are, but interesting
to me, who affirm it, and to the majority of men, who deny it. In the ease of
thought, originality is an ideal still more chimerical than certitude. You are
aware of that.”


“Give me some Lesbian wine,” said Seso to the slave. “It is
stronger than the other.”


“I maintain,” Timon went on, “that the married woman, by
devoting herself to a man who deceives her, by refusing herself to all others
(or by committing adultery very rarely, which comes to the same thing), by
giving birth to children who deform her before they see the light and
monopolise her when they are born,—I maintain that by living thus a woman
destroys her life without merit, and that on her wedding-day a young girl
concludes a dupe’s bargain.”


“She acts in fancied obedience to a duty,” said Naukrates without
conviction.


“A duty? and to whom? Is she not free to settle a question which concerns
nobody but herself? She is a woman, and in virtue of her sex is generally
insensible to the pleasures of the intellect; and not content with remaining a
stranger to one half of human joys, she excludes herself, by her marriage, from
the other aspect of pleasure. Thus a young girl can say to herself, at the age
when she is all passion: ‘I shall know my husband, and in addition, ten
lovers, perhaps twelve’, and believe that she will die without having
regretted anything? Three thousand women will not be enough for me on the day I
take my leave of life.”


“You are ambitious,” said Chrysis.


“But with what incense, with what golden poesy,” exclaimed the
gentle Philodemos, “should we not praise to eternity the beneficent
courtesans! Thanks to them, we escape all the complicated precautions, the
jealousies, the stratagems, the throbbings of the heart that accompany
adultery. It is they who spare us hours of waiting in the rain, rickety
ladders, secret doors, interrupted meetings, and intercepted letters and
misunderstood signals. O! dear creatures, how I love you! With you there are no
sieges to be undertaken: for a few little coins you give us what another would
hardly be capable of granting us as a condescension, after three weeks of
coldness. For your enlightened souls, love is not a sacrifice, it is an equal
favour exchanged by two lovers, and so the sums we confide to you do not serve
to compensate you for your priceless caresses, but to pay at its proper price
for the multiple and charming luxury with which, by a supreme complaisance, you
pacify nightly our ravenous passions. As you are innumerable, we always find
amongst you both the dream of our lives and our fancy for the evening, all
women at a day’s notice, hair of every shade, eyes of every colour, lips
of every savour. There is no love under heaven so pure that you cannot feign
it, nor so revolting that you dare not propose it. You are tender to the
disreputable, consolatory to the afflicted, hospitable to all, and beautiful!
That is why I tell you, Chrysis, Bacchis, Seso, Faustina, that it is a just law
of the gods which decrees that courtesans shall be the eternal desire of lovers
and the eternal envy of virtuous spouses.”


The dancing-girls had ceased dancing.


A young girl-acrobat had just entered, who juggled with daggers and walked on
her hands between the upright blades.


As the attention of the guest was entirely absorbed by the lassie’s
dangerous sport, Timon looked at Chrysis, and gradually, without being seen,
manoevered so that he lay behind her at full length and touched her with his
feet and mouth.


“No,” said Chrysis in a low voice, “no, my friend.”


But he had slipped his arm around her through the large slit in her robe and
was carefully caressing the reclining courtesan’s delicate, burning skin.


“Wait,” she implored. “We shall be seen. Bacchis will be
angry.”


She let herself slip down from the bed.


A glance convinced the young man that he was not being watched. He ventured
upon a caress after which women rarely resist when once they have allowed
things to go so far. Then, in order to quench by a decisive argument the last
scruples of expiring modesty, he put his purse in her hand, which happened by
chance to be open.


Chrysis resisted no longer.


Meanwhile the young acrobat continued her subtle and dangerous tricks. She
walked upon her hands, with her skirt reversed, with her feet dangling in front
of her head, between sharp swords and long keen blades. The effort occasioned
by this critical posture, and perhaps also the fear of wounds, flooded her
cheeks with dark warm blood, which heightened still further the glitter of her
wide-open eyes. Her waist bent and straightened itself again. Her legs parted
like the arms of a dancing girl.


A violent respiration agitated her naked breast.


“Enough,” said Chrysis briefly: “you have only excited me a
little. Let us have no more of it. Leave me. Leave me.”


And at the moment when the two Ephesians rose, according to the tradition, to
play The Fable of Hermaphroditus, she let herself slip down from the bed
and went out feverishly.


Hardly had the door closed upon her than Chrysis pressed the inflamed centre of
her desire with her hand as one presses a sore spot to relieve shooting pains.
Then she leaned up against a column and twisted her fingers, groaning with
anguish.


She would never know anything, then!


As the hours passed, the improbability of her success increased, became
flagrant. Brusquely to ask for the mirror was a very risky method of
discovering the truth. In case it should have been taken, she would attract the
suspicions of all to herself, and would be lost. On the other hand, she had
left the banqueting hall out of sheer impatience.


Timon’s clumsinesses had merely served to exasperate her dumb rage. A
trembling fit due to over-excitement compelled her to apply her whole body to
the freshness of the smooth, monstrous column. She felt an attack coming on and
was afraid.


She called the slave Aretias:


“Keep my jewels for me: I am going out.”


And she descended the seven stone steps.


The night was hot. Not a breath of wind to fan the heavy beads of sweat upon
her forehead. The disappointment increased her discomfort and made her reel.


She walked along down the street.


Bacchis’s house was situated at the extremity of Brouchion, on the limits
of the native town, an enormous slum inhabited by sailors and Egyptian women.
The fishermen, who slept upon their vessels anchored during the crippling heat
of the day, came to pass their nights there till the break of dawn, and in
return for a double intoxication left the harlots and the wine-sellers the
price of the evening’s catch.


Chrysis entered the narrow streets of this Alexandrian Suburra, full of sound,
movement and barbarous music. She cast furtive glances through open doors into
rooms reeking with lamp smoke, where naked couples lay enlaced together. At the
cross-roads, on low trestles erected in front of the houses, multi-coloured
mattresses creaked and tumbled in the shadow, under a double human load.
Chrysis walked along with embarrassment. A woman without a lover solicited her.
An old man caressed her breasts. A mother offered her her daughter. A gaping
peasant kissed the back of her neck. She fled, in a sort of hot terror.


This foreign town within the Greek town was, for Chrysis, full of night and
dangers. She was ill acquainted with the strange labyrinth, the intricacy of
the streets, the secrets of certain houses. When, at rare intervals, she
ventured to set foot in it, she always followed the same direct road towards a
little red door; and there she forgot her usual lovers in the indefatigable
arms of a young ass-driver with strong muscles, whom she had the joy of paying
in her turn.


But this evening, she felt even without turning her head that she was being
followed by a double footstep.


She increased her pace. The double footstep did likewise. She began to run; the
footsteps behind her ran also; then beside herself with terror, she took
another alley, and then another in the opposite direction, and then a long
street which stretched away in an unknown direction.


With dry throat and swollen temples, but sustained by Bacchis’s wine, she
pursued her flight, turned from right to left, pale, panic-stricken.


Finally, a wall blocked farther progress: she was in a blind alley. She tried
hastily to double, but two sailors with brown hands barred the narrow passage.


“Where are you going to, my little wisp of gold?” said one of them
laughing.


“Let me pass.”


“Eh? you are lost, young lady, you don’t know Rhacotis well, eh? We
are going to show you the town.”


And they both took her by the waist. She shouted, and struggled, struck out
with her fist, but the second sailor seized both her hands in his left hand and
simply said:


“A little calm, please. You know that the Greeks are not loved here:
nobody will come to your assistance.”


“I am not Greek!


“You lie, you have a white skin and a straight nose. Unless you want the
stick, submit quietly.”


Chrysis looked at the speaker, and suddenly fell on his neck.


“I love you, I will follow you,” she said. “You will follow
both of us. My friend shall have his share. Walk with us: it will not be
dull.”


Where were they taking her to? She had not the least idea, but this second
sailor’s very rudeness, his brutish head pleased her. She considered him
with the imperturbable glance that young bitches have in the presence of meat.
She bent her body towards him, to touch him as she walked.


With rapid steps they traversed strange quarters, without life, without lights.
Chrysis could not understand how they threaded their way through this nocturnal
maze out of which she never could have got alone on account of the curious
intricacy of the streets. The closed doors, the deserted windows, the
motionless shadows terrified her. Above her head, between the houses, that
almost met, ran a pale ribbon of sky, flooded with moonlight.


Finally, they entered life once more. At a turning of the street, suddenly,
eight, ten, eleven lights appeared, illuminated doorways occupied by Nabatæan
women squatting between two red lamps which cast a gleam from below upon their
heads hooded with gold.


She shouted and struggled.


In the distance, they heard first a swelling murmur, and then a confused roar
of chariots, tumbling bales, asses’ footsteps, and human voices. It was
the square of Rhacotis where, during the Alexandrian summer, all the provisions
for nine hundred thousand mouths a day were collected and stacked up.


They passed the houses of the square, between green piles, vegetables, lotus
roots, smooth beans, baskets of olives. Chrysis took a handful of mulberries
out of a violet heap, and ate them without stopping. Finally, they arrived
before a low door and the sailors entered with her for whom had been stolen the
True Pearls of Anadyomene.


There was an immense hall there. Five hundred men of the people sat waiting for
the day, drinking cups of yellow beer, eating figs, lentils, sesame cakes,
olyra bread. In their midst, swarmed a herd of yelping women, a whole field of
black hair and multicoloured flowers in an atmosphere of fire. They were poor
homeless girls who were the property of all. They came there to beg for scraps,
bare-footed, bare-breasted, with a scanty red or blue rag tied round their
bellies, carrying, for the most part, a tattered infant on their left arm.
There were also dancing-girls, six Egyptians on a dais, with an orchestra of
three musicians, the first two of whom smote ox-hide timbrels with drum-sticks,
whilst the third wielded a great sistrum of sonorous brass.


“Oh! myxaira sweets!” said Chrysis gleefully.


And she bought two sous’ worth of the little girl who hawked them.


But suddenly she swooned, overcome by the insupportable stink of this den, and
the sailors carried her out in their arms.


The fresh air brought her round a little.


“Where are we going to?” she implored. “Let us be quick: I
can walk no more. You see that I don’t resist, I am nice to you. But let
us find a bed as soon as possible, otherwise I shall drop down in the
street.”


When she once more found herself at Bacchis’s door, she was penetrated by
the delicious sensation produced by the respite from desire and the silence of
the flesh. Her forehead no longer ached. Her mouth no longer twitched. She felt
nothing but an intermittent pain which seized her from time to time in the
small of the back. She mounted the steps and crossed the threshold.


As soon as Chrysis had left the room the orgie had developed like a flame.


Other friends entered, to whom the twelve dancing girls fell an easy prey.
Forty tattered wreaths strewed the ground with flowers. A leathern bottle of
Syracusan wine had burst in a corner, and its golden flood flowed under and
around the table.


Philodemos was by the side of Faustina.


He had torn her robe and was singing her the verses he had made in her honour.


“O feet,” he said, “O sweet thighs, deep reins, round croup,
cloven fig, hips, shoulders, breasts, mobile neck; O all ye things that charm
me, warm hands, expert movements, active tongue! You are a Roman, you are a
Roman, you are too dark and you do not sing the poems of Sappho; but Perseus
was the lover of the Indian Andromeda.” [1]


Meanwhile, Seso lay flat upon her belly on the table in a pile of crushed
fruit. She was completely overpowered by the fumes of Egyptian wine, and as she
lay dipping the nipple of her right breast in a pond of snow-cooled wine, she
kept repeating with a comical pathos:


“Drink, my little darling. You are thirsty. Drink, my little darling.
Drink. Drink. Drink.”


Aphrodisia, still a slave, triumphed in the midst of a circle of men, and was
celebrating her last night of servitude by an extravagant debauch. In obedience
to the tradition of all Alexandrian orgies, she had begun by giving herself to
three lovers at once; but her task did not end there, and according to the law
of slaves who became courtesans, she was expected to prove by an incessant
zeal, lasting all night, that she had not usurped her new dignity.


Standing alone behind a curtain, Naukrates and Phrasilas discussed courteously
the respective value of Arcesilas and Carneades.


At the end of the hall, Myrtocleia protected Rhodis against the over-zealous
enterprises of one of the guests.


As soon as the two Ephesians saw Chrysis enter, they rose to meet her.


“Come away, my Chryse. Theano stays: but we are going.


“I stay too,” said the courtesan. And she lay down on her back upon
a great bed covered with roses.


A din of voices and the clattering of money falling on the floor attracted her
attention. It was Theano who, in order to parody her sister, had bethought her
to caricature the “Fable of Danaë,” simulating a mad ecstasy
of voluptuous delight every time a golden coin penetrated her. The
child’s daring impiety amused all the guests, for they were no longer in
the days when the thunderbolt would have exterminated those who scoffed at the
Immortal One. But the sport degenerated, as might have been foreseen. A clumsy
fellow hurt the poor little thing, and she fell to weeping noisily.


It was necessary to invent a new amusement to console her. Two dancing-girls
pushed into the centre of the room an immense silver-gilt bowl filled to the
top with wine. Then somebody seized Theano by the feet, and made her drink with
her head downwards. This convulsed her with a fit of laughter which she was
unable to master.


This idea was such a success that everybody crowded around, and when the
flute-girl was set on her feet again, the sight of her little face purple with
congestion and dripping with wine, produced such a general hilarity that
Bacchis said to Selene:


“A mirror! a mirror! let her see herself!”


The slave brought a bronze mirror. “No, not that one. The mirror of
Rhodopis. She merits it.”


Chrysis sprang up with a bound. The blood spurted to her cheeks, then retired
again, and she remained perfectly pale, with the beatings of her heart
battering her breast, and her eyes fixed on the door through which the slave
had disappeared.


That instant was to decide her whole life. Her last hope was either to vanish
or be realised. The fête continued all around her.


An iris wreath, thrown from somewhere or other, fell upon her lips. A man broke
a little phial of perfume over her hair. It ran down too quickly and wetted her
shoulders. The splashes of wine from a full tankard into which somebody had
thrown a pomegranate spotted her silk tunic and penetrated to the skin. She
bore all the traces of the orgie magnificently.


The slave who had gone out did not return.


Chrysis remained stone-pale, motionless as a sculptured goddess. The rhythmic
and monotonous wail of a woman in travail of love not far away marked the
passage of time for her. It seemed to her that this woman had been moaning thus
since the night before. She could have twisted something, broken her fingers,
shouted.


At last Selene came back, empty-handed.


“The mirror?” asked Bacchis.


“It . . . It has gone . . . it . . . has been . . . stolen,”
stammered the servant.


Bacchis uttered a cry so piercing that all ceased speaking, and a frightful
silence brusquely interrupted the tumult.


Men and women crowded round her from all parts of the vast chamber, leaving a
little space in the centre which was occupied by the distracted Bacchis and the
kneeling slave.


“What! What!” she shrieked.


And as Selene did not answer, she seized her violently by the neck:


“You have stolen it yourself! You have stolen it yourself! Answer,
answer! I will loosen your tongue with the whip, miserable little bitch!”


Then a terrible thing happened. Beside herself with fear, the fear of
suffering, the fear of death, the most instant terror she had ever known, the
child exclaimed hurriedly:


“It is Aphrodisia! It is not I! it is not I!”


“Your sister!”


“Yes, yes,” said the mulatto woman; “it is Aphrodisia who has
taken it.”


And they dragged their sister, who had just fallen into a fainting fit, before
Bacchis.


 [1] Philodème AP.
V. 132.


They all repeated together:


“It is Aphrodisia who has taken it! Bitch! Bitch! Filthy thief!”


Their hatred of the favourite sister was reinforced by their fear for
themselves.


Aretias gave her a kick in the breast.


“Where is it?” asked Bacchis. “Where have you put it?”


“She has given it to her lover.”


“Who is he?”


“An Opian sailor.”


“Where is his ship?”


“It sailed this evening for Rome. You will never see your mirror again.
Let us crucify the bitch, the bloody animal!”


“Ah! Gods! Gods!” sobbed Bacchis.


Then suddenly her sorrow changed into a frenzy of rage.


Bacchis seized her by the hair.


Aphrodisia had come to herself again; but, paralysed by terror, and unable to
understand what was happening, she remained speechless and tearless.


Bacchis seized her by the hair, dragged her over the soiled floor, through the
flowers and pools of wine, and cried:


“The cross! the cross! bring the nails! bring the hammer!”


“Oh!” said Seso to her neighbour; “I have never seen that.
Let us follow them.”


All pressed forward to follow. And Chrysis, who alone knew the guilty one, and
was alone the cause of everything, Chrysis followed too.


Bacchis went straight into the slaves’ chamber, a square apartment
furnished with three mattresses on which they slept in couples when the nights
were over. At the lower end, like an ever-present menace, stood a T-shaped
cross which had never yet been used.


In the midst of the confused murmur of the young men and women, four slaves
hoisted the martyr to the level of the branches of the cross.


Not a sound had yet left her lips; but when she felt the touch of the cold
rough beam on her naked back, her long eyes dilated, and she was seized with a
convulsive fit of groaning which lasted till the end.


They put her astride on a wooden peg driven into the centre of the upright.
This served to support the body and obviate the tearing of the hands.


Then they opened out her arms.


Chrysis looked on and held her peace. What could she say? She could only have
exonerated the slave by incriminating Demetrios, who was beyond reach of all
attack, and who would have taken a cruel revenge. Besides, a slave was a source
of riches, and it was a satisfaction to the long-standing grudge that Chrysis
bore her enemy to think that she was destroying in this way with her own hands
the value of three thousand drachmæ as completely as if she had thrown the
money into the Eunostis. And then, was the life of a minion worth troubling
about?


Heliope handed Bacchis the first nail and the hammer, and the torture began.
Intoxication, rancour, anger, all the passions together, even the instinct of
cruelty which lurks in a woman’s heart, animated the soul of Bacchis at
the moment she struck, and she uttered a shriek almost as piercing as that of
Aphrodisia when the nail bent in the open palm.


She nailed up the second hand. She nailed the feet one upon the other. Then,
excited by the sight of the blood spurting from the three wounds, she cried:


“It is not enough! Thief! Sow! Sailors’ strumpet!”


She took the long pins out of her hair, and dug them violently into the flesh
of her breasts, the belly, and the thighs. When she had no more weapons left in
her hands, she smacked the poor wretch and spat upon her.


She contemplated this work of vengeance for some time; then she returned into
the banqueting-hall with all the guests.


Phrasilas and Timon alone did not follow her.




After a moment’s silent meditation, Phrasilas coughed slightly, put his
right hand into his left, raised his head, lifted his eyebrows, and drew near
the crucified one, whose body shook with a continuous, horrible trembling.


“Although I am,” he said to her, “in divers circumstances,
opposed to absolute theories so-called, yet I cannot blind myself to the fact
that, in the conjuncture which has overtaken you, you would gain by being
familiarised in more solid fashion with the maxims of the Stoics. Zeno, who
does not seem to have had a spirit completely exempt from error, has left us
several sophistries of no great general import, but, at the same time, you
might derive profit from them to the particular end of calming your last
moments.


“Pain”, he said, “is a word void of meaning, since our will
transcends the imperfections of our perishable body. It is true that Zeno died
at the age of ninety-eight, without ever having had, according to his
biographers, any illness, however slight; but this circumstance cannot be used
as an argument against him, for from the mere fact that he succeeded in
maintaining an unimpaired good health, we cannot logically conclude that he
would have been lacking in force of character had he fallen ill. Besides, it
would be an abuse to compel the philosophers to practise in their persons the
rules of conduct they profess, and to cultivate without respite the virtues
they deem superior. In a word, not to prolong inordinately a discourse which
might last longer than yourself, endeavour to lift up your soul, my dear, as
far as possible, above your physical sufferings. However melancholy, however
cruel they may appear to you, I beg you to believe that I have a real part in
them. They are drawing to a close: be patient, forget. Between the various
doctrines which attribute immortality to us, this is the moment for choosing
the one most fitted to alleviate your regrets at having to disappear. If these
doctrines are true, you will have lightened the bitter agony of the passage. If
they lie, what does it matter? You will never know that you were
mistaken.”


Having spoken thus, Phrasilas re-adjusted the folds of his garment over his
shoulder and vanished with an unsteady gait.


Timon remained alone in the room with the woman hanging in the throes of death
upon the cross.


The memory of a night passed on the poor wretch’s breast haunted his
brain, and confounded itself with the atrocious vision of the imminent
rottenness into which this splendid body that had burned in his arms was about
to fall.


He pressed his hand over his eyes in order not to see her torture, but he
heard the unceasing trembling of the body upon the cross.


Finally, he looked. Great threads of blood formed a network on the skin from
the pins in the breast down to the curled-up heels. The head turned
perpetually. All the hair, matted with blood, sweat, and perfume, hung over the
left side.


“Aphrodisia! do you hear me! do you recognise me? It is I, Timon;
Timon.”


Her glance, almost blind, rested on him for a second. But the head turned
incessantly. The body trembled continually.


Softly, as if he feared the sound of his foot-steps would hurt her, the young
man advanced to the foot of the cross. He stretched out his arms, he carefully
took her strengthless and ever-turning head between his two fraternal hands,
piously smoothed away her tear-drenched hair from her cheeks, and imprinted on
the hot lips a kiss of infinite tenderness.


Aphrodisia closed her eyes. Did she recognise him who had charmed her horrible
end by this impulse of affectionate pity? An inexpressible smile distended her
blue eyelids, and with a sigh she gave up the ghost.


A kiss of infinite tenderness.


So, the deed was accomplished. Chrysis had the proof.


If Demetrios had brought himself to commit the first crime, the two others had
probably followed without delay. A man of his rank would consider murder, and
even sacrilege, as less dishonourable than theft.


He had obeyed, consequently he was a captive. This man, free, impassive, and
cold as he was, had submitted to the yoke of slavery like the others, and his
mistress, his tamer, it was she, Chrysis, Sarah of Gennesaret.


Ah! to think of it, to repeat it, to say it out aloud, alone!


Chrysis rushed out of the noisy house and ran quickly, straight before her,
with the fresh breeze of morning bathing her face.


She went as far as the Agora along the road which led to the sea, at the end of
which the masts of eight hundred ships stood huddled together like gigantic
stalks of corn. Then she turned to the right, before the immense avenue of the
Dromos where the house of Demetrios was. A thrill of pride came over her when
she passed in front of the windows of her future lover; but she did not commit
the indiscretion of attempting to see him the first. She followed the long road
as far as the Canopic Gate, and cast herself upon the ground between two aloes.


He had done it. He had done everything for her, certainly more than any lover
had ever done for any woman. She repeated it unceasingly and reiterated her
triumph again and again. Demetrios, the Well-Beloved, the impossible and
hopeless dream of so many feminine hearts, had run every sort of peril for her,
every kind of shame, of willing remorse. He had even abjured the ideal of his
thought, he had despoiled his handiwork of the miraculous necklace, and that
day which was just dawning would see the lover of the goddess at the feet of
his new idol.


“Take me! take me!” she cried. She adored him now. She called out
for him. She longed for him. The three crimes became metamorphosed in her mind
into three heroic actions, in return for which she would never be able to give
enough affection, enough passion. With what an incomparable flame would their
love burn—this unique love of two beings equally young, equally
beautiful, equally loved by one another and united for ever after the conquest
of so many obstacles.


She extended her arms.


They would go away together, they would set sail for mysterious countries, for
Amaronthis, for Epidauros, or even for that unknown Rome which was the second
town in the world after immense Alexandria, and which had undertaken the
subjugation of the earth. What would they not do, wherever they might be? What
joy would be a stranger to them, what human felicity would not envy them
theirs, and pale before their enchanted passage?


Chrysis rose from the ground, dazzled, She extended her arms, set back her
shoulders, threw out her bust. A sensation of languor and mounting joy
stiffened her firm breasts. She set out for home . . .


On opening the door of her chamber, she started with surprise to see that
nothing had changed under her roof since the night before. The little objects
on her toilet-table, on the stands, on the shelves, appeared to her an
inadequate setting for her new life.


She broke some that reminded her too directly of bygone useless lovers, for
whom she now conceived a sudden hatred. If she spared others, it was not that
she valued them more, but she was afraid of dismantling her chamber in case
Demetrios had formed the design of passing the night there.


She undressed slowly. Vestiges of the orgie fell from her tunic, crumbs of
cake, hairs, rose-leaves.


When her waist was relieved of the pressure of her girdle, she smoothed the
skin and plunged her fingers into her hair to lighten its weight.


But before going to bed a longing came over her to rest an instant on the rugs
of the terrace, where the coolness of the air was so delicious.


She mounted.


The sun had barely risen. It lay on the horizon line like a vast swollen
orange.


A great gnarled palm-tree stood with its thicket of green leaves hanging over
the balustrade. Chrysis ensconced her tingling nudity in its shade, and
shivered, with her breasts in her hands.


Her eyes wandered over the gradually whitening town. The violet vapours of the
dawn rose from the silent streets and disappeared in the pellucid air.


Suddenly, an idea burst upon her mind, grew upon her, took possession of her.
Demetrios, who had already done so much, why should he not kill the Queen,
Demetrios who might be the king?


And then?




And then, that monumental ocean of houses, palaces, temples, porticoes,
colonnades, that swam before her eyes from the Necropolis of the west to the
gardens of the Goddess: Brouchion, the Egyptian town, in front of which the
gleaming Paneion reared itself aloft like a mountain acropolis; the Great
Temple of Serapis, from the facade of which arose, horn-like, two long pink
obelisks; the Great Temple of Aphrodite engirded by the rustling of three
hundred thousand palm-trees and countless waves; the Temple of Persephone and
the Temple of Arsinoë, the two sanctuaries of Poseidon, the three towers of
Isis Lochias, and the theatre, and the Hippodrome, and the Stadium where
Pittacos had run in competition with Nicosthenes, and the tomb of Stratonice,
and the tomb of the god Alexander—Alexandria! Alexandria! the sea, the
men, the colossal marble Pharos whose mirror saved men from the sea!
Alexandria! the city of the eleven Ptolemies, Physcon, Philometor, Epiphanes,
Philadelphos; Alexandria, the climax of all dreams, the diadem of all the
glories conquered during three thousand years in Memphis, Thebes, Athens,
Corinth, by the chisel, the pen, the compass, and the sword! Still farther
away, the Delta, cloven by the seven tongues of Nile, Saïs, Boubastis,
Heliopolis; then, travelling towards the South, that ribbon of fertile land,
the Heptanomos with the long array of its twelve hundred riverside temples
dedicated to all the gods, and further still, Thebaïs. Diospolis, the Isle
of Elephants, the impassable cataracts, the Isle of Argo . . . Meroë . . .
the unknown; and even, if it was permitted to believe the traditions of the
Egyptians, the country of the fabulous lakes, whence escapes the antique Nile,
lakes so vast that one loses sight of the horizon when crossing their purple
flood, and perched so high upon the mountains that the stars are reflected in
them like golden apples.—all this, all, should be the kingdom, the
domain, the possession of Chrysis, the courtesan.


She almost choked, and threw her arms on high as if she thought to touch the
heavens.


And simultaneously, she watched on her left the slow flight towards the open
sea of a great bird with black wings.


Queen Berenice had a young sister called Cleopatra. Many other Egyptian
princesses had borne the same name, but this girl became in later years the
great Cleopatra who destroyed her kingdom, and killed herself, as one might
say, on the corpse of her dead empire.


About this time, she was twelve years of age, and no one could tell what her
beauty would be. Her body, tall and thin, seemed out of place in a family where
all the females were plump. She was ripening like some badly-grafted, bastard
fruit of foreign, obscure origin. Some of her lineaments were hard and bold, as
seen in Macedonia; other traits appeared as if inherited from the depths of
Nubia, where womankind is tender and swarthy, for her mother had been a female
of inferior race whose pedigree was doubtful. It was surprising to see
Cleopatra’s lips, almost thick, under an aquiline nose of rather delicate
shape. Her young breasts, very round, small, and widely separated, were crowned
with a swelling aureola, thereby showing she was a daughter of the Nile.


The little Princess lived in a spacious room, opening on to the vast sea and
joined to the Queen’s apartment by a vestibule under a colonnade.


Cleopatra passed the hours of the night on a bed of bluish silk, where the skin
of her young limbs, already of a dark hue, took on still deeper tints.


It came to pass that in the night when—far from her and her
thoughts—the events already chronicled in these pages look place,
Cleopatra rose long before dawn. She had slept but little and badly, being
anxious about her troubles of puberty which she had just experienced, and
disturbed by the extreme heat of the atmosphere.


Without waking the woman who watched over her slumbers, she softly put her feet
to the ground, slipped her golden bangles round her ankles, girded her little
brown belly with a row of enormous pearls, and thus accoutred, left her
chamber.


In the monumental corridor, armed guards were also sound asleep, except one who
stood sentinel at the door of the Queen’s room.


He fell on his knees and whispered in dire terror, as if he had never before
found himself thus struggling in such a conflict of duty and danger:


“Princess Cleopatra, I crave thy pardon! I cannot let thee pass!”


The lass drew herself up to her full height, knitted her brows violently, and
dealt a dull blow on the soldier’s forehead with her clenched fist.


“As for thee,” she said in smothered accents, but with ferocious
meaning, “I’ll raise a cry of rape, and have thee quartered!”


Then, in silence, she entered the Queens chamber.




Berenice was asleep, her head pillowed on her arm, her hand hanging down.


Over the great crimson couch, a hanging lamp mingled its feeble glare with that
of the moon, reflected by the whiteness of the walls. The vague, luminous
outlines of the slumbering woman’s supple nudity were thus enwrapped in
misty shadow, between these two contrasting lights.


Slender Cleopatra sat straight up on the edge of the bed. She took her
sister’s face in her two little hands, waking Berenice up by touch and
speech.


“Why is your lover not with you?” asked Cleopatra.


Berenice, startled, opened her lovely eyes.


“Cleopatra! What are you doing here? What do you want of me?”


“Why is your lover not with you?” repeated the girl, insisting.


“Is he not with me?”


“Certainly not! You know that well enough!”


“True! He’s never here. Oh, Cleopatra, how cruel of you to wake me,
to tell me so!”


“But why is he always away?”


“I see him when he chooses,” sighed Berenice, in grief.
“During the day— for a minute or two.”


“Did you not see him yesterday?”


“Yes. I met him by the roadside. I was in my litter. He got in with
me.”


“As far as the Palace?”


“No—not quite. He was still in sight nearly as far as the
gates.”


“What did you tell him?”


“Oh, I was furious! I said most wicked things. Yes, darling, I
did!”


“Indeed?” rejoined the young girl, ironically.


“Perhaps too wicked, for he never answered me. Just when I felt myself
scarlet with rage, he recited a long fable for my benefit. As I did not quite
understand it, I did not know how to reply. He slipped out of the litter, just
as I thought of keeping him by my side.


“Why not have called him back?”


“I feared to displease him.”


Cleopatra, swelling with indignation, took her sister by the shoulders, and
looking her full in the face, spoke thus to her:


“How now! You are the Queen, the people’s goddess! Half the world
belongs to you; all that Rome does not rule is yours; you reign over the Nile
and the entire ocean. You even reign over the heavens, since you are nearer to
the ear of the Gods than anyone, and yet you cannot reign over the man you
love!”


“Reign . . . reign!” said Berenice, hanging her head.
“That’s easy to say, but, look you, one does not reign over a lover
as if dominating a slave.”


“And why not, pray?”


“Because . . . But you cannot understand! To love, is to prefer the
happiness of another to that which we formerly selfishly desired before meeting
the loved one. Should Demetrios be content, so likewise would I be, even
weeping and far from his side. I wish for no delight that is not his, and all I
bestow on him gives me great joy.”


“You know not how to love,” said the young lass.


Berenice smiled sadly, then she stretched her two arms stiffly on either side
of her couch, as she jutted out her breasts and arched her loins.


“Ah, little presumptuous virgin!” she sighed. “When for the
first time you’ll swoon in loving conjunction, then only will you
understand why one is never the queen of a man who causes you thus to lose your
senses.”


“A woman can always be a queen should she so will it.”


“But she has no longer any power of will.”


“I have! Why should you not be the same? You are my elder!”


Berenice smiled again.


“My little girl, upon whom do you exercise your strength of will? On
which one of your dolls?”


“On my lover!” said Cleopatra.


Without allowing her sister time to find words to express her stupefaction, the
damsel went on talking with growing vivacity.


“I have got a lover! Yes, I’ve a lover! Why should I not have a
sweetheart like everybody else, the same as you and my mother, and my aunt, and
the lowest woman in Egypt? A lover? Of a surety! And why not, prithee, seeing
that for six months past, I am a woman, and you have not yet found me a
husband? Aye, Berenice, I have a lover. I’m no longer a little girl. I
know now! I know! Be silent—say nothing, for I know more than you. I,
too, have clasped my arms till they were fit to snap, over the naked back of a
man who thought he was my master. I, too, have crooked my toes in the empty
air, feeling as if life was leaving me, and I’ve died a hundred times
over in the same way as you have swooned, but immediately afterwards, Berenice,
I was on my feet, upstanding, erect! Say naught to me, for I am ashamed to
claim you as my Sovereign—you, who are someone’s slave!”


Little Cleopatra drew herself up to her full height, endeavouring to appear as
tall as possible. She took her head in her hands, like an Asiatic queen trying
on a tiara.


Seated on the bed, her feet tucked under her, the elder sister listened, and
then knelt, so she could come near to the young lass and place her hands on
Cleopatra’s sloping, slender shoulders.


“So you’ve a lover?” Berenice now spoke timidly, almost
respectfully.


“If you don’t believe me, you can look,” replied the girl,
curtly.


“When do you see him?” sighed Berenice.


“Three times a day.”


“Where?”


“Do you want me to tell you?”


“Yes.”


“How comes it that you do not know this?” interrogated Cleopatra in
her turn.


“I know nothing, not even what goes on at the Palace. Demetrios is the
only subject of conversation I care about. I have not watched over you as I
should have done, my child. All this is my fault.”


“Watch me if you like. When I can no longer have my own way, I’ll
kill myself. Therefore, little care I, whatever happens!”


“You are free,” replied Berenice, shaking her head. “At any
rate, it is too late to restrain you. But, answer me, darling. You have a lover
and—you manage to keep him to yourself?”


“I have my way of holding him.”


“Who taught you?”


“I taught myself all alone. Such knowledge comes instinctively or never.
When I was but six years old, I knew how I meant to hold my sweetheart later on
in life.”


“Will you not tell me?”


“Follow me.”


Berenice rose slowly, put on a tunic and a mantle, shook out her heavy tresses,
adhering together by the sweat of the bed, and both the sisters left the room.


Cleopatra crossed a courtyard.


First went the youngest, straight along the vestibule, back to her bed. Under
the mattress of fresh, dry byssos, she took a newly-cut key.


“Follow me. It’s rather far,” she said, turning to her
sister.


In the middle of the passage was a staircase which she ascended. Then she
glided along a never-ending colonnade, opened several doors, walking on
carpets, white marble slabs and the mosaic floors of a score of empty, silent
apartments.


She descended a stone stairway, and stepped over the dark thresholds of
clanging doors. Now and again, the two women came upon soldiers, resting on
mats in couples, their spears close to their hands. Some long time afterwards,
Cleopatra crossed a courtyard lit up by the rays of the full moon, and the
shadow of a palm-tree caressed her hips. Berenice, wrapped in her blue mantle,
still followed her.


At last, they reached a massive door, clamped with iron like a warrior’s
breastplate. In the lock, Cleopatra slipped her key, turning it twice. Then,
pushing open the portal, a man—a very giant in the darkness—rose to
his full height out of the depths of his dungeon.


Berenice stirred with emotion, looked in, and with drooping head, said very
softly:


“Tis you, my child, who know not how to love. At least—not yet. I
was quite right when I told you that.”


“Love for love, I prefer mine,” said the girl. “He gives me
naught but joy, at any rate.”


So saying, erect on the prison threshold, and without making a step forward,
she said to the man who stood in the shadow:


“Come hither, and kiss my foot, son of a cur!”


When he had done so, she pressed her mouth to his lips.


Now, with the mirror, the necklace, and the collar, Demetrios having returned
home, a dream visited him in his slumber, and this was his dream:


He is going towards the quay, mingled with the crowd, on a strange moonless
night, cloudless, but shedding a peculiar brilliance of its own.


Without knowing why, or what it is that draws him, he is in a hurry to arrive,
to be there as soon as he can, but he walks with effort, and the air
opposes an inexplicable resistance to his legs, as deep water hampers
footsteps.


He trembles, he thinks he will never reach the goal, that he will never know
towards whom, in this bright obscurity, he is walking thus, panting and
troubled.


At times, the crowd disappears entirely, whether it be that it really fades
away, or that he ceases to be conscious of its presence. Then it jostles more
importunately than ever, and all press, on, on, on, with a quick and sonorous
step, more quickly than he . . .


Then the human mass closes in upon him; Demetrios pales; a man pushes him with
his shoulder; a woman’s buckle tears his tunic; a young girl is wedged
against him, so tightly that he feels the pressure of her nipples against his
chest, and she pushes his face away with two terrified hands.


Suddenly he is alone, the first, upon the quay. And as he turns to look behind
him, he perceives in the distance the white swarm of the crowd which has all at
once receded to the Agora.


And he realises that it will advance no further.


The quay lies white and straight like the first stage of an unfinished road
which has undertaken to cross the sea.


He wants to go to Pharos, and he walks. His legs have suddenly become light.
The wind blowing in the sandy deserts drives him headlong towards the watery
solitudes into which the quay plunges venturesomely. But in proportion as he
advances, Pharos retreats before him; the quay is immeasurably prolonged. Soon
the high marble tower on which blazes a purple wood-pile touches the livid
horizon, flickers, dies down, wanes, and sets like another moon.


Demetrios walks ever onwards.


Days and nights seem to have passed since he left the great quay of Alexandria
far behind him, and he dare not turn his head, for fear of seeing nothing but
the road he has travelled along: a white line stretching to infinity—and
the sea.


And still he turns round.


An island is behind him, covered with great trees whence droop enormous
blossoms.


Has he crossed it like a blind man, or does it spring into sight at the same
instant and become mysteriously visible? He does not think of conjecturing: he
accepts the impossible as a natural event . . .


A woman is in the isle. She is standing before the door of its one house, with
her eyes half closed and her face bending over a monstrous iris-flower that
reaches to the level of her lips. She has heavy hair, the colour of dull gold,
and of a length one may surmise to be marvellous, judging by the mass of the
great coil that lies on her drooping neck. A black tunic envelopes this woman,
and a robe blacker still is draped upon the tunic, and the iris whose perfume
she breathes with downcast eyelids is of the same hue as night.


In all this mourning garb, Demetrios sees but the hair, like a golden vase on
an ebony column. He recognises Chrysis.


The recollection of the mirror and of the necklace and of the comb recurs to
him vaguely; but he does not believe in it, and in this singular vision reality
alone seems to him a dream . . .


“Come,” says Chrysis. “Follow me.”


He follows her. She slowly mounts a staircase strewn with white skins. Her arm
rests upon the rail. Her naked heels float in and out from under her robe.


The house has but one storey. Chrysis halts at the topmost step.


“There are four chambers,” she says.


“When you have seen them, you will never leave them. Will you follow me?
Have you confidence?”


A monstrous iris-flower reaches to the level of her lips.


But he will follow her everywhere. She opens the first door and closes it
behind him.


This room is long and narrow. It is lighted by a single window, through which
is seen enframed the great expanse of sea. On the right and left are two small
tables and on them a dozen book-rolls.


“Here are the books you love,” says Chrysis. “There are no
others.”


Demetrios opens them: they are The Oineus of Chæremon, The Return
of Alexis, The Mirror of Lais of Aristippos, The Enchantress,
The Cyclops, the Bucolics of Theocritos, Œdipus at
Colonos, the Odes of Sappho, and several other little works. Upon a
pile of cushions, in the midst of this ideal library, there is a naked girl who
utters no word.


“Now,” murmurs Chrysis, drawing from a long golden coder a
manuscript consisting of a single leaf, “here is the page of antique
poesy that you never read alone without weeping.”


The young man reads at a venture:


[Greek: Hoi men ar’ ethrêneon, epi de stenachonto gynaikes.
Têsin d’Andromachê leukôlenos êrche gooio,
Hektoros androphonoio karê meta chersin echousa;
Aner, ap’ aiônos neos ôleo, kadde me chêrên
Leipeis en megaroisi; pais d’eti nêpios autôs,
Hon tekomen sy t’egô te dysammoroi. . .]


He stops, casting upon Chrysis a look of surprise and tenderness.


“You?” he says. “You show me this?”


“Ah! you have not seen everything. Follow me. Follow me quickly.”


They open another door.


The second chamber is square. It is lighted by a single window, through which
is seen enframed all nature. In the midst, stands a wooden trestle bearing a
lump of red clay, and in a corner, a naked girl lies upon a curved chair, and
utters no word.


“Here you will model Andromeda and Zagreus and the Horses of the Sun. As
you will create them for yourself alone, you will break them in pieces before
your death.”


“It is the House of Felicity,” says Demetrios in a low voice.


And he lets his forehead sink into his hands.


But Chrysis opens another door.


The third chamber is vast and round. It is lighted by a single window, through
which is seen enframed the great expanse of blue sky. Its walls consist of
gratings of bronze bars so disposed as to form lozenge-shaped interstices.
Through them glides a music of flutes and pipes played to a doleful measure by
invisible musicians. And against the far wall, upon a throne of green marble,
sits a naked girl who utters no word.


“Come! Come!” repeats Chrysis.


They open another door.


The fourth chamber is low, sombre, hermetically closed, and triangular. Thick
carpets and rugs array it so luxuriously from floor to roof that nudity is not
astonished in it. Lovers can easily imagine that they have cast off their
garments upon the walls in all directions. When the door is closed again, it is
impossible to guess where it was. There is no window. It is a narrow world,
outside the world. A few wisps of black hair hanging to the cushions shed
tear-drops of perfumes. And this chamber is lighted by seven little myrrhine
panes which colour diversely the incomprehensible light of seven subterranean
lamps.


“See,” explains the woman in an affectionate and tranquil tone,
“there are three different beds in the three corners of our
chamber.”


Demetrios does not answer. And he asks within himself:


“Is it really a last term? Is it truly a goal of human existence? Have I
then passed through the other three chambers only to stop in this one? And
shall I, shall I ever be able to leave it if I lie in it a whole night in the
attitude of love which is the prostration of the tomb.”


But Chrysis speaks.




“Well-Beloved, you asked for me; I am come, look at me well . . .”


She raises her two arms together, lays her hands upon her hair, and, with her
elbows projecting in front of her, smiles.


“Well-Beloved, I am yours . . . Oh! not immediately . . . I promised you
to sing, I will sing first . . .”


And he thinks of her no more, and lays him down at her feet. She has little
black sandals. Four threads of blue pearls pass between the dainty toes, on the
nails of which has been painted a carmine lunar crescent.


With her head reposing on her shoulder, she taps on the palm of her left hand
with her right, and undulates her hips almost imperceptibly.


“By night, on my bed,
I sought him whom my soul loveth:
I sought him, but I found him not. . . . .
I charge ye, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
If ye find my beloved,
Tell him
That I am sick of love.”


“Ah! it is the Song of Songs, Demetrios. It is the nuptial canticle of
the women of my country.”


“I sleep, but my heart waketh:
It is the voice of my beloved . . .
That knocketh at my door,
The voice of my beloved!
He cometh,
Leaping upon the mountains
Like a roe
Or a young hart.”



“My beloved speaks, and says unto me:
Open unto me, my sister, my fair one:
My head is filled with dew,
And my locks with the drops of the night.
Rise up, my love, my fair one,
And come away.
For lo, the winter is past,
The rain is over and gone,
The flowers appear on the earth.
The time of the singing of birds is come,
The voice of the turtle-dove is heard in the land.
Rise up, my love, my fair one,
And come away.”


She casts her veil away, and stands up arrayed in some tight-fitting stuff
wound closely round the legs and hips.


“I have put off my coat;
How shall I put it on?
I have washed my feet:
How shall I defile them?
My well-beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door,
And my bowels were moved for him.
I rose up to open to my beloved,
And my hands dropped with myrrh,
And my fingers with sweet-smelling myrrh,
Upon the handles of the lock.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth!


She throws her head back and half closes her eyelids.


“Stay me, comfort me,
For I am sick of love.
Let his left hand be under my head
And his right hand embrace me.
Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, with
one of thine eyes,
With one chain of thy neck.
How fair is thy love!
How fair are thy caresses!
How much better than wine!
The smell of thee pleaseth me more than all spices.
Thy lips drop as the honeycomb:
Honey and milk are under thy tongue.
The smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.”

“A garden enclosed is my sister,
A spring shut up, a fountain sealed.



“Awake, O north wind!
Blow, thou south!
Blow upon my garden,
That the spices thereof may flow out.”


She rounds her arms, and holds out her mouth.


“Let my beloved come into his garden
And eat of his pleasant fruits.
Yes, I come into my garden,
O! my sister, my spouse,
I gather my myrrh with my spice,
I eat my honeycomb with my honey.
I drink my wine with my milk.
SET ME AS A SEAL UPON THINE HEART
AS A SEAL UPON THINE ARM
FOR LOVE IS STRONG AS DEATH.” [1]


Without moving her feet, without bending her tightly-pressed knees, she slowly
turns her body upon her motionless hips. Her face and her two breasts, above
her tightly-swathed legs, seem three great pink flowers in a flower-holder made
of stuffs.


She dances gravely, with her shoulders and her head and the intermingling of
her beautiful arms. She seems to suffer in her sheath and to reveal ever and
ever more the whiteness of her half imprisoned body. Her breathing inflates her
breast. Her mouth cannot close. Her eyelids cannot open. A heightening flame
flushes her cheeks.


Now her ten interlocked fingers join before her face. Now she raises her arms.
She strains voluptuously. A long fugitive groove separates her shoulders as
they rise and fall. Finally, with a single movement of her body, enveloping her
panting visage in her hair as with a bridal veil, she tremblingly unfastens the
sculptured clasp which retained her garment about her loins, and allows all the
mystery of her grace to slip down upon the ground.


Demetrios and Chrysis . . .


Their first embracement before love is immediately so perfect, so harmonious,
that they keep it immobile, in order fully to know its multiple voluptuousness.
One of her breasts stands out erect and round, from under the strong encircling
arm of Demetrios. One of her burning thighs is rivetted between his two legs,
and the other lies with all its heavy weight thrown upon them. They remain
thus, motionless, clasped together but not penetrated, in the rising exaltation
of an inflexible desire which they are loth to satisfy. At first, they catch
at one another with their mouths alone. They intoxicate each other with the
contact of their aching and ungated virginities.


She dances gravely with her shoulders and her head.


We look at nothing so minutely as the face of the woman we love. Seen at the
excessively close range of the kiss, Chrysis’s eyes seem enormous. When
she closes them, two parallel creases remain on each eyelid, and a leaden-hued
patch extends from the brilliant eyebrows to the verge of the cheeks. When she
opens them, a green ring, fine as a silken thread, illumines with a coloured
coronal the fathomless black eyeball immeasurably distended under the long
curved lashes. The little pellet of red flesh whence the tears flow has sudden
palpitations.


Their kiss is endless. Chrysis would seem to have under her tongue, not milk
and honey, as in Holy Writ, but living, mobile, enchanted water. And this
multiform tongue itself, now incurved like an arch, now rolled up like a
spiral, now shrinking into its hiding-place, now darting forth like a flame,
more caressing than the hand, more expressive than the eyes, circling,
flower-like, into a pistil, or thinning away into a petal, this ribbon of flesh
that hardens when it quivers and softens when it licks, Chrysis animates it
with all the resources of her endearing and passionate fantasy . . . Then she
showers on him a series of prolonged caresses that twist and turn. Her nervous
finger-tips suffice to grasp him tightly, and to produce convulsive tremblings
along his sides. She is happy only when palpitating with desire or enervated by
exhaustion: the transition terrifies her like a torture. As soon as her lover
summons her, she thrusts him away with rigid arms: she presses her knees close
together, she supplicates him dumbly with her lips. Demetrios constrains her by
force.


...No spectacle of nature, neither the blazing glory of the setting sun, nor the
tempest in the palm-trees, nor the mirage, nor the mighty upheavals of the
waters, seem worthy of astonishment to those who have witnessed the
transfiguration of a woman in their arms. Chrysis becomes extraordinary.
Arching her body upwards, and sinking back again in turns, with her bent elbow
resting on the cushions, she seizes the corner of a pillow, clutches at it like
a dying woman, and gasps for breath, with her head thrown back. Her eyes,
brilliant with gratitude, fix the madness of their glance at the corner of the
eyelids. Her cheeks are resplendent. The curve of her swaying hair is
disconcerting. Two admirable, muscular lines, descending from the ear and the
shoulder, meet under the right breast and bear it like a fruit.


Demetrios contemplates this divine madness in the feminine body with a sort of
religious awe—this transport of a whole being, this superhuman convulsion
of which he is the direct cause, which he exalts or represses at will, and
which confounds him for the thousandth time.


Under his very eyes all the mighty forces of life strain in the effort to
create. The breasts have already assumed, up to their very tips, maternal
majesty. And these wails, these lamentable wails that prematurely weep over the
labour of childbirth! . . .


 [1] Song of Songs.


Far above the sea and the Gardens of the Goddess, the moon poured down torrents
of light.


Melitta—that little damsel, so delicate and slender, possessed by
Demetrios for a fleeting moment, and who had offered to take him to Chimairis,
learned in chiromancy—had remained behind alone with the fortune-teller,
crouching, and still fierce.


“Do not follow that man,” Chimairis had said.


“Oh yes, I will! I’ve not even asked him if I am ever to see him
again. Let me run after him to kiss him, and I’ll come back—”


“No, you’ll not see him ever more. And so much the better, my girl.
Women who meet him once, learn to knew pain. Women who meet him twice, trifle
with death.”


“Oh, prophetess of evil! Take back what you’ve said!


“Why say it? I’ve just met him, and I’ve only trifled with
pleasure in his arms.”


“You owe your pleasure to him because you do not know what voluptuousness
means, my tiniest of tiny girls. Forget him as you would a playmate and
congratulate yourself on being only twelve years old.”


“So one is very unhappy when grown up?” asked the child. “All
the women here chatter unceasingly of their troubles, and I, who never hardly
cry, see so many weeping!”


Chimairis dug her two hands into her hair and uttered a groan. Her goat shook
its gold collar and turned its head in her direction, but she did not bestow a
glance on the animal.


“Nevertheless, I know one happy woman,” continued Melitta,
significantly. “She’s my great friend, Chrysis. I’m certain
she never sheds a tear.”


“She will,” said Chimairis.


“Oh, prophetess of evil! Take back what you’ve said, distraught old
woman, or I shall hate you!”


Seeing the young girl’s threatening gestures, the black goat reared up
erect, its front legs bent under; its horns thrust forward.


Melitta fled without looking where she went.


Twenty paces farther on, she burst out laughing, as she caught sight of a
ridiculous couple hidden between two bushes. That sufficed to change the
current of her young thoughts.


She took the longest road before returning to her hut, and then decided not to
go home at all. It was a magnificent, warm, moonlight night. The gardens were
full of many voices and songs. Satisfied with what she had earned through the
visit of Demetrios, she was seized with a sudden fancy to play the part of a
vagrant girl of roads and ditches, in the depths of the wood, with pauper
passers-by. In this way, she was enjoyed twice or three against a tree, a stone
pillar, or on a bench, and found amusement as if the game was new, because the
scene kept changing. A soldier, standing in the middle of a pathway, lifted her
bodily up in his robust arms and identified himself with the God of the Gardens
who joins himself to the wenches who tend the rose-trees without needing to let
the hussies feet touch the ground. At this, Melitta uttered a cry of triumph.


Escaping again, she continued her flight through an avenue of palms, where she
met a lad, named Mikyllos, seemingly lost in the forest. She offered to be his
guide, but led him astray designedly, so as to keep him with her for her own
purposes. Mikyllos was not long in fathoming Melitta’s intentions, as
well as her tiny talents and capabilities. Soon becoming companions, rather
than lovers, they ran along side by side in solitude that grew more and more
silent. Suddenly, they came in front of the sea.


The spot where they found themselves was far distant from the parts where the
courtesans generally celebrated the rites of their religious profession. Why
they chose other trysting-places in preference to this—the most admirable
of all—they could not have told you. The part of the wood where the crowd
gathered soon became a notorious central alley, surrounded by a network of
bypaths and starry glades. On the outskirts, despite the charm or the beauty of
the sites, there reigned eternal solitude where luxuriant vegetation flourished
peacefully.


Thus strolling, hand in hand, Mikyllos and Melitta reached the limit of the
public park, a low hedge of aloes, forming a useless dividing line between the
gardens of Aphrodite and those of her High Priest.


Encouraged by the hushed solitude of this flowery wilderness, the young couple
easily climbed over the irregular wall formed by the quaint twisted plants. The
Mediterranean, at their feet, slowly swept the shore, with wavelets like the
fringes of a river. The two children waded in breast-high and chased each
other, laughing meanwhile, as they tried to effect difficult conjunctions in
the water. They soon put an end to these sports, which failed like games
insufficiently rehearsed. After that, luminous and dripping wet, wriggling
their frog-like legs in the moonlight, they sprang upon the dark edge of the
sea.


Traces of footprints on the sand urged the boy and girl onwards. They walked,
ran, and struggled, pulling each other by the hand; their black, well-defined
shadows sketching bold outlines of their two figures. How far were they to go
in this wise? They saw no other living things on the immense azure horizon.


“Ah! Look!” exclaimed Melitta, all of a sudden.


“What’s the matter?”


“There’s a woman!”


“A courtesan! Oh, the shameless thing! She has fallen asleep in the
open.”


“No, no!” rejoined Melitta, shaking her head. “I dare not go
near her, Mikyllos. She’s no courtesan.”


“I should have thought she was.


“No, I say, Mikyllos, she’s not one of us. It’s Touni, wife
of the High Priest. Look well at her. She is not asleep. Oh, I’m afraid
to approach her. Her eyes are wide open! Let us go away! I’m
afraid—oh, so afraid!”


Mikyllos made three steps forward on tip-toe.


“You’re right, Melitta. She is not sleeping, poor woman! She is
dead.”


“Dead?”


“There is a pin in her heart.”


He stretched out his hand to draw it from her breast, but Melitta was
terrified.


“No, no! Touch her not! She is sacred! Remain by her side, watch over
her, protect her. I’ll call for help. I’ll tell the others.”


She fled with all the strength of her legs into the deep shadow of the black
trees.


Alone and trembling, Mikyllos wandered round the corpse of the young woman. He
touched the pierced breast with his finger. Then, either scared by death, or
more likely fearing to be taken for an accomplice of the murder, he suddenly
took to his heels, resolved to apprise no one.


The icy nakedness of Touni remained as before, abandoned in the bright light of
the moon.




A long time afterwards, the woods near where she lay became filled with murmurs
which were frightful because almost imperceptible.


On all sides, between tree-trunks and bushes, a thousand courtesans, huddled
together like frightened sheep, advanced slowly, their masses quivering with a
unanimous shudder.


By a movement as regular as that of the sea striking the sandy foreshore, the
front rank of this army made way for those following behind. It seemed as if
nobody wanted to be the first to find the dead woman.


A great cry, taken up by a thousand mouths and dying away at a distance, arose
to salute the poor corpse when it was perceived stretched out at the foot of a
tree.


A thousand naked arms were first uplifted and then as many others.


“Goddess! Not on us!” now sobbed many voices. “Goddess, not
on us! If thou wreakest vengeance, Goddess, spare our lives!”


“To the Temple!” was the rallying-cry arising from one despairing
throat.


“Open the gates for us!”


“To the Temple! To the Temple!” repeated all the other women.


At this juncture, a new eddy convulsed the surging multitude. Without daring to
cast another look at the dead woman, stretched out on her back on the ground,
her eyes upturned and her arms thrown back, all the courtesans in one great
mob, black women and white, those of the East and the West, some in sumptuous
robes and others in vague nudity, scampered through the trees, rushing across
glades, paths, and roads; swarming into the vast open spaces in front of the
houses, until they mounted the gigantic pink marble staircase that gleamed
deeply red in the light of coming day. With their weak clenched fists, they
battered the lofty bronze doors, squalling childishly:


“Open the gates for us! Open! Let us in!”


The morning the orgie at Bacchis’s came to an end an event took place at
Alexandria: rain fell.


Immediately, contrarily to what usually happens in countries less African,
everybody went out to welcome the shower.


The phenomenon was neither torrent-like nor stormy. Large warm drops fell from
a violet cloud and traversed the air. The men looked at the sky with interest.
The little children roared with laughter, and went about splashing their tiny
naked feet in the surface-mud.


Then the cloud faded away in the light, the sky remained implacably pure, and a
short time after midday the mud had once more turned into dust under the sun.


But this momentary shower had sufficed. It filled the town with gaiety. The men
congregated on the pavement of the Agora, and the women thronged together in
groups, intermingling their shrill voices.


Only the courtesans were there, for the third day of the Aphrodisæ being
reserved for the exclusive devotions of the married women, the latter had just
started for the Astarteïon in a great procession, and there was nothing in the
square but flowered robes and eyes blackened with paint.


As Myrtocleia passed by, a young girl called Philotis, who was talking with
many others, pulled her by the sleeve knot.


“Ho, my little lass! you played at Bacchis’s yesterday? What
happened? What took place there? Did Bacchis put on a new necklace to hide the
cavities in her neck? Has she got wooden breasts or copper ones? Did she forget
to dye the little white hairs on her temples before putting on her wig? Come,
speak, fried fish!”


“Do you suppose I looked at her? I arrived after the banquet, I played my
piece, I received my payment, and I ran off.”


“Oh, I know you don’t dissipate!”


“To stain my robe and receive blows? No, Philotis. Only rich women can
afford to indulge in orgies. Little flute-girls get nothing but tears.”


“When one doesn’t want to stain one’s robe, one leaves it in
the ante-chamber. When one receives blows, one insists on being paid double. It
is quite elementary. So you have nothing to tell us? not an adventure, not a
joke, not a scandal? We are yawning like storks. Invent something if you know
nothing.”


“My friend Theano stayed after me. When I awoke a few minutes ago, she
had not yet come. The fête is perhaps still going on.”


“It is finished,” said another woman. “Theano is down there,
by the ceramic wall.”


The courtesans started off at a run, but presently stopped with a smile of
pity.


Theano, in a naive fit of drunkenness, was obstinately pulling at a rose
stripped of its leaves, the thorns of which were caught in her hair. Her yellow
tunic was soiled with red and white stains as if she had borne the brunt of the
whole orgie. The bronze clasp, which kept up up the converging folds of the
stuff upon her left shoulder, dangled below the waist, and revealed the mobile
globe of a young breast already too mature, and which was stained with two
spots of purple.


As soon as she saw Myrtocleia, she brusquely went off into a peal of singular
laughter. Everybody knew it at Alexandria, and it had procured her the nickname
of the “Fowl.” It was an interminable cluck-cluck, a torrent of
gaiety which commenced in a very low key and took her breath away, then shot up
again into a shrill cry, and so forth, rhythmically, like the joy of a
triumphant hen.


“An egg! an egg!” said Philotis.


But Myrtocleia made a gesture:


“Come, Theano, come to bed. You are not well. Come with me.”


“Ah! . . . ha! . . . Ah! . . . ha!” laughed the child. And she took
her breast in her little hand, crying in a hoarse voice:


“Ah! . . . Ha! . . . the mirror . . .”


“Come along!” repeated Myrto, losing patience.


“The mirror . . . it is stolen, stolen! Ah! haaa! I shall never laugh so
much again if I live to be as old as Chronos. Stolen, stolen, the silver
mirror!”


The singing-girl tried to drag her away, but Philotis had understood.


“Hi!” she cried to the others, waving her two arms. “Come
here quickly! There is news! Bacchis’s mirror has been stolen!”


And all exclaimed:


“Papaië! Bacchis’s mirror!”


In an instant, thirty women crowded round the flute-girl:


“What is happening?”


“What?”


“Bacchis has had her mirror stolen: Theano has just said so.”


“But when?”


“Who has taken it?”


The child shrugged her shoulders:


“How do I know?”


“You passed the night there. You must know. It is not possible. Who
entered her house? You have certainly been told. Try to collect yourself,
Theano.”


Thirty women crowded round the flute-girl.


“What do I know about it? There were more than twenty of them in the
banqueting room.


“They had hired me to play the flute, but they prevented me from playing
because they do not like music. They asked me to mimic the figure of Danaë
and they threw gold coins at me, and Bacchis took them all away from me . . .
It was a band of madmen. They made me drink head downwards out of a bowl
overflowing with wine. They had poured seven tankards in it because there were
seven wines upon the table. My face was all dripping. Even my hair was soaked,
and my roses.”


“Yes,” interrupted Myrto, “you are an awful fright. But the
mirror? Who took it?”


“Exactly! when they put me on my feet again, my head was suffused with
blood, and I was covered with wine up to the ears. Ha! Ha! they all began to
laugh . . . Bacchis sent for the mirror . . . Ha! ha! it had disappeared.
Somebody had taken it.”


“Who? That is what we want to know.”


“It was not I, that is all I know. It was no use searching me: I was
quite naked. I cannot hide a mirror under my eyelid, like a drachma. It was not
I, that is all I know. She crucified a slave, perhaps on account of that. When
I saw that they were not looking at me, I picked up the Danaë coins. See,
Myrto, I have five: you shall buy robes for the three of us.”




The news of the theft spread gradually over the whole square. The courtesans
did not hide their envious satisfaction. A noisy curiosity animated the moving
groups.


“It is a woman,” said Philotis; “it is a woman who is
responsible for this piece of work.”


“Yes, the mirror was well hidden. A thief could have carried off
everything in the room and upset everything without finding the stone.”


“Bacchis had enemies, especially her former friends. They knew all her
secrets. One of them has probably enticed her away somewhere, and then entered
her house at the hour when the sun is hot and the streets are almost
deserted.”


“Oh! she has perhaps sold the mirror to pay her debts.”


“Supposing it were one of her lovers? They say she takes porters
now!”


“No, it is a woman, I am sure of it.”


“By the two goddesses! it serves her right.”


 

“What is the matter? what is the matter?”


And a shrill voice dominating the tumult shouted over all their heads:


“The High-Priest’s wife has been killed!”


Violent consternation took possession of the crowd. It was incredible. People
refuse to believe that so atrocious a murder could have been committed at the
very height of the Aphrodisisæ, bringing down the wrath of the gods upon the
town. But the same sentence passed from mouth to mouth in all directions:


“The wife of the High-Priest has been killed! The festival at the Temple
is put off.”


News arrived rapidly. The body had been found, lying on a pink marble seat, in
a lonely place, at the summit of the gardens.


A long golden pin penetrated her left breast; the wound had not bled; but the
assassin had cut off all the young woman’s hair, and had carried away the
antique comb of Queen Nitaoucrit.


After the first exclamations of anguish, a profound stupor gained the
uppermost. The whole multitude grew every minute. The whole town was there: it
was a sea of bare heads and women’s hats, an immense herd pouring
simultaneously from the streets bathed in blue shade into the dazzling
brilliance of the Alexandrian Agora. Such a throng had never been seen since
the day when Ptolemy Auleter had been driven from the throne by the partisans
of Berenice. And even political revolutions seemed less terrible than this
piece of sacrilege, on which the safety of the whole city might depend.


The men pushed their way close to the witnesses. They clamoured for further
details. They put forth conjectures. Women informed the new arrivals of the
theft of the celebrated mirror. The wiseacres swore that these two simultaneous
crimes had been committed by the same hand.


But who could it be? Courtesans, who had made their offerings the night before
for the ensuing year, were fearful lest the goddess should pay no attention to
them, and sat sobbing, with their heads buried in their robes.


An ancient superstition had it that two such events would be followed by a
third and still graver one. The crowd awaited the third. After the mirror and
the comb, what had the mysterious robber taken? A stifling atmosphere, inflamed
by the south wind and filled with sand dust, weighed upon the motionless crowd.


Gradually, as if this human mass were a single being, it was seized with a
shivering which grew little by little until it became a panic, and all eyes
were turned towards the same point on the horizon.


It was at the distant extremity of the long straight avenue which traversed
Alexandria from the Canopic gate and led from the Temple to the Agora. There,
on the top of the gentle incline, where the road opened upon the sky, a second
terror-stricken multitude had just made its appearance and was running down the
hill to join the first one.


“The courtesans, the sacred courtesans!”


Nobody stirred. Nobody dared to go and meet them, for fear of hearing of a new
disaster. They arrived like a living flood, preceded by the dull noise of their
footsteps on the ground. They waved their arms, they jostled one another, they
seemed to be in flight before an army. They were to be recognised now. One
could distinguish their robes, their girdles, their hair. Rays of light gleamed
on their golden jewels. They were quite near. They opened their mouths. There
was a silence.


“The necklace of the Goddess has been stolen, the True Pearls of
Anadyomene are gone!”


A clamour of despair arose at the fatal utterance. The crowd retreated at first
like a wave, then poured headlong forward, beating the walls, filling the road,
thrusting back the frightened women, in the long avenue of the Dromos, towards
the desecrated immortal saint.


And the Agora was left empty, like a beach after the tide.


Empty, but not completely: a man and a woman stayed behind, the only two
mortals who knew the secret of the great public emotion, the two beings who
were the cause of it: Chrysis and Demetrios.


The young man was seated on a block of marble near the port. The young woman
stood at the opposite end of the square. They could not recognise one another;
but they divined one another mutually: Chrysis, drunk with pride and finally
with desire, ran in the full glare of the sun.


“You have done it!” she cried; “you have done it,
then!”


“Yes,” said the young man simply. “You are obeyed.”


She quickly sat herself on his knees and embraced him deliriously:


“I love you! I love you! I have never before felt what I feel now! Gods!
At last I know what it is to be in love! You see, my beloved, I give you more
than I promised you the day before yesterday. I, who have never denied anyone,
I could not dream that should change so quickly. I had only sold you my body
upon the bed, now I give you all my excellence, all my purity, my sincerity, my
passion, my virgin soul, Demetrios. Come with me; let us leave this town for a
time; let us go into a hidden place, where there are only you and I. We will
spend days such as the world has never seen. Never did a lover do what you have
done for me. Never did a woman love as I love: it is not possible! it is not
possible! I can hardly speak. I am choking. You see, I weep. I know now what it
is to weep: it is through excess of happiness. But you do not answer! You say
nothing? Kiss me!”


Demetrios stretched out his right leg to ease his knee, which was a little
cramped. Then he raised the young woman, stood up, shook the creases out of his
garments, and said softly with an enigmatic smile:


“No . . . Adieu . . .”


“You say nothing! Kiss me!


And he tranquilly turned away.


Chrysis stood rooted to the ground with stupefaction, her mouth open and her
head dangling.


“What? What . . . what . . . what do you say?”


“I say adieu,” he said, without raising his voice.


“But . . . but it cannot be you who . . .”


“Yes. I had promised.”


“Then . . . I fail to understand . . .”


“My dear, whether you understand or not is a matter of indifference to
me. I leave this little mystery to your meditations. If what you have told me
is true, they are likely to be prolonged. This affair occurs most conveniently
to give them occupation. Adieu.”


“Demetrios! What do I hear? . . . what is the meaning of this tone? Is it
really you who speak? Explain! I conjure you! What has happened between us? It
is enough to make one dash one’s head against the wall.”


“Am I to repeat the same thing a hundred times? Yes, I have taken the
mirror; yes, I have killed the priestess Touni in order to get the peerless
comb; yes, I have stolen the great seven-stringed necklace of the goddess. I
was to hand you over the presents in exchange for a single sacrifice on your
part. It was putting it at a high value, was it not? Now, I have ceased to
estimate it at this extraordinary value, and I have nothing more to ask of you.
Act in the same way, and let us part. I wonder you do not understand a
situation the simplicity of which is so evident.”


“Keep your presents! Do you suppose I care about them? It is yourself
that I want, you, you alone.”


“Yes, I know. But once again, I am not willing, and, as the consent of
both the parties is necessary for a rendez-vous, I am very much afraid it will
not take place, if I persist in my present views. This is what I am trying to
impress upon you with all the clearness of diction of which I am capable. I see
it is inadequate; but as I cannot improve it, I beg you to kindly accept the
accomplished fact with a good grace, without prying into what you consider
obscure about it, since you do not admit that it is within the limits of
probability. I am most anxious to bring this discussion to an end. It can lead
to no result, and might perhaps force me to be impolite.”


“People have been tittle-tattling about me?”


“No!”


“Oh yes, I guess as much! People have been talking about me, don’t
deny it. They have said things about me behind my back! I have terrible
enemies, Demetrios! You must not listen to them: I swear to you by the gods,
they lie!”


“I do not know them.”


“Believe me! Believe me, Well-beloved! What interest could I have in
deceiving you, since I desire nothing from you except yourself? You are the
first person I have ever spoken to like this . . .”


Demetrios looked her in the eyes.


“It is too late,” he said. “I have possessed you.”


“You are raving . . . When? Where? How?”


“I speak the truth. I have possessed you in spite of yourself. What I
hoped from your complaisance you have given me without your knowledge. You took
me to the country you want to go to, in a dream, last night, and you were
beautiful . . . ah! you were beautiful, Chrysis! I have returned from that
country. No human will shall force me to see it again. The same event never
brings happiness twice. I am not so mad as to ruin a happy souvenir. I am
indebted for this to you, you will say; but as I have only loved your shadow,
you will dispense me, dear creature, from thanking your reality.”


Chrysis pressed her hands to her temples.


“It is abominable, abominable! And he dares to say this! And he makes a
boast of it!”


“You jump to definite conclusions very quickly. I have told you that I
have had a dream: are you sure that I was asleep? I have told you that I was
happy: does happiness, according to you, consist in the gross physical thrill
which you say you are so expert in producing, but which you cannot diversify,
since it is much the same with all women who give themselves! No, it is
yourself that you belittle by taking this most unbecoming point of view. I
think you do not quite realise all the felicities which spring from under your
footsteps. What differentiates mistresses from one another is that they have
each a fashion, personal to themselves, of preparing and terminating an
incident which, as a matter of fact, is as monstrous as it is necessary, and
the quest of which, supposing we had only it in view, would not be worth all
the trouble we take to find a perfect mistress. In this preparation and in this
termination you excel beyond all women. At least, it has been a pleasure to me
to think so, and perhaps you will grant me that after having produced the
Aphrodite of the Temple my imagination has had no great difficulty in divining
the manner of woman you are. Once again, I will not tell you whether it is a
question of a night dream or a waking error. It is enough for you to know that,
whether dreamed or conceived, your image has appeared to me in an extraordinary
frame. Illusion; but, in all things I shall prevent you, Chrysis, from
disillusioning me.”


“And me, what do you mean to do with me, who loves you still in spite of
all the horrors that proceed from your mouth? Have I had the consciousness of
your odious dream? Have I had my share in this happiness of which you speak,
and which you have stolen, stolen from me! Has one ever heard of a lover so
amazingly selfish as to take his pleasure of the woman who loves him without
allowing her to share it! . . . This confounds all thought. It will drive me
mad.”


At this point, Demetrios dropped his tone of mockery, and said, in a voice that
trembled slightly:


“Did you trouble yourself about me when you took advantage of my sudden
passion to extort from me, in a moment of folly, three actions which might have
destroyed my existence, and which will always leave behind them the remembrance
of a triple shame?”


“If I asked this, it was to attach you to me. I should not have got you
if I had given myself.”


“Good. You have been satisfied. You have held me, not for long, but you
have held me, nevertheless, in the serfdom you desired. Today, you must allow
me to free myself!”


“I am the only slave, Demetrios.”


He freed himself from both her arms.


“Yes, you or I, but one of us two if he loves the other. Slavery!
Slavery! that is the real name of passion. You have all of you only one dream,
one idea in your heads; to break men’s strength with your feebleness and
govern his intelligence with your futility. As soon as your breasts take form,
you desire neither to love nor to be loved, but to bind a man to your ankles,
to lower him, to bow his head and put your sandals upon it. Then, in conformity
with your ambition, you can dash the sword, the chisel, or the compass out of
our hands, break everything which transcends you, emasculate everything which
frightens you, tweak Hercules by the nose and set him a-spinning wool. But when
you have been able neither to bow his head nor weaken his character, you adore
the fist that beats you, the knee that strikes you to the ground, the very
mouth that insults you. The man who has refused to kiss your naked feet
satisfies your dearest wish if he violates you. The man who has not wept when
you left his house, can drag you there by the hair: your love will spring up
again from your tears, for there is but one thing that consoles you when you
are unable to impose slavery, amorous women! and that is to submit to
it.”


“Ah, beat me, if you like! but love me afterwards!”


And she hugged him so brusquely that he had not time to turn away his lips. He
freed himself from both her arms.


“I detest you! Adieu,” he said.


But Chrysis clung to his mantle.


“Do not lie. You adore me. Your soul is full of me: but you are ashamed
at having yielded. Listen, listen, Well-beloved! If that is all that is needed
to console your pride, I am ready to give you, in order to have you, still more
than I asked of you. Whatever sacrifice I make you, I will not complain of life
after our union.”


Demetrios looked at her curiously, and, like her, the night before upon the
quay, he said to her:


“What oath do you swear me?”


“By Aphrodite also.”


“You do not believe in Aphrodite. Swear by Jehovah Sabaoth.”


The Galilæan woman paled.


“We do not swear by Jehovah.”


“You refuse?”


“It is a terrible oath.”


“I must have it.”


She hesitated, then said in a low voice: “I swear by Jehovah. What do you
want of me, Demetrios?”


The young man kept silence.


“Speak quickly, I am afraid.”


“Oh! very little.”


“But what is it?”


“I will not ask you to give me three presents, were they as simple as the
first three were rare. It would be contrary to the usages. But I can ask you to
accept some, can I not?”


“Assuredly,” said Chrysis joyously.


“This mirror, this necklace, this comb, which you made me steal for you,
you did not expect to use them, I suppose? A stolen mirror, the comb of a
victim, and the goddess’s necklace are not jewels one can make a display
of.”


“What an idea!”


“No, I thought so. It is therefore out of pure cruelty that you incited
me to ravish them at the price of the three crimes with which the whole town
resounds to-day. Well, you are going to wear them.”


“What?”


“You must go into the little enclosed garden where the statue of the
Stygian Hermes is. This place is always deserted, and you will run no risk of
being disturbed. You will take off the god’s left heel. The stone is
broken, you will see. Then, in the interior of the pedestal, you will find
Bacchis’s mirror, and you will place it in your hand; you will find the
great comb of Nitaoucrit, and will place it in your hair; you will find the
seven pearl necklaces of the goddess Aphrodite, and you will put them on your
neck. Thus adorned, beautiful Chrysis, you will go about the town. The crowd
will deliver you to the Queen’s soldiers, but you will have what you
desired, and I will go and see you in your prison before sunrise.”


Chrysis’s first impulse was to shrug her shoulders. She would not be so
ingenuous as to keep her word.


The second was to go and see.


A rising curiosity impelled her toward the mysterious place where Demetrios had
hidden the three criminal trophies. She wanted to take them, to touch them with
her hands, to make them gleam in the sunlight, to possess them for an instant.
It seemed to her that her victory would not be quite complete so long as she
should not have seized the booty of her ambitions.


As for Demetrios: she would find the means of recapturing him ultimately. How
was it possible to believe that he had emancipated himself from her for ever?
The passion she attributed to him was not one of those that die out in a
man’s heart irrevocably. The women one has once greatly loved form a
family of election in a man’s heart and the meeting with a former
mistress, even though hated or forgotten, excites an unexpected disorder of the
soul whence the new love may burst forth. Chrysis was not ignorant of this.
However ardent she might be herself, however anxious to conquer the first man
she had ever loved, she was not mad enough to buy him at the cost of her life
when she saw so many other methods of seducing him more simply.


And yet . . . what a blessed end he had proposed to her!


Under the eyes of an innumerable crowd, bear the antique mirror into which
Sappho had gazed, the comb which had held in place the royal hair of
Nitaoucrit, the necklace of marine pearls that had rolled in the shell of the
goddess Anadyomene . . . Then, from the evening till the morning drink madly of
all the sensations with which the wildest love can inspire a woman . . . and
towards the middle of the day, die without effort . . . what an incomparable
destiny!


She closed her eyes . . .


But no: she would not allow herself to be tempted.


She crossed Rhacotis and mounted the street which led in a straight line to the
Great Serapeion. This road, constructed by the Greeks, seemed incongruous in
this quarter of angular alleys. The two populations mingled oddly, in a
promiscuity from which hatred was not absent. Amongst the blue-shirted
Egyptians, the unbleached tunics of the Hellenes made splashes of white.
Chrysis mounted rapidly, without listening to the conversations in which the
people discoursed of the crimes committed for her sake.


Before the steps of the monument, she turned to the right, took an obscure
street, then another, the houses of which almost touched, crossed a little
star-shaped square where two swarthy little girls were playing in a sunny
fountain, and finally she stopped.




The garden of Hermes Anubis was a little necropolis long ago abandoned, a sort
of no man’s land to which parents no longer brought the libations to the
dead, and that the passers-by avoided. In the midst of the crumbling tombs,
Chrysis advanced in the greatest silence, quaking with fear at every stone that
clattered under her feet. The wind, always charged with fine sand, blew her
hair over her temples and sent her veil of scarlet silk floating towards the
white leaves of the sycamores.


She discovered the statue between three monuments that hid it on all sides and
enclosed it in a triangle. The spot was well chosen for the concealment of a
mortal secret.


Chrysis forced her way as best she could through the narrow, stony passage; on
seeing the statue she paled slightly.


The jackal-headed god was in a standing attitude, with his right leg advanced,
and with his hair falling on his shoulders. This hair was pierced by two holes
for the arms.


The head on the top of the rigid body was bent downwards and contemplated the
movement of the hands as they performed the characteristic gesture of the
embalmer. The left foot was loose.


Looking round slowly and fearfully, Chrysis made sure that she was quite alone.
A little noise behind her made her start; but it was only a green lizard
slipping away into a marble fissure.


Then she ventured at last to lay hold of the broken foot of the statue. She
lifted it obliquely, and not without difficulty, for it was attached to a loose
fragment of the hollow pedestal. And under the stone she suddenly saw the gleam
of the enormous pearls.


She withdrew the necklace altogether. How heavy it was! She would never have
imagined that unmounted pearls could weigh with such a weight upon the hand.
The pearl globes were all marvellously round and of an almost lunar water. The
seven strings succeeded one another in ever-widening circles, like circular
clouds on a star-studded lake.


She put it round her neck.


On seeing the statue she paled slightly.


She arranged it in tiers with one hand, closing her eyes in order the better to
feel the coldness of the pearls on her skin. She disposed the seven tiers
regularly along her naked breast, and thrust the last one into the warm channel
between her breasts.


Then she took the ivory comb, considered it for a time, caressed the white
figurine carved in the dainty coronal, and plunged the jewel into her hair
several times before fixing it exactly as she wished.


Then she drew the silver mirror from the pedestal, looked at herself in it, saw
her triumph in it, her eyes gleaming with pride, her shoulders adorned with the
spoils of the gods . . .


And enveloping herself to the hair in her great purple cyclas, she left the
necropolis, taking with her the terrible jewels.


Then, out of the mouth of the hierodules, the people had learnt the certainty
of the sacrilege for the second time, they gradually melted away through the
gardens.


The courtesans of the temple crowded by hundreds along the paths of black olive
trees. Some scattered ashes on their heads. Others beat their foreheads on the
ground, or pulled out their hair, or tore their breasts, as a sign of calamity.
Many sobbed, with their heads in their hands.


The crowd descended into the town in silence, along the Dromos and along the
quay. Universal mourning spread consternation throughout the streets. The
shopkeepers had hastily taken in their multicoloured stands, from fear, and
wooden shutters kept in place by iron bars succeeded one another like a
monotonous palisade on the ground-floor of windowless houses.


The life of the harbour had come to a stand-still. The sailors sat motionless
on the street-posts, with their cheeks in their hands. The ships ready to leave
had taken in their long oars and clewed up their pointed sails along the masts
rocking in the wind. Those who wished to enter the harbour waited for the
signals out in the open, and some of their passengers, who had relatives at the
queen’s palace, believing a bloody revolution was in progress, sacrificed
to the infernal gods.


At the corner of the island of Pharos and the quay, Rhodis recognised Chrysis
standing near her in the crowd.


“Ah! Chrysis! take me under your care! I am afraid! Myrto is here! but
the crowd is so great . . . I am afraid that we shall be separated. Take us by
the hand.”


“You know,” said Myrtocleia, “you know what is happening? Do
they know the culprit? Is he being tortured? Nothing like it has ever been seen
since Hierostratos. The Olympians are deserting us. What is going to become of
us?”


Chrysis did not answer.


“We had given doves,” said the little flute-player; “will the
goddess remember? The goddess must be very angry. And you, my poor Chryse! you
who were to be very happy to-day or very powerful . . .”


“All is accomplished,” said the courtesan.


“What do you mean?”


Chrysis took two steps backwards and lifted her right hand to her mouth.


“Look well, Rhodis; look, Myrtocleia. Human eyes have never beheld what
you are to behold to-day, since the day, when the goddess descended upon Ida.
And such a sight will never be seen again upon the earth.”


The two friends, believing her to be mad, recoiled in stupefaction. But
Chrysis, lost in her dream, walked to the monstrous Pharos, a mountain of
gleaming marble in eight hexagonal tiers. Taking advantage of the public
inattention, she pushed open the bronze door and closed it on the inside by
letting drop the sonorous bars.


A few minutes elapsed.


The crowd surged perpetually. The living tide added its clamour to the regular
upheavals of the waters.


Suddenly a cry arose upon the air, repeated by a hundred thousand voices.


“Aphrodite!”


“Aphrodite!!”


A thunder of cries burst forth. The joy, the enthusiasm of a whole people sang
in an indescribable tumult of ecstasy at the walls of Pharos.





The rout that covered the quay surged violently forward into the island, took
possession of the rocks, mounted on the houses, on the signal masts, on the
fortified towers. The isle was full, more than full, and the crowd arrived ever
more compact, like the onrush of a swollen river hurling long rows of human
beings into the sea from the top of the precipitous cliff.


This flood of men was interminable. From the palace of the Ptolemies to the
wall of the Canal, the banks of the Royal Port, of the Great Port, and of
Euroste were alive with a dense mass of human beings that received continual
reinforcements from the side streets. Above this ocean, agitated by immense
eddies, a foaming mass of arms and faces, floated like a barque in peril the
yellow sails of Queen Berenice’s litter. The tumult gathered force every
moment and became formidable.


Neither Helen on the Scain Gates, nor Phryne in the waves of Eleusis, nor
Thaïs setting fire to Persepolis have known what triumph means.




Chrysis had appeared by the western Gate, on the first terrace of the red
monument.


She was naked like the goddess, she held in her two hands the ends of her
scarlet veil which floated with the wind upon the evening sky, and in her right
hand the mirror, in which was reflected the setting sun.


She went on her way towards the sky.


Slowly, with bended head, moving with infinite grace and majesty, she mounted
the outer staircase which wound around the high vermilion tower like a spiral.
Her veil flickered like a flame. The rosy sunset reddened the pearl necklace
like a river of rubies.


She mounted, and in this glory, her gleaming skin took on all the magnificence
of flesh, blood, fire, blue carmine, velvety red, bright pink, and revolving
upwards with the great purple walls, she went on her way towards the sky.


“You are loved of the gods,” said the old gaoler. “If I, a
poor slave, had committed the hundredth part of your crimes, I should have been
bound upon the rack, hung up by the feet, lashed with thongs, burnt with
pincers. They would have poured vinegar into my nostrils, overwhelmed and
crushed me with bricks, and if I had died under the agony, my body would
already be food for the jackals of the burning plains. But you who have stolen,
assassinated, profaned, you may expect nothing more than the gentle hemlock,
and in the meanwhile you enjoy a good room. May Zeus blast me with his
thunderbolt if I can tell why! You probably know somebody at the palace.”


“Give me figs,” said Chrysis; “my mouth is dry.”


The old slave brought her a dozen ripe figs in a green basket.


Chrysis was left alone.


She sat down and got up again, she walked round the room, she struck the walls
with the palms of her hands without thinking of anything whatever. She let down
her hair to cool it, and then put it up again almost immediately.


They had dressed her in a long garment of white wool. The stuff was hot.
Chrysis was bathed in perspiration. She stretched her arms, yawned, and leaned
herself against the lofty window.


Outside, the silvery moon shone in a sky of liquid purity, a sky so pale and
clear that not a star was visible.


It was on just such a night that, seven years before, Chrysis had left the land
of Gennesaret.


She remembered . . . They were five. They were sellers of ivory. Their
long-tailed horses were adorned with parti-coloured tufts. They had met the
child at the edge of a round cistern . . .


And before that, the blue lake, the transparent sky, the light air of the land
of Galilee. . . . .


The house was environed with pink flax-plants and tamarisks. Thorny
caper-bushes pricked one’s fingers when one went a-catching butterflies .
. . One could almost see the wind in the undulations of the pine grasses . . .


The little girls bathed in a limpid brook where one found red shells under the
flowering laurels: and there were flowers upon the water, and flowers all over
the mead, and great lilacs upon the mountains, and the line of the mountain was
that of a young breast . . .


Chrysis closed her eyes with a faint smile which suddenly died away. The idea
of death had just occurred to her. And she felt that, until the last, she would
be incapable of ceasing to think.


“Ah!” she said to herself, “what have I done? Why did I meet
that man? Why did he listen to me? Why did I let myself be caught in the trap?
How is it that, even now, I regret nothing?


“Not to love or to die: that is the choice God has given me. What have I
done to deserve punishment?”


And fragments of sacred verses occurred to her that she had heard quoted in her
childhood. She had not thought of them for seven years. But they returned, one
after the other, with an implacable precision, to apply to her life and predict
her penalty.


She murmured:


“It is written:


I remember thy love when thou wast young.
For of old thou hast broken thy yoke.
And burst thy bonds;
And thou hast said: I will no longer serve.
But upon every high hill,
And under every green tree,
Thou hast wandered, playing the harlot. [1]


“It is written:


I will follow after my lovers,
Who give me my bread and my wine,
And my wool and my flax,
And my oil and my wine. [2]


“It is written:


How canst thou say: I am not polluted?
See thy way in the valley,
Know what thou hast done,
O thou dromedary traversing her ways,
O thou wild ass,
Panting and ever lustful,
Who could prevent thee from satisfying thy desire? [3]


“It is written:


She has played the harlot in the land of Egypt.
She has doted upon paramours
Whose flesh is as the flesh of asses,
And whose issue is like the issue of horses.
