# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2011
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	John Augustine Zahm, Woman in Science
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34912/34912-h/34912-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

When one remembers that many of the watercourses here named would be
considered large rivers outside of South America; that, notwithstanding
their countless rapids and waterfalls, necessitating numberless
portages, Mme. Coudreau explored all these rivers from their embouchures
to as near their sources as the water would carry her rude dugouts, we
can form some idea of the miles she traveled and of the stupendous labor
that was involved in making these long journeys in the sweltering and
debilitating and insect-laden atmosphere of the Amazon basin.
[Pg 266]
As woman was the first nurse, so was she also the first practitioner of
the healing art. Among savages the world over it is the women, in the
great majority of cases, who have the care of the sick and wounded, and
who, by reason of their superior knowledge of simples for the cure of
diseases, occupy the position of doctors. In certain parts of the
uncivilized world there are, it is true, shamans or medicine men; but
these are conjurers or exorcists, who profess to expel disease, or
rather the evil spirits causing the disease, by sorcery or incantation,
rather than physicians who essay to cure ailments or relieve suffering
by the use of substances which experience has showed to possess remedial
properties. In a word, the shaman is a kind of a religious functionary
who imposes on the ignorance of his tribe and who holds his position by
the fear he excites, and not by any knowledge he possesses of the
healing art. It was the same, we may believe, in the early history of
our race—women, and not men, were the first physicians; and they were
also most probably the first surgeons.
According to Greek mythology, the god of the medical art was Æsculapius,
a male; but his six daughters, as antiquity beautifully expressed it,
were not only goddesses but were also medical mistresses—artifices
medici—of suffering humanity. Of these Hygiea was specially
distinguished as the goddess of health, or, rather, as the conserver of
good health, while Panacea was invoked as the restorer of health after
it had been impaired or lost.[Pg 267]
One of the most beautiful pictures in the Iliad is that representing the
daughter of Augea, King of the Epei, caring for the wounded and
suffering Greeks on the plain before Troy. She was:
Nothing deterred by the din of battle around her, she provided cordial
potions for the disabled warrior and prepared
What a beautiful prototype of another ministering angel in the same land
nearly thirty centuries later, amid similar scenes of suffering—of one
who, though unsung by immortal bard, the world will never let die—the
courageous, the self-sacrificing Florence Nightingale.
That there were in Greece from the earliest times numerous women
possessed of a high degree of medical skill is evidenced by many of the
ancient writers. They were what we would call medical herbalists, and
not a few of them exhibited a natural genius for determining the
curative virtues of rare plants and a remarkable sagacity in preparing
from them juices, infusions and soothing anodynes. Others there were
who, in addition to evincing the cunning of leechcraft in the
therapeutic art, were distinguished for nimble hands in treating painful
lesions and festering sores, and who, when occasion required, were
experts in "quickly drawing the barb from the flesh and healing the
wound of the soldier."
In the Odyssey special mention is made of the surpassing expertness of
the Egyptian female leech, Polydamna, whose name signifies the subduer
of many diseases. The land of the Nile, the poet tells us, "teems with
drugs," and
In this favored cradle of civilization, to which Greece owed so much of
its knowledge and culture, there were many women who, like Polydamna,
achieved distinction in the healing art, and many, too, we have reason
to think, who communicated their knowledge to their sisters in the fair
land of Hellas.
But not only were there in Greece women physicians like Agamede, who
were noted for their general medicinal knowledge and practice, but there
were also others who made a specialty of treating ailments peculiar to
their own sex. This we learn from a passage in the Hippolytus of
Euripides, wherein the nurse of Phædra addressed the suffering queen in
the following words:
More positive information, however, is afforded us by the ancient Roman
author Hyginus, who, in writing of the Greek maiden, Agnodice, tells us
how the medical profession was legalized for all the free-born women of
Athens. Instead of a literal translation of Hyginus, the version of his
story is given in the quaint language of one Mrs. Celleor, a noted
midwife in the reign of James II.
"Among the subtile Athenians," writes Mrs. Celleor, "a law at one time
forbade women to study or practice medicine or physick on pain of death,
which law continued some time, during which many women perished, both in
child-bearing and by private diseases, their modesty not permitting them
to admit of men either to deliver or cure them. But God finally stirred
up the spirit of Agnodice, a noble maid, to pity the miserable condition
of her own sex, and hazard her life to help them; which, to enable
herself to do, she apparelled her like a man and became the scholar[Pg 269] of
Hierophilos, the most learned physician of the time; and, having learnt
the art, she found out a woman that had long languished under private
diseases, and made proffer of her service to cure her, which the sick
person refused, thinking her to be a man; but, when Agnodice discovered
that she was a maid, the woman committed herself into her hands, who
cured her perfectly; and after her many others, with the like skill and
industry, so that in a short time she became the successful and beloved
physician of the whole sex."
When it became known that Agnodice was a woman "she was like to be
condemned to death for transgressing the law—which, coming to the ears
of the noble women, they ran before the Areopagites, and, the house
being encompassed by most women of the city, the ladies entered before
the judges and told them they would no longer account them for husbands
and friends, but for cruel enemies, that condemned her to death who
restored to them their health, protesting they would all die with her if
she were put to death. This caused the magistrates to disannul the law
and make another, which gave gentlewomen leave to study and practice all
parts of physick to their own sex, giving large stipends to those that
did it well and carefully. And there were many noble women who studied
that practice and taught it publicly in their schools as long as Athens
flourished in learning."[182]
After the time of Agnodice many Greek women won distinction in medicine,
some as practitioners in the healing art, others as writers on medical
subjects. Nor were their activities confined to the land of Hellas. They
were also found succoring the infirm and instructing the poor and
ignorant in Italy, Egypt and Asia Minor. Among these was Theano, the
wife of Pythagoras, who, after her husband's death, assumed charge of
his school of philosophy,[Pg 270] and who, like her husband and teacher, was
distinguished for her attainments in medicine. The names of many others
occur in the pages of Hippocrates, Galen and Pliny; and frequent
references are made to the works and prescriptions of women doctors who
enjoyed more than ordinary celebrity during their time. Of these female
practitioners many confined their practice to the diseases of women and
children, while others excelled in surgery and pharmacy, as well as in
general medical practice.
Among the medical women whom antiquity especially honored, particularly
during the Greco-Roman period, were Origenia, Aspasia—not the famous
wife of Pericles—and Cleopatra, who was not, however, as is often
asserted, the ill-fated queen of Egypt. Likewise deserving of special
mention was Metradora, of whom there is still preserved in Florence a
manuscript work on the diseases of women,[183] and Antiochis, to whom
her admiring countrymen erected a statue bearing the following
inscription: "Antiochis, daughter of Diodotos of Tlos; the council and
the commune of the city of Tlos, in appreciation of her medical ability,
erected at their own expense this statue in her honor."
Pliny, the naturalist, felicitates the Romans on having been for nearly
six hundred years free from the brood of doctors. These he does not
hesitate to berate roundly. His statement regarding the non-existence of
physicians, it must be observed, is somewhat exaggerated. It is true
that during the first five centuries there were no professional doctors
who lived entirely on their practice. There were, however, many men who
had by long experience gained an[Pg 271] extensive knowledge of drugs and
simples, and who were able to dress wounds and treat diseases with
considerable success.
The first Greek freeman to practice medicine in Rome was one Archagatos,
about two centuries B.C. He was soon followed by one of his countrymen
named Asclepiades. These two soon built up a great reputation as
successful practitioners, and were held in the highest esteem by the
people of Rome. In consequence of this and of the favorable conditions
offered foreigners for the practice of the healing art, there was soon a
large influx of physicians and surgeons from Greece, not only into Rome
but also into other parts of Italy.
Not long after the arrival of Greek doctors in the capital of the Roman
world we learn of certain women physicians in Rome who were held in high
repute. Among these were Victoria and Leoparda, both mentioned by the
medical writer, Theodorus Priscianus. To Victoria, Priscianus dedicates
the third book of his Rerum Medicarum, and in the preface to this book
he refers to her as one who has not only an accurate knowledge of
medicine, but also as one who is a keen observer and experienced
practitioner.
The word medica, which occurs in Latin authors of the classical
period, testifies to the existence of the woman doctor as early as the
age of Augustus.
But the most important documents bearing on women physicians, not only
in the city of Rome but also in Italy, Gaul and the Iberian peninsula,
are the large body of epigraphic monuments which have recently been
brought to light, and which prove beyond all doubt that women were not
only obstetricians, but that they were successful practitioners in the
entire field of medical art. Thus a funeral tablet found in Portugal
tells of a woman who was a most excellent physician—medica
optima—while another describes the deceased not only as a woman
incomparable for[Pg 272] her virtues, but also as a mistress of medical
science, antistes disciplinæ in medicina fuit.
The Greek word for medica—iatromaia—occasionally found in some of
the inscriptions, seems to refer specially to women of Greek origin or
birth. This is particularly true of a monument erected to one Valiæ, who
is designated as Kalista iatromaia—the best doctor.[184]
Among the many women who became converts to Christianity during the
early ages of the church a goodly number were physicians. Unfortunately,
our information respecting these votaries of the healing art is not as
complete as we could wish. One of the most noted of them is St.
Theodosia, whose name is given in the Roman martyrology for the
twenty-ninth of May. She was the mother of the martyr, St. Procopius,
and was distinguished for her knowledge of medicine and surgery, both of
which she practiced in Rome with the most signal success. She died a
heroic death by the sword during the persecution of Diocletian.
Another woman who was as eminent for her knowledge of medicine as for
her holiness of life was St. Nicerata, who lived in Constantinople
during the reign of the emperor Arcadius. She is said to have cured St.
John Chrysostom of an affection of the stomach from which he was a
sufferer.
To the Roman lady Fabiola, remarkable as the daughter of one of the most
illustrious patrician families of Rome, but more remarkable for her
sanctity and her boundless charity toward the poor, was due the erection
of the first hospital—a noble structure which she founded in Ostia, at
the mouth of the Tiber, which was then the port of entry to the capital
of the Roman empire. Here the noble matron received the poor and
suffering from all parts, and did[Pg 273] everything in her power to afford
them succor in their wants and infirmities.
It is difficult for us now, when hospitals and charitable institutions
of all kinds are so common, to understand what an innovation Fabiola's
unheard-of institution was considered by her contemporaries. For her
method of treating the needy and the suffering was as different from
that which had hitherto obtained as were the debasing lessons of
heathendom from the elevating precepts of the Gospels.
No wonder that the news of this godlike work was soon wafted to the
uttermost bounds of the earth; that, in the words of St. Jerome, "summer
should announce in Britain what Egypt and Parthia had learned in the
spring." No wonder that the same eloquent hermit of Bethlehem should
proclaim the foundress of this home of the indigent and the afflicted to
be "the glory of the church, the astonishment of the Gentiles, the
mother of the poor and the consolation of the saints." No wonder that,
in contemplating her countless acts of charity, he should ignore the
fact that Fabiola was a daughter of the Fabii and a descendant of the
renowned Quintus Maximus, who, by his sage counsel, had saved his
country from her enemies, and that, recalling the words of Virgil, he
should declare: "If I had a hundred tongues and a hundred mouths and
iron lungs, I should not be able to enumerate all the maladies to which
Fabiola gave the most prodigal care and tenderness—to the extent even
of making the poor who were in health envy the good fortune of those who
were sick."[185] No wonder that Fabiola's funeral, which brought
together the whole of Rome, was more like an apotheosis than the
transfer of the remains of the deceased to their last resting-place, and
that Jerome should declare, "the glory of Furius and Papirius[Pg 274] and
Scipio and Pompey, when they triumphed over the Gauls, the Sammites,
Numantia and Pontus" was less than that which was spontaneously accorded
to Fabiola, the solace of the sick and the comforter of the distressed.
For she had in her hospital at Ostia established a type of institution
that was to effect more for ameliorating the condition of suffering
humanity than anything that had before been dreamed of; something that
was to contribute immensely to the efforts of physicians and surgeons in
minimizing the sad ravages of wounds and disease; something whose
beneficent effects were to be felt through the centuries and in every
part of the world down to the wards of the military hospital at Scutari,
guarded by the watchful eyes of Florence Nightingale, and to the
leper-tenanted lazarettos, blessed by the ministrations of Father Damien
and the Sisters of Charity, on the desolate shores of plague-stricken
Molokai.
After the fall of the Roman empire and through the long period of the
Middle Ages, when the monasteries and convents were almost the only
centers of learning and culture for the greater part of Europe, the
practice of medicine was to a great extent in the hands of monks and
nuns. For every religious house was then a hospital as well as a school,
a place where drugs and ointments were compounded and distributed, as
well as a place where manuscripts were transcribed and illuminated. At a
time when there were but few professional physicians and when these few
were widely separated from one another, the only places where the poor
could always be sure to find free medical treatment as well as abundant
alms were those sanctuaries of knowledge and charity where the love of
one's neighbor was never lost sight of in the love of science and
literature. And during this time, too, the care of the sick was regarded
as a duty incumbent on everyone, but particularly on those devoted to
the service of God in religion. It was considered, above all, as a duty
devolving[Pg 275] on women, especially on the lady in the castle and on the nun
in the convent.
The old romance of Sir Isumbras gives us a charming picture of the
nuns of long ago receiving the wounded knight and ministering unto him
until he was made whole and strong, as witness the following verses:
So universally during mediæval times was the healing art considered as
pertaining to woman's calling that it became a part of the curriculum in
convent schools; and no girl's education was considered complete unless
she had an elementary knowledge of medicine and of that part of surgery
which deals with the treatment of wounds. For during those troublous
times a woman was liable to be called upon at any time to nurse the sick
wayfarer or dress the wounds of those who had been maimed in battle or
in the tourney.
Illustrations of these facts are found in many of the romances and
fabliaux of the Middle Ages. Thus, when a sick or wounded man was given
hospitality in a château or castle it was not the seigneur, but his wife
and daughters, as being better versed in medicine and surgery, who acted
as nurses and doctors and took entire charge of the patient until his
recovery.
In the exquisite little story of Aucassin et Nicolette, the heroine is
pictured as setting the dislocated shoulder of her lover in the
following simple but touching language:
"Nicolette searched his hurt, and perceived that his shoulder was out of
joint. She handled it so deftly with[Pg 276] her white hands, and used such
skillful surgery that, by the grace of God, who loveth all true lovers,
the shoulder came back to its place. Then she plucked flowers and fresh
grasses and green leafage, and bound them tightly about the setting with
the hem torn from her shift, and he was altogether healed."
And in the mediæval Latin poem, Waltharius, written by a German monk,
Ekkehard, reference is made to a sanguinary contest in which one of the
combatants falls to the earth seriously wounded. Seeing this,
Alpharides, in a loud voice, summons a young girl, who timidly comes
forward and dresses the unfortunate man's wound.[186]
Still more to our purpose is a passage from the famous epic poem,
Tristan and Isolde, written by Godfrey of Strasburg, in which
Isolde, accompanied by her mother and cousin, is represented as
administering restoratives to Tristan, who had fallen exhausted after
his combat with the dragon. It shows that women, in accompanying an army
to the field of battle, always went provided with bandages and
medicaments for dressing wounds and fractured limbs. Similarly Angelica,
in Orlando Furioso, and Ermina, in Jerusalem Delivered, are
portrayed as surgeons with deftness of hand and leeches with rare
knowledge and skill.
The frequent introduction of women doctors into the poems and romances
of the Middle Ages would of itself, if other evidence were wanting,
suffice to show what an important rôle women played in medicine and
surgery at a time when, in many parts of Europe, women were far better
educated and far more cultured than men—"when the knights and barons of
France and Germany were inclined to look upon reading and writing as
unmanly and almost degrading accomplishments, fit only for priests or[Pg 277]
monks, and especially for priests or monks not too well born."[187]
In the instances just quoted, as well as those mentioned by Homer and
Euripides, the writers do no more than faithfully reflect conditions
which then obtained, and truthfully report what were the occupations of
women when their status was so different from what it is to-day. But,
fortunately, we do not have to rely on works of the imagination for our
knowledge respecting the women practitioners of the healing art, either
during the Homeric period or during that which intervened between the
downfall of Rome and the dawn of the Renaissance. For the history of
medicine during mediæval times affords too many examples of women who
became famous for their knowledge of medicine, as well as for their
success in surgical and medical practice, to leave any doubt about the
matter. Besides this, we have still the writings of many of these women,
and are thus able to judge of their competency in those branches of
knowledge on which they shed so great luster.
One of the most noted of them was the Benedictine abbess, St. Hildegard,
of Bingen on the Rhine, who was eminent[Pg 278] not only as a theologian but
also as a writer whose treatises on various branches of science are
justly regarded as the most important productions of the kind during the
Middle Ages prior to the time of Albertus Magnus. Besides this, she not
only wrote many books on materia medica, on pathology, physiology and
therapeutics, but, as a practitioner, she gloriously sustained the best
traditions of her sex in both theoretical and practical medicine.
Her work entitled Liber Simplicis Medicinæ, which deals with what in
the Saint's time was called "simples"—for the belief was then current
that each plant or herb was or provided a specific for some
disease—contains accounts of many plants used in materia medica, as
well as statements of their importance in therapeutics. Her descriptions
often indicate an observer of exceptionally keen perception and one
whose knowledge of science was far in advance of her epoch. The same
observations may be made respecting Hildegard 's work, Liber Compositæ
Medicinæ, in which she treats of the causes, signs and treatment of
diseases.[188]
Still more remarkable, in many respects, is a treatise in nine books,
entitled Physica or Liber Subtilitatum Diversarum Naturarum
Creaturarum, which, among other things, treats of the various elements,
of plants, trees, minerals, fish, birds, quadrupeds, and of the manner
in which they may be of service to man. Of so great importance was this
book considered that several editions of it were printed as early as the
sixteenth century. No less an authority than the late Rudolph Virchow,
the founder of cellular pathology, characterizes it as an early materia
medica, curiously complete, considering the age to which it
belongs.[189] And Hæser, in his history of medicine,[Pg 279] directs attention
to the historical value of the book, declaring it to be "an independent
German treatise, based chiefly on popular experience."
Dr. F. A. Reuss, of the University of Würtzburg, at the conclusion of
his Prolegomena to the Physica published in Migne's Patrologia,
expresses himself as follows regarding the writings and medical
knowledge of the illustrious abbess of Bingen: "Among all the saintly
religieuses who, during the Middle Ages, practiced medicine or wrote
treatises on it, the first, without contradiction, is Hildegard.
According to the monk Theodoric, who was an eye witness, she had to so
high a degree the gift of healing that no sick person had recourse to
her without being restored to health. There is among the books of this
prophetic virgin a work which treats of physics and medicine. Its title
is De Natura Nominis Elementorum Diversarumque Creaturarum, and it
embodies, as the same Theodoric fully explains, the secrets of nature
which were revealed to the saint by the prophetic spirit. All who wish
to write the history of the medical and natural sciences should read
this book, in which the holy virgin, initiated into all the secrets of
nature which were then known, and having received special assistance
from above, thoroughly examines and scrutinizes all that which was,
until then, buried in darkness and concealed from the eyes of mortals.
It is certain that Hildegard was acquainted with many things of which
the doctors of the Middle Ages were ignorant, and which the
investigators of our own age, after rediscovering them, have announced
as something entirely new."[190]
The life and works of St. Hildegard throw a flood of light on many
subjects that have long been veiled in mystery. It explains why the
convents of the later Middle Ages were so famed as curative centers and
why the sick flocked to them for relief from far and near. It reveals
the real agencies employed in effecting the extraordinary[Pg 280] cures that
were reported in so many religious houses—cures so extraordinary that
they were usually regarded by the multitude as miraculous—and discloses
the secret of the success of so many nuns in the alleviation of physical
and mental sufferings. It was not because they were thaumaturges, but
because they were good nurses, and because of their thorough knowledge
of the healing art, that they were able to diagnose and prescribe for
diseases of all kinds with a success which, in the estimation of the
multitude, savored of the supernatural.
There was also another reason for the fame of convents as sanctuaries of
health. They were usually situated in healthy locations where there was
an abundance of pure water, fresh air and cheerful sunshine. Then there
were likewise a wholesome diet, good sanitary conditions, and, above
all, regularity of life.
The same can be said of the hospitals connected with the convents. They
were not like some of the public hospitals of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries in many of the large cities of Europe—repulsive,
prison-like structures, with narrow windows and devoid of light and air
and the most necessary hygienic appliances—institutions that were
hospitals in name, but which were in reality too frequently breeding
places of disease and death.[191]
[Pg 281]
Unlike these, the hospitals presided over by nuns of the type of
Hildegard were splendid roomy structures with large windows and
abundance of light, pure air, with special provisions for the privacy of
the patients, and with sanitary arrangements that not only precluded the
dissemination of disease but which contributed materially to those
marvelous cures which the good people of the time attributed to
supernatural agencies rather than to the medical knowledge and skill of
the devoted nuns,[192] who were the real conquerors of disease and
death.
But the inmates of the cloister were not the only women who, during the
Middle Ages, achieved distinction by their writings on medical subjects
and by their signal success in the practice of the healing art. In
various parts of Europe, but especially in Italy and France, there were
at this time among women, outside as well as inside convent walls, many
daughters of Æsculapius and sisters of Hygeia who stood in such high
repute among their contemporaries that they received the same honors and
emoluments as were accorded to their masculine colleagues.
This was particularly the case in Salerno, which was the venerated
mother of all Christian medical schools, and which, for nine centuries,
was universally regarded as "the unquestioned fountain and archetype of
orthodox medicine." Situated on the Gulf of Salerno, and laved by the[Pg 282]
cerulean waters of the Tyrrhenian sea, the Civitas Hippocratica, as it
was called on its medals, rejoiced in a salubrious climate, and was
celebrated throughout the world as the "City sacred to Phœbus, the
sedulous nurse of Minerva, the fountain of physic, the votary of
medicine, the handmaid of Nature, the destroyer of disease and the
strong adversary of death."[193] For to this favored city flocked from
all quarters the lame and the halt and those afflicted with the tortures
of disease and the disabilities of advancing years. The noble and the
simple, crowned heads as well as the poorest of the poor, were found
there, all of them in quest of life's most precious boon—health and
strength.
Never did the far-famed sanctuary of the god of medicine in Epidaurus
witness such an influx of invalids as gathered in the hospitals of
Salerno and pressed through the streets of the Hippocratic city, seeking
the aid of those doctors whose marvelous cures had given them a
world-wide reputation. Small wonder, then, that the Regimen Santatis
Salernitanum—that famous code of health of the school of Salerno—has
been translated into almost all the languages of modern Europe, and that
since 1480 no fewer than two hundred and fifty editions of it have been
published. "Not to have been familiar with it from beginning to end, not
to have been able to quote it orally as occasion might require, would,
during the Middle Ages, have cast serious suspicion upon the
professional culture of any physician."[194][Pg 283] But the noblest claims of
the Hippocratic city to the gratitude of humanity yet remain to be told.
A German traveler in the thirteenth century wrote:
This was because Salerno was universally recognized as the "day star"
and "morning glory" of the best culture in the healing art, and, still
more, because of the thorough instruction she gave in her schools of
medicine and the preëminence she so long held in every department of
medical lore.
The course of study in medicine was long and thorough, and the candidate
applying for a degree had to pass a rigid examination and give proof not
only of his proficiency in every branch of the healing art, but also of
perfect acquaintance with the various branches of science and letters as
well. At the time of Frederick II, who organized all the different
schools of Salerno into a single university, a three years' course in
philosophy and literature was required before one could present himself
for entrance into the school of medicine. The courses in medicine lasted
five years, at least, after which a year of practice with an old
physician was required. In addition to this, if the candidate wished to
practice surgery he was obliged to devote one year to the study of human
anatomy and to the dissection of human bodies. Considering the progress
of knowledge since the time of Frederick II, it must be admitted that
the legal requirements enforced by the faculty of Salerno compare
favorably with those of the best of our medical schools of to-day.
Still more to the credit of Salerno, long known as the[Pg 284] Athens of the
two Sicilies, was her boundless liberality toward scholarship and
culture regardless of sex. For, with a chivalrous admiration for
intellect, wherever found, and with a sense of intellectual justice that
has put to shame all medical schools outside of Italy, until less than
fifty years ago, the school of Salerno was the first to throw open its
portals to women as well as men, and give to an admiring world a number
of women—those celebrated mulieres Salernitanæ—who were eminent not
only as physicians, but also as professors of the theory and practice of
medicine. For this reason, if for no other, it can be truly affirmed
that "No school of medicine in any age or country, if only for this, can
ever over-peer her in renown; and, even as formerly in the universities
of Europe, at the bare mention of the name of the learned Cujacius,
every scholar instinctively uncovered himself, so at the very name of
Salernum, the fount and nurse of rational medicine, every physician
should recall her memory 'with mute thanks and secret ecstasy' as among
the most spotless and venerated chapters in the history of his
art."[196]
The most noted professor and successful practitioner among the women of
Salerno was Trotula, wife of the distinguished physician, John
Platearius, and a member of the old noble family of the Ruggiero. She
flourished during the eleventh century and enjoyed a reputation as a
physician that was not inferior to that of the most noted doctors of her
time. Besides occupying a chair in the school of medicine and having an
extensive practice, she was the author of many works on medicine which
had a great vogue among her contemporaries. Some of them, especially
those relating to diseases of her own sex,[197] were published[Pg 285] several
times after the invention of printing, and many manuscript copies of her
works are still found in various libraries of Europe. But she did not
confine her practice to the diseases of women. She was also well versed
in general medicine and exhibited, besides, as her works testify, marked
skill as a surgeon in many cases that would even now be considered as
peculiarly difficult of treatment.
One of her books was entitled De Compositione Medicamentorum—the
Compounding of Medicaments—and it was this work, doubtless, that gave
her much of the fame she enjoyed beyond the confines of Italy.
Rutebœuf, a noted French trouvère of the thirteenth century, gives us
a quaint picture of a scene frequently witnessed in his day. Crowds were
frequently attracted by herbalists—venders of simples—who, stationed
at street corners or in other public places, near tables covered with a
cloth of flaring colors, were wont to descant, somewhat after the style
of certain of our patent-medicine hawkers and quack-salvers, upon the
extraordinary curative properties of the various drugs and panaceas
which they had for sale.
"Good people," one of these traveling herb doctors would begin, "I am
not one of those poor preachers, nor one of those poor herbalists who
carry boxes and sachets and spread them out on a carpet. No, I am a
disciple of a great lady named Madame Trotte of Salerno, who performs
such marvels of every kind. And know ye that she is the wisest woman in
the four quarters of the world."
Ordericus Vitalis, an English Benedictine monk, in his Historia
Ecclesiastica, tells us of the impression made by Trotula on Rudolfo
Malacorona, one of those famous itinerant scholars of the Middle Ages,
who spent their lives in wandering from one university to another in
pursuit of knowledge. He had been a student from his youth and was a man
of remarkable attainments in every department of learning. After
visiting and conferring with the learned men of the most celebrated
universities of France and[Pg 286] Italy, he finally arrived at Salerno, where,
he informs us, he found no one who could cope with him in disputation
except quandam sapientem matronam—a certain very learned woman.[198]
This was Trotula, who, by reason of the extraordinary cures she
effected, was known among her contemporaries as magistra operis—a
consummate practitioner. When, however, we consider the thorough course
of study that every one aspiring to a degree in medicine was obliged to
complete, women as well as men, it is not so surprising that Trotula
should be regarded both as a learned woman and as a successful
physician.
Among other women doctors who did honor to Salerno and whose names have
come down to us were three who are known in history as Abella, Rebeca de
Guarna and Mercuriade. All of them achieved a great reputation by their
writings on medical subjects, especially Mercuriade, who distinguished
herself in surgery as well as in medicine. Still another woman deserving
special mention is Francesca, wife of Matteo de Romana, of Salerno.
After passing a very severe examination before a board composed of
physicians and surgeons, she was accorded the doctorate in surgery. An
official document of the time referring to this event reads as follows:
"Whereas the laws permit women to practice medicine, and whereas, from
the viewpoint of good morals, women are best adapted to the treatment of
their own sex, we, after having received the oath of fidelity, permit
the said Francesca to practice the said art of healing," etc.[199]
[Pg 287]
In view of the facts above mentioned regarding the University of
Salerno—the excellence of its work, its liberality and breadth of view,
its attitude toward the higher education of women, and its preëminence
for so many centuries as a school of medicine—is it surprising that it
was, until comparatively recent times, considered "the mater et caput
of medical authority in ethical matters," and that, so late as 1748, the
Medical Faculty of Paris should address an official letter to the
faculty of Salerno requesting its judgment regarding the rights of
precedence as between physicians and surgeons? But what is surprising,
and what, too,[Pg 288] passes all understanding, is that the University of
London, after being empowered by royal charter to do all things that
could be done by any university, was legally advised that it could not
grant degrees to women without a fresh charter, because no university
had ever granted such degrees.[200]
While women were winning such laurels in Salerno in every department of
the healing art, their sisters north of the Alps were not idle. As early
as 1292 there were in Paris no less than eight women doctors—called
miresses or mediciennes—whose names have come down to us, not to
speak of those who practiced in other parts of France. There was also a
certain number of women who devoted themselves to surgery and called by
the old Latin authors of the time cyrurgiæ.
In Paris, however, conditions for studying and practicing medicine and
surgery were far from being as favorable to women as they were in
Salerno. As there were no schools open to them for the study of these
branches, they had to depend entirely for such knowledge as they were
able to acquire on the aid they could get from practicing doctors, the
reading of medical books and their own experience. The consequence was
that they were not at all so well equipped for their work as were the
women who enjoyed all the exceptional advantages offered the students at
Salerno. None of them was noted for scholarship, none of them was a
writer of books, and only one of them—Jacobe[Pg 289] Felicie, about whom more
presently—rose above mediocrity.
The reason for the great difference between the conditions of the women
doctors of Paris and those of Salerno is not far to seek. The Faculty of
Medicine in Paris was, from the beginning of its existence, unalterably
opposed to female medical practitioners. As early as 1220 it promulgated
an edict prohibiting the practice of medicine by any one who did not
belong to the faculty, and, according to its constitutions and by-laws,
only unmarried men were eligible to membership.
For a long time the edict remained a dead letter. But eventually, as the
faculty grew in power and influence, it was able to enforce the
observance of its decrees. One of its first victims was Jacobe Felicie,
just mentioned, who was hailed before court for practicing medicine in
contravention of its edict issued many years before.
Jacobe Felicie was a woman of noble birth, and had won distinction by
her success in the healing art. As the testimony at her trial revealed,
she never treated the sick for the sake of gain. In nearly all cases the
sick who had addressed themselves to her had been abandoned by their own
physicians. All the witnesses who had been called testified that they
had been cured by Jacobe Felicie, and all expressed their deepest
gratitude to her for her care and devotion. But, in spite of all these
facts, and in spite of the brilliant defence that this worthy woman
made, she was condemned to pay a heavy fine—condemned because, as the
indictment read, she had presumed to put her sickle into the harvest of
others-falcem in messem mittere alienam—and this was a crime.[201]
The faculty was a close corporation and insisted that its members should
have a monopoly of all the honors and emoluments that were to accrue
from the treatment of the sick and suffering. What[Pg 290] a curious
adumbration of similar proceedings within the memory of many still
living!
The prosecution of Jacobe Felicie recalls that of Agnodice in Greece
long ages before. And the plea urged for the necessity of a female
physician—that many a woman would rather die than reveal the secrets of
her infirmity to a man[202]—was the same as that offered by the women
of Athens before the council of the Areopagus. It was the same agonizing
cry that had been heard thousands of times before and which has been
heard thousands of times since. Isabella of Castile was not the first of
the long list of victims who, for lack of a doctor of their own sex,
have been sacrificed through womanly modesty, and, more's the pity, she
will not be the last.
Unfortunately for the women of France, the result of the prosecution of
Mme. Felicie was the very reverse of that instituted against Agnodice;
for the latter came off victorious, while the former was condemned and
punished. So crushing was the blow dealt to women practitioners, outside
of obstetrics, that they did not recover from its effects for more than
five hundred years. For it was not until 1868 that the École de Medicine
of Paris opened its doors to women, and it was not until nearly twenty
years later that female physicians were able to enter the hospitals of
the French capital as internes.[203]
Until quite recent years there is very little to be said of women
physicians in England and Germany. Their practice, outside of that of
certain herb doctors, was confined[Pg 291] chiefly to midwifery. There was no
provision made in either of these countries for the education of women
in medicine and surgery, and such a thing as a college where they could
receive instruction in the healing art was unknown. It is true that an
ecclesiastical law of Edgar, King of England, permitted women as well as
men to practice medicine, but this law was subsequently abolished by
Henry V.[204]
During the reign of Henry VIII a law was again enacted in favor of women
physicians; for at that time an act was passed for the relief and
protection of "Divers honest psones, as well men as women, whom God
hathe endued with the knowledge of the nature, kind and operaçon of
certeyne herbes, rotes and waters, and the using and ministering them to
suche as be payned with customable diseases, for neighbourhode and
Goddes sake and of pitie and charitie, because that 'The Companie and
Fellowship of Surgeons of London, mynding only their owne lucres and
nothing the profit or case of the diseased or patient, have sued, vexed
and troubled' the aforesaid 'honest psones,' who were henceforth to be
allowed 'to practyse, use and mynistre in and to any outwarde sore,
swelling or disease, any herbes, oyntments, bathes, pultes
or emplasters, according to their cooning, experience and
knowledge—without sute, vexation, penaltie or loss of their
goods.'"[205]
The italicized words in this quotation prove that the women doctors of
England had the same difficulties as their sisters in France, and that
the real reason of the opposition of the male practitioners was that
they wished to monopolize[Pg 292] the practice of medicine. They, like the
medical faculty of Paris, strenuously objected to women "putting the
sickle into their harvest," and they, accordingly, left nothing undone
to circumvent the intrusion of those whom they always regarded as
undesirable competitors.
It was argued by the men that women, to begin with, lacked the strength
and capacity necessary for medical practice. It was also urged that it
was indelicate and unwomanly for the gentler sex to engage in the
healing art, and that, for their own good, they should be excluded from
it at all costs. Those who were willing to waive these objections
contended that women had not the knowledge necessary for the profession
of medicine and should be excluded on the score of ignorance. When women
sought to qualify themselves for medical practice by seeking instruction
under licenced practitioners or in medical schools, they found a deaf
ear turned to their requests. The doctors declined to teach them and the
medical schools, one and all, closed their doors against them.
Thus it was that in England, France and Germany the practice of medicine
and surgery was always practically in the hands of men until only a
generation ago. Even the English midwives gradually "fell from their
high estate," and were left far behind the female obstetricians of
Germany and France. For these two countries can point to a number of
midwives who, by their knowledge, successful practice, and the books
they wrote, achieved a celebrity that still endures.
Chief among these in Germany were Regina Joseph von Siebold, her
daughter Carlotta, and Frau Teresa Frei, all of whom, in the early part
of the last century, enjoyed an enviable reputation in the Fatherland.
The first named, after following a course of lectures on physiology and
the diseases of women and children, and passing a brilliant examination
in the medical college of Darmstadt, devoted herself to the practice of
obstetrics,[Pg 293] and with so great success that the University of Giessen in
1819 conferred on her the degree of doctor of obstetrics. Her daughter,
Carlotta, after studying obstetrics under her mother, went to the
University of Göttingen, where she devoted herself to physiology,
anatomy and pathology. After passing an examination and successfully
defending a number of theses in the University of Giessen, she was also
proclaimed a doctor of obstetrics. At a later date Frau Frei received a
similar degree.[206]
More noted as accoucheuses and gynecologists than the three
distinguished women just mentioned were Mme. Marie Louise La Chapelle
and Mme. Marie Bovin, who, shortly after the French Revolution, entered
upon those wonderful careers in their chosen specialties which have
given them so unique a place in the annals of medicine.
Mme. La Chapelle was particularly celebrated for the[Pg 294] numerous
improvements she effected in lying-in hospitals, for the large number of
skilled midwives whom she furnished, not only to France, but also to the
whole of Europe, and, above all, for the excellent treatises which she
wrote on obstetrics, which gave her a reputation second to none among
her contemporaries, men or women. Her Pratique des Accouchements, in
three volumes, based on the immense number of fifty thousand cases at
which she presided, reveals an operator of rarest skill and genius. This
production was long regarded as a standard work on the topics discussed,
and for years exerted an immense influence in the medical world.
Less skillful as an operator, but of greater ability as a doctor than
Mme. La Chapelle, was her illustrious contemporary, Mme. Bovin.
Possessing extraordinary insight as an investigator and marvelous
sagacity as a diagnostician, Mme. Bovin achieved the distinction of
being the first really great woman doctor of modern times. Her marvelous
success as a practitioner—Dupuytren said she had an eye at the tip of
her finger—her extended knowledge of the entire range of gynecology,
but above all her numerous treatises on the subject matter of her life
work, gave her a prestige that none of her sex had ever before enjoyed,
and commanded the admiration of the doctors of the world. Her Memorial
de l'Art des Accouchements passed through many editions and was
translated into several European languages. And so highly were her
scientific attainments valued in Germany that the University of Marburg
recognized them by conferring on her—honoris causa—the degree of
doctor of medicine and, had its rules permitted the admission of women,
the Royal Academy of Medicine would have honored her with a place among
its members. She was also the recipient of many other honors, besides
being a member of several learned societies. But the greatest monument
to her genius is a large illustrated treatise in two volumes, in which
she[Pg 295] exhibits a wonderful knowledge of anatomy, physiology, surgery,
pathology and therapeutics. It gave her a large following in Germany as
well as in France, and there were not wanting distinguished German
accoucheurs who followed Mme. Bovin's teachings to the letter.
The remarkable German and French women just named were all practically
self-made women. They won fame as they had acquired knowledge—chiefly
by courage, in spite of the countless obstacles that beset their paths.
They owed nothing to schools or universities, nothing to government
patronage or assistance, nothing to the medical fraternity as a whole.
Universities would not admit them to their lecture rooms or
laboratories, and the various medical faculties opposed them as
intruders into their jealously guarded domain, and as competitors whose
aspirations were to be frustrated, whatever the means employed. It is
true that, when some of the women mentioned had won world-wide renown by
their achievements, they were made the recipients of belated honors by
certain universities and learned societies; but these societies and
universities were then honoring themselves as much as the women who
received their degrees and diplomas of membership.
How different it was in Italy, which, since the fall of the Roman
Empire, has ever been in the van of civilization, and which has always
continued the best traditions of Græco-Roman learning and
culture—Italy, which has been the home of such supreme masters of
literature, science, art as Dante, Petrarch, Galileo, Leonardo da Vinci,
Raphael, Michaelangelo, Brunelleschi—Italy, the mother of universities,
the birthplace of the Renaissance, and the recognized leader of
intellectual progress among the nations of the world. Here in the
favored land of the Muses and the Graces, women enjoyed all the rights
and privileges accorded to men; here the doors of schools and
universities were open to all regardless of sex; and art, science,
literature, law, medicine, jurisprudence counted its votaries[Pg 296] among
women as well as among men; here, far from encountering jealousy and
opposition in the pursuit of knowledge or in the practice of the
professions, women never found aught but generous emulation and
sympathetic coöperation.
For a thousand years women were welcomed into the arena of learning and
culture on the same footing as men. In Salerno, Bologna, Padua, Pavia,
they competed for the same honors and were contestants for the same
prizes that stimulated the exertions of the sterner sex. Position and
emolument were the guerdons of merit and ability, and the victor,
whether man or woman, was equally acclaimed and showered with equal
honor. Women asked for no favors in the intellectual arena and expected
none. All they desired were the same opportunities and the same
privileges as were granted the men, and these were never denied them.
From the time when Trotula taught in Salerno to the present, when
Giuseppina Catani is professor of general pathology in the medical
faculty of Bologna, the women of Italy always had access to the
universities and were at liberty to follow any course of study they
might elect. We thus find them achieving distinction in civil and canon
law, in medicine, in theology even, as well as in art, science,
literature, philosophy and linguistics. No department of knowledge had
any terrors for them, and there was none in which some of them did not
win undying fame. They held chairs of language, jurisprudence,
philosophy, physics, mathematics, medicine and anatomy, and filled these
positions with such marked ability that they commanded the admiration
and applause of all who heard them.
This is not the place to tell of the triumphs of the women professors in
the Italian universities, or to recount the achievements of those who
were honored with degrees within their classic walls. Let it suffice to
recall the names of a few of those who won renown in medicine and
surgery[Pg 297] and whose names are still in their own land pronounced with
respect and veneration.
One of the most noted practitioners in Southern Italy, after the death
of Trotula and her compeers, was one Margarita, who had studied medicine
in Salerno. One of her patients was no less a personage than Ladislaus,
King of Naples. Among those that had diplomas for the practice of
surgery were Maria Incarnata, of Naples, and Thomasia de Matteo, of
Castro Isiae.
That women enjoyed in Rome the same privileges in the practice of
medicine and surgery as their sisters in the southern part of the
peninsula is manifest from an edict issued by Pope Sixtus IV in
confirmation of a law promulgated by the Medical Faculty of Rome, which
reads as follows: "No man or woman, whether Christian or Jew, unless he
be a master or a licentiate in medicine, shall presume to treat the
human body either as a physician or as a surgeon."[207]
In central and northern Italy—in Florence, Turin, Padua, Venice—as
well as in the southern part, we find constantly recurring instances of
women practicing medicine and surgery and winning for themselves an
enviable reputation as successful practitioners.
But after the decline of Salerno, consequent on the establishment by
Frederick II of a school of medicine in Naples, the great center of
medicine and surgery, as of civil and canon law, was Bologna.[208] So
renowned did it become[Pg 298] as a teaching and intellectual center that it
was, as Sarti informs us, known throughout Europe as Civitas
Docta—the learned city—and Mater Studiorum—the mother of studies.
On its coins were stamped the words Bononia Docet—Bologna
teaches—and on the city seal, which is still used for certain public
documents, were the words Legum Bononia Mater—Bologna, the Mother of
Laws.
Here, more than in Salerno, more than in any other city in the world,
was, for long centuries, witnessed a blooming of female genius that has,
since the time of Gratian and Irnerius, given the University of Bologna
preëminence in the estimation of all friends of woman's education and
woman's culture. For here, within the walls of what was for centuries
the most celebrated university in Christendom, women had, for the first
time, an opportunity of devoting themselves at will to the study of any
and all branches of knowledge. And it can be truthfully affirmed that no
seat of learning can point to such a long list of eminent scholars and
teachers among the gentler sex as is to be found on the register of
Bologna's famous university. For here, to name only a few, achieved
distinction, either as students or as professors, such noted women as
Bitisia Gozzadina, Bettina and Novella Calendrini, Dorotea Bocchi,
Giovanna and Maddalena Bianchetti, Virginia Malvezzi, Maria Vittoria
Dosi, Elisabetta Sirani, Ippolita Grassi, Properzia de Rossi, Maria
Mastellagri, Laura Bassi, Maddelena Noe-Candedi, Clotilda Tambroni and
Anna Manzolini. In this honor list we have a group of savantes[Pg 299] that
were famed throughout Europe for their attainments in law, philosophy,
science, ancient and modern languages, medicine, and surgery—the
rivals, and sometimes the superiors, in scholarship of the ablest men
among their distinguished colleagues.
It would be a pleasure to recount the achievements of these justly
celebrated daughters of Italy; but lack of space precludes the mention
of more than one of them. This was Maria dalle Donne, who was born of
poor peasants near Bologna, and who at an early age exhibited
intelligence of a superior order. After pursuing her studies under the
ablest masters, she obtained from the University of Bologna, maxima cum
laude, the degree of doctor in philosophy and medicine. On account of
her knowledge of surgery, as well as of medicine, she was soon afterward
put in charge of the city's school for midwives. When Napoleon, in 1802,
passed through Bologna he was so struck by the exceptional ability of
the young dottoressa that, on the recommendation of the savant
Caterzani, he had instituted for her in the university a chair of
obstetrics—a position which she held until the time of her death, in
1842, with the greatest credit to herself and to the institution with
which she was identified.
Maria dalle Donne is a worthy link between that long line of women
doctors, beginning with Trotula, who have so honored their sex in Italy,
and those still more numerous practitioners in the healing art who,
shortly after her death, began to spring up in all parts of the
civilized world.[209]
[Pg 300]
For it was about this time that the movement which had long been
agitated in behalf of the higher education of women began suddenly to
assume extraordinary vitality, not only throughout Europe but in America
as well. And to no women did this movement appeal so strongly as to
those who had long been looking forward to an opportunity to qualify
themselves for the learned professions, especially medicine. No sooner
did they descry the first flush of dawn on their long-deferred hopes
than they began to consider ways and means for putting their fondly
nurtured projects into execution.
Seven years, almost to the day, after the death of Maria dalle Donne,
Miss Elizabeth Blackwell, a young woman in America, of English birth,
decided to enter college with a view of studying medicine and surgery.
But, at the very outset, she encountered all kinds of unforeseen
difficulties—difficulties that would have caused a less courageous and
determined woman to give up her plans in despair. She was told, in the
first place, that it was highly improper for a woman to study medicine
and that no decent woman would think of becoming a medical practitioner.
As to a lady studying or practicing surgery that, of course, was out of
the question.
But a more serious obstacle than the conventionalities in the case was
the difficulty of finding a medical college that was willing to admit a
woman to its lecture rooms and laboratories. Miss Blackwell applied to
more than a dozen[Pg 301] of the leading institutions of America, and received
a positive refusal to her request. Finally, when hope had almost
vanished, she received word from a small college in Geneva, New York,
announcing that her application had been favorably considered and that
she would be admitted as a student whenever she presented herself.
The truth is that the faculty of the college was opposed to the young
woman's admission, but wished to escape the odium incident to a direct
refusal by referring the question to the class with a proviso which, it
was believed, would necessarily exclude her. "But in this it was greatly
surprised and disappointed. For the entire medical class, to the number
of about one hundred and fifty, decided unanimously in favor of the fair
applicant's admission. And they did more than this. They put themselves
on record regarding the equality of educational opportunities for women
and men in a way that must have put their timid professors to shame.
Their resolution, accompanying an invitation to the young woman to
become a member of the student body, was worded as follows:
"'Resolved, That one of the radical principles of a republican
government is the universal education of both sexes; that to every
branch of scientific education the door should be equally open to all;
that the application of Elizabeth Blackwell to become a member of our
class meets our entire approbation, and, in extending our unanimous
invitation, we pledge ourselves that no conduct of ours shall cause her
to regret her attendance at this institution.'"
The students were as good as their word. Their conduct, as Miss
Blackwell wrote years afterward, was always admirable and that of "true
Christian gentlemen." But the women of Geneva were shocked at the female
medical student. They stared at her as a curious animal; and the theory
was fully established that she was "either a bad woman, whose designs
would gradually become evident, or[Pg 302] that, being insane, an outbreak of
insanity would soon be apparent."[210]
In due time Miss Blackwell finished her course in medicine and surgery,
and graduated at the head of her class. The orator of the day, who was a
member of the faculty, naturally referred to the new departure that had
been made—the admission of a woman for the first time to a complete
medical education—and among other things declared that the experiment,
of which every member of the faculty was proud, "had proved that the
strongest intellect and nerve and the most untiring perseverance were
compatible with the softest attributes of feminine delicacy and
grace."[211]
The awarding of the degree of M.D. for the first time to a woman in
America excited general comment and widespread interest, not only in the
United States, but in Europe as well. The public press was not
unfavorable in its opinion of the new departure, and even Punch could
not resist writing some verses, sympathetic, albeit humorous, in honor
of the fair M.D.[212]
[Pg 303]
After spending some time abroad studying in the great hospitals of
Europe, Miss Blackwell started the practice of medicine in New York
City. At first, as she declares in her autobiographical sketches, it was
"very difficult, though steady, uphill work. I had," she tells us, "no
medical companionship, the profession stood aloof, and society was
distrustful of the innovation."
The aloofness of the profession arose from a dread of successful
rivalry, and the men did not wish to encourage "the invasion by women of
their own preserves." "You cannot expect us," one of them frankly
admitted to her, "to furnish you with a stick to break our heads with."
But, undeterred by opposition, Miss Blackwell continued her work, daily
making converts to the new movement and receiving substantial aid, as
well as sympathetic coöperation, from many people, both men and women,
prominent in society and public life. In 1854 she started a free
dispensary for poor women. Three years later she founded a hospital for
women and children, where young women physicians as well as patients
could be received. These were the humble beginnings of the present
flourishing institutions known as the New York Infirmary and the College
for Women. And in less than ten years after her graduation, Miss
Blackwell saw the new departure in medical practice successfully
established, not only in New York, but also in other large cities of the
United States. In 1869 the early pioneer medical work by women in
America was completed.
"During the twenty years which followed the graduation of the first
woman physician, the public recognition of the justice and advantage of
such a measure had steadily grown. Throughout the northern states the
free and equal entrance of women into the profession of medicine was
secured. In Boston, New York and Philadelphia special medical schools
for women were sanctioned by the[Pg 304] legislatures, and in some
long-established colleges women were received as students in the
ordinary classes."[213]
Meanwhile, the women in Europe were not idle nor heedless of the example
set by their brave sisters in America. The University of Zurich threw
open its portals to women, and was soon followed by those of Bern and
Geneva. The first woman to obtain a degree in medicine in Zurich—it was
in 1867—was Nadejda Suslowa, a Russian. She was soon followed by scores
of others from Europe and America, who found greater advantages and more
sympathy in Swiss universities than elsewhere.
In 1869 the Medico-Chirurgical Academy of St. Petersburg conferred the
degree of M.D. upon Madame Kaschewarow, the first female candidate for
this honor. When her name was mentioned by the dean it was received with
an immense storm of applause which lasted several minutes. The ceremony
of investing her with the insignia of her dignity being over, her fellow
students and colleagues lifted her on a chair and carried her with
triumphant shouts throughout the halls.
The first woman graduate from the University of France was Miss
Elizabeth Garrett, of England. She received her degree in medicine in
1870, and the following year the same institution conferred the doctor's
degree on Miss Mary C. Putnam, of New York.
After these precedents had been established, the universities of the
various countries on the continent, following the examples set by those
in the United States and Switzerland, opened one after the other their
doors to women, and in most of them accorded them all the privileges of
cives academici enjoyed by the men.
Great Britain held out against the new movement long after most of the
continental countries had fallen into line, nor did she surrender until
after a protracted and bitter fight, during which the men leading the
opposition exhibited[Pg 305] evidences of selfishness and obscurantism that now
seem incredible.
The leader in Great Britain of pioneer medical work for women was Miss
Sophia Jex-Blake, whose academic pathway was beset with difficulties far
sterner than had in the United States confronted her friend and
colleague, Miss Blackwell.
Hearing much of the tolerance and liberality of the University of
London, she applied to it for admission as a student, but was informed
at once that the charter of the institution "had purposely been so
worded as to exclude the possibility of examining women for medical
degrees."
After this rebuff she made application to the University of Edinburgh,
which, like the other Scotch universities, had always boasted of its
broad-mindedness and freedom from educational trammels. She was received
provisionally, and was, after a while, joined by six other women who had
in view the same object as herself. For a time, notwithstanding
opposition from certain quarters, everything was quiet and apparently
satisfactory. But the gathering storm soon broke, and the seven young
women, as they were one day entering the university gates, were actually
mobbed by a ruffianly band of students who had all along been opposed to
the presence of women in the class and lecture rooms. They pelted the
helpless females with street mud and hurled at them all the vile
epithets and heaped upon them all the abuse that their foul tongues
could command. These outrageous proceedings on the part of the rabble of
rowdies were allowed to continue for several days, and, had it not been
for a brave band of chivalrous young Irishmen among the students, who
formed themselves into a bodyguard for the protection of their fair
classmates, and were, in consequence, known as "The Irish Brigade," the
hapless women students would not have escaped bodily harm. What a marked
contrast between the conduct toward Miss Blackwell of the gallant
students[Pg 306] of the modest little American town and that of the cowardly
ruffians of the vaunted "Athens of the North!"
But this was not all. The seven young women in question had matriculated
as students of the university with the understanding that they were to
have all the rights and privileges of the male students. But after the
disgraceful conduct of the mob just referred to, they discovered that
the authorities of the university were prepared to break faith with
them, and prevent them from getting their coveted degrees, and thus
debar them from all chance of medical practice.
The reason why the university was induced to annul its contract, after
the women on their part had fully complied with all its stipulations,
soon became apparent. It was purely and simply to make it impossible for
women to secure a license as medical practitioners. Both in and outside
of Edinburgh the conviction daily grew stronger that women doctors were
a menace to the monopoly so long enjoyed by the medical fraternity, and
that the movement in their favor should be crushed by fair means or foul
before it got beyond control. The Spectator made this clear by stating
at the time of the controversy that "every profession in this
country"—England—"is more or less of a trades union," and yet the
members of these professions "would shake their heads and prate about
the necessity of stamping out trades unionism among workmen." "Women,"
whined one of the doctors, "would snatch the bread from the mouths of
poor practitioners." Another doctor who had championed the cause of
women physicians, when commenting on the hypocritical objection that it
was unbecoming for women to practice medicine or surgery, expressed the
same idea in other words. "It appears," he declared, "that it is most
becoming and proper for a woman to discharge all the duties which are
incidental to our profession for thirty shillings a week; but, if she is
to have three or four guineas a day for discharging[Pg 307] the same duties,
then they are immoral and immodest and unsuited to the soft nature that
should characterize a lady."
After Miss Jex-Blake and her companions learned that the university was
determined to refuse them the degrees to which they were entitled, they
brought suit against it for breach of contract. But, after a long and
expensive trial, the judge rendered a decision against them. They then
appealed to Parliament, and, after a protracted and strenuous campaign
on the part of friends whom they had enlisted in their cause, they saw
their opponents not only dragged at the chariot wheels of progress but
forced to help to turn them; for, in 1878, after nearly ten years of a
persistent, continuous struggle such as had rarely been witnessed in
woman's long battle for things of the mind—a struggle in which the
intrepid, dauntless Miss Jex-Blake "made the greatest of all the
contributions to the end attained"—the women of Great Britain had the
supreme satisfaction of winning what was probably the most glorious
victory which their sex had ever won.[214] The war was over and
henceforward they were free—as were their sisters in other parts of the
world—as the women in Italy had been for a thousand years—to devote
themselves at will to the study and practice of the healing art without
let or hindrance.
What a wonderful change has taken place in the medical world almost
within the space of a single generation! The tiny grain of mustard that
was sown by two lone women, the Misses Blackwell and Jex-Blake, in their
chosen field of effort has grown and "waxed a great tree."[Pg 308] Women
doctors are now found in all parts of the civilized world and are
numbered by thousands. And so great has been their professional success,
so widespread is the desire to secure their services, especially in
countries like America and England, where opposition was in the
beginning especially bitter, that the proportion of women practitioners
in medicine and surgery is now regarded as the best index of a nation's
enlightenment.
The healing art of Greece and Rome has broadened out into the noble
sciences of medicine and surgery of to-day. For, based as they now are
on the sciences of chemistry, botany, biology, hygiene, physiology,
anatomy and bacteriology, which have all witnessed such extraordinary
developments during the last half century, they both deserve a
preëminent place in the history of the sciences. And the success which
has crowned woman's efforts in surgery and medicine is not only a
conclusive indication of her capacity, so long denied by her
self-interested opponents, but also the most convincing indication that
she is at last properly occupied in a field of activity from which she
was too long excluded. Her contributions as writer and investigator
toward the progress of both sciences, even during the short time in
which she has been able to give proof of her ability, have been notable
and augur well for the share she will have in their future advancement.
But more important still is the refining influence she has already
exerted on both professions, and the relief she has been able to afford
to countless thousands of her own sex who would otherwise have been the
voluntary victims of untold misery. Women doctors are, indeed, not only
worthy representatives of Æsculapia Victrix and of the two sciences
which they have so elevated and so ennobled, but are also ministering
angels to poor, suffering humanity comparable only with the heroic
Sisters of Charity and the devoted nurses of the Red Cross.
[182] Quoted in Medical Women, p. 11, by Sophia Jex-Blake, M.
D., Edinburgh, 1886. Cf. Hyginus, Fabularum Liber, No. 274.
[183] Charles Daremberg, who, at the time of his death in 1872,
was professor of the history of medicine in the Faculty of Medicine in
Paris, had the intention of publishing this work Περι των
γυναιων ταζων.—On the Diseases of Women—but his premature death
prevented him from executing his project. It is to be hoped that some
one else, interested in woman's medical work, may at an early date give
this production to the public with an appropriate commentary.
[184] Cf. Hertzen et Rossi Inscriptiones Urbis Romæ Latinæ,
p. 1245, No. 9478, Berlin, 1882.
[185] "Non mihi si linguæ centum, oraque centum, ferrea vox ...
omnia morborum percurrere nomina possim quæ Fabiola in tanta miserorum
refregeria commutavit ut multi pauperum sani languentibus inviderent."
Epistola ad Oceanum.
[186] Hæc inter timidam revocat clamore puellam Alpharides,
veniens quæ saucia quæque ligavit.

[187] That the Germans, at the time under discussion, regarded
learning as having an effeminating effect on men is well illustrated by
the following characteristic anecdote: "when Amasvintha, a very learned
woman who was a daughter of the Ostrogoth King, Theodoric, selected
three masters for the instruction of her son, the people became
indignant. 'Theodoric,' they exclaimed, 'never sent the children of the
Goths to school, learning making a woman of a man and rendering him
timorous. The saber and the lance are sufficient for him.'" Procopius,
De Bello Gothico, I, 2, Leipsic, 1905.


If we may judge by a letter from Pace to Dean Colet, the noted classical
scholar and founder of St. Paul's school in London, such views found
acceptance in England as late as the time of More and Erasmus. For we
are told of a British parent who expressed his opinion on the education
of men in these words: "I swear by God's body I'd rather that my son
should hang than study letters. The study of letters should be left to
rustics."
[188] This work was for a long time regarded as lost, but a
manuscript copy was recently found in Copenhagen, and it has since been
published by Teubner of Leipsic, under the title of Hildegard's Causæ
et Curæ.
[189] Archiv für Pathologische Anatomie und Physiologie und
für Klinische Medicin, Band 18, p. 286, Berlin.
[190] S. Hildegardis Opera Omnia, Ed. Migne, p. 1122, Paris,
1882.
[191] "In the municipal and state institutions of this period
the beautiful gardens, roomy halls and springs of water of the old
cloistral hospital of the Middle Ages were not heard of, still less the
comforts of their friendly interiors." A History of Nursing, Vol. I,
p. 500, M. Adelaide Nutting and Lavinia L. Dock, New York, 1907.


The mortality in some of the state hospitals from the latter part of the
seventeenth to the middle of the nineteenth century was appalling, often
as high as fifty and sixty per cent. This was due not only to shockingly
unsanitary conditions, but also to inordinate overcrowding. A large
proportion of the beds, incredible as it may seem, were purposely made
for four patients, and six were frequently crowded into them. "The
extraordinary spectacle was then to be seen of two or three small-pox
cases, or several surgical cases, lying on one bed." John Howard, in his
Prisons and Hospitals, pp. 176-177. Warrington, 1874, tells us of two
hospitals that were so crowded that he had "often seen five or six
patients in one bed, and some of them dying."


It is gratifying to learn that the chief agents in changing this
revolting condition, due to faulty construction and management of
hospitals, were women. Prominent among these benefactors of humanity
were Mme. Necker, Florence Nightingale, and the wise and alert superiors
of the various nursing sisterhoods.
[192] How like Chaucer's prioress who

[193] Cf. Lib. de Virtutibus et Laudibus, by Ægidius, head
physician to Philip Augustus of France, in which occur the following
verses:


quoted in the appendix, p. xxxii, to S. de Renzi's, Storia Documentata
della Scuola Medica di Salerno, Naples, 1857.
[194] Cf. The introduction to the English translation of the
Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum, p. 28, by J. Ordronaux, Philadelphia,
1870.
[195]
[196] See Storia Documentata della Scuola Medica di Salerno,
ut. sup., p. 474 et seq., and p. lxxvi et seq. of Appendix; also
Ordronaux, ut sup., p. 16.
[197] Probably her most noted work is the one which bears the
title De Morbis Mulierum et Eorum Cura—The Diseases of Women and
Their Cure.
[198] "Physicæ quoque scientiam tam copiose habuit ut in urbe
Psaleritana, ubi maxime medicorum scholæ ab antiquo tempore habentur,
neminem in medicinali arte, præter quandam sapientem matronam, sibi
parem inveniret." Migne, Patrologiæ Latinæ, Tom. 188, Col. 260.
[199] As this decree is of singular interest and importance, a
copy of the original is here given in full:


"Karolus, etc., Universis per Justitieratum Principatus citra Serras
Montorii constitutis presentes litteras inspecturis fidelibus paternis
et suis salutem, etc. In actionibus nostris utilitati puplice libenter
oportune perspicimus et honestatem morum in quantum suadet modestia
conservamus. Sane Francisca uxor Mathei de Romana de Salerno in Regia
Curia presens exposuit quod ipsa circa principale exercitium cirurgie
sufficiens circumspecto in talibus judicio reputatur. Propter quod
excellentie nostre supplicavit attentius ut licentiam sibi dignaremus
concedere in arte hujusmodi practicandi. Quia igitur per scriptum
puplicum universitatis terre Salerni presentatum eidem Regie Curie,
inventum est lucide quod Francisca prefata fidelis est et genere orta
fidelium ac examinata per medicos Regios paternos nostrosque cirurgicos,
in eadem arte cirurgie tamquam ydiota sufficiens est inventa, licet
alienum sit feminis conventibus interrese virorum, ne in matronalis
pudoris contumelia irruant et primum culpam vetite transgressionis
incurrant. Quia tamen de juris indicto medicine officium mulieribus est
concessum expedienter attento quod ad mulieres curandas egrotas de
honestate morum viris sunt femine aptiores, not recepto prius ab eadem
Francisca solito fidelitatis et quod iuxta tradiciones ipsius artis
curabit fideliter corporaliter Juramento, licentiam curandi et
practicandi sibi in eadem arte per Justitieratum jam dictum auctoritate
presentium impartimus. Quare fidelitati vestre precipimus quatenus
eandem Franciscam curare et practicari in prefata arte per Justitieratum
predictum ad honorem et fidelitatem paternam et nostram ac utilitatem
fidelium presentium earumdam libere permittatis, nullum sibi in hoc
impedimentum vel obstaculum interentes. Datum Neapoli per dominum
Bartholomeum de Capua, etc., Anno domini mcccxxi, die x Septembris v,
indictionis Regnorum dicti domini patris nostri anno xiii."


Collectio Salernitana, Tom. III, p. 338, by G. Henschel, C. Daremberg,
and S. de Renzi, Naples, 1852-59.
[200] Universities in the Middle Ages, Vol. II, Part II, p.
712, by H. Rashdall, Oxford, 1895. The most exhaustive work on the
University of Salerno and its famous doctors, men and women, is a joint
work in five volumes entitled Collectio Salernitana; ossia Documenti
Inediti e Trattati di Medicina appartenenti alla scuola Salernitana,
raccolti e illustrati, by G. Henschel, C. Daremberg e S. Renzi, Naples,
1852-59. Cf. also, Storia Documentata della Scuola Medica di Salerno,
by S. de Renzi, Naples, 1857; L'École de Salerne, by C. Meaux, with
introduction by C. Daremberg, Paris, 1880, and Piero Giacosa's Magistri
Salernitani Nondum Editi, Turin, 1891.
[201] Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis, Tom. II, p.
150, and pp. 255 and 267, by Denifle and Chatelain, Paris, 1889-1891.
[202] "Mulier antea permitteret se mori, quam secreta
infirmitatis sui homini revelare propter honestatem sexus muliebris et
propter verecundiam quam revelando pateretur." Chartularium
Universitatis Parisiensis, Tom. II, p. 264, Paris, 1891.
[203] It may interest the reader to know that the first two
women to get the doctorate in the Paris School of Medicine were Miss
Elizabeth Garret, an English woman, and Miss Mary Putnam, an American.
The first woman permitted to practice in the Paris hospitals was
likewise an American, Miss Augusta Klumpke, of San Francisco.
[204] "Possunt et vir et fœmina medici esse." Cf.
Chiappelli, Medicina negli Ultimi Tre Secoli del Medio Evo, Milan,
1885.
[205] Quoted in Woman's Work and Woman's Culture, p. 87,
Josephine E. Butler, London, 1869. Dom Gasquet in his English Monastic
Life, p. 175, tells us that in the Wiltshire convents "the young maids
learned needlework, the art of confectionery, surgery—for anciently
there were no apothecaries or surgeons; the gentlewomen did cure their
poor neighbors—physic, drawing, etc."
[206] The first woman to receive the doctorate of medicine in
Germany was Frau Dorothea Christin Erxleben. Hers, however, was a wholly
exceptional case, and required the intervention of no less a personage
than Frederick the Great. In 1754, Frau Erxleben, who had made a
thorough course of humanities under her father, presented herself before
the faculty of the University of Halle, where she passed an oral
examination in Latin which lasted two hours. So impressed were the
examiners by her knowledge and eloquence that they did not hesitate to
adjudge her worthy of the coveted degree, which was accorded her by
virtue of a royal edict.


Her reception of the doctorate was made the occasion of a most
enthusiastic demonstration in her honor. Felicitations poured in upon
her from all quarters in both prose and verse. One of them, in lapidary
style, runs as follows:


This, freely translated, adverts to the fact that an event, which before
had been witnessed only in Italy, was then being celebrated in Germany
for the first time, and was, for that very reason, specially deserving
of commemoration.
[207] "Nemo masculus aut fœmina, seu Christianus vel Judæus,
nisi Magister vel Licentiatus in Medicina foret, auderet humano corpori
mederi in physica vel in chyrurgia." Marini, Archiatri Pontifici, Tom.
I, p. 199, Roma, 1784.
[208] Thomas Aquinas, the Angel of the Schools, who had taught
in Salerno, and was well acquainted with the leading universities of
Europe, was wont to say "Quattuor sunt urbes cæteris præeminentes,
Parisius in Scientiis, Salernum in Medicinis, Bononia in legibus,
Aurelianis in actoribus—" there are four preëminent cities: Paris, in
the sciences; Salerno, in medicine; Bologna, in law; Orleans, in actors.
Op. 17. De Virtutibus et Vitiis, Cap. ult.


The mediæval poet, Galfrido, expressed the same idea in verse when he
wrote:

[209] It may be remarked that it was a woman, Lady Mary
Montagu, who introduced inoculation with small-pox virus into Western
Europe, and that it was also a woman—a simple English milkmaid—who
communicated to Jenner the information which led to his discovery of a
prophylactic against small-pox. But of far greater importance was the
introduction into Europe of that priceless febrifuge and
antiperiodic—chinchona bark. This was due to the Countess of Chinchon,
vicereine of Peru. Having been cured by its virtues of an aggravated
case of tertian fever in 1638, while living in Lima, she lost no time,
on her return to Spain, in making known to the world the marvelous
curative properties of the precious quinine-producing bark. The powder
made from the bark was most appropriately called Pulvis Comitessæ—the
countess's powder—and by this name it was long known to druggists and
in commerce. Thanks to Linnæus, the memory of the gracious lady will
always be kept green, because her name is now borne by nearly eight
score species of the beautiful trees which constitute the great and
incomparable genus Chinchona. See A Memoir of the Lady Ana de Osorio,
Countess of Chinchon, and Vice-Queen of Peru, by Clements R. Markham,
London, 1874.
[210] Pioneer Work in Opening the Medical Profession to
Women, p. 70, by Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell, London, 1895.
[211] Ibid., p. 91.
[212]
[213] Op. cit., p. 241.
[214] For an interesting account of the long campaign for the
admission of women to medical schools and practice, see Medical
Women—A Thesis and a History, by Dr. Sophia Jex-Blake, Edinburgh,
1886.


For a more elaborate work on women in medicine, the reader may consult
with profit, Histoire des Femmes Médecins, by Mlle. Melanie Lepinska,
Paris, 1900.
[Pg 309]
Archæology, in its broadest sense, is one of the most recent of the
sciences, and may be said to be a creation of the nineteenth century. In
its restricted sense, however, it dates back to the beginning of the
Italian Renaissance. For it was at this period that the collector's zeal
began to manifest itself, and that were brought together those priceless
treasures of ancient art which are to-day the pride of the museums of
Rome and Florence. It was then that Pope Sixtus IV and Julius II, his
nephew, laid the foundations of the great museums of the Capitol and the
Vatican, and enriched them with such famous masterpieces as the Ariadne,
the Nile, the Tiber, the Laocoön and the Apollo Belvidere. Their example
was quickly followed by such cardinals as Ippolito d'Este, Fernando de'
Medici, and by representatives of the leading princely houses of the
Italian peninsula. In rapid succession the palaces of the Borghese,
Chigi, Pamphili, Ludovisi, Barbarini and Aldobrandini became filled with
the choicest Greek and Roman antiques. In the course of time many of
these treasures found their way to the museums of Venice, Madrid, Paris,
Munich and Dresden, while still others were purchased by wealthy art
connoisseurs in various parts of Europe and Great Britain.
In the beginning these antiques in marble and bronze were used chiefly
for decorative purposes. "Courts, stairs, fountains, galleries and
palaces were adorned with statues, busts, reliefs and sarcophagi applied
in such a manner as[Pg 310] to become incorporated in contemporary art and
thereby to gain fresh life."[215]
These treasures of antiquity, statues, bas-reliefs, mosaics, coins,
medals, busts, sarcophagi, and productions of ceramic art, although at
first used almost exclusively for decorating palaces and villas and
enriching museums, were eventually to become of inestimable value in the
study of the history of art and the civilization of Greece and Rome, as
well as of the various nations of antiquity with which they had come
into contact. Besides this, they supplied the necessary raw material not
only for classical archæology, but also for that more comprehensive
science of archæology which deals with the art, the architecture, the
language, the literature, the inscriptions, the manners, customs and
development of our race from prehistoric times until the present day.
Among the women who took a prominent part in collecting material toward
the advancement of archæologic science were those illustrious ladies—as
celebrated for their knowledge and culture as for their noble lineage
and their patronage of men of letters—who presided over the brilliant
courts of Urbino, Mantua, Milan and Ferrara.
Preëminent among these were Elizabetta Gonzaga, Duchess of Urbino, and
Isabella d'Este, Marchioness of Mantua. The palace of the former—"that
peerless lady who excelled all others in excellence"—was famous for its
precious antiques in bronze and marble, but above all for its superb
collection of rare old books and manuscripts in Greek, Latin and Hebrew.
Isabella d'Este, who was through life the most intimate friend of
Elizabetta Gonzaga, was acclaimed by her contemporaries as "the first
lady in the world." She was a true daughter of the Renaissance, in the
heart of which she was brought up; and "the small, passing incidents of[Pg 311]
her everyday life are to us memorials of the classic age when the gods
of Parnassus walked with men."[216] She was an even more enthusiastic
collector than the Duchess of Urbino, and her magnificent palace in
Mantua was filled with the choicest works of Greek and Roman art that
were then procurable.
She has been described as one who secured everything to which she took a
fancy. She had but to hear of the discovery of a beautiful antique, a
rare work in bronze or marble uncovered by the spade of the excavator,
when she forthwith made an effort to procure it for her priceless
collection. If that was not possible, she would not rest until she could
secure something else even more precious. She aimed at supremacy in
everything artistic and intellectual, and would be content with nothing
short of perfection. Hence it is that her collection of antiques, like
those of her friend, the Duchess of Urbino, is rightly regarded as
having been of singular value in preparing the way for the foundation of
scientific archæology—a foundation that was laid by the eminent German
scholar, Winckelmann, in the eighteenth century by the publication of
his masterly work—History of the Art of Antiquity.
The first woman of eminence to take an active part in archæologic
excavation was the youngest sister of Napoleon Bonaparte, "the
beautiful, clever and ambitious Caroline." When Joachim Murat became
king of Naples, after his brother-in-law, Joseph Bonaparte, had in 1808
been transferred to the throne of Spain, his wife, Queen Caroline, gave
at once a new impetus to the work of the excavation of Pompeii along the
lines planned a few years before by the eminent Neapolitan scholar,
Michele Arditi. She exhibited the keenest interest in the work, and the
notable discoveries which were made under her inspiring supervision of
this important undertaking show how much[Pg 312] classical archæology owes to
her intelligent and munificent patronage.
Queen Caroline proved her interest in the excavations that were to
contribute so much to our knowledge of antiquity "by appearing
frequently at Pompeii and stimulating the workmen to greater efforts.
She frequently spent entire days, during the great heat of summer, at
the excavations, to encourage the lazy workmen and to reward them in the
event of success. The funds were increased so as to make the employment
of six hundred men possible. The Street of Tombs was next uncovered,
forming a complete and solemn picture, greatly impressing the beholder
even to-day. For the first time a complete outline of an ancient
marketplace and its surroundings could be obtained. The market, closed
and inaccessible to wheeled traffic, was surrounded by a colonnade
filled with monuments, with the great temple in the background, and
beyond the arcades were other temples or public buildings, among the
principal being the stately Basilica. Constant and increased efforts
were thus crowned by important results. The Queen did not withhold
generous assistance. The French architect, Fr. Mazois, received from her
fifteen hundred francs while preparing his monumental work at
Pompeii."[217]
It is not too much to say that Queen Caroline's archæological work at
Pompeii was as far-reaching in its results as was that of her
illustrious brother in the land of the Pharaohs. It drew in the most
impressive manner the attention of the world to the vast treasures of
art which lay concealed under the earth-covered ruins of the once noted
cities of the ancient world, and stimulated scholars and learned
societies to undertake similar researches in[Pg 313] Sicily, Greece,
Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and the almost forgotten islands of the Ægean
Seas.
While this energetic sister of the great Napoleon was occupied in
bringing to light those priceless treasures of art which had for
seventeen centuries lain beneath the ashes of Vesuvius, a bright,
refined, spirituelle young girl, born in Dublin and bred in England,
was unconsciously preparing herself for a brilliant career in the branch
of archæology known as Christian iconography. Her name was Anna Murphy,
better known to the world as Mrs. Jameson. At an early age she gave
evidence of unusual intelligence, and she had hardly attained to
womanhood when she was noted for her knowledge of languages and for her
remarkable attainments in art and literature. Numerous journeys to
France, Italy and Germany and a systematic study in the great museums
and art galleries of these countries, but, above all, her association
with the most distinguished scholars of Europe, completed her education
and prepared her for those splendid works on Christian art which have
made her name a household word throughout the world.
Mrs. Jameson was a prolific writer, but those of her works on which her
fame chiefly rests are the ones which are classed under the general
title, Sacred and Legendary Art. They treat of God the Father and Son,
of the Madonna and the Saints, as illustrated in art from the earliest
ages to modern times. So masterly and exhaustive was her treatment of
the difficult subjects discussed in this chef d'œuvre of hers that
no less an authority than the eminent German archæologist, F. X. Kraus,
writes of this elaborate production as follows:
"Neither before nor since has the subject matter of this work been
handled with such skill and thoroughness. The older iconographic works
were mere dilettanteism. For the first time since classical archæology
had applied the principles[Pg 314] of modern criticism to Greek and Roman
iconography, and had presented an example of scientific treatment free
from such reproach, was a serious iconography of our early Christian
monuments possible. Mrs. Jameson was the first to attempt this on a
large scale. It was clear to her—and here lay the advance which her
work reveals—that in order to accomplish her colossal task two things
must be realized. She must not build on a foundation of material that is
imperfect or brought together in a haphazard way. She must not only see
and test everything available in the way of monuments, but she must
likewise place the productions of literature and poetry beside those of
the plastic arts. It was clear to her, also, that, in this case, one
would throw light on the other, and that the investigator who would lay
claim to the name of archæologist must, moreover, study the spirit of a
people in all its monumental and literary manifestations.
"Mrs. Jameson strove to learn the mind and the mode of early Christian
times from the works of the Fathers. She saw in the hymns of the Middle
Ages and in the writings of the mystics the sources of the art ideas
which disclose themselves in the wall and glass paintings of our
cathedrals and in the entrancing creation of a Fiesole. She had also the
special advantage of being thoroughly imbued with Dante's ideas of the
plastic arts of the Middle Ages.
"And all this is evidenced in a form which exhibits neither dry
dissertation nor wearisome nomenclature. Each of her articles is a
little essay. It teaches us what place the Madonna, or St. Catherine, or
some other saint has held in the memory and in the imagination of past
centuries. We behold the sainted forms flitting before our eyes in all
the charm of poetic perfection which was given them by the childlike
phantasy of the Middle Ages, and in all the power which they exercised
over men's minds, and which, however we may view the religious side of
the[Pg 315] question, certainly had the effect of creating forms of infinite
beauty and pictures of unspeakable reality."[218]
When we recollect that Mrs. Jameson achieved so much before the
foundations of Christian archæology had been fully laid; before de
Rossi's monumental publications had supplied the means of interpreting
early Christian sculpture; before critics and archæologists were at one
regarding the significance of early Christian and Middle Age symbolism,
or agreed on the principles that were to guide to a correct
understanding of the pictures of Roman and Gothic art, and while
students were yet in ignorance as to the real influence of Byzantine art
on that of western Europe, we cannot but wonder at the courage and the
energy of this gifted woman in undertaking and in bringing to a happy
issue a work which, even to-day, with all our increased facilities and
greater array of facts, would be considered a herculean task.
As we read her admirable volumes on Sacred and Legendary Art we can,
as did a close friend of hers, see the enraptured author "kindle into
enthusiasm amidst the gorgeous natural beauty, the antique memorials and
the sacred Christian relics of Italy," and we are prepared to believe,
with the same friend, that there was not "a cypress on the Roman hills,
or a sunny vine overhanging the southern gardens, or a picture in those
vast somber galleries of foreign palaces, or a catacomb spread out, vast
and dark, under the martyr churches of the City of the Seven Hills,
which was not associated with some vivid flashes of her intellect and
imagination." And we can also understand how "the strange, mystic
symbolism of the early mosaics was a familiar language to her," and why
she should experience special delight when she found herself "on the
polished marble of the Lateran floor or under the gorgeously somber
tribune of the Basilica of Santa Maria[Pg 316] Maggiore, reading off the quaint
emblems or expounding the pious thoughts of more than a thousand years
ago."[219]
It is gratifying to know that Queen Victoria recognized the surpassing
merits of this noble woman by placing her on the civil list, and that
our own Longfellow was able to say of her masterpiece, Sacred and
Legendary Art, "It most amply supplies the cravings of the religious
sentiment of the spiritual nature within."
A countrywoman of Mrs. Jameson and her contemporary, who also deserves
an honorable place in the literature of archæology, is Louise Twining.
Although inferior in intellectual attainments and literary activity to
the accomplished author of Sacred and Legendary Art, her two works on
Types and Figures of the Bible Illustrated by Art and Symbols and
Emblems of Early Mediæval Christian Art have given her a well-deserved
reputation on the Continent as well as in the British Isles. The latter
volume Mrs. Jameson herself declares in her Legends of the Madonna to
be "certainly the most complete and useful book of the kind which I know
of."
A third woman who has won fame for her sex in the island kingdom in the
domain of archeology is Miss Margaret Stotes. Her activities, however,
have been chiefly confined to the antiquities of Ireland, on which she
is a recognized authority.
The notable part she took in editing Lord Dunraven's great work, Notes
on Irish Architecture, established her reputation on a firm basis.
Among her other important works are Early Christian Art in Ireland and
Christian Inscriptions in the Irish Language, chiefly collected and
drawn by George Petrie, one of the annual volumes of the Royal
Historical and Archæological Association of Ireland. This work has
justly been described as an epoch-making contribution to Christian
epigraphy and to our rapidly[Pg 317] developing knowledge of Keltic language
and literature. The learned Dr. Krauss, than whom there is no more
competent judge, in referring to this splendid performance, does not
hesitate to affirm, "No man could have done better than this brave
college girl, whom I would wish to greet across the Channel with a
cordial Macte virtute."
The women archæologists so far mentioned, with the exception of Queen
Caroline Murat, were conspicuous as writers rather than active
investigators in the field. There have been, however, quite a number who
have won distinction as "archæologists of the spade"—women who, either
alone or with their husbands, have superintended excavations in
different lands, which have yielded results of untold scientific value.
Among the most conspicuous of these are Mme. Sophia Schliemann, Mme.
Dieulafoy and the enterprising Yankee girl, Miss Harriet A. Boyd.
Of these the first named is the wife of the late Dr. Henry Schliemann,
who immortalized himself by his famous excavations at Troy, Tiryns and
Mycenæ—enterprises which solved for us the great problem of nearly
thirty centuries and demonstrated in the most startling manner "the
truth of the foundations on which was framed the poetical conception
that has for thousands of years called forth the enchanted delight of
the educated world." During his meteoric career as an archæologist,
Schliemann was able to realize the dreams of his youth, and succeeded in
unveiling the mystery that had so long hung over Sacred Ilios, and to
give the heroes of the Iliad a local habitation on the rediscovered
Plain of Troy. And his glorious achievements we must credit largely to
that brave and devoted woman—his wife—who was ever at his side to
share in his trials and labors and to raise his drooping spirits in
hours of depression, or when hostile criticism treated him as a
visionary in the pursuit of a chimera.
Mrs. Schliemann is a Greek lady who was born and bred under the shadow
of the Acropolis and a worthy descendant[Pg 318] of those proud Athenian women
who wore the golden grasshopper in their hair as a sign that they were
natives of the City of the Violet Crown. She was not only dowered with
intellectual gifts of a high order, but she was also her husband's most
congenial companion and sympathetic friend in all his literary work,
while she was his very right hand in those glorious enterprises at
Hissarlik and Mycenæ, which secured for both of them undying fame.
Dr. Schliemann was the first to attest the never-failing assistance
which he received from this noble woman who, as he informs us, was "a
warm admirer of Homer" and "with glad enthusiasm" joined her husband in
executing the great work which he had conceived in his early boyhood.
Usually they worked together, but at times Mrs. Schliemann superintended
a gang of laborers at one spot while the Doctor was occupied at another
in the immediate vicinity. Thus it was she who excavated the heroic
tumulus of Batieia in the Troad—that Batieia who, according to Homer,
was a queen of the Amazons and undertook a campaign against Troy.[220]
Mme. Jane Dieulafoy is noted as the collaborator of her husband, Marcel
Dieulafoy, in the important archæological mission to Persia that was
entrusted to him by the French government. The results of this mission,
in which Mme.[Pg 319] Dieulafoy had a conspicuous part, were published in Paris
in 1884 in five octavo volumes.
It was during this expedition to the ancient empire of Cyrus and
Artaxerxes that this indefatigable couple became interested in the ruins
of Susa, the ancient capital of the Persian kings. On their return to
France they succeeded in securing money and supplies for conducting
excavations among these ruins which, in the end, yielded results which
were, in some respects, as important as those which rewarded the labors
of the Schliemanns in Greece and Asia Minor.
So completely had Susa—the City of the Lilies—been buried and
forgotten for nearly two thousand years that even its site was almost as
much a matter of dispute as was that of ancient Troy. And yet it was one
of the greatest and richest cities of antiquity—the city of Esther and
Daniel, the city of the mighty Assuerus who reigned from India even unto
Ethiopia, over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces—the city where the
great Alexander celebrated his nuptials with Statira, the daughter of
Darius, with a magnificent festival at which, according to Plutarch,
"there were no fewer than nine thousand guests, to each of which he gave
a golden cup for the libations."
In December, 1884, the two brave and venturesome explorers were on their
way to Susa with high hopes, but not without a full knowledge of the
difficulties and dangers that they would have to confront among the
fanatical nomads of Arabistan, where the very name of Christian inspires
rage and horror. It meant, as Mme. Dieulafoy herself[Pg 320] tells us, "to
cross the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, the Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf
and the deserts of Elam three times in less than a year; to pass whole
weeks without undressing; to sleep on the bare ground; to struggle
nights and days against robbers and thieves; to cross rivers without a
bridge; to suffer heat, rain, cold, mists, fever, fatigue, hunger,
thirst, the stings of divers insects; to lead this hard and perilous
existence without being guided by any interest other than the glory of
one's country."[221]
In spite, however, of all the opposition which they encountered among
the fanatical Mussulmans of Arabistan and of the dreadful sufferings
incident to living in a desert where it was at times impossible to
secure the necessaries of life, their mission was successful, and their
account of their finds in the ancient capital of Elam was as thrilling
in its way as anything reported of the excavations at Troy or Pompeii.
Their splendid collection of specimens of ancient Persian art and
architecture, now on exhibition in the Museum of the Louvre, testifies
to the successful issue of their expedition and to their indomitable
energy in conducting researches under the most untoward
conditions.[222][Pg 321] So highly did the French government value the part
Mme. Dieulafoy had taken in this arduous enterprise that it conferred on
her a distinction rarely awarded to a woman for scientific work—that of
Chevalier of the Legion of Honor.
As an archæologist, the gifted and energetic American woman, Miss
Harriet Boyd—now Mrs. C. H. Hawes—has achieved an international
reputation for her remarkable excavations in the island of Crete. She is
a frequent contributor to archæological journals; but it is upon her
splendid work in the field that her fame will ultimately rest.
Her first work of importance was undertaken as Fellow of the American
School of Classical Studies at Athens. This was in 1900, and the field
of her investigations was the Isthmus of Hierapetra in Crete. Here she
excavated numerous tombs and houses of the early Geometric Period,
circa 900 B.C., and paved the way for those brilliant discoveries
which rewarded her labors during the following three years.
The investigations conducted during these three years under Miss Boyd's
directions yielded results of transcendent value. Assisted by three
young American women—the Misses B. E. Wheeler, Blanche E. Williams, and
Edith H. Hall—she superintended the work of more than a hundred native
employees whom she had on her payroll. By good fortune in the choice of
a site for excavation and by well-directed efforts she was soon able to
unearth one of the oldest of Cretan cities and to expose to view the
ruins of what was probably one of the ninety cities which Homer tells us
in his Odyssey graced the land of Crete—"a fair land and a rich, in the
midst of a wine-dark sea."
So remarkable were the finds in this long-buried Minoan town and so well
preserved are its general features that it has justly been called the
Cretan Pompeii. It antedates by long centuries the oldest cities of
Greece and was a[Pg 322] flourishing center of commerce ages before the heroes
of the Iliad battled on the plains of Troy.
It is not too much to say that the extraordinary discoveries made by
this enterprising Yankee girl at Gournia, no less than those made by
British and Italian archæologists at Knossos and Phæstos, have
completely revolutionized our ideas respecting the state of culture of
the inhabitants of Crete during the second and third millenia before the
Christian era. They have thrown a flood of light on the origins of
Mediterranean culture, and have, at the same time, supplied material for
a study of European civilization that was before entirely wanting.
An enduring monument to Miss Boyd's ability as an archæologist is her
notable volume containing an account of her excavations at Gournia,
Vasilike and other prehistoric sites on the Isthmus of Hierapetra. It
will bear comparison with any similar productions by the Schliemanns or
the Dieulafoys. A later work on Crete, the Forerunner of Greece, which
she wrote in collaboration with her husband, Mr. C. H. Hawes, is also a
production of recognized merit. As a study on the origin of Greek
civilization it opens up many new vistas in pre-history and illumines
many questions that were before involved in mystery.
Besides Mrs. Hawes, three other American women have achieved marked
distinction by their archæological researches. These are Mrs. Sarah
Yorke Stevenson, Miss Alice C. Fletcher and Mrs. Zelia Nuttall.
Mrs. Stevenson has long been identified with the progress of
archæological research, especially with that in Egypt and the
Mediterranean. A prominent member of many learned societies, she is
likewise a writer and lecturer of note. She enjoys the distinction of
being the first woman whose name appears as a lecturer on the calendar
of the University of Harvard. In acknowledgment of her scholarly ability
and eminent services in the development of its Department of Archæology,
the University of Pennsylvania[Pg 323] has conferred upon her the honorary
degree of Doctor of Science.
That American women have not been behind their sisters in Europe in
their enthusiasm for archæological investigation is evinced by the
researches and writings of Miss Alice C. Fletcher and Mrs. Zelia
Nuttall, both of whom enjoy an international reputation in the learned
world.
Miss Fletcher's chosen field of labor has been in ethnology and
anthropology. Her studies of the folk lore and the manners and customs
of various tribes of North American Indians have a distinct and
permanent value, while those of her contributions which have been
published by the Smithsonian Institution and the Bureau of
Ethnology—contributions based on personal knowledge of a long residence
among the tribes she writes about—show that she has exceptional talent
for the branches of archæology to which she has devoted many years of
earnest and successful study.
Mrs. Nuttall is the daughter of an American mother and an English
father. Thanks to the care that was bestowed on her education by her
parents and to her long residence in the different countries of Europe,
she is proficient in seven languages. This knowledge of tongues has been
of inestimable advantage to her in her researches in European libraries
and in those historical and archæological investigations which have
rendered her famous. She has devoted special attention to the early
history, languages, religions and calendar systems of the primitive
inhabitants of Mexico and Central America, in all of which she is a
recognized authority.
When, some years ago, the mysterious ruins of Mexico began to attract
the special attention of archæologists, Mrs. Nuttall was selected by the
University of California as the field director of the commission which
it sent to pursue archæological researches in this Egypt of the New
World. A more competent or a more enthusiastic director could[Pg 324] not have
been chosen. Her finds in the Pyramids of the Sun and Moon at
Teotihuacan and elsewhere in our sister republic were especially
important. In recognition of her achievements President Porfirio Diaz
nominated Mrs. Nuttall honorary professor in the Mexican National
Museum. She was also offered the position of curator of the
archæological Museum of Mexico; but this office she declined. She holds
membership in a large number of learned societies in America and Europe
and is a frequent contributor to numerous magazines on historical and
archæological subjects. She has had the good fortune to discover a
number of important manuscripts illustrating the early history of
Mexico. Chief among these are a Hispano-American manuscript which she
dug out of one of the libraries of Madrid and another which was found in
a private collection in England and reproduced in facsimile in this
country. In honor of its fair discoverer it is now known as the Codex
Nuttall, and is regarded by experts as one of the most precious records
of ancient Mexico.
What is probably Mrs. Nuttall's most valuable contribution to
archæological science is her erudite work entitled The Fundamental
Principles of Old and New World Civilizations. It is a comparative
research based on a study of the ancient Mexican, religious,
sociological and calendar systems, and represents thirteen years of
assiduous labor. It is a worthy monument to the scientific ability of
this gifted Americanist, and one which brilliantly illumines some of the
most controverted points of comparative archæology.
The Nestor of women archæologists is Donna Ersilia
Caetani-Bovatelli—the daughter of the famous Dante scholar, the late
Duke Don Michel Angelo Caetani-Sermonetta. Since the days of Boniface
VIII, whom Dante scornfully denounced as lo principe de' Pharisei, the
family of the Caetani has been one of the most illustrious of the[Pg 325] Roman
nobility, and is to-day ranked with those of the Colonna and Orsini.
Besides his thorough knowledge of Dante, whose Divina Commedia he
regarded as the great artistic production of the human mind—a work
which he knew by heart—the Duke of Sermonetta was deeply versed in
philology and archæology. No one was more familiar with the history and
antiquities of Rome than he was, nor a greater friend and patron of
scholars of every nationality. The Palazzo Caetani was the resort of not
only the savants of Rome, but also and especially of those who gathered
from all quarters of the world to study the rich collections of
antiquities for which the Eternal City is so famous. Here the ablest
authorities in history and archæology discussed the latest discoveries
among the ruins of Greece and Asia Minor, and the most recent finds in
the Forum or amidst the crumbling ruins of the palaces of the Cæsars.
Having such a father and brought up in such an environment it is not
surprising that Donna Ersilia acquired at an early age that taste for
archæology which was, as events proved, to constitute the chief
occupation of her long and busy life. Having enjoyed and studied
literature and the languages under the best masters in Rome, she was
thoroughly prepared for the work of deciphering Greek and Latin
inscriptions and for an intelligent study of the ancient monuments of
Italy and Hellas.
Her learned countryman, A. de Gubernatis, assures us that she has such a
thorough knowledge of Latin and Greek that she writes both with ease and
elegance, and that she is endowed with an admirable memory for philology
and archæology. Besides being a mistress of several modern languages,
she is also familiar with Sanscrit.
Since the death of her husband, in 1879, she has devoted all her time,
outside of that given to the care and education of her children, to the
pursuit of classical archæology, in which she has long been regarded as
an authority of the[Pg 326] first order. Her salon, unlike those of the
frivolous leaders of high life, has for many years been the favorite
rendezvous in Rome of learned men and women from every clime. Here were
seen the noted historians Gregorovius, Theodore Mommsen, and Giovanni
Battista de Rossi, the illustrious founder of Christian archæology. Here
the representatives of the French, German and American schools of
archæology meet to exchange views on their favorite science and to find
inspiration in the knowledge and enthusiasm of their gifted hostess, who
always takes an active part in their recondite discussions, and never
fails to contribute her share to these meetings, which have contributed
so much toward the advancement of science and the history of antiquity.
Whether the discussion turn on the deciphering of an ancient text, the
inscription of a monument or a recently excavated sarcophagus, Donna
Ersilia's opinion is eagerly sought, and her judgment is generally
unerring.
This cultured and erudite daughter of sunny Italy has been a prolific
writer on her favorite branch of research. Besides contributing to such
publications as the Nuova Antologia and the bulletins of the
archæological commissions in Rome, she has found time to prepare for the
press a number of volumes of the highest value on divers questions of
Roman and Greek archæology.
It is interesting, in this connection, to note the fact that, after Mme.
Curie had been refused admittance into the French Academy, one of the
members of this institution, who had voted against her on the ground
that she was a woman, had occasion to attend a meeting of the Academy of
the Lincei in Rome, an association which plays the same rôle in Italy as
does the French Academy in France, and found, to his astonishment, that
the dean of the department of archæology, as well as the presiding
officer of some of the most important meetings of the academy, was a
woman. She was no other than Donna Ersilia Caetani-Bovatelli, the
learned and gracious scion of an honored[Pg 327] race. So taken aback was the
Gallic opponent of feminisme that he could but exclaim: "Diable!
they order things differently in Italy from what we do in la belle
France."
Considering their attainments and achievements, the two women who occupy
the highest place as archæologists in the English-speaking world are
Mrs. Agnes Smith Lewis and Margaret Dunlop Gibson. They are the twin
daughters of the Rev. John Smith, an English clergyman, and have long
enjoyed an enviable reputation among Scriptural scholars and
Orientalists.
During their youth they had the advantage of instruction under the best
masters, and, among other things, acquired a wide knowledge of the
modern and classical languages. Subsequent study and frequent visits to
Greece and the Orient made them proficient in modern Greek, Arabic,
Hebrew and Syriac. Becoming interested in the search for ancient
manuscripts, they resolved to make the long and arduous journey to the
Greek convent of St. Catherine on Mt. Sinai.
In the latter part of January, 1892, these two brave and enterprising
women left Suez for their destination in the heart of the Arabian
desert. They were accompanied only by their dragoman and Bedouin
servants. Eleven camels carried the two travelers, their baggage, tents
and provisions for fifty days. They had laid in supplies not only for
the two or three weeks they were to spend on the way to and from Sinai,
but also for the month they expected to remain at the Convent of St.
Catherine.
Arriving at the end of their journey, they were most cordially received
by the monks, who afforded them every facility for examining the
treasures of their unique and venerable library. They immediately set to
work, and before they left the room in which the manuscripts were
preserved they had made one of the most remarkable finds of the century.
For, in closely inspecting a dirty, forbidding old manuscript whose
leaves had probably not[Pg 328] been turned for centuries, they discovered a
palimpsest, of which the upper writing contained the biographies of
women saints, while that beneath proved to be one of the earliest copies
of the Syriac Gospels, if not the very earliest in existence.
No find since the celebrated discovery by Tischendorf of the Sinaitic
Codex, in the same convent nearly fifty years before, ever excited such
interest among Scriptural scholars or was hailed with greater
rejoicings. It was by all Biblical students regarded as an invaluable
contribution to Scriptural literature, and as a find which "has doubled
our sources of knowledge of the darkest corner of New Testament
criticism." To distinguish it from the Codex Sinaiticus, the precious
manuscript brought to light by Mrs. Lewis has been very appropriately
named after the fortunate discoverer, and will hereafter be known as the
Codex Ludovicus.[223]
Another find of rare importance made by the gifted twin sisters was a
Palestinian Syriac lectionary similar to the hitherto unique copy in the
Library of the Vatican. A[Pg 329] special interest attaches to this lectionary
from the fact that it is written in the language that was most probably
spoken by our Lord.
Among other notable discoveries of Mrs. Lewis and her sister during the
four visits[224] which they made to Mt. Sinai and Palestine between the
years 1892 and 1897 were a number of manuscripts in Arabic and a portion
of the original Hebrew manuscript of Ecclesiastes which was written
about 200 B.C. Previously the oldest copies of this book of the Old
Testament were the Greek and Syriac versions.
What is specially remarkable about the discoveries made by Mrs. Lewis
and Mrs. Gibson is that they were able to make so many valuable finds
after the convent library at Mt. Sinai had been so frequently examined
by previous scholars. The indefatigable Tischendorf made three visits to
this library and had but one phenomenal success. But neither "he nor any
of the other wandering scholars who have visited the convent attained,"
as has been well said, "to a tithe of the acquaintance with its
treasures which these energetic ladies possess."
But more remarkable than the mere discovery of so many invaluable
manuscripts, which was, of course, an extraordinary achievement, is the
fact that these manuscripts, whether in Syriac, Arabic or Hebrew, have
been translated, annotated and edited by these same scholarly women.
Already more than a score of volumes have come from their prolific pens,
all evincing the keenest critical acumen[Pg 330] and the highest order of
Biblical and archæological scholarship. The reader who desires a popular
account of their famous discoveries should by all means read Mrs.
Gibson's entertaining volume, How the Codex Was Found, and Mrs. Lewis'
charming little work entitled, In the Shadow of Sinai. As to those
men—and the species is yet far from extinct—who still doubt the
capacity of women for the higher kinds of intellectual effort, let them
glance at the pages of the numerous volumes given to the press by these
richly dowered women under the captions of Studia Sinaitica and Horæ
Semiticæ; and, if they are able to comprehend the evidence before them,
they will be forced to admit that the long-imagined difference between
the intellectual powers of men and women is one of fancy and not one of
reality.[225]
And yet, strange to relate, while Mrs. Lewis and Mrs. Gibson were
electrifying the learned world by their achievements[Pg 331] in the highest
form of scholarship, the slow-moving University of Cambridge was gravely
debating "whether it was a proper thing to confer degrees upon women,"
and preparing to answer the question in the negative. The fact that
there were "representatives of the unenfranchised sex at their gates who
had gathered more laurels in the field of scholarship than most of those
who belong to the privileged sex" did not appeal to the university dons
or prevent them from putting themselves on record as favoring a
condition of things which, at this late age of the world, should be
expected only among the women-enslaving followers of Mohammed.
The saying that "a prophet hath no honor in his own country" was
fulfilled to the letter in the case of the two[Pg 332] women who had shed such
luster on the land of their birth. While foreign institutions were vying
with one another in showering honors on the two brilliant Englishwomen,
with whose praises the whole world was resounding, the University of
Cambridge was silent. The University of St. Andrews conferred on them
the degree of LL.D., while conservative old Heidelberg, casting aside
its age-old traditions, made haste to honor them with the degree of
Doctor of Divinity. In addition to this, Halle made Mrs. Lewis a Doctor
of Philosophy. One would have thought that sheer shame, if not patriotic
spirit, would have compelled the university in whose shadows the two
women had their home, and in which Mrs. Lewis' husband had held for
years an official appointment, to show itself equally appreciative of
superlative merit and equally ready to reward rare scholarship,
regardless of the sex of the beneficiaries. But no. The illustrious
archæologists and Biblical scholars were women, and this fact alone was
in the estimation of the Cambridge authorities enough to withhold from
them that recognition which was so spontaneously accorded them by the
great universities of the Continent.
Nor was this the only instance of the kind. While the celebrated twin
sisters just referred to were so materially contributing to our
knowledge of Biblical lore, another Englishwoman, Jane E. Harrison, who
lived within hearing of the church bells of Cambridge, was lecturing to
delighted audiences in Newnham College on the history, mythology and
monuments of ancient Athens, and writing those learned works on the
religion and antiquities of Greece which have given her so conspicuous a
place among modern archæologists.[226] But, as in the case of her
distinguished[Pg 333] neighbors, the discoverers of the Codex Ludovicus, the
degrees she was honored with came not from Cambridge, with which,
through her fellowship in Newnham, she was so closely connected.
And while this gifted lady was deserving so well of science and
literature, the undergraduate students of Cambridge, following the cue
given by the twenty-four hundred graduates who had just rejected the
proposal to give honorary degrees to women who could pass the required
examinations, were giving an exhibition of rowdyism which far surpassed
that which, a few years before, had so disgraced the University of
Edinburgh, when the same question of degrees for women was under
consideration.
According to the report of an eye witness of the turbulent scene at
Cambridge, "The undergraduate students appeared to be, as a body,
viciously opposed to the proposal to give degrees to women, and became
fairly riotous. They hooted those who supported the reform and fired
crackers even in the Senate House and made the night lurid with bonfires
and powder. They put up insulting effigies of girl students, and such
mottoes as 'Get you to Girton, Beatrice. Get you to Newnham. Here is no
place for maids!'"
Verily, when such scenes are possible in one of the world's great
intellectual centers—a place where, above all others, women should
receive due recognition for their contributions toward the progress of
knowledge—one is constrained to declare that what we call civilization
is still far from the ideal. And, when one witnesses the total
indifference of institutions like Cambridge and the French Academy to
the splendid achievements of women like Mrs. Lewis, Mrs. Gibson and Mme.
Curie, one cannot but exclaim in words Apocalyptic: "How long, O Lord,
holy and true," is this iniquitous discrimination against one-half of
our race to endure? O Lord, how long?
[215] A. Michælis, A Century of Archæological Discoveries, p.
6, New York, 1908.
[216] The Most Illustrious Ladies of the Renaissance, p. 152,
by Christopher Hare, London, 1904.
[217] Michælis, Op. cit., p. 20, Cf. also Fiorelli's
Pompeinarum Antiquitatum Historia, Vol. I, Pars. III, Naples, 1860.
Arditi characterized Queen Caroline's interest in the excavations as
"entusiasmo veramente ammirabile."
[218] Frauenarbeit in der Archæologie in Deutsche Rundschau,
March, 1890, page 396.
[219] Memoirs of the Life of Anna Jameson, pp. 296-297, by
her niece, Geraldine Macpherson, London, 1878.
[220] Ilios, the City and Country of the Trojans, pp.
657-658, by Dr. Henry Schliemann, New York, 1881.


As an illustration of Mrs. Schliemann's devotion to the work which has
rendered her, as well as her husband, immortal, a single passage from
the volume just quoted, p. 261, is pertinent. Referring to the
sufferings and privations which they endured during their third year's
work at Hissarlik, Dr. Schliemann writes as follows:


"My poor wife and myself, therefore, suffered very much since the icy
north wind, which recalls Homer's frequent mention of the blasts of
Boreas, blew with such violence through the chinks of our house-walls,
which were made of planks, that we were not even able to light our lamps
in the evening, while the water which stood near the hearth froze into
solid masses. During the day we could, to some degree, bear the cold by
working in the excavations; but, in the evenings, we had nothing to keep
us warm except our enthusiasm for the great work of discovering Troy."


So high was Dr. Schliemann's opinion of his wife's ability as an
archæologist that he entrusted to her—as well as to their daughter,
Andromache, and son, Agamemnon—the continuation of the work which death
prevented him from completing.
[221] See Mme. Dieulafoy's graphic account of the expedition in
a work which has been translated into English under the title, At Susa,
the Ancient Capital of the Kings of Persia, Narrative of Travel Through
Western Persia and Excavations Made at the Site of the Lost City of the
Lilies, 1884-1886, Philadelphia, 1890.


See also her other related work—crowned by the French
Academy—entitled, La Perse, La Chaldée et la Susiane, Paris, 1887.
[222] Among the specimens secured were two of extraordinary
beauty and interest. One of them is a beautiful enameled frieze of a
lion and the other, likewise a work in enamel, represents a number of
polychrome figures of the Immortals—the name given to the guards of the
Great Kings of Persia. Both are truly magnificent specimens of ceramic
art, and compare favorably with anything of the kind which antiquity has
bequeathed to us. Commenting on the pictures of the Persian guards, Mme.
Dieulafoy writes: "Whatever their race may be, our Immortals appear fine
in line, fine in form, fine in color and constitute a ceramic work
infinitely superior to the bas-reliefs, so justly celebrated, of Lucca
della Robbia." Op. cit., p. 222.
[223] One passage in this codex bears so strongly on a leading
argument of this work that I cannot resist the temptation to give it
with Mrs. Lewis' own comment:


"The piece of my work," she writes, In the Shadow of Sinai, p. 98 et
seq., "which has given me the greatest satisfaction, consists in the
decipherment of two words in John IV, 27. They were well worth all our
visits to Sinai, for they illustrate an action of our Lord which seems
to be recorded nowhere else, and which has some degree of inherent
probability from what we know of His character. The passage is 'His
disciples came and wondered that with the women he was standing and
talking'....


"Why was our Lord standing? He had been sitting on the wall when the
disciples left Him; and, we know that He was tired. Moreover, sitting is
the proper attitude for an Easterner when engaged in teaching. And an
ordinary Oriental would never rise of his own natural free will out of
politeness to a woman. It may be that He rose in His enthusiasm for the
great truths He was uttering; but, I like to think that His great heart,
which embraced the lowest of humanity, lifted Him above the restrictions
of His race and age, and made Him show that courtesy to our sex, even in
the person of a degraded specimen, which is considered among all really
progressive peoples to be a mark of true and noble manhood. To shed even
a faint light upon that wondrous story of His tabernacling amongst us is
an inestimable privilege and worthy of all the trouble we can possibly
take."
[224] Mrs. Gibson, unaccompanied by her sister, has since made
two more visits to Mt. Sinai in order to complete the work so
auspiciously begun.
[225] The following partial list of the works of these erudite
twins on subjects connected with Scripture and Oriental literature gives
some idea of their extraordinary attainments and of their prodigious
activity in researches that are usually considered entirely foreign to
the tastes and aptitudes of women.


Some Pages of the Four Gospels Retranscribed From the Sinaitic
Palimpsest, with a translation of the whole text by Agnes Smith Lewis.


An Arabic Version of St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians,
Galatians and part of Ephesians. Edited from a ninth century MS. by
Margaret Dunlop Gibson.


Apocrypha Sinaitica. Containing the Anaphora Pilati in Syriac and
Arabic: the Syriac transcribed by J. Rendel Harris, and the Arabic by
Margaret Dunlop Gibson; also two recensions of the Recognitions of
Clement, in Arabic, transcribed and translated by Margaret Dunlop
Gibson.


An Arabic Version of the Acts of the Apostles and the Seven Catholic
Epistles, from an eighth or ninth century MS., with a treatise on the
Triune Nature of God and translation. Edited by Margaret Dunlop Gibson.


Apocrypha Arabica, Edited by Margaret D. Gibson, containing 1, Kitab al
Magall or the Book of the Rolls; 2, The Story of the Aphikia Wife of
Jesus Ben Sira (Carshuni); 3, Cyprian and Justa, in Arabic and Greek.


Select Narratives of Holy Women, from the Syro-Antiochene or Sinai
Palimpsest, as written above the Old Syriac Gospels in A. D. 778.
Translation by Agnes Smith Lewis.


Apocrypha Syriaca Sinaitica, being the Protevangelium Jacobi and
Transitus Mariæ, from a Palimpsest of the fifth or sixth century.
Edited by Agnes Smith Lewis.


Forty-One Facsimiles of Dated Christian Arabic Manuscripts, with Text
and English Translation, arranged by Agnes Smith Lewis and Margaret
Dunlop Gibson, with introductory observations in Arabic calligraphy by
the Rev. David S. Margoliouth.


The Didascalia Apostolorum in Syriac, edited from a Mesopotamian MS,
with various readings and collations of other MS, by Margaret Dunlop
Gibson.


The Arabic Version of the Acta Apocrypha Apostolorum, edited and
translated by Agnes Smith Lewis, with fifth century fragments of the
Acta Thomæ, in Syriac.


The Gospel of Isbodad in Syriac and English, by Margaret D. Gibson.


Acta Mythologica Apostolorum in Arabic, with translation by Agnes
Smith Lewis.


For an elaborate and sympathetic account of the labors and discoveries
of Mrs. Lewis and her sister, the reader is referred to an article from
the pen of the learned Professor V. Ryssel, in the Schweizerische
Theologische Zeitschrift, XVI, Jahrgang, 1899.
[226] For an evidence of this learned lady's competency to deal
with the most recondite stores of history and archæology, the reader is
referred to two of her later works, viz., Primitive Athens as Described
by Thucydides, Cambridge, 1906, and Prolegomena to the Study of Greek
Religion, Cambridge University Press, 1903.
[Pg 334]
"There have been very learned women as there have been women warriors,
but there have never been women inventors."[227] Thus wrote Voltaire
with that flippancy and cocksureness which was so characteristic of the
author of the Dictionnaire Philosophique—a man who was ever ready to
give, offhand, a categorical answer to any question that came before him
for discussion. His countryman, Proudhon, expressed the same opinion in
other words when he wrote, Les femmes n'ont rien inventé, pas mème leur
quenouille—women have invented nothing, not even their distaff.
Had these two writers thoroughly sifted the evidence available, even in
their day, for a proper consideration of this interesting subject, they
would, both of them, have reached a very different conclusion from that
which is expressed in the sentences just quoted. Had they consulted the
records of antiquity, they would have learned that most of the earliest
and most important inventions were attributed to women; and, had they
studied the reports of explorers among the savage tribes of the modern
world, they would have found that these early legends and traditions[Pg 335]
regarding the inventions of women were fully confirmed by what was being
done in their own time. Man's first needs were food, shelter and
clothing; and tradition in all parts of the world is unanimous in
ascribing to woman the invention, in essentially their present forms, of
all the arts most conducive to the preservation and well-being of our
race.
In Egypt, as Diodorus Siculus informs us, the inventors of specially
useful things were, as a reward of their deserts, enrolled among the
gods, as were certain heroes among the ancient Greeks and Romans.
Foremost among these was Isis, who laid the foundation of agriculture by
the introduction of the culture of wheat and other cereals. Before her
time the Egyptians lived on roots and herbs. In lieu of these crude
articles of food, Isis gave them bread and other more wholesome
aliments. She invented the process of making linen and was the first to
apply a sail to the propulsion of a boat. To her also was attributed the
art of embalming, the discovery of many medicines and the beginnings of
Egyptian literature.
Even more prominent was Pallas Athene, one of the greatest divinities of
the Greeks. Virgil, in his Georgics, invokes her as
But not only was she regarded as the oleæ inventrix-inventress of the
olive—as Virgil phrases it, but also as the inventor of all
handicrafts, whether of women or men. Like Isis, she was deemed the
originator of agriculture and many of the mechanic arts. But, above all,
she was the inventor of musical instruments and those plastic and
graphic arts which have for ages placed Greece in the forefront of
civilization and culture.
From the beginning it was woman who first made use of wool and flax for
textile fabrics; and of this prehistoric[Pg 336] woman one can affirm what
Solomon, in his Book of Proverbs, said of the virtuous woman of his
day:
She was also the first one to weave cotton and silk. It was Mama Oclo,
the wife of Manco Capac, as the Inca historian, Garcilasso de la Vega,
tells us, who taught the women of ancient Peru "to sew and weave cotton
and wool and to make clothes for themselves, their husbands and
children."
And it was a woman, Se-ling-she, the wife of the emperor, Hwang-te, who
lived nearly three thousand years before Christ, to whom the most
ancient Chinese writers assign the discovery of silk. Her name is
perpetuated in the name China, the goddess of silkworms, and under this
appellation she still receives divine honors.
The preparation and weaving of silk were introduced into Japan by four
Chinese girls, and the new industry soon became there, as in China, one
of the chief sources, as it is to-day, of the country's wealth. To
perpetuate the memory of these four pioneer silk weavers the grateful
Japanese erected a temple in their honor in the province of Setsu.
According to tradition, the eggs of the silk moth and the seed of the
mulberry tree were conveyed to India, concealed in the lining of her
headdress, by a Chinese princess. She was thus instrumental in
establishing in the region watered by the Indus and the Ganges the same
industry which her countrywomen had introduced into the Land of the
Rising Sun.
Cashmere shawls and attar of roses, the costliest of perfumes, are
attributed to an Indian empress, Nur Mahal, whom her husband, in view of
her achievements, as well as[Pg 337] on account of his passionate love for her,
called "The Light of the World."[228]
And what shall we say of those exquisite creations of woman's brain and
hand—needle-point and pillow lace? These two inventions, like the
manufacture of silk, have given employment to tens of thousands of women
throughout the world; and, in such countries as Italy, Belgium and
France, where lace-making has received special attention, they have for
centuries been most prolific sources of revenue. Silk fabrics in ancient
Rome were worth their weight in gold. The finest specimens of point lace
are, even to-day, as highly prized as precious stones, and, like the
great masterpieces of plastic art, are handed down as heirlooms from
generation to generation. In no other instance, except possibly in the
hairspring of a watch, is there such an extraordinary difference in
value between the raw material and the finished product as there is in
the case of the finest thread lace.
A great sensation was caused in Italy a few decades ago when a humble
workwoman, Signora Bassani, succeeded in rediscovering the peculiar
stitch of the celebrated Venetian point, which had been lost for
centuries. She was at once granted a patent for her invention, which was
by her countrymen regarded as an event of national importance.
After painting and sculpture, probably no art has contributed more to
the development of the esthetic sense[Pg 338] among the nations of the world
than has the art whose chief tools are the needle and the bobbin in the
deft hands of a beauty-loving woman. If the name of the first lace-maker
had not been lost in the mists of antiquity, it is reasonable to suppose
that she, too, would long since have had a monument erected to her
memory, as well as the weavers of silk and makers of attar of roses and
cashmere shawls. She was surely as deserving of such an honor.
More conclusive information respecting woman as an inventor is, strange
as it may appear, afforded by a systematic study of the various races of
mankind which are still in a state of savagery. Such a study discloses
the interesting fact that woman, contrary to the declaration of
Proudhon, has not only been the inventor of the distaff, but that she
has furthermore—pace Voltaire—been the inventor of all the peaceful
arts of life, and the inventor, too, of the earliest forms of nearly all
the mechanical devices now in use in the world of industry.
Architecture, as well as many other things, was credited by the ancient
Greeks to Minerva. This was a poetical way of stating the fact—now
generally accepted by men of science—that women were the first
homemakers. But the first home was a very simple and a very humble
structure. When not a cave, it was a simple shelter made of bark or
skins, sufficient to afford protection to the mother and her child.
Subsequently it was a lodge made of earth, of stone or wattle work or
adobe.
Women were, in the light of anthropology, as well as in that of
mythology and tradition, the first to discover the nutritive and
medicinal values of fruits, seeds, nuts, roots and vegetables. They were
consequently the first gardeners and agriculturists and the first to
build up a materia medica. While men were engaged in the chase or in
warfare, women were gradually perfecting those divers domestic arts
which, in the course of time, became their recognized specialties. They
soon found that it was better to[Pg 339] cultivate certain food plants and
trees than to depend on them for nourishment in the wild state. This was
particularly true in the case of such useful and widely distributed
species as wheat, rice, maize, the yam, potato, banana and cassava.
At first most of these food products were used in the raw state, but
woman's quick inventive genius was not long in making one of the most
important and far-reaching discoveries—a method for producing fire. In
a certain sense this was the greatest discovery ever made, and the
Greeks showed their appreciation of the value of it by asserting that
fire was stolen from heaven. Considering its multifarious uses in
heating and cooking, thereby immensely adding to the comfort and
well-being of primitive man, we are not surprised that in certain parts
of the world fire has always been considered something sacred, and that
the old Romans instituted Vestal Virgins, and the ancient Peruvians
Virgins of the Sun, to preserve this precious element and have it ever
ready when required for sacrifice or for any of their various liturgical
functions. If any one ever deserved a "monument more durable than
bronze," it was the woman who, "on the edge of time," first drew the
Promethean spark from a piece of pyrites by striking it with flint or
produced it by the friction of two pieces of wood.
After building a home and establishing in it a fireplace for the
preparation of food, woman's next concern was to secure more raiment
than was afforded by the traditional fig leaf. This she found in the
bark of certain trees, in the fiber of hemp and cotton and in the wool
of sheep and goats. With these and her distaff she spun thread, and from
the thread thus obtained she was by means of her primitive
loom—likewise her invention—able to provide all kinds of textile
fabrics for clothing for herself and family.
But there was much more to invent before the home of[Pg 340] primitive man, or
rather primitive woman, could be considered as fairly equipped.
Furniture and culinary utensils were required, and these, too, were
provided by the deft and cunning fingers of woman. She was the first
potter and the first basketmaker; and anyone who has lived among the
savages of any land, especially among the aborigines in the interior of
South America, knows what an important part is played in domestic
economy by native basketry and ceramic ware. Both of these articles were
at first of the simplest character, but woman's innate esthetic sense
soon enabled her to produce those highly ornate specimens of pottery and
basketry that are so highly prized in the public and private collections
of this country and Europe.
The first device for converting grain into flour was, like the many
other articles already named, the invention of woman. Whether the simple
mortar and pestle of the North American Indian, or the Mexican metate
and muller, or the Irish quern, it was, in every case, the product of
woman's brain and handiwork, as it was also the basal prototype of our
most improved types of flouring mills. And so was the soapstone pot—the
predecessor of the iron or brass kettle—a woman's invention, as well as
many similar contrivances for preparing food.
But what is probably the most remarkable culinary invention of woman in
the state of savagery is her unique contrivance for converting the
poisonous root of the manihot utilissima—the staple food of tropical
America—into a wholesome and nutritious aliment. It is a bag, called
matapi, which serves both as a press and as a sieve. For the
inhabitants of the vast basins of the Amazon and the Orinoco, where the
chief articles of diet are derived from the manihot and the plantain,
this invention of woman is the most important ever made and ranks in
importance with the discovery by the same skilled food purveyor of the
dietetic value of manihot itself.[Pg 341]
The first knife was a woman's invention, as the arrow-head and the spear
point were the inventions of her hunter husband. It was in the beginning
a most primitive implement; but, whether in the form of a simple flake
of flint of obsidian, or in that of an Eskimo ulu—the woman's knife—it
was the archetype of all the forms of cutlery now in use. With this rude
knife the primitive housewife skinned and carved the game brought to her
by her male companion. With it she scraped the interior of the hide and
cut it up into articles of clothing. She was thus the first furrier and
tailor. With it she made the first sandals and moccasins, and, in doing
so, became the first shoemaker and the original St. Crispin.
To woman, the originator of the first home, is due also the invention of
the oven and the chimney. She was also the first maker of salt—that
all-important condiment and sanitary agent—and the first to obtain
nitre from wood ashes. She was the first engineer, as is evinced in her
invention of the parbuckle and in the bamboo conduit, which was the
predecessor of the great canals of Babylonia[229] and the imposing
aqueducts of ancient Rome.
Important, however, as are all the foregoing inventions, we must not
forget what was an equally important contribution by woman to the
welfare and progress of our race—the domestication of animals. No
discovery after that of artificially producing fire has contributed more
toward the development of our race than the taming of milk- and
fleece-bearing animals, like the cow, the sheep, the goat and the llama,
or of burden-bearing animals, like the horse, the ass, the camel and the
reindeer, or of hunting and watching animals like the faithful,
ubiquitous dog. For, in the first place, the domestication of these[Pg 342]
supremely useful animals diminished man's labor as burden bearers. It
likewise supplemented the fecundity of women and facilitated the
multiplication of the race, because it supplied to the child a
nourishment that previously could be obtained only from the mother, who
had been obliged to suckle her young several years longer than was
necessary after the friendly goat and cow came to her aid. Still another
consequence of the domestication of animals was that it immensely
diminished the amount of woman's care and labor, afforded her the
necessary leisure to develop the arts of refinement, and stimulated
intellectual growth in a way that otherwise would have been impossible.
It is often stated by certain writers who love to indulge in fanciful
speculations that women inventors got their ideas as home builders and
weavers and potters from nest-building birds, from web-weaving spiders,
and from clay workers like termites and mud wasps. Be this as it may,
the fact remains in all its inspiring truth that, in the matter of
industrialism, as opposed to the militancy of man, we can unhesitatingly
declare, with Virgil, Dux femina facti—woman was the leader in all
the arts of peace—arts which have been slowly perfected through the
ages until they present the extraordinary development which we now
witness.
When we contemplate the splendid porcelain wares of Meissen and Sèvres,
or the countless varieties of cutlery produced in the factories of
Sheffield, or the beautiful textile fabrics from the looms of Lowell and
Manchester, or the delicate silks woven in the famous establishments of
Lombardy and Southern France, or the countless forms of footwear made in
Lynn and Chicago, or the exquisite furs brought from Siberia and the
Pribyloff Islands, and dyed in Leipsic and London, or the astonishing
output of food products from the factories of Pittsburgh and the immense
roller mills of Minneapolis, we little think that the colossal[Pg 343] wheels
of these vast and varied industries were set in motion by the inventive
genius of woman in the dim and distant prehistoric past.
And yet such is the case. Her handiwork from the earliest pottery may be
traced through its manifold stages from its first rude beginnings to the
most gorgeous creations of ceramic art. The primeval knife of flint or
obsidian has become the keen tool of tempered steel; the simple distaff
has issued in the intricate Jacquard loom; the metate and pestle
actuated by a woman's arm have, by a long process of evolution,
developed into our mammoth roller mills impelled by water power, steam
or electricity.[230]
But these extraordinary changes from the rude implements of prehistoric
time to the complicated machinery of the present is but a change of
kind, not one of principle. It is a change due to specialization of work
which became possible only when men, liberated from the avocations of
hunting and warfare, were able to take up the occupations of women, and
develop them in the manner with which we are now familiar.
Why men, rather than women, should have achieved this work of
specialization; whether it was due to social causes or to woman's
physical and mental organization, or to these various factors combined,
we need not inquire; but such is the fact. Whereas in primitive times
every woman having a home was a cook, a butcher, a baker, a potter, a
weaver, a cutler, a miller, a tanner, a furrier, an engineer, man, in
assuming the work which was originally exclusively feminine and
performed by one and the same person, has subdivided and specialized by
improved forms of machinery and otherwise, so that what is now done is
accomplished[Pg 344] more rapidly and to better purpose, and with
correspondingly greater results in the development of industry and in
the progress of civilization.
And the remarkable fact is that many of the most important of these
improvements due to specialization have been made within the memory of
those yet living, while still others have been originated in quite
recent years. Nevertheless, great as has been the work of specialization
and coördination in every department of human industry during the last
few decades, it is, to judge by the reports of the Patent Office, as yet
in little more than its initial stage.
We are now prepared for the consideration of the part woman has taken in
this specializing movement and for a discussion of her share in modern
inventions and in the improvements of those manifold inventions which
were due to her genius and industry untold ages ago. Considering the
short time during which her inventive mind has been specially active,
and the many handicaps which have been imposed on her, the wonder is not
that she has achieved so little in comparison with man, but rather that
she has accomplished so much.
The first woman to receive a patent in the United States was Mary Kies.
It was issued May 5, 1809, for a process of straw-weaving with silk or
thread. Six years later Mary Brush was granted a patent for a corset. It
seems to have been quite satisfactory, for no other patent for this
article of feminine attire was issued to a woman until 1841, when one
was granted to Elizabeth Adams. During the thirty-two years which
elapsed between the issuing of a patent to Mary Kies and Elizabeth
Adams, but twenty other patents were granted to women. The chief of
these were for weaving hats from grass, manufacturing moccasins,
whitening leghorn straw, for a sheet-iron shovel, a cook stove and a
machine for cutting straw and fodder.
During the decade following 1841, fourteen patents were[Pg 345] issued to as
many different women. Among the articles patented by them were an
ice-cream freezer, a weighing scale and a fan attachment for a rocking
chair. It was not recorded, however, that this last invention, valuable
as it was apparently, ever became particularly popular. But by far the
most remarkable of woman's inventions during this period was a submarine
telescope and lamp, for which a patent was awarded in 1845 to Sarah
Mather.
From 1851 to 1861, twenty-eight patents were issued to women—just twice
the number awarded them during the preceding decade. Most of these
patents were for articles of domestic use or feminine apparel. Four of
them, however, comprised a scale for instrumental music, for mounting
fluid lenses, a fountain pen and an improvement in reaping and mowing
machines.
The following decade is remarkable for the wonderful increase in the
number of inventions due to women, for there was a sudden jump from
twenty-eight to four hundred and forty-one patents awarded them between
the years 1861 and 1871. Women now began to have confidence in their
inventive faculties, and, no longer content with exercising their genius
on articles of clothing and culinary utensils, sewing, washing and
churning machines, they began to devote their attention to objects that
were entirely foreign to their ordinary home activities. This is clearly
evinced by the patents they obtained for such inventions as improvements
in locomotive wheels, devices for reducing straw and other fibrous
substances for the manufacture of paper pulp, improvements in corn
huskers, low-water indicators, steam and other whistles, corn plows, a
method of constructing screw propellers, improvements in materials for
packing journals and bearings, in fire alarms, thermometers, railroad
car heaters, improvements in lubricating railway journals, in conveyors
of smoke and cinders for locomotives, in pyrotechnic night signals,
burglar alarms, railway car safety apparatus, in apparatus[Pg 346] for punching
corrugated metals, desulphurizing ores and other similar inventions in
the domain of mechanical engineering, inventions that, at first blush,
would seem to be quite alien to the genius and capacity of woman.
From now on women's inventions in the United States increased at an
extraordinary rate, for from 1871 until July 1, 1888, when the first
government report was made on the patents issued to women inventors, she
had to her credit nearly two thousand inventions, many of which were of
prime importance.[231]
During the seven years following 1888 she was awarded twenty-five
hundred and twenty-six patents—more than the total number that had been
granted her during the preceding seventy-nine years. Between 1895 and
1910, three thousand six hundred and fifteen more patents were placed to
her credit, making a grand total for her first century of inventive
achievement of eight thousand five hundred and ninety-six patents. No
Patent Office reports are available since 1910, but the number of
inventions for which women have received patents since Mary Kies was
awarded hers on May 5, 1809, for "straw-weaving with silk or thread,"
cannot be far from ten thousand. This fact will, doubtless, be a
revelation to that large class of men who still seem to share the views
of Voltaire and Proudhon that women are incapable of inventing even the
simplest article of domestic use.
The following story well illustrates the prevailing ignorance regarding
the part women have taken in the invention of certain articles that are
so common that most people think they were never patented.
"I was out driving once with an old farmer in Vermont," writes Mrs. Ada
C. Bowles, "and he told me,[Pg 347] 'You women may talk about your rights, but
why don't you invent something?' I answered, 'Your horse's feed bag and
the shade over his head were both of them invented by women.' The old
fellow was so taken aback that he was barely able to gasp, 'Do tell!'"
Had he investigated further he would have found that the flynet on his
horse's back, the tugs and other harness trimmings, the shoes on his
horse's feet[232] and the buggy seat he then occupied were all the
inventions of women. He would, doubtless, also have discovered that the
currycomb he had used before starting out on his drive, as well as the
snap hook of the halter and the checkrein and the stall unhitching
device were likewise the inventions of members of that sex whose
capacity he was so disposed to depreciate; for women have been awarded
patents—in some instances several of them—for all the articles that
have been mentioned. He might furthermore have learned that the fellies
in his buggy wheels and his daughter's side saddle had been made under
women's patents; and that, to complete his surprise and confusion, the
leather used in his harness had been sewn by a machine patented by a
woman who was not only an inventor but who was also for many years the
manager and proprietor of a large harness factory in New York City.
What particularly arrests one's attention in reading the Patent Office
reports is not only the large number of inventions by women, but also
the very wide range of the devices which they embrace. It is not
surprising to find them inventing and improving culinary utensils, house
furniture and furnishings, toilet articles, wearing apparel and
stationery, trunks and bags, toys and games, designs for printed and
textile fabrics, for boxes and baskets, screens, awnings, baby carriers,
musical instruments, appliances for[Pg 348] washing and cleaning, attachments
for bicycles and type-writing machines, art, educational and medical
appliances; for these things are in keeping with their proper métier;
but it is surprising for those who are not familiar with the history of
modern inventions to learn of the share women have had in inventing and
improving agricultural implements, building appurtenances, motors of
various kinds, plumbing apparatus, theatrical stage mechanisms, and,
above all, countless railway appliances from a coupling or fender to an
apparatus for sanding railroad tracks, or a device for unloading
boxcars.
Those who are still of the opinion of Voltaire and Proudhon—and their
name is legion—respecting woman's inventive powers, might be willing to
accord to her the capacity to design a new form of clothes pin, or hair
crimper, or rouge pad, or complexion mask, or powder puff, or baby
jumper; but they would limit her ability to contrivances of this
character. But what would these same people say if they were told that
over and above the things just mentioned for which many women have
actually received patents, the much depreciated female sex had been
granted patents for locomotive wheels, stuffing boxes, railway car
safety apparatus, life rafts, cut-offs for hydraulic and other engines,
street cars, mining machines, furnaces for smelting ores,
sound-deadening attachments for railway cars, feed pumps and transfer
apparatus for traction cars, machines for driving hoops on to barrels,
apparatus for destroying vegetation on and removing snow from railroads,
coke crushers, artificial stone compositions, elevated railways, new
forms of cattle cars, dams and reservoirs, welding seams of pipes and
hardening iron, alloys for bell metal and alloys to resemble silver,
methods of refining and hardening copper, processes for concentrating
ores, improvement in elevators and designs for raising sunken vessels?
And yet, incredible as it may appear to these scoffers at woman's
genius, patents for all these inventions,[Pg 349] methods and processes—many
of them of exceeding value—and for hundreds of others of a similar
nature, have been issued to women during recent years. And the activity
of the fair inventors, far from abating, is becoming daily more
pronounced, and promises to reward their efforts with far greater
triumphs. Indeed, women are becoming so active in the numerous fields of
invention—even in such unlikely ones as metallurgy and civil,
mechanical and electrical engineering—that they bid fair to rival men
in what they have long regarded as their peculiar specialty.
In 1892 a woman in New York was granted two patents, one for a process
of malting beer and the other for hooping malt liquors. These
inventions, however, are not so foreign to the avocation of woman as
they at first appear. For, if we may believe the teachings of ethnology
and prehistoric archæology in this matter, women were the first brewers.
The one, therefore, who two decades ago secured the two patents just
mentioned was but taking up anew an occupation in which her sex
furnished the first invention many thousand years ago.
An instructive fact touching woman's inventive achievements is that her
fullest success is coincident with her enlarged opportunities for
education, and began with the breaking down of the prejudices which so
long existed against her having anything to do with the development of
the mechanical or industrial arts. When one recollects that the public
schools of Boston, established in 1642, were not open to girls until a
century and a half later, and then only for the most elementary branches
and for but one-half the year; and that girls did not have the benefit
of a high school education in the center of New England culture until
1852; and when one furthermore recalls the attitude of the general
public toward women and girls extending their activities beyond the
nursery and the kitchen, it is easy to understand that there was not
much encouragement[Pg 350] for them to exercise their inventive talent, even if
they had felt an inclination to do so.
The experience of Miss Margaret Knight, of Boston, who in 1871 was
awarded a valuable patent for making a paper-bag machine is a case in
point and well illustrates some of the difficulties that women inventors
had to contend with only a few decades ago.
"As a child," she writes to a friend, "I never cared for the things that
girls usually do; dolls never had any charms for me. I couldn't see the
sense of coddling bits of porcelain with senseless faces; the only
things I wanted were a jackknife, a gimlet and pieces of wood. My
friends were horrified. I was called a tomboy, but that made very little
impression on me. I sighed sometimes because I was not like other girls,
but wisely concluded that I couldn't help it, and sought further
consolation from my tools. I was always making things for my brothers.
Did they want anything in the line of playthings, they always said,
'Mattie will make them for us.' I was famous for my kites, and my sleds
were the envy and admiration of all the boys in town. I'm not surprised
at what I've done; I'm only sorry I couldn't have had as good a chance
as a boy, and have been put to my trade regularly."
Even after she had demonstrated her skill as an inventor, Miss Knight
had to encounter the skepticism of the workmen to whom she entrusted the
manufacture of her machines. They questioned her ability to superintend
her own work, and it was only her persistency and remarkable competency
that ultimately converted their incredulity into respect and admiration.
Since women have come into the possession of greater freedom than they
formerly enjoyed, and have been afforded better opportunities of
developing their inventive faculties, many of them have taken to
invention as an occupation, and with marked success. They find it the
easiest and most congenial way of earning a livelihood, and not a[Pg 351] few
of them have been able thereby to accumulate comfortable fortunes,
besides developing industries that have given employment to thousands of
both sexes.
Thus the straw industry in the United States is due to Miss Betsy
Metcalf, who, more than a century ago, produced the first straw bonnet
ever manufactured in this country. Since then the industry which this
woman originated has assumed immense proportions. The number of straw
hats now made in Massachusetts alone, not to speak of those annually
manufactured elsewhere, runs into the millions.
Scarcely less wonderful is the industry developed by Miss Knight,
already mentioned, through her marvelous invention for manufacturing
satchel-bottom paper bags. Many men had previously essayed to solve the
problem which she attacked with such signal success, but all to no
purpose. So valuable was her invention considered by experts that she
refused fifty thousand dollars for it shortly after taking out her
patent.
Often what are apparently the most trivial inventions prove the most
lucrative. Thus, a Chicago woman receives a handsome income for her
invention of a paper pail. A woman in San Francisco invented a baby
carriage, and received fourteen thousand dollars for her patent. The
gimlet-pointed screw, which was the idea of a little girl, has realized
to its patentee an independent fortune. Still more remarkable is the
Burden horseshoe machine, the invention of a woman, which turns out a
complete horseshoe every three seconds and which is said to have
effected a saving to the public of tens of millions of dollars.
The cotton gin, one of the most useful and important of American
inventions—a machine that effected a complete revolution in the cotton
industry throughout the world—is due to a woman, Catherine L. Greene,
the wife of General Nathaniel Greene, of Revolutionary fame. After she
had fully developed in her own mind a method for separating[Pg 352] the cotton
from its seed, which was after her husband's death, she intrusted the
making of the machine to Eli Whitney, who was then boarding with her,
and who had a Yankee's skill in the use of tools. Whitney was several
times on the point of abandoning as impossible the task which had been
assigned to him, but Mrs. Greene's faith in ultimate success never
wavered, and, thanks to her persistence in the work and the putting into
execution of her ideas, her great undertaking was finally crowned with
success. She did not apply for a patent for her invention in her own
name, because so opposed was public opinion to woman's having part in
mechanical occupation that she would have exposed herself to general
ridicule and to a loss of position in society. The consequence was that
Whitney—her employee—got credit for an invention which, in reality,
belonged to her. She was, however, subsequently able to retain a
subordinate interest in it through her second husband, Mr. Miller.
This is only one of many instances in which patents, taken out in the
name of some man, are really due to women. The earliest development of
the mower and reaper, as well as the clover cleaner, belongs to Mrs. A.
H. Manning, of Plainfield, New Jersey. The patent on the clover cleaner
was issued in the name of her husband; but, as he failed to apply for a
patent for the mower and reaper, his wife was, after his death, robbed
of the fruit of her brain by a neighbor, whose name appears on the list
of patentees of an invention which originated with Mrs. Manning.
A few years ago men of science awoke to the startling fact that the
earth's supply of nitrates was being rapidly exhausted. It was then
realized that, unless some new store of this essential fertilizer could
be found, it would soon be impossible to provide the food requisite for
the world's teeming millions. What was to be done? Never was a more
important problem presented to science for[Pg 353] solution, and never did
science more quickly and efficaciously respond. It was soon recognized
that the earth's atmosphere was the only available storehouse for the
much-needed nitrogen. Forthwith scientists and inventors the world over
proceeded to tap this source of supply and to convert its vast stores of
nitrogen into the nitrates which are so indispensable to vegetable life.
To form some idea of the importance of the problem and the urgency of
its solution, it may be stated that the amount of fertilizer required
for the cotton crop alone in the Southern States in 1911 was no less
than three million tons. What, then, must have been the total amount
used through the world for cereals and other crops that need constant
fertilizing? The famous nitrate deposits of Chili could supply only a
small fraction of the stupendous amount required, and they, according to
recent calculations, cannot continue to meet the present demands on them
for more than a hundred years longer, at most.
The process involved, when once conceived, was simple enough, for it
merely required the conversion of the nitrogen of the air into nitric
acid, which in turn was employed in the production of nitrate of lime.
But, simple as it was, mankind had to wait a long time for its
origination, and action was taken only when necessity compelled. At
present there are numerous nitrate factories in France, Germany,
Austria, Sweden, Norway and the United States, and the output is already
enormous and constantly increasing. Electricity, that mysterious force
which has so frequently come to man's assistance during the last few
decades, is the agent employed.
But who was the originator of the idea of utilizing the atmosphere for
the production of nitrates? Who took out the first patent for a process
for making nitrates by using the nitrogen of the air? It was a
Frenchwoman—Mme. Lefebre, of Paris—long since forgotten. As early as
1859 she obtained a patent in England for her invention, but,[Pg 354] as the
need of fertilizers was not so urgent then as it is now, it was allowed
to drop into oblivion, and the matter was not again taken up until a
half-century later, when others secured the credit for an idea which was
first conceived by a woman who happened to have the misfortune to live
fifty years in advance of her time.
It were easy to extend the list of important inventions due to women and
of patents which were issued in the name of their husbands or other men;
to tell of inventions, too, of whose fruits, because they happened to be
helpless or inexperienced women, the real patentees were often robbed;
but the foregoing instances are quite sufficient to show what woman's
keen inventive genius is capable of achieving in spite of all the
restrictions put on her sex, and in spite of her lack of training in the
mechanic arts.
Had women, since the organization of our Patent Office, enjoyed all the
educational opportunities possessed by men; had they received the same
encouragement as the lordly sex to develop their inventive faculties;
had the laws of the country accorded them the rewards to which their
labor and genius entitled them, they would now have far more inventions
to their credit than those indicated in our government reports; and they
would, furthermore, be able to point to far more brilliant achievements
than have heretofore, under the unfavorable conditions under which they
were obliged to work, been possible. But when we recall all the
obstacles they have had to overcome and remember also the fact that most
of the patents referred to in the preceding pages have been secured by
women living in the United States—little being said of the modern
inventions of women in foreign countries—we can see that their record
is indeed a splendid one, that their achievements are not only worthy of
all praise, but also a happy augury for the future. When they shall have
the same freedom of action as men in all departments of activity in
which they exhibit special aptitude, when they shall have the same[Pg 355]
advantages of training and equipment and the prospect of the same
emoluments as the sterner sex for the products of their brainwork and
craftsmanship, then may we expect them to achieve the same distinction
in the mechanic arts as has rewarded their efforts in science and
literature; and then, too, may we hope to see them once more regain
something of that supremacy in invention which was theirs in the early
history of our race.
[227] "On a vu des femmes très savantes, comme en fût des
guerrières, mais il n'y en eut jamais d'inventrices." Dictionnaire
Philosophique, sub voce Femmes. Condorcet, in commenting on this
statement, remarks that "if men capable of invention were alone to have
a place in the world, there would be many a vacant one, even in the
academies."
[228] That marvelous structure known as the Taj Mahal—India's
noblest tribute to the grace and goodness of Indian womanhood—is
sometimes said to be a monument to the memory of Nur Mahal. This is not
the case. This matchless gem of architecture—


is a monument to Nur Mahal's niece and successor as empress,
Mumtaz-Mahal—The Crown of the Palace—who, like her aunt, was a woman
of rare beauty and talent and endeared herself to her people by her
splendid qualities of mind and heart.
[229] The inventor of canals as well as of bridges over rivers
and causeways over morasses was, according to Greek historians, the
famous Assyrian queen, Semiramis, the builder of Babylon with its
wonderful hanging gardens.
[230] Among the works which treat of the subject-matter of the
foregoing pages the reader may consult with profit, Woman's Share in
Primitive Culture, by O. T. Mason, London, 1895; Man and Woman, the
introductory chapter, by Havelock Ellis, London, 1898; and Histoire
Nouvelle des Arts et des Sciences, by A. Renaud, Paris, 1878.
[231] Cf. Women Inventors to whom patents have been granted by
the United States Government, Compiled under the Direction of the
Commissioner of Patents, Washington, 1888. See also subsequent reports
of the Patent Office.
[232] To one woman, Mary E. Poupard, of London, England, were
granted in a single year no less than three patents for horse-shoes—two
of the patents being for sectional and segmental horse-shoes.
[Pg 356]
One of the most interesting literary figures of the fifth century was
Caius Apollinaris Sidonius, who, after holding a number of important
civil offices, became the bishop of Clermont. The most valuable of his
extant works are his nine books of letters which are a mine of
information respecting the history of his age and the manners, customs
and ideals of his contemporaries.
In one of these letters, addressed to Hesperius, a young friend of his
who exhibited special talent in polite literature, he expresses a
sentiment which applies as well to the votary of science as to the man
of letters. Referring to the assistance which women had given to their
husbands and friends in their studies, he conjures him to remember that
in days of old it was the wont of Martia, Terentia, Calpurnia,
Pudentilla and Rusticana to hold the lamp while their husbands,
Hortensius, Cicero, Pliny, Apuleius and Symmachus, were reading and
meditating.[233]
This picture of women as light-bearers to the great orators and
philosophers just named is symbolic of them as the helpmates and
inspirers of men in every field of human activity and in every age of
the world's history. Always and everywhere, when permitted to occupy the
same social plane as men, women have been not only as lamps unto the[Pg 357]
feet and as lights unto the paths of their male compeers in the ordinary
affairs of life, but have also been their guiding stars and ministering
angels in the highest spheres of intellectual effort.
For nearly fifteen centuries St. Jerome has had the gratitude of the
church for his masterly translation, known as the Vulgate, of the Hebrew
Scriptures. But, had it not been for his two noble friends, Paula and
Eustochium, who were as eminent for their intellectual attainments as
they were for their descent from the most distinguished families of Rome
and Greece, there would have been no Vulgate. For they were not only his
inspirers in this colossal undertaking, but they were his active and
zealous collaborators as well.
Dante and Petrarch are acclaimed as the morning stars of modern
literature, but both of them owed their immortality to the inspiration
of two pure-minded and noble-hearted women.
In the concluding paragraph of his Vita Nuova—the most beautiful love
story ever written—Dante records his purpose to say of his inspirer,
the gentle, gracious Beatrice Portinari, "what was never said of any
woman." The outcome of this exalted purpose was the Divina Commedia, the
world's greatest literary masterpiece.
Petrarch, the father of humanism, is the first to give Laura de Noves
credit for his attainments as a poet. In one of his poems he sings:
Elsewhere in one of his prose dialogues with St. Augustine he declares,
"Whatever you see in me, be it little or much, is due to her; nor would
I ever have attained to this measure of name and fame unless she had
cherished[Pg 358] by those most noble influences that my feeble implanting of
virtues which nature had placed in this breast."[234]
A no less remarkable inspirer, but in an entirely different sphere of
activity, was the devout and spotless Italian maiden, Chiara Schiffi,
better known as St. Clara. She was, as is well known, the ardent
coöperator of St. Francis Assisi in his great work of social and
religious reform which has contributed so much toward the welfare of
humanity. But it is not generally known what an important part she had
in this great undertaking, and how she sustained the Poverello during
long hours of trial and hardship. It was during these periods of care
and struggle that we see how courageous and intrepid was "this woman who
has always been represented as frail, emaciated, blanched like a flower
of the cloister."
"She defended Francis not only against others but also against himself.
In those hours of dark discouragement which so often and so profoundly
disturb the noblest souls and sterilize the grandest efforts, she was
beside him to show the way. When he doubted his mission and thought of
fleeing to the heights of repose and solitary prayer, it was she who
showed him the ripening harvest with no reapers to gather it in, men
going astray with no shepherd to herd them, and drew him once again into
the train of[Pg 359] the Galilean, into the number of those who give their
lives as a ransom for many."[235]
It is under the shade of the olive trees of St. Damian, with his
sister-friend Clara caring for him, "that he composes his finest work,
that which Ernest Renan called the most perfect utterance of modern
religions sentiment, The Canticle of the Sun."[236]
This canticle, however, beautiful as it is, lacks, as has well been
remarked, one strophe. "If it was not upon Francis' lips, it was surely
in his heart:"
It was through the inspiration and influence of Theodora that the famous
Church of St. Sophia, that matchless poem in marble and gold, that
imperishable monument to the glory of the true God, came into existence.
It was through her that Justinian conceived the idea of those Pandects
and Institutes which constitute the greatest glory of his reign, and
which are the basis of the Code Napoleon and of all modern
jurisprudence.
It was to Vittoria Colonna that Michaelangelo dedicated many of the most
exquisite productions of his peerless genius. "He saw," as has been
said, "with her eyes and acted by her inspiration."
Almost every one of Chopin's compositions was inspired by women, and a
large proportion of them are dedicated to them. The same may be said of
Mozart, Mendelssohn, Schubert, Beethoven, Weber, Schumann and other
illustrious composers. All these sons of genius believed with
Castiglione that "all inspiration must come from woman;"[Pg 360] that she had
been expressly created and sent into the world to inspire them with
intelligence and creative power.
M. Clavière declares that "There is hardly a philosopher or a poet of
the sixteenth century whose pages are not illuminated or gladdened by
the smile of some high-born lady."[238]
What the brilliant Frenchman says of the influence of woman on the poets
and philosophers of a single century could with equal truth be said of
the poets and philosophers of every century from Anacreon and Plato to
the present day. And, still more, it can be predicated of woman's
inspiration and influence in every department of intellectual effort, in
art and architecture, in music and literature, in science in all its
departments, whether deductive or inductive.
It has been well said, "Were history to be rewritten, with due regard to
women's share in it, many small causes, heretofore disregarded, would be
found fully to explain great and unlooked-for results.... For it is not
in outward facts, nor great names, nor noisy deeds, nor genealogies of
crowned heads, nor in tragic loves, nor ambitious or striking heroism,
nor crime, that we find proofs of the constant and secret working
whereby woman most effectually asserts herself. Certainly she has played
her part in the outward and visible history of the world, but in that
history which is told and written, which is buried in archives and
revivified in books, woman's part is always small when set beside that
of her companion, man. She contributes but little, and at this she may
surely rejoice, to the tales of battles and treaties of successions and
alliances, of violence, fraud, suspicions and hatreds. But if the inward
history of human affairs could be described as fully as the outward
facts; if the story of the family could be told together with the story
of the nation; if human thoughts could with certainty be divined from
human deeds, then[Pg 361] the chief figure in this history of sentiment and
morals would certainly be that of Woman the Inspirer."[239]
This same statement would hold equally good if applied to the part taken
by women in the history of science. Their achievements have, in most
cases, been so overshadowed by those of men that their work has been
usually regarded as a negligible quantity. But when one considers the
mainsprings of actions, and examines the silent undercurrents which
escape the notice of the superficial observer, one finds, as in social
and political history, that the most important scientific investigations
are often conducted, and the most momentous discoveries are made, in
consequence of the promptings of some devoted woman friend, or in virtue
of the still, small voice of a cherished wife, or sister, who prefers to
remain in the background in order that all the glory of achievement may
redound to the man.
There have been, it may safely be asserted, few really eminent men in
science, as there have been few really eminent men in art or letters, or
in the great reform and religious movements of the world, who have not
been assisted by some woman light-bearer, as were Hortensius by Martia,
Tully by Terentia and Pliny by Calpurnia. There have been few that have
not, during hours of doubt and discouragement, been sustained and
stimulated as was Francis by Clara, and Jerome by Paula and Eustochium.
And there have been still fewer who have not had, like Petrarch and
Dante, their Laura or their Beatrice of whom each could say:
In the preceding chapters we have had notable examples of women whose
beneficent influence and coöperation have[Pg 362] enabled distinguished men of
science to achieve results that would otherwise have been impossible.
Among these—to mention only a few—were Mme. Lavoisier and Mme. Curie
in chemistry, Mme. Lapaute and Miss Herschel in astronomy, Mrs. Agassiz
and Mme. Coudreau in natural science and exploration, Mme. Schliemann
and Mme. Dieulafoy in archæology.
One of the most illustrious women inspirers of France was Catherine de
Parthenay, who, after attaining womanhood, became the brilliant Princess
de Rohan, and was recognized as one of the most learned and most
remarkable women of the sixteenth century. As a young girl she exhibited
rare intelligence and displayed special aptitude for the exact sciences.
For this reason her mother saw to it that her child had the benefit of
instruction under the ablest masters that could be secured.
The most noted of these was François Viète, the learned French
mathematician, who is justly regarded as the father of modern algebra.
In his day, especially in the higher classes of society, the education
given to women was often more thorough than that afforded to men. For
this reason, too, women not infrequently became distinguished in
astronomy, which was then usually known under the name of astrology.
Viète, in initiating his gifted pupil into the principles of this
science, became himself so enthusiastic a student of astronomy that he
determined to prepare an elaborate work on the subject—something on the
plan of the Almagest of Ptolemy—a work which he designated
Harmonicum Celeste.
In order that the instruction given his pupil might not be lacking in
precision, Viète wrote out, with the most scrupulous care, the lessons
designed for her benefit. The manuscripts containing these lessons were
long preserved among the family archives, but nearly all of them were[Pg 363]
unfortunately consigned to the flames during the French Revolution in
1793.
No one was more interested in Viète's mathematical researches—those
researches which have rendered him so famous in the history of
science—than was the Princess de Rohan. The former pupil was the first
to receive notice of her distinguished master's discoveries and the
first to congratulate him on his success.
It was to this cherished pupil, who always remained his friend and
benefactress, that Viète dedicated his important work on mathematical
analysis entitled In Artem Analyticam Isagoge. The words of the
dedication are a tribute to the learning and the genius of the pupil as
well as an expression of the gratitude of the teacher. It reads as
follows:
"It is to you especially, august daughter of Melusine, that I am
indebted for my proficiency in mathematics, to attain which I was
encouraged by your love for this science, as well as your great
knowledge of it, and by your mastery of all other sciences, which one
cannot too much admire in a person of your noble lineage."[240]
More interesting, and at the same time more pathetic, were the relations
of an Italian nun, Sister Maria Celeste, and the man whom Byron so
happily designates as
Sister Celeste, who was a Franciscan nun in the convent of St. Matthew,
in Arcetri, was the great astronomer's eldest and favorite daughter.
They were greatly attached to[Pg 364] each other, and the gentle religieuse was
not only her father's confidante and consoler in the hours of trial and
affliction, but was also his inspirer and ever-vigilant guardian angel.
She watched over him, not as a daughter over a father, but as a mother
watches over an only son.[241]
All this is beautifully exhibited in her one hundred and twenty-four
letters which were published in 1891 for the first time. A few of these
letters, it is true, were published as early as 1852 by Alberi, in his
edition of the complete works of Galileo, and others were given to the
press at subsequent dates; but the world had to wait more than two and a
half centuries for a complete collection of all the known letters of
this remarkable daughter of an illustrious sire.
These documents are precious for the insight they give into the sterling
character of a noble woman, but they are beyond price as sources of
information respecting the tenderly affectionate relations which existed
between her and one of the foremost men of science, not only of his own
age, but of all time. They show how he made her his confidante in all
his undertakings, and how she was his amanuensis, his counselor, his
inspirer; how her love was an incentive to the work that won for him
undying fame; how she was his support and comfort when suffering from
the jealousy of rivals or the enmity of those who were opposed to his
teachings.
These letters cover a period of nearly eleven years—the most momentous
years of her father's busy and troubled life. Now playful, quaint,
elfish, then serious, vivid, confidential, they show that the writer's
intelligence was as rare as her nature was loyal and affectionate. At
times she half-apologizes for the length of a letter, "but you[Pg 365] must
remember," she adds in excuse, "that I must put into this paper
everything that I should chatter to you in a week."
No daughter was ever prouder of her father or loved him with a more
abounding love. "I pride myself," she says, "that I love and revere my
dearest father more, by far, than others love their fathers, and I
clearly perceive that, in return, he far surpasses the greater part of
other fathers in the love which he has for me, his loved daughter."
When he was ill she prepared dishes and confections that she knew would
tempt his appetite. But she was not satisfied with looking after the
welfare of his body, for she took occasion to send with the cakes and
preserved fruits a sermonette for the benefit of his soul.
An extract from one of her letters gives an insight into the character
of this devoted daughter, who, Galileo says in a letter to his friend,
Elia Diodati, "was a woman of exquisite mind, singular goodness and most
tenderly attached to me."
"Of the preserved citron you ordered," she writes him on the nineteenth
of December, 1625, "I have only been able to do a small quantity. I
feared the citrons were too shriveled for preserving, and so they
proved. I send two baked pears for these days of vigil. But the greatest
treat of all I send you is a rose, which ought to please you extremely,
seeing what a rarity it is at this season. And with the rose you must
accept its thorns, which represent the bitter passion of Our Lord, while
the green leaves represent the hope we may entertain that, through the
same sacred passion, we, having passed through the darkness of this
short winter of our mortal life, may attain to the brightness and
felicity of an eternal spring in heaven, which may our gracious God
grant us through His mercy."[242]
[Pg 366]
She always insists upon his keeping her fully informed about his studies
and discoveries. She is particular, also, about receiving without delay
copies of his latest publications. "I beg you," she writes in one of her
letters, "to be so kind as to send me that book of yours which has just
been published, Il Saggiatore, so that I may read it; for I have a
great desire to see it."
On another occasion, after his difficulties with the Holy Office, when
she fancies her father is not keeping her fully informed about the
subject matter of his writings, she implores him to tell her on what
topic he is engaged, "if," she archly adds, "it be something I can
understand and you are not afraid that I will blab."
And on still another occasion Sister Celeste reminds her father of a
promise of his to send her a small telescope. From this we should infer
that she desired to repeat the observations on the heavenly bodies that
had created such a sensation in the learned world, and which had given
occasion for such acrimonious controversy.
In one of her earlier letters Sister Celeste calls her father's
attention to a promise of his to spend an afternoon with her and her
sister Arcangela, also a nun in the same convent. And, referring to one
of the regulations of the Franciscan cloister, she playfully observes:
"You will be able to sup in the parlor, since the excommunication is for
the table cloth"—O Sister Celeste!—"and not for the meats thereon."
What would one not give for a stenographic report of the conversations
held that afternoon in the convent garden of Arcetri, as father and
daughters leisurely strolled through the peaceful enclosure, all quite
oblivious of the fleeting hours? How interesting would be a faithful
record of the confidences exchanged at the frugal meal in the evening in
the humble parlor of S. Matteo! We would willingly exchange many of the
famous Dialoghi di Galileo[Pg 367] Galilei for a verbatim report of what
passed between Sister Celeste and the father whom she so idolized.[243]
Judging from her letters, she had many questions to ask him about his
studies, his experiments, his discoveries, his books, as well as about
more personal and domestic matters.
Although there is no documentary proof of the fact, yet there is every
reason to believe that Galileo had taken personal charge of the
education of this, his favorite daughter. She shared his taste for
science and inherited not a little of his genius. Such being the case,
we may well believe that a faithful account of their conversations of
that day would be not only of surpassing interest, but would also throw
a flood of light on many questions now ill understood. They would
certainly tend to fill up the numerous lacunæ caused by the
disappearance of the letters of Galileo, which he wrote in answer to
those of his ever-cherished daughter.[244]
[Pg 368]
They would also show more clearly than any facts now available what an
unbounded influence the gentle nun had over the greatest intellect of
his time, and would, more clearly than anything in her correspondence,
exhibit Sister Celeste as the efficient co-worker and the abiding
inspirer of the father of modern physics and astronomy.
But, although we have no record of this soul-communion between father
and daughter on the occasion in question; although we are deprived of
the invaluable letters which he wrote in reply to hers, we are,
nevertheless, from the evidence at hand, justified in regarding this
unique pair as being ever one in heart, aspirations and ideals, and
comparable in their mutual influence on each other with any of those
famous men and women who, through achievement on the one side and
inspiration and collaboration on the other, have ever been recognized as
the greatest benefactors of their race.
One of Galileo's countrymen, G. B. Clemente de Nelli, was right when he
declared that, had it not been for the assistance and consolation which
he received from Sister Celeste, Galileo would have succumbed to the
blows that were showered upon him during the most trying part of his
career. An indication of this is given in one of the letters written by
Sister Celeste in the last year of her life.[Pg 369]
While in a fit of despondency and imagining his friends had forgotten
him, Galileo, in a moment of bitterness, wrote in a letter to his
daughter: "My name is erased from the book of the living." "Nay," came
at once Sister Celeste's cheering reply, "say not that your name is
struck de libro viventium, for it is not so; neither in the greater
part of the world nor in your own country. Indeed, it seems to me that,
if for a brief moment your name and fame were clouded, they are now
restored to greater brightness, at which I am much astonished, for I
know that generally Nemo propheta acceptus est in patria sua. I am
afraid, however, if I begin quoting Latin, I shall fall into some
barbarism. But, of a truth, you are loved and esteemed here more than
ever."[245]
How much Sister Celeste was to her father in every way was not known
until after her premature death in her thirty-fourth year. He was never
the same man afterward. Disconsolate and broken, he fancied he heard the
voice of the daughter he so fondly loved resounding through the house.
Brooding over his great loss, the heart-broken old man writes to a
friend in words of infinite pathos, "Mi sento continuamente chiamare
della mia diletta figlioula—I continually hear myself called by my
dearly beloved daughter." The eighth of January, 1642, he answered her
call and went to join her in a better world.
Two other noted investigators, one of them a contemporary of Galileo,
owed much to the inspiration and encouragement which they received from
women. These were Descartes and Leibnitz. And the women that had the
most influence on them were representatives of royal families, who were
famous in their day for their love and knowledge and the extent of their
intellectual attainments.
One of the most noted of these was Elizabeth of Bohemia, Princess
Palatine. She was the favorite pupil of Descartes, and it was to her
that he dedicated his great work, Principia[Pg 370] Philosophiæ. She, he
declared, understood him better than any one else he had ever met, for
"in her alone were united those generally separated talents for
metaphysics and for mathematics which are so characteristically
operative in the Cartesian system."[246]
To this earnest student who was always absorbed in the mysteries of
metaphysics and the problems of geometry, Descartes could refuse
nothing. When distance separated them he continued his instructions by
correspondence. One of the results of this correspondence was his
treatise on Passions de l'Âme, in which he develops certain ethical
views suggested by the Vita Beata of Seneca.
Another distinguished pupil of Descartes who exercised a marked
influence over him was the celebrated daughter of Gustavus Adolphus,
Queen Christine of Sweden. A mistress of many languages and an ardent
votary of science, she was a munificent patron of scientific men, a
great number of whom she had attracted to her court. The most
distinguished of these was Descartes, to whom she was deeply attached,
and with whom she had planned great things for science in Sweden, when
his career was cut short by a premature death.
Not the least influence on the intellectual life of Leibnitz was Sophia
Charlotte, Queen of Prussia and mother of Frederick the Great. She was
the niece of Descartes' illustrious friend, Elizabeth of Bohemia, and,
as the pupil of Leibnitz, quite as gloriously associated as had been her
aunt with the father of Cartesianism.
Leibnitz was as distinguished by genius as his royal pupil was by birth.
Besides being eminent as a philosopher and[Pg 371] a statesman, he shared with
Newton the honor of discovering the calculus. Huxley pronounced him "a
man of science, in the modern sense, of the first rank," while the King
of Prussia declared of him, "He represents in himself a whole academy."
Through the coöperation of Sophia Charlotte he founded the Berlin
Academy of Sciences. For her he wrote one of the most notable of his
productions—his famed Theodicy.
It would be difficult to estimate the influence of this learned queen on
Leibnitz, but it was undoubtedly greater than any other single influence
whatever. Her death was the greatest loss he ever suffered, and when she
was no more, the beautiful Berlin suburb, Charlottenburg—named after
her—where he had been so happy in reading and philosophizing with his
illustrious pupil, lost all attraction for him.
A more striking illustration of woman's helpfulness is afforded in the
case of François Huber, the celebrated Swiss naturalist. Although blind
from his seventeenth year, he was able to carry on researches requiring
the keenest eyesight and the closest observation. This he was able to do
through the affectionate coöperation of his devoted wife, Marie Aimée.
When her friends tried to dissuade her from marrying Huber, to whom she
had been engaged for some time, saying he had become blind, her reply
was worthy of her generous and noble nature: "He then needs me more than
ever."
During the forty years of their married life her tenderness and devotion
to her husband were as unfailing as they were inspiring. He worked
through the eyes and hands of his wife as if they were his own. She was
his reader, his observer, his secretary, his enthusiastic collaborator
in all those investigations that have rendered him so famous. The blind
man devised the experiments to be made, and the quick-witted wife
executed them and recorded the[Pg 372] observations which supplied the material
for his epoch-making work on bees, entitled Nouvelles Observations sur
les Abeilles. So accurate are his descriptions of the habits of the
winged creatures, to the study of which he devoted the best years of his
life, that one would think his great work was the production, not of a
man who had been blind for a quarter of a century, when he wrote it, but
of one who was gifted with exceptional keenness of vision and powers of
observation.
"As long as she lived," exclaimed the great naturalist after his trusty
Aimée's death, "I was not sensible of the misfortune of being blind."
Nay, more. During her lifetime, when, though sightless, he was always so
happy in his work, he went so far as to aver that he would be miserable
were he to recover his eyesight. "I should not know," he declared, "to
what an extent a person in my condition could be beloved. Besides, to
me, my wife is always young, fresh and pretty, which is no light
matter." He could truly say of her, as Wordsworth said of his sister
Dorothy,
We hear much of the achievements of Galvani and Faraday in the domain of
electricity and electromagnetism, but little is said of the women to
whom they were so greatly indebted for their success and fame.
It was Galvani's wife who first directed his attention to the
convulsions of a frog's leg when placed near an electrical machine. This
induced him to make those celebrated investigations which led to the
foundation of a new science which has ever since been identified with
his name.
It was Mrs. Marcet's works on science—especially her Conversations on
Chemistry—that inspired Faraday with a love of science and blazed for
him that road in chemical[Pg 373] and physical experimentation which led to
such marvelous results. He was always proud to call her his first
teacher, and never hesitated to attribute to her that taste for
scientific research for which he became so preëminent. And it was his
devoted wife who was not only a helpmate but a soulmate as well for
nearly half a century, that had very much to do with the splendid
development of the germ which had been placed in his youthful mind by
Mrs. Marcet.
The same may likewise be asserted of the wives of two distinguished
geologists—Charles Lyell and Xavier Hommaire de Hell. Mrs. Lyell was
intimately associated with her husband in all his scientific
undertakings, and her ready intellect contributed immensely toward
securing for him that enviable position which he attained of being the
premier geologist of his century. Mme. Hommaire de Hell deserves special
mention in the history of geology for the invaluable assistance which
she gave her husband in the scientific exploration of the basin of the
Caspian Sea. Not only did she share his labors and perils in this then
wild part of the world, and collaborate with him in the preparation of
the report for which the French government conferred on him the Cross of
the Legion of Honor, but she also wrote unaided the two descriptive
volumes of their great work, Steppes de la Mer Caspienne. Her part of
this great undertaking received the special commendation of M.
Villemain, who was the minister of public instruction, and had she not
belonged to the disenfranchized sex, she, too, would have been decorated
with the Cross of the Legion of Honor.
All the world has heard of the daring explorations of Baker and
Livingstone in the Dark Continent, but how few are aware of the
important part taken in their great enterprises by their devoted and
heroic wives? Sir Samuel Baker immortalized himself by discovering Lake
Albert Nyanza, one of the main sources of the Nile, but in attaining[Pg 374]
this goal, which other explorers had in vain essayed to reach, he was
not alone. The companion of his triumph, as of his trials and hardships,
was Lady Baker, a woman who, although delicately reared, was as brave in
presence of danger as she was resourceful in trials and difficulties.
More than once her husband owed his life to her intrepidity and presence
of mind, when confronted by the treacherous savages of equatorial
Africa; and, if he achieved success where others failed, it was in no
slight measure due to her tact, her energy and perseverance in what
seemed at times a forlorn hope. "She had learned Arabic with him in a
year of necessary but wearisome delay; her mind traveled with his mind
as her feet had followed his footsteps." And, when after preliminary
toils without number, after braving dangers from climate, disease and
ruthless savages, they finally stood on the shore of that unknown sea
which was then first beheld by English eyes, she could, in contemplating
their achievements of which Albert Nyanza was the crowning glory,
exclaim with exaltation and truth, "Quorum pars magna fui."
When Livingstone lost, in the unexplored valley of the Zambesi, the
faithful wife who had been his inspiring companion in his wanderings in
darkest Africa, he lost completely that enthusiasm for deeds of high
emprise that before had been one of his leading characteristics. Writing
to his distinguished friend, Sir Roderick Murchison, he mournfully
declares: "I must confess this heavy stroke quite takes the heart out of
me. Everything that has happened only made me more determined to
overcome all difficulties; but after this sad stroke I feel crushed and
void of strength.... I shall do my duty still, but it is with a darkened
horizon that I again set about it."
The noted English naturalist, Frank Buckland, in speaking of the aid
afforded by his gifted mother to her distinguished husband, Dr.
Buckland, writes as follows: "During the long period that Dr. Buckland
was engaged[Pg 375] in writing the book which I now have the honor of editing,
my mother sat up night after night, for weeks and months consecutively,
writing to my father's dictation; and this often until the sun's rays,
shining through the shutters at early morn, warned the husband to cease
from thinking and the wife to rest her weary hand.
"Not only with the pen did she render material assistance, but her
natural talent in the use of her pencil enabled her to give accurate
illustrations and finished drawings, many of which are perpetuated in
Dr. Buckland's works. She was also particularly clever and neat in
mending broken fossils. There are many specimens in the Oxford Museum,
now exhibiting their natural forms and beauty, which were restored by
her perseverance to shape from a mass of broken and almost comminuted
fragments. It was her occupation also to label the specimens, which she
did in a particularly neat way; and there is hardly a fossil or a bone
in the Oxford Museum which has not her handwriting upon it.
"Notwithstanding her devotion to her husband's pursuits, she did not
neglect the education of her children, but occupied her mornings in
superintending their instruction in sound and useful knowledge. The
sterling value of her labors they now, in after life, fully appreciate,
and feel most thankful that they were blessed with so good a
mother."[247]
What has been said of the influence and coöperation of the women already
named may, with equal truth, be affirmed of numberless others of recent
as well as of earlier date. It is particularly true of the wife of the
naturalist Heller and of the great astronomer, Kepler. It is true of the
wife of the illustrious mathematician, the Marquis de l'Hôpital. She not
only shared her husband's talent for mathematics, but was of special
assistance to him in preparing[Pg 376] for the press his important Analyse des
Infiniment Petits. It is true of the wife of Asaph Hall, the
illustrious discoverer of the satellites of Mars. Often he was on the
point of abandoning the quest of these diminutive moons—which no one
had ever seen but which his calculations led him to believe really
existed—but he was encouraged by Mrs. Hall to continue his
observations, with the result that his labors and vigils were at last
rewarded by the startling discovery of Deimos and Phobos.
And there is Mme. Pasteur, who, in her way, was quite as important a
factor in the scientific career of her immortal husband as were the
women just mentioned in the lives of their husbands, to whose triumphs
they so materially contributed.
One of the great Frenchman's biographers has truly declared that "it is
impossible rightly to appreciate Pasteur's life without some
understanding of the immense assistance which he received in his home.
Whether in discussing forms of crystals, watching over experiments,
shielding her husband from all the daily fret of life, or busy at the
customary evening task of writing to his dictation, Madame Pasteur was
at once his most devoted assistant and incomparable companion. His
surroundings at home were entirely subordinated to his scientific life,
and his family shared with him both his trials and his triumphs. At the
time when Pasteur was engrossed with the study of anthrax, and, after
many difficulties and disappointments, had at length succeeded in
preparing a vaccine against it, he at once hurried from the laboratory
to communicate his great discovery first to his wife and daughter."[248]
[Pg 377]
It was particularly during his long and arduous researches on the
disease of silkworms that Pasteur found his wife's aid of incalculable
value. For Mme. Pasteur and her daughter then constituted themselves
veritable silkworm rearers. They collected mulberry leaves, sorted
larvæ, and were unremitting in their labors during the continuance of
this memorable investigation. And not only in the silk-producing
districts of Southern France were they thus occupied, but also in a
special laboratory in École Normale, after their return to Paris.
And, when in the midst of these researches, on the successful outcome of
which hinged one of the greatest sources of national wealth, the
indefatigable savant was stricken with paralysis and his life was for a
while despaired of, it was again his devoted helpmate that afforded him
solace in suffering and exercised a supervision over those experiments
which the great man was still conducting almost in the presence of
death.
That Pasteur's life was prolonged for a quarter of a century after the
terrible attack of hemiplegia in 1868, that he was able to unravel the
deep mysteries of microbian life, that he was able to make discoveries
whose economical value to France was, in the estimation of Professor
Huxley, more than sufficient to liquidate the immense indemnity of five
billion francs exacted from his country by Germany at the termination of
the Franco-Prussian war, that he was able, especially during these
fruitful twenty-five years, to render his "scientific life like a
luminous trail in the great night of the infinitely little in those
ultimate abysses of being where life is born," was, in great measure,
due to the unceasing care, the untiring vigilance and the sympathetic
collaboration of one of the most devoted of wives and most noble and
whole-souled of women.
What has been said of the influence and helpfulness of Mme. Pasteur can
be asserted with even greater truth of Elizabeth Agassiz and of Caroline
Herschel. For these[Pg 378] two women, apart from the assistance they gave to a
loved husband and an idolized brother, in the labors that made them so
famous, both achieved distinction for their contributions to the
sciences which they individually cultivated with such splendid results.
And had they elected to devote all their time to scientific research,
instead of giving the greater part of it to those to whom they were so
devotedly attached, who can tell how much more brilliant would have been
their achievements and how much greater would have been the fame they
would have won for themselves. Both of them were dowered in an eminent
degree with taste and talent for science, and had they chosen to make it
the sole object of their life work, there can be no doubt that their
personal contributions to natural history and astronomy would have been
far greater than they were. As it was, they were so overshadowed by
those for whom they labored with such unselfishness and loyalty that the
real value of their work is too often forgotten when there is question
of the scientific triumphs of Louis Agassiz and Sir William Herschel.
But they willed it so. They gladly effaced themselves that those whom
they loved with such a deep and abiding love might shine the more
brightly in the firmament of science. They preferred to spend and be
spent in strengthening the great workers and leaders with whose lives
their own were so thoroughly identified—"Inspiring them with courage,
keeping faith in their own ideas alive, in days of darkness
Both of these noble women had the same quality in common—absolute
devotion and unswerving faith in those to whose success and happiness
they had dedicated their lives. They sought nothing for themselves, they
thought nothing of themselves. They both had, to borrow the idea of
another,[Pg 379] an intense power of sympathy, a generous love of giving
themselves to the service of others, which enabled them to transfuse the
force of their own personality into the objects to which they dedicated
their powers.
In the preface of the joint work of Mr. and Mrs. Agassiz entitled A
Journey in Brazil, that delightful volume which throws such a flood of
light on the fauna and flora of the Amazon valley, occur the following
significant words regarding the share each had in producing the book:
"Our separate contributions have become so closely interwoven that we
should hardly know how to disconnect them." So was it with all their
undertakings. There was the same common interest, the same unity of
purpose, the same unselfish devotion to the cause of science during
those long years of toil which were so prolific in results of supreme
importance. Reading between the lines in A Journey in Brazil, and in
Louis Agassiz, His Life and Correspondence, written by Mrs. Agassiz,
we can easily fancy that the great naturalist owed as much, if not more,
to his wife's never-failing sympathy and inspiration as to her active
coöperation in his work, and we are ready to apply to her the words of
Longfellow when he sings:
As to Caroline Herschel as a helper and sustainer of her illustrious
brother, too much cannot be said. "In the days when he gave up a
lucrative career that he might devote himself to astronomy, it was owing
to her thrift and care that he was not harassed by the rankling
vexations of money matters. She had been his helper and assistant when
he was a leading musician; she became his helper and assistant when he
gave himself up to astronomy. By sheer force of will and devoted
affection she learned enough[Pg 380] of mathematics and of methods of
calculation, which to those unlearned seem mysteries, to be able to
commit to writing his researches. She became his assistant in the
workshop; she helped him to grind and polish his mirrors; she stood
beside his telescope in the nights of midwinter, to write down his
observations when the very ink was frozen in the bottle. She kept him
alive by her care; thinking nothing of herself, she lived for him. She
loved him and believed in him, and helped him with all her heart and
with all her strength. She might have become a distinguished woman on
her own account, for with the seven-foot Newtonian sweeper given her by
her brother she discovered eight comets first and last. But the pleasure
of seeking and finding for herself was scarcely tested. She 'minded the
heavens' for her brother; she worked for him, not for herself, and the
unconscious self-denial with which she gave up 'her own pleasure in the
use of her sweeper' is not the least beautiful picture in her
life."[249]
While recounting the achievements of women who directly or indirectly
contributed to our knowledge of the earth and what it contains we cannot
forget what the world owes to the gracious and glorious Isabella of
Castile. For it is to her probably as much as to Columbus that a new
continent was discovered at the close of the fifteenth century. For,
while the doctors of Salamanca—most of whom were what Galileo called
"paper philosophers," men who fancied that a correct knowledge of the
physical universe was to be obtained by a collation of ancient
texts—were denouncing the great navigator as an idle dreamer, and
quoting the ill-founded notions of Pliny and Aristotle to prove the
impossibility of his carrying out his project, Isabella was quietly
revolving in her own mind the reasons which Columbus had adduced in
favor of his great enterprise. Having satisfied herself that his views
were sufficiently[Pg 381] probable to justify action, she was prepared to make
any sacrifices to have his plans executed. The result of her decision is
but another illustration of the value of woman's quick intuition, as
against the slow reasoning processes of philosophers and men of science.
Again, while considering what women have accomplished for the
advancement of science by inspiration and collaboration, we must not
lose sight of what they have done by suggestion. For, as John Stuart
Mill well observes: "It no doubt often happens that a person who has not
widely and accurately studied the thoughts of others on a subject has by
natural sagacity a happy intuition which he can suggest but cannot
prove, which yet, when matured, may be an important addition to
knowledge: but, even then, no justice can be done to it until some other
person, who does possess the previous acquirements, takes it in hand,
tests it, gives it a scientific or practical form, and fits it into its
place among the existing truths of philosophy or science. Is it supposed
that such felicitous thoughts do not occur to women? They occur by
hundreds to every woman of intellect; but they are mostly lost for want
of a husband or friend who has the other knowledge which can enable him
to estimate them properly and bring them before the world; and, even
when they are brought before it, they usually appear as his ideas, not
their real author's. Who can tell how many of the original thoughts put
forth by male writers belong to a woman by suggestion, to themselves
only by verifying and working out? If I may judge by my own case, a very
large proportion indeed."[250]
[Pg 382]
Nor should we forget those active and energetic women—and their number
is much greater than is ordinarily supposed—whose husbands, although
often endowed with genius of the highest order, were indolent by
temperament and disorderly and unmethodical by nature. Such men would,
in the majority of cases, have run to seed had not their genius been
given special force and impulse by their vigorous and methodical
helpmates. Sir William Hamilton, the most learned philosopher of the
Scottish school, is a striking instance in point; for it was due almost
entirely to the stimulation he received from his ever active wife that
he was always kept keyed up to his fullest working capacity as a
philosopher and became recognized the world over as one of the
commanding intellects of his age.
"Lady Hamilton," writes Professor Veitch in his Memoir of Sir William
Hamilton, "had a power of keeping her husband up to what he had to do.
She contended wisely against a sort of energetic indolence which
characterized him, and which, while he was always laboring, made him apt
to put aside the task actually before him, sometimes diverted by
subjects of inquiry suggested in the course of study on the matter in
hand, sometimes discouraged by the difficulty of reducing to order the
immense mass of materials[Pg 383] he had accumulated in connection with it.
Then her resolution and cheerful disposition sustained and refreshed
him, and never more so than when, during the last twelve years of his
life, his bodily strength was broken and his spirit, though languid, yet
ceased not from mental toil. The truth is that Sir William's marriage,
his comparatively limited circumstances, and the character of his wife
supplied to a nature that would have been contented to spend its mighty
energies in work that brought no reward but in the doing of it, and that
might never have been made publicly known or available, the practical
force and impulse which enabled him to accomplish what he actually did
in literature and philosophy. It was this influence, without doubt,
which saved him from utter absorption in his world of rare, noble and
elevated but ever-increasingly unattainable ideas. But for it the serene
sea of abstract thought might have held him becalmed for life; and, in
the absence of all utterance of definite knowledge of his conclusions,
the world might have been left to an ignorant and mysterious wonder
about the unprofitable scholar."[251]
[Pg 384]
What has been so far said, important as it is, does not tell the whole
story of woman's influence on men of science, and consequently on the
progress of science. We should not have an adequate conception of women
as inspirers and collaborators if we did not advert to certain faculties
which they usually possess in a more eminent degree than the most of
men. It is a well-known fact that in many of the affairs of life women
are more practical, have more tact, and possess keener and quicker
perceptions than men. They are, too, more ideal, more romantic and more
enthusiastic.
Men of science in their investigations usually proceed by the slow and
laborious process of collecting facts and collating phenomena, either by
observation or experiment, or both, and, from the observed facts and
phenomena, they formulate a law which explains and correlates them. This
is known as induction, a method which proceeds from facts to ideas.
Women, on the contrary, are rather disposed to proceed from ideas to
facts; to explain phenomena from ideas which already exist in the mind,
without having recourse to the slow process of induction. This is the
deductive method, and is the very reverse of that employed by the
average man of science. It would, however, be a mistake to maintain that
the inductive method is always employed, for such is not the case. More
than a half a century ago the historian, Buckle, in a notable lecture
delivered in the Royal Institution of Great Britain, directed attention
to the fact that some of the greatest scientific discoveries had been
made by the deductive method.
One of these was Newton's epoch-making discovery of universal
gravitation. While sitting in a garden he saw[Pg 385] an apple fall, and this
simple fact caused him to advance from idea to idea, and to be carried,
by what Tyndall loved to call "the scientific use of the imagination,"
into the distant realms of space. And, heedless of the operations of
nature, neither observing nor experimenting, the great philosopher, by
pure a priori reasoning, "completed the most sublime and majestic
speculation that it ever entered into the heart of man to conceive." "It
was," as Buckle well observes, "the triumph of an idea. It was the
audacity of genius." It was also the triumph of the deductive method in
the solution of a problem that one not a genius could have worked out
only by the long and toilsome process of induction.
Similarly, the great law of metamorphosis in plants, "according to which
the stamens, pistils, corollas, bracts, petals and so forth, of every
plant, are simply modified leaves," was discovered not by an inductive
investigator, but by a poet. "Guided by his brilliant imagination, his
passion for beauty and his exquisite conception of form which supplied
him with ideas," Germany's greatest poet, Goethe, by reasoning
deductively, was able to generalize a law which lesser minds could never
have arrived at except through the application of the inductive method.
So also was it in the science of crystallography. Its foundations were
laid, not by a mineralogist nor a mathematician, as one would suppose,
but by one of strong imagination and marked poetic temperament. Like
Goethe, Haüy was led by his ideas of beauty and symmetry to work
deductively on the problem before him. Descending from ideas to facts,
he finally succeeded, after a long series of subsequent labors, in
reading "the riddle which had baffled his able but unimaginative
predecessors."
It is the possession of this deductive faculty, so characteristic of men
of genius—their ability to reach conclusions directly, as great
mathematicians perceive inferences which those less gifted reach only
after pages of elaborate calculations—which[Pg 386] enable women, "not indeed
to make scientific discoveries, but to exercise the most momentous and
salutary influence over the method by which scientific discoveries are
made." For, as Buckle points out, men of science are too inclined to
employ the inductive method to the exclusion of the deductive.[252] They
have become slaves to the tyranny of facts, and, as such, are
incompetent to further the progress of science as they would by using
both methods instead of one. And their slavery would be still more
complete and ignominious were it not for the great though unconscious
service to science rendered by women who have kept alive the deductive
habit of thought. "Their turn of thought, their habits of mind, their
conversation, their influence, insensibly extending over the whole
surface of society and frequently penetrating its intimate structure,
have, more than all other things put together, tended to raise us up
into an ideal world, lift us from the dust in which we are too prone to
grovel, and develop in us those germs of imagination which even the most
sluggish and apathetic understandings in some degree possess."
From the foregoing observations it is manifest that the best results to
science are secured when men and women work together—men supplying the
slow, logical reasoning[Pg 387] power, women the vivid, far-reaching
imagination; men generalizing from facts, women from ideas; men working
chiefly by induction, women principally by deduction. For thus
collaborating, each with his or her predominant faculties, the two
combined possess in a measure the elements which go to make up a man or
woman of genius and which enable them to achieve far more for the
advancement of science than would otherwise be possible.
No one has ever given more eloquent expression to this truth than John
Stuart Mill, who was as keen as an observer as he was profound as a
thinker. Writing on the subject under discussion, he does not hesitate
to say: "Hardly anything can be of greater value to a man of theory and
speculation who employs himself, not in collecting materials of
knowledge by observation, but in working them up by processes of thought
into comprehensive truths of science and laws of conduct, than to carry
on his speculations in the companionship and under the criticism of a
really superior woman. There is nothing comparable to it for keeping his
thoughts within the limits of real things and the actual facts of
nature. A woman seldom runs wild after an abstraction.... Women's
thoughts are thus as useful in giving reality to those of thinking men
as men's thoughts in giving width and largeness to those of women. In
depth, as distinguished from breadth, I greatly doubt if even now women,
compared with men, are at any disadvantage."[253]
We have already learned, from his own avowal, how much Mill was beholden
to his wife for her active coöperation in the production of those works
of his which have exerted so profound an influence on many phases of
modern thought. A more striking illustration of the value of woman's
assistance, but in the domain of biology, is found in the biography of
the late Professor Huxley. By those[Pg 388] who know this distinguished man of
science—so remarkable for his intellectual vigor—only from his
writings, the impression would be gleaned that he was one of the most
independent of thinkers, and that his utterances on all subjects were
absolutely personal and entirely unmodified by suggestion or criticism
from any quarter.
How far this view is from being correct is found in the statement by his
son that his father "invariably submitted his writings to the criticism
of his wife before they were seen by any other eye. To her judgment was
due the toning down of many a passage which erred by excess of vigor,
and the clearing up of phrases which would be obscure to the public. In
fact, if any essay met with her approval, he felt sure it would not fail
of its effect when published."[254] She was not only his "help and stay
for forty years; in his struggles ready to counsel, in adversity to
comfort," but, over and above this, she was "the critic whose judgment
he valued above almost any, and whose praise he cared most to win"—the
other self who made his life work possible.[255]
An intelligent, sympathetic pair of this kind—and this, as we have
seen, is but one of a multitude which illuminates and beautifies the
history of science—are competent to achieve wonders. They are like "the
two-celled heart beating with one full stroke"—
The woman is then truly, as De Lamennais in Scriptural phrases has it,
"Man's companion, man's assistant, bone of his bone and flesh of his
flesh," and, in her sublime and endearing character so complete in every
relation of life,[Pg 389] she fully answers to the beautiful characterization
which Adam, in Paradise Lost, gives of his beloved Eve:
[233] Sis oppido meminens quod olim Martia Hortensio, Terentia
Tullio, Calpurnia Plinio, Pudentilla Apuleio, Rusticana Symmacho
legentibus meditantibusque candelas and candelabra tenuerunt. Lib. II,
Epist. 10.
[234] "Verum hoc—seu gratitudini seu ineptiæ ascribendum—non
sileo, me quantulucunque conspicis, per illam esse, nec unquam ad hoc,
si quid est nominis aut gloriæ fuisse venturum, nisi virtutum tenuissman
sementem, quasi pectore in hoc natura locaverat, nobilissimis his
affectibus coluisset." Francisci Petrarchæ, Colloquiorum Liber quem
Secretum Suum Inscripsit, pp. 105-106, Berne, 1603.


In his canzone beginning with the words Perchè la vita e breve,
Petrarch declares to his inspirer—

[235] The Life of St. Francis of Assisi, by Paul Sabatier, p.
166, New York, 1894.
[236] Ibid., p. 167.
[237] Ibid., p. 307.
[238] The Women of the Renaissance, p. 394, New York, 1901.
[239] Women of Florence, by Isodoro del Lungo, p. xxvii,
London, 1907.
[240] This passage from the dedication is so important that I
reproduce the Latin original: "Omnino vitam, aut, si quid mihi carius
est, vobis autem debeo, tibi autem, o diva Melusinis, omne presertim
Mathematicis studium, ad quod me excitavit tum tuus in earn amor, tum
summa artis illius, quam tenes, peritia, immo vero nunquam satis
admiranda in tuo tamque regii et nobilis generis sexu Encyclopædia."
François Viète, Inventeur de l'Algèbre Moderne, p. 20, par Frederic
Ritter, Paris, 1895.
[241] "E nell' amore della figlia il grande astronomo trovò non
soltanto un conforto a suoi affanni, ma anche una guida benefica alla
quale sembrò egli abandonarsi con cieca tenerezza figliale." La Storia
del Feminismo, p. 509, by G. L. Arrighi, Florence, 1911.
[242] Galileo Galilei e Suor Celeste, by Antonio Favaro, p.
256 et seq., Florence, 1891.
[243] An English writer, discussing this subject, pertinently
observes: "For, after all, is it not the personal incidents and
commonplaces of life that gather interest as the centuries roll on,
while its more pretentious events often drop into mere literary lumber?
How much more interesting Dr. Johnson's incidental admission, 'I have a
strong inclination, Sir, to do nothing to-day,' is to us now than many
of his more formal utterances. And, in reality, is it the personal
element alone that is in the long run perennial? The wise may prate as
they will about the importance of maintaining the continuity of history
and of handing on the torch of science. The world cares for none of
these things; they interest only some few political economists and
laborious men. What does the crowd and poor little Tom Jones and his
nestful, for instance, care about the fact that Cheops was—at any rate
by courteous tradition—a mighty man of valor of such an era and land?
But little Tom Jones and the rest of us would become mightily interested
in this misty monster of many traditions, could we learn in some magical
way all he thought, hated and loved in his inmost heart of hearts." The
National Review, p. 461, June, 1889.
[244] The Duke of Peiresc, in a letter to Gassendi, regarding
Galileo, refers to certain letters—très belles epistres—of the great
philosopher, "à une sienne fille religieuse sur le sujet mesme des
matières traictèes en son dernier livre." This shows that Sister Celeste
was kept fully informed by her father respecting the nature and contents
of his various works while he was preparing them for the press. It
implies, likewise, that she was not only interested in them in a general
way, but that she was able to read them intelligently and appreciate
them as well.


How fondly Galileo treasured the letters written him by this daughter of
predilection is made known to us by Sister Celeste herself, when she
tells him in one of her letters "Resto confusa sentendo ch'ella conservi
le mie lettere, e dubito che il grande affeto que mi porta gliele
dimonstri piu compita di quello che sono." Op. cit., p. 317.
[245] Op. cit., p. 404.
[246] In the dedication of his Principles of Philosophy he
addresses his young friend and pupil in the following words: "Je puis
dire avec verité que je ne jamais rencontré que le seul esprit de votre
altesse auquel l'un et l'autre"—metaphysics and mathematics—"fût
également facile; ce qui fait quo j'ai une très juste raison de
l'estimer incomparable."
[247] Geology and Mineralogy Considered with Reference to
Natural Theology, by William Buckland, p. xxxvi, London, 1858.
[248] Pasteur, by Mr. and Mrs. Percy Frankland, p. 26 et
seq., London, 1898. A French writer referring to this happy discovery
expresses himself as follows: "Quand Pasteur trouva le vaccin de
charbon, il remonta triomphant de son laboratoire et les larmes lui
vinrent aux yeux en embrassant sa femme et sa fille auxquelles annoncait
sa victoire." Revue Encyclopédique, p. 20, Jan. 15, 1895.
[249] Memoir and Correspondence of Caroline Herschel, London,
1879, pp. vi and vii, by Mrs. John Herschel. Cf. Chap. IV of this Vol.
[250] The Subjection of Women, pp. 98, 99, London, 1909.


The idea herein expressed is beautifully accentuated in the touching
dedication to the author's work On Liberty, which reads as follows:


"To the beloved and deplored memory of her who was the inspirer, and in
part the author, of all that is best in my writings—the friend and wife
whose exalted sense of truth and right was my strongest incitement, and
whose approbation was my chief reward—I dedicate this volume. Like all
that I have written for many years, it belongs as much to her as to me;
but the work as it stands has had, in a very insufficient degree, the
inestimable advantage of her revision, some of the most important
portions having been reserved for a more careful re-examination, which
they are now never destined to receive. Were I but capable of
interpreting to the world one-half the great thoughts and noble feelings
which are buried in her grave, I should be the medium of a greater
benefit to it than is ever likely to arise from anything I can write,
unprompted and unassisted by her all but unrivalled wisdom."


The chivalrous sentiments expressed in this generous tribute by one of
the deepest thinkers of his time, to the memory of his noble and gifted
life-companion, extravagant as they may seem, are but echoes of similar
sentiments often voiced before by the world's greatest leaders of
thought and science.
[251] Memoir of Sir William Hamilton, by John Veitch, p. 136
et seq., Edinburgh, 1869.


It is frequently said that women, unlike men, are indifferent to fame.
This may be true so far as they are personally concerned; but it is
certainly not true of them in regard to their husbands, or the men for
whom they have a genuine affection. This is abundantly proved by the
lives of Mme. Huber, Mme. Pasteur, Caroline Herschel and Lady Hamilton,
not to name others who have been mentioned in the foregoing pages. After
Sir William Hamilton, at the age of fifty-six, had been stricken by
hemiplegia on the right side, as the result of over-work, his faithful
wife became for twelve years eyes, hands and even mind for him. She read
and consulted books for him, and helped him to prepare his lectures and
the works which have given him such celebrity. "Everything that was sent
to the press and all the courses of lectures were written by her, either
to dictation or from copy." And when we remember that the lectures and
books were of the most abstruse character and that Lady Hamilton was
associated with her husband in his recondite work throughout his long
and brilliant career, we must confess that her conduct was not only
heroic to a degree, but also that the fame of the one she loved was to
her a matter of the deepest concern.
[252] "Induction is, indeed, a mighty weapon laid up in the
armory of the human mind, and by its aid great deeds have been
accomplished and noble conquests have been won. But in that armory there
is another weapon, I will not say of stronger make, but certainly of
keener edge; and, if that weapon had been oftener used during the
present and preceding century, our knowledge would be far more advanced
than it actually is. If the imagination had been more cultivated, if
there had been a closer union between the spirit of poetry and the
spirit of science, natural philosophy would have made greater progress,
because natural philosophers would have taken a higher and more
successful aim, and would have enlisted on their side a wider range of
human sympathies." Buckle: The Influence of Women on the Progress of
Knowledge.
[253] The Subjection of Women, ut sup., p. 87.
[254] Life and Letters of Thomas Henry Huxley, by his son
Leonard Huxley, Vol. I, p. 324, New York, 1900.
[255] Ibid., p. 39, Vol. II, p. 458.
[Pg 390]
Saint-Evremond, the first great master of the genteel style in French
literature, who was equally noted as a brilliant courtier, a graceful
wit, a professed Epicurean, and who exerted so marked an influence on
the writings of Voltaire and the essayists of Queen Anne's time, gives
us in one of his desultory productions an entertaining disquisition on
La femme qui ne se trouve point et ne se trouvera jamais—the woman
who is not and never will be found. The caption of this singular essay
admirably expresses the idea that the majority of mankind has, even
until the present day, held respecting woman in science. For them she
was non-existent. Nature, in their view, had disqualified her for
serious and, above all, for abstract science. Never, therefore, in the
opinion of these solemn wiseacres, had been found or could be found a
woman who had achieved distinction in science.
The foregoing chapters show how ill-founded is such a view regarding
woman in times past. For that half of humanity which has produced such
scientific luminaries as Aspasia, Laura Bassi, Maria Gaetana Agnesi,
Sophie Germain, Mary Somerville, Caroline Herschel, Sónya Kovalévsky,
Agnes S. Lewis, Margaret Dunlop Gibson, Eleanor Ormerod and Mme.
Curie—to mention no others—is far from exhibiting any evidence of
intellectual disqualification and still farther from warranting any one
from declaring[Pg 391] that the successful pursuit of science is entirely
beyond the mental powers of womankind.
The preceding pages, likewise, afford an answer to those who insist on
woman's incapacity for scientific pursuits, and point to the small
number of those that have attained eminence in any of the branches of
science; who continue to assert that the women named are but exceptions
to the rule of the hopeless inferiority of their sex, and that no
conclusions can be deduced from the paucity of women who have risen
above the intellectual level of their less fortunate or less highly
dowered sisters. They further show that, until the last few decades,
woman's environment was rarely if ever favorable to her pursuit of
science. From the days of Aspasia until the latter half of the
nineteenth century she was discriminated against by law, custom and
public opinion. Save only in Italy, she was excluded from the
universities and from learned societies in which she might have had an
opportunity of developing her intellect. In other countries her social
ostracism in all that pertained to mental development was so complete
and universal that she rarely had an opportunity of making a trial of
her powers or exhibiting her innate capacity. The consequence was that
her mind remained in a condition of comparative atrophy—a condition
that gave rise to that long prevalent belief in woman's intellectual
inferiority to man and her natural incapacity for everything that is not
light or frivolous.
Practically all that women have achieved in science, until very recent
years, has been accomplished in defiance of that conventional code which
compelled them to confine their activities to the ordinary duties of the
household. The lives and achievements of the eminent mathematicians,
Sophie Germain and Mary Somerville, are good illustrations of the truth
of this assertion. It was only their persistence in the study of their
favorite branch of science, in spite of the opposition of their family
and friends, and in[Pg 392] spite of what was considered taboo for their sex by
the usages and ordinances of society, that they were able to attain that
eminence in the most abstruse of the sciences which won for them the
plaudits of the world. Both were virtually self-made women. Deprived of
the advantages of a college or university education, and denied the
stimulus afforded by membership in learned scientific associations, they
nevertheless succeeded by their own unaided efforts in winning a place
of highest honor in the Walhalla of men of science.
M. Alphonse de Candolle, in his great work, Histoire des Sciences et
des Savants depuis Deux Siècles, devotes only two pages to the
consideration of woman in science. She is, to him, a negligible
quantity. And, although a professed man of science, he repeats, without
any scientific warrant whatever, all the gratuitous statements of his
predecessors regarding the superficial character of the female mind, "a
mind," he will have it, which "takes pleasure in ideas that are readily
seized by a kind of intuition;" a mind "to which the slow methods of
observation and calculation by which truth is surely arrived at are not
pleasing. Truths themselves," the Swiss savant continues, "independent
of their nature and possible consequences—especially general truths
which have no relation to a particular person—are of small moment to
most women. Add to this a feeble independence of opinion, a reasoning
faculty less intense than in man, and, finally, the horror of doubt,
that is, a state of mind in which all research in the sciences of
observation must begin and often end. These reasons are," according to
de Candolle, "more than sufficient to explain the position of women in
scientific pursuits."[256]
They certainly are more than sufficient to explain their position if we
choose to accept the author's method of determining one's attainments in
the realm of science. His[Pg 393] chief test of one's eminence in science is
the number of learned societies to which one belongs. For De Candolle,
membership in one or more such bodies is prima facie evidence of
special distinction in some branch of science. But "We," he declares,
"do not see the name of any woman on the lists of learned men connected
with the principal academies. This is not due entirely to the fact that
the customs and regulations have made no provision for their admission,
for it is easy to assure one's self that no person of the feminine sex
has ever produced an original scientific work which has made its mark in
any science and commanded the attention of specialists in science. I do
not think it has ever been considered desirable to elect a woman a
member of any of the great scientific academies with restricted
membership."[257]
When De Candolle insisted on membership in learned societies as a
necessary indication of scientific eminence, he must have known, what
everybody knew, that such exclusive societies as the French Academy of
Sciences and the Royal Society of Great Britain have always been dead
set against the admission of women members. It is difficult to imagine
that the learned author of the History of Science and Scientists was
entirely ignorant of the exclusion from the French Academy of Maria
Gaetana Agnesi solely because she was a woman. And he must have been
aware that, had it not been for her sex, Sophie Germain would have been
accorded a fauteuil in the same society for her remarkable
investigations in one of the difficult departments of mathematical
physics. He must likewise have been cognizant of the attitude of such
organizations as the Royal Society toward women, no matter how
meritorious their achievements in science.
According to De Candolle's criterion, such women as Mme. Curie, Sónya
Kovalévsky, Eleanor Ormerod, Agnes S. Lewis, Margaret Dunlop Gibson have
accomplished nothing[Pg 394] worthy of note because, forsooth, their names are
not found on the rolls of membership of the Royal Society or the French
Academy of Sciences—associations whose constitutions have been
purposely so framed as to exclude women from membership. It would,
indeed, be difficult to instance a more unfair or a more unscientific
test of woman's eminence in science, and that, too, proposed by one who
is supposed to be actuated in his judgments by rigorously scientific
methods. Had any of the women named belonged to the male sex, there
never would have been any question of their fitness to become members of
the societies in question. This is particularly true of Mme. Curie, who,
in the estimation of the world, has done more to enhance the prestige of
French science than any man of the present generation—a statement that
is sufficiently justified by the fact that she is the only one so far
who has twice, in competition with the greatest of the world's men of
science, succeeded in carrying away the great Nobel prize.[258]
[Pg 395]
Not only have men, from time immemorial, been wont to point to woman's
incapacity for science as evidenced by the small number of those who
have achieved distinction in any of its branches, but they have also
taken a special pleasure in directing attention to the fact that no
woman has ever given to the world any of the great creations of genius,
or been the prime-mover in any of the far-reaching discoveries which
have so greatly contributed to the weal, the advancement and the
happiness of our race.
No one, probably, has expressed himself on this subject in a more
positive or characteristic fashion than the noted litterateur and
philosopher, Count Joseph de Maistre. Writing from St. Petersburg to his
daughter, Constance, he says: "Voltaire, according to what you
affirm—for as to me, I know nothing, as I have not read all his works,
and have not read a line of them during the last thirty years—says that
women are capable of doing all that men do, etc. This is merely a
compliment paid to some pretty woman, or, rather, it is one of the
hundred thousand and[Pg 396] thousand silly things which he said during his
lifetime. The very contrary is the truth. Women have produced no chef
d'œuvre of any kind whatsoever. They have been the authors neither
of the Iliad, nor the Æneid, nor the Jerusalem Delivered, nor
Phèdre, nor Athalie nor Rodogune, nor The Misanthrope, nor
Tartufe, nor The Joueur, nor The Pantheon, nor The Church of St.
Peter's, nor the Venus de' Medici, nor the Apollo Belvidere, nor
the Principia, nor the Discourse on Universal History, nor
Telemachus. They have invented neither algebra nor the telescope, nor
achromatic glasses nor the fire engine, nor hose-machines, etc."[259]
All this is true, but what does it prove? It does not prove, as is so
frequently assumed, woman's lesser brain[Pg 397] power or inferior
intelligence. It does not prove—as the learned Frenchman and those who
are similarly minded would have us believe—her incapacity for the
highest flights of genius in every sphere of intellectual effort. Such
assumptions are entirely negatived by woman's past achievements in all
departments of art, literature and science.
Far from making the inference that De Maistre wished his daughter to
draw from his letter, we should, from what we know of woman's ability as
disclosed in the foregoing chapters, hesitate to set a limit to her
powers, or to declare apodictically that she could not have been the
author of works of as great merit as most of those—if not all of
them—mentioned as among men's supreme achievements. The simple fact
that Mme. Curie and Sónya Kovalévsky were able, in sciences usually
considered beyond female intelligence, to wrest from their male
competitors the most coveted prizes within the gift of the Nobel Prize
Commission and the French Academy of Sciences, demonstrates completely
that woman's assumed incapacity for even the most recondite scientific
pursuits is a mere figment of the masculine imagination.
What women have done "that at least, if nothing else," as John Stuart
Mill aptly observes, "it is proved they can do. When we consider how
sedulously they are all trained away from, instead of being trained
toward, any of the occupations or objects reserved for men, it is
evident that I am taking very humble ground for them, when I rest their
case on what they have actually achieved. For, in this case, negative
evidence is worth little, while any positive evidence is conclusive. It
cannot be inferred to be impossible that a woman should be a Homer, or
an Aristotle, or a Michaelangelo, or a Beethoven, because no woman has
yet actually produced works comparable to theirs in any of those lines
of excellence. This negative fact at most leaves the question uncertain
and open to psychological[Pg 398] discussion. But it is quite certain that a
woman can be a Queen Elizabeth or a Deborah or a Joan of Arc, since this
is not inference but a fact."[260]
In like manner it is quite certain that, in spite of all kinds of
disabilities and prejudices and adverse legislation, there have been a
large number of women who, in every department of intellectual activity,
have achieved marked distinction and won imperishable renown for their
proscribed sex. It is a fact, which admits of no question, that,
notwithstanding their being debarred from all the educational advantages
so generously lavished upon the dominant sex, women have since the days
of Sappho and Hypatia shown themselves the equals and often the
superiors of men in the highest and noblest spheres of mental
achievement.
Such being the case, what, we may ask, would have been the result had
women, from that splendid Heroic Period of which Homer sings until the
present, enjoyed all the opportunities of mental development of which
men have systematically claimed the exclusive privilege?[261] What would
now be their condition if, from the days of the Muses—who were but
learned women apotheosized—women had never been deprived of their
intellectual birthright and had been permitted to continue in the path
so auspiciously blazed by Corinna—the victor over Pindar—and Arete,
the splendor of Greece and the possessor of the mind of Socrates and the
tongue of Homer? What would[Pg 399] not now be their intellectual
efflorescence, if Plato's dream of twenty-three centuries ago of giving
women equal rights with men in all things of the mind could have been
realized; if those ardent female disciples of his, who so lovingly
followed him through the streets of Athens—"the home of the
intellectual and the beautiful"—and hung on his lips during his
matchless discourses in the groves of the Academy and on the banks of
the Ilyssus, could have continued that race of intellect and genius
which was the admiration and the inspiration of all Hellas during the
most brilliant period of its marvelous history?
Speculating only on what the gifted daughters of Greece might have
achieved, we may easily believe that they would have kept pace with
their most highly gifted countrymen, and that, following in the
footsteps of Sappho and the other Muses of the "Terrestrial Nine," they
would have been worthy rivals of Homer, Pindar and Æschylus, and would
have occupied a prominent place in that brilliant galaxy of genius
composed of such luminaries as Anaxagoras, Sophocles, Euclid,
Archimedes, Theophrastus, Polygnotus, Diophantus, Pausanias and
Thucydides.
To those who base their opinions on what so long has been the absurdly
anomalous condition of women and who, in formulating their theories of
human progress, completely ignore the fundamental laws of heredity, such
conjectures will seem extravagant, if not chimerical. But, when one
bears in mind the universal fact that offspring, whatever the sex,
inherits its characteristics and its powers from both parents alike;
that the soul, unlike the body, has no sex, and that, so far as
legitimate indications from the teachings of biology and psychology can
serve as a guide, there is no valid reason for asserting the mental
superiority of man over woman, one will be obliged to confess that these
surmises are far from being either fanciful or preposterous.
It is then the veriest sophism to predicate woman's[Pg 400] incapacity for
science and for intellectual achievements of the highest order on what
she has not accomplished in the past, or on the comparatively limited
number of her contributions to the advancement of knowledge; for up till
the present she has, for the most part, been but a dwarf of the
gynæceum,
Had men been compelled to labor under similar conditions, it is doubtful
if they would have accomplished any more than women have now to their
credit.
Considering woman's past achievements in science, as well as in other
departments of knowledge; considering her present opportunities for
developing her long-hampered faculties, and considering, especially, the
many new social and economic adjustments which have been made within the
last half century, in consequence of the greatly changed conditions of
modern life, it requires no prophetic vision to forecast what share the
gentler sex will have in the future advancement of science. That it will
be far greater than it has been hitherto there can be no reasonable
doubt. That the number of savantes of the type of Maria Gaetana Agnesi,
Sónya Kovalévsky and Mme. Curie will be greatly enlarged there is every
reason to believe. That among these coming votaries of science there
will be more than one woman who, even in the most abstruse sciences,
will stand
seems to be assured by the achievements of many who are now so
materially adding to the sum of human knowledge.
Is it probable that the future will bring forth women whose achievements
in science will rank with those of Euler, Faraday, Liebig, Leverrier,
Champollion and Geoffry Saint-Hillaire? It would be a rash man who would
answer in the negative. We cannot, as De Maistre seems[Pg 401] to do, reason
from what they have not done—when everything was against them—to what
they may do when conditions shall, in every way, be as favorable to them
as they always have been to the dominant sex.
Still rasher would be the man who would attempt to prove the negative of
this question. Mere a priori arguments, based on preconceived bias or
on the vague and groundless impression that woman is essentially and
hopelessly the intellectual inferior of man, have no more value than
gratuitous opinions. The unprejudiced seeker after truth will insist on
a demonstration based on incontrovertible facts. He will appeal to
history to learn what the sex has already accomplished, and to science
to inquire if there be anything in the female brain to differentiate it
from that of the male, or to preclude woman from attaining the highest
rank in the activities of the intellect.
The result of such an investigation will, I think, cause even the most
biased person to suspend judgment, if it does not induce him to align
himself with those who, finding no differences in the mental endowments
of the sexes, have reached the conclusion that the day will come, and,
mayhap, in the near future, when the achievements of women will be on a
par with those of man. The facts stated in the preceding chapters seem,
not unreasonably, to point to such a conclusion, if, indeed, they do not
warrant it as a necessary inference.
A few considerations germane to this discussion will illustrate the
danger of forming hasty judgments regarding questions like the one under
discussion.
During the last hundred years no country in the world has done more for
the education of the masses than the United States. Everything that
money could purchase and ingenuity suggest has been adopted to develop
the minds and stimulate the latent talents and genius of our youth. From
the primary schools to the highest and best equipped universities, a
special premium has been put on success in[Pg 402] study, and the highest
rewards have awaited those who should make any notable contribution
towards the advancement of knowledge. But, notwithstanding all the
educational advantages our people have enjoyed and all the encouragement
they have received to achieve something of supreme excellence, our great
country with its teeming millions attracted from the most gifted nations
of the Old World has not yet produced a single man who has attained the
highest rank in either literature or art or science. Far from having a
preëminent master of song like Homer or Dante, we have not even a poet
approaching Goethe or Tasso or Camoens. We have no Cervantes, no Milton,
no Racine, no Molière. America has produced no Raphael or Michaelangelo;
no Mozart or Wagner or Tschaikovsky. Nor has it given us a Descartes, a
Leibnitz, a Newton or a Darwin. Would any one, from this complete
absence in America of representatives of the highest order in
literature, art and science, ever dream of concluding that we shall
never have such favorite sons of genius and such giants of intellect?
Does our comparative intellectual sterility in the past, and in a
country which seemed specially adapted to foster genius and attainments
of the highest order, justify any one in inferring that the days of
great geniuses, like the days of demigods, are gone never to return?
And yet the number of men in our broad commonwealth who, during the past
hundred years, have enjoyed such signal opportunities for attaining
distinction in every domain of intellectual effort is incomparably
greater than that of all the women so favored since the earliest days of
human history. If, from the first flowering of Greek culture to the
present day, as many millions of women had enjoyed all the transcendent
advantages of education as have been in the United States so lavishly
accorded to the same number of millions of men, who will say that very
many of them would not have attained a much higher[Pg 403] rank in science, as
well as in art and literature, than has yet been reached by any man that
America has yet produced? Who even, on the evidence now available, would
be warranted in denying that at least some of these millions of women
might have attained the very highest rank in every department of
intellectual achievement?
Gray, in his Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard, muses on the
potential statesmen and the "mute, inglorious Miltons" of those
countless multitudes who, for lack of opportunity to develop their
inborn gifts, were condemned to pass their lives in obscurity and die,
"to Fortune and to Fame unknown." But how much more truthfully could his
words have been applied to that much larger number of women of rare
mental powers to whose eyes knowledge
and whose God-given genius was ruthlessly suppressed from the cradle to
the grave?
We are still in ignorance as to many of the conditions which are
essential to the development of genius and which contribute to its
loftiest flights. We have yet to learn how far the efflorescence of the
human mind is aided and modified by heredity, environment, atmosphere,
as well as by education, encouragement and other stimuli equally potent.
But we do know that Germany, in spite of its famed universities and its
feverish intellectual activity in many departments of knowledge, had to
wait many long dreary centuries before it could point to a Goethe, a
Schiller, a Humboldt, a Bach, or a Beethoven. We know that France—so
long the reputed center of culture—has so far produced no great epic
poet, no Cervantes, no Murillo. But shall we affirm that she will never
give to the world imperishable works like Paradise Lost, Don Quixote
or the[Pg 404] Immaculate Conception? We know that Athens, which during the
most brilliant period of its history counted only fifty-four hundred
free-born citizens—less than the population of a small modern town—was
able to produce within a very brief epoch more men of supreme
distinction than all the rest of Europe from the Age of Pericles until
the dawn of the Renaissance. Hers is still the art of the world, the
literature of the world, the philosophy of the world, the culture of the
world. For twenty-five centuries her canons of taste and beauty have
guided poets, orators, artists; and her matchless productions have been
the inspiration, as they have been the despair, of the greatest geniuses
of our modern world.
Had the women of Greece not been put under constraint just as they were
beginning to exhibit the splendid results of their intellectual
activities; had they been encouraged to develop to the utmost their
richly-dowered minds, as were the men, a far larger number of them, no
doubt, would have been as successful in carrying off coveted prizes in
the intellectual arena as was Corinna in her contests with Pindar. And
they would, likewise, as we may easily conceive, have greatly added to
the number of masterpieces of Greek intellect in science as well as in
art and letters.
But the opportunity for women to test their powers, which was so
wantonly snatched from their sisters in the Hellenic world, seems again
to be offered to their sex. This opportunity, as has been stated, is due
chiefly to their persistence in claiming the same right as men to
intellectual development as well as to the countless proofs they have
given that their demands are founded on reason and justice. What shall
be the outcome of the new opportunity for woman to prove her capacity as
compared with man's in things of the intellect remains to be seen, but,
from indications she has during recent years given of her powers in
every branch of scientific inquiry, there can be little doubt that it
will be of such character as to place[Pg 405] woman on a higher intellectual
plane than she has yet occupied. In physical strength and in the rougher
conflicts with the world she will doubtless always remain "the lesser
man," but, once she feels in full possession of liberty
she will duly justify her advocates who throughout the centuries have
been
Not the least of the contributing factors to woman's intellectual
growth, and especially to her future achievements in science, are the
recent adjustments for women in social and economical conditions brought
about chiefly by far-reaching changes in the industrial world. Even so
late as the last half of the nineteenth century the energies of women,
when they were not engaged in the kitchen or the nursery, were spent on
the domestic loom, spinning wheel and the knitting needle. All the
various processes from carding the wool to making it into clothing for
all the members of the family were in the hands of the housewife.
Ready-made clothing was far from being as common and inexpensive as it
is now. Canned foods and cereals, which do away with so much of the
drudgery of the kitchen, were unknown. Electricity, which has proved to
be such a remarkable aid in every modern home, was little more than a
mysterious force that was utilized in the electric telegraph. Most of
the domestic labor-saving machines were still in their infancy and
possessed by but few people. Large fortunes were confined to only a
favored few in our great metropolises. The mass of the people was
preoccupied with the struggle for existence.
But science, the spirit of invention and the advent of the[Pg 406] age of
machinery have completely changed the conditions of life which obtained
but a generation ago. They have not only opened up for women countless
occupations that were undreamed of in their mother's time, but have also
given to tens of thousands of them the necessary means and leisure to
indulge their tastes for study and research and enabled an ever
increasing number of them to realize their aspirations for achieving
distinction in the divers departments of scientific research.
As an instance of this marked change in the intellectual activity of
women, we need only consider what an important part they now take in our
present prodigious literary output, as compared with their share in
similar work but a few decades ago. As authors, as writers and readers
in the editorial rooms of our leading periodicals, as contributors to
learned journals and reviews dealing with every branch of science, even
the most abstruse, they now occupy a conspicuous place and are doing
work that is quite as creditable as that of men.
And it is no longer necessary, in deference to public sentiment, for
them to write under a pseudonym, for it is no longer considered
unfeminine, as it was in the time of the Brontë sisters, for women to
acknowledge themselves the authors of books or of articles in magazines.
If they elect to devote their lives to literary or scientific work, they
will not be deterred from so doing by what Mrs. Grundy may say, or by
the fear that some feeble imitator of Molière may dub them as
Précieuses Ridicules. The value of their productions, like those of
men, is gauged solely by merit and not by any narrow-minded
considerations of the author's sex.
So also will it be in all other occupations where women choose to gain
their livelihood by devoting themselves to scientific pursuits rather
than to manual labor or to secretarial work in the counting-room. There
are positions open for them in colleges, universities and the
government[Pg 407] service where, as professors or experts in every branch of
science, their talents have full liberty of action and where they have
the same opportunity of achieving distinction in their chosen life-work
as have their male colleagues.
In Germany there are to-day a million more women than men. It is the
same in England. In France the number of women who are widows or
unmarried or divorcées or mothers with full-grown children aggregates no
less than four and a half millions. A similar condition obtains in other
parts of Europe. A large percentage of this number is without home ties
and, as the old fields of labor are no longer open to women, they are
forced to find new ones. They naturally demand the privilege of
exercising their talents in occupations which are most congenial to
them. Many have no inclination for any of the avocations in the
industrial or commercial world, but have a very decided inclination as
well as talent for scientific pursuits. Hence the ever-increasing number
of women who seek employment in chemical and biological laboratories, in
museums and astronomical observatories, as well as aspire to
professorships of science in schools and colleges. From this large
number of votaries of science some are sure to achieve distinction in
their calling and to contribute materially to the advancement of
knowledge. In the course of time the number of those, like Mme. Curie,
Mme. Coudreau, Mary Kingsley, Sónya Kovalévsky, Eleanor Ormerod,
Caroline Herschel, Zelia Nuttall, Harriet Boyd Hawes, Donna Eersilia
Bovatillo, Sophie Pereyaslawewa—to name only a few—who will become
prominent as chemists, explorers, naturalists, mathematicians,
entomologists, astronomers, archæologists, biologists will be vastly
increased, for women will find a greater stimulus for such work and more
numerous demands for their service in the constantly expanding sphere of
scientific research.[Pg 408]
Many women will, doubtless, become specialists in some specific branch
of science, particularly if they have a genuine love for it, or be fired
by an ambition to achieve fame as discoverers. But it is not probable
that they will ever specialize to the same extent as men do. For men
scientific work has to a large extent become a métier, and success, as
in industry, depends on a division of labor. Hence it is that their
field of investigation is daily becoming more and more circumscribed.
This is observable in all the sciences, but especially in such
all-embracing sciences as chemistry, biology, and archæology. A man now
does well if he master a single branch of any of these sciences, and is
hailed as exceptionally fortunate if he succeed in making some notable
discovery in his limited field of research. So great, indeed, has been
the activity of scientific men in every department of science during the
last half century, and so thoroughly have they explored the most hidden
recesses of nature, that it, at times, seems as if there were but little
left to discover. A prominent scientist recently well expressed the
difficulty of making any striking additions to our knowledge of nature
by asserting that all great discoveries would hereafter be made in the
sixth place of decimals. This statement is well illustrated by the
delicate experiments that were required to isolate such rare elements as
radium, polonium, helium and neon, which occur only in infinitesimal
quantities.
While men of science will be forced to continue as specialists as long
as the love of fame, to consider no other motives of research, continues
to be a potent influence in their investigations, it is probable that
women will have less love for the long and tedious processes involved in
the more difficult kinds of specialization. They will, it seems likely,
be more inclined to acquire a general knowledge of the whole circle of
the sciences—a knowledge that will enable them to take a comprehensive
survey of nature. And it will be fortunate for themselves, as well as
for[Pg 409] the men who must perforce remain specialists, if they elect to do
so. For nothing gives falser views of nature as a whole, nothing more
unfits the mind for a proper apprehension of higher and more important
truths, nothing more incapacitates one for the enjoyment of the
masterpieces of literature or the sweeter amenities of life, than the
narrow occupation of a specialist who sees nothing in the universe but
electrons, microbes and protozoa.
But just at the critical moment, when men of science would rather
discover a process than a law, when they are so preoccupied with the
infinitely little that they lose sight of the cosmos as a whole; when
their attention is so riveted on particular phenomena that they will no
longer have aptitude for rising from effects to causes; when they cease
to have any interest in general ideas and stray away from the guidance
of the true philosophic spirit; when, like Plato's cave men, they have
so long groped in darkness that their powers of vision are impaired,
then it is that woman, "The herald of a brighter race," comes to the
rescue and holds up to their astonished gaze the picture of an ideal
world whose existence they had almost forgotten. For women, as a rule,
love science for its own sake, and, unlike the specialists in question,
they are, in its pursuit, rarely actuated by any selfish or mercenary
interests, or by the hope of financial reward. Precise and never-ending
observations with the microscope and spectroscope, which at best give
them but a superficial knowledge of certain details of science, while it
leaves them in ignorance of the greater and better part of it, do not
appeal to them. They prefer general ideas to particular facts, and love
to roam over the whole realm of science rather than confine themselves
to one of its isolated corners.
"Women," writes M. Étienne Lamy, the distinguished French Academician,
"group themselves at the center of human knowledge, whereas men disperse
themselves[Pg 410] towards its outer boundaries. While men are always pushing
analysis to its utmost limits, women are seeking a synthesis. While men
are becoming more technical, women are becoming more intellectual. They
are better placed to observe the correlations of the different sciences,
and to subordinate them to the common and unique source of truth from
which they all descend. We seem, indeed, to be approaching a time when
women will become the conservers of general ideas."[262]
In the preceding chapter reference was made to the fact that women are
naturally inclined to adopt the deductive method in their search for
truth when men would employ only the inductive method. This disposition
of theirs to arrive at conclusions by a kind of intuition, coupled with
their more pronounced idealism, is sure to react favorably on men, and
prevent them from becoming so involved in mere facts and phenomena as to
cause them to forget that it is as important to reason well as to
observe well—that the fundamental principles of a true philosophy are
quite as necessary for the eminent man of science as they are to the
trustworthy historian or commanding statesman.
From what has been said, it is clear that man's ideal of the woman of
the future will be quite different from what it was but a little more
than a century ago, when Dr. Johnson could say that "any acquaintance
with books," among women, "was distinguished only to be censured." It
will be quite different from the ideal woman, as portrayed by poets and
novelists, for centuries past. For among the thousands of women painted
by our leading writers of fiction, poets and dramatists there are few,
if any, outside of those sketched by Tennyson in The Princess, who are
distinguished for their learning or for their love of intellectual
pursuits. Even Portia, Shakespeare's[Pg 411] most learned woman, was, according
to her own confession, but
And the heroines of the novelist, far from being women who had a thirst
for knowledge, or were eager
were those only whose chief attractions were physical graces and charms,
affectionate natures, brilliant wit together with "sweet laughs for
bird-notes and blue eyes for a heaven."
Now, however, that women after ages of struggle are beginning to
experience a sense of intellectual freedom before unknown, and to exult
in the fact that
now that they are, for the first time, beginning, in every civilized
nation, to realize their age-long aspirations for unimpeded opportunity
in all the activities of the intellect; now that they are no longer
we may expect soon to see a marked change in the character of the ideal
woman as depicted in literature and as desired by the intelligent
portion of mankind.
What woman's liberation from intellectual bondage and her freedom to
devote herself to scientific pursuits mean for the future of humanity it
is difficult at present adequately to forecast. That it will contribute
immensely to the betterment of social conditions and to the elevation of
the masses of humanity, there can be no doubt. Setting free the
imprisoned energies of one half of our race,[Pg 412] means more than doubling
mankind's capacity for advancement. For the failure to utilize woman's
vast energies, pining for an outlet, acted as a drag on man's own
potentialities, and thus retarded to an untold extent the world's
advancement. In times past, as has aptly been said, "an enormous part of
the brain power of mankind has been spent or wasted in smiting the
Philistines hip and thigh, and an enormous part of the brain power of
womankind has been spent in cajoling Sampson."
It will mean that the women of the future will be more suitable
companions for the rapidly increasing number of highly educated men of
science; that having their intellects developed pari passu with those
of men, they will be able to sympathize with the noblest aims of their
husbands and assist them in their most important undertakings, as did
the wives of Huber, Lavoisier, Pasteur, Huxley, Louis Agassiz and others
scarcely less renowned in the annals of science. It will mean that they
will not only share in the joys and the sorrows of their
life-companions, but that they will also have a part in their thoughts,
their studies, their labors, their achievements. For one should bear in
mind that the first essential to a perfect union of hearts is a perfect
harmony of minds. Where neither husband nor wife is educated, the
virtues may suffice for companionship, but where the man is educated and
the woman ignorant, there are sooner or later estrangements and the wife
becomes little better than an old Japanese conception of her, "a cook
without pay," or a pasha's toy for an idle hour. Chrysalde in Molière's
L'École des Femmes, declares:
A briefer and truer statement of the evils of unequal intellectual
mating was never penned.[263] Men of intelligence[Pg 413] are no longer, like
Rousseau, satisfied with an ignorant domestic for a wife, and still less
are they disposed with[Pg 414] Schopenhauer to regard woman as an incurable
Philistine, and as a mere intermediary between a child and a man. They
have learned by sad experience that it is contrary both to justice and
public policy to impose artificial restrictions on the acquisition of
knowledge by women, or to close to the vigorous and capable
representatives of their sex careers which are open to the weakest and
most incompetent men. History has taught them that the fall of Greece
and Rome was owing to the failure of these nations to make due provision
for the mental development of women.
And women know that it was because of the inability of the wives of the
Athenians to enter into the thoughts of their highly educated husbands
and to sympathize with their aims and appreciate their achievements that
caused the men to leave them in their solitude and seek in the
companionship of the hetæræ the intellectual atmosphere which was
wanting in their own homes. They know, too, that the lack of knowledge
in the wife and the absence of virtue in the hetæræ, which brought such
disasters on[Pg 415] the most learned and most cultured of nations are still
evils to be guarded against, and that one of the means over and above
moral rule and revealed truth of safe-guarding their own interests and
preserving the sanctity of the home is to make themselves by knowledge
and culture the intellectual equals of their consorts.
They realize also that if they are to attain the highest measure of
success as wives and mothers, a broad and thorough education—a
knowledge of science, as well as familiarity with art and literature and
the teachings of religion—is essential to them for their children's
sake. It is said that
but how much truer is it that "The domestic hearth is the first of
schools, and the best of lecture-rooms; for here the heart will
coöperate with the mind, the affections with the reasoning power." It is
only when the mothers of this, the woman's century, shall dispute with
men the primacy of erudition—when they shall prove their mastery of
those newer sciences by which our age sets such great store—when they
shall possess
that their grown-up sons will have the same confidence in their
intelligence as they now have in their hearts. Then only will mothers be
properly equipped for developing the character of their children; for
inspiring them with a love of the true, the beautiful and the good; for
stimulating their talents and aiding them to attain to all the
sublimities of knowledge; for assisting them in doubt and despondency
and firing them with an ambition to strive for supreme excellence in all
that makes for the nobility of manhood and the glory of womanhood; for
making[Pg 416] them, as Beatrice made Dante after he was renewed and purified
in the waters of Eunoe, "fit to mount up to the stars."
The romantic idea of treating woman as a clinging vine, and thus
eliminating half the energies of humanity, is rapidly disappearing and
giving place to the idea that the strong are for the strong—the
intellectually strong; that the evolution of the race will be complete
only when men and women shall be associated in perfect unity of purpose,
and shall, in fullest sympathy, collaborate for the attainment of the
highest and the best. Then, indeed, will man's helpmate become to him
and to his children
Then will men and women for the first time fully supplement each other
in their aspirations and endeavors and realize somewhat of that oneness
of heart and mind which was so beautifully adumbrated in Plato's
androgyn. Then will the world witness the return of another Golden
Age—the Golden Age of Science—the Golden Age of cultured, noble,
perfect womanhood. Then to all who really think and love will be
manifest the clearness and power of vision of England's great poet
laureate when in matchless numbers he sings:
[256] Histoire des Sciences et des Savants, p. 271,
Genève-Bale, 1885.
[257] Ibid., p. 270.
[258] A writer in the English magazine, Nature, under date of
January 12, 1911, when the European press was discussing Mme. Curie's
claims to membership in the French Academy of Sciences, makes the
following sane observations on the admission of women to the various
academies of the French Institute:

"There may be room for difference of opinion as to the
wisdom or expediency of permitting women to embark on the
troubled sea of politics, or of allowing them a determinate
voice in the settlement of questions which may affect the
existence or the destiny of a nation; but surely there ought
to be no question that in the peaceful walks of art,
literature and science, there should be the freest possible
scope extended to them, and that, as human beings, every
avenue to distinction and success should unreservedly be
open to them.


"All academies tend to be conservative and to move slowly;
they are the homes of privilege and of vested interest. Some
of them incline to be reactionary. They were created by men
for men and for the most part at a time when women played
little or no part in those occupations which such societies
were intended to foster and develop. But the times have
changed. Women have gradually won for themselves their
rightful position as human beings. We have now to recognize
that academies as seats of learning were made for humanity
and that, as members of the human race, women have the right
to look upon their heritage and property no less than men.
This consummation may not at once be reached, but, as it is
based upon reason and justice, it is certain to be attained
eventually."

A fortnight later the same magazine contained a second article, in which
the matter is treated in an equally manly fashion.


"As scientific work," the writer pertinently observes, "must ultimately
be judged by its merits, and not by the nationality or sex of its
author, we believe that the opposition to the election of women into
scientific societies will soon be seen to be unjust and detrimental to
the progress of natural knowledge. By no pedantic reasoning can the
rejection of a candidate for membership of a scientific society be
justified, if the work done places the candidate in the leading position
among other competitors. Science knows no nationality and should
recognize no distinction of sex, color or creed among those who are
contributing to its advancement. Believing that this is the conclusion
to which consideration of the question must inevitably lead, we have
confidence that the doors of all scientific societies will eventually be
open to women on equal terms with men."
[259] Lettres et Opuscules Inédits du Comte Joseph de
Maistre, Tom. I, p. 194, Paris, 1851.


It was this same brusque and original writer who asserted that "science
was a most dangerous thing for women; that no woman should study science
under penalty of becoming ridiculous and unhappy; that a coquette can
more readily get married than a savante." And he it was who declared
that women who attempted to emulate men in the pursuit of science are
monkeys and donne barbute—bearded women—and who designated Mme. de
Staël as "la science en jupons, une impertinente femelette"—science
in petticoats, a silly, impertinent female.


He, however, met an opponent worthy of his steel in the person of the
eloquent bishop of Orleans, Mgr. Dupanloup. In a lengthy and brilliant
critique of De Maistre's views he shows them to be untenable, if not
ridiculous. "I by no means," he writes, "agree with M. de Maistre that
'la science en jupons,' as he calls it, or talents of any kind
whatsoever, militates in the slightest against a woman being a good wife
or a good mother. Quite the contrary." And considering woman as the
companion and aid of man—socia et adjutorium—he expresses a view
which is quite the opposite of that championed by his distinguished
adversary for, in words precise and pregnant, he asserts that the
education of women cannot be too consistent, too serious, and too
solid—"L'éducation des femmes ne saurait être trop suivie, trop
sérieuse et trop forte." La Femme Studieuse, p. 160, Paris, 1895.
[260] The Subjection of Women, p. 81, London, 1909.
[261] The late Mr. Gladstone asserts that "It would be hard to
discover any period of history or country of the world, not being
Christian, in which they"—women—"stood so high as with the Greeks of
the Heroic Age"—when the position of the Greek woman was so remarkable
and "so elevated, both absolutely and in comparison with what it became
in the Historic Ages of Greece and Rome amidst their elaborate
civilization." Studies on Homer and the Homeric Age, Vol. II, p. 479
et seq., Oxford, 1858. Cf. also the same author's Juventus Mundi, p.
405 et seq., London, 1869.
[262] La Femme de Demain, pp. 45, 46, Paris, 1912.
[263] Dr. Johnson expressed the same sentiment when he declared
that a man of sense should meet a suitable companion in a wife. "It was
a miserable thing," he asserted in characteristic fashion, "when the
conversation could only be such as whether the mutton should be boiled
or roasted, and a probable dispute about that."


Sidney Smith, in a forceful and trenchant essay On the Education of
Women, written for the Edinburgh Review a century ago, gives it as
his deliberate opinion that "The instruction of women improves the stock
of natural talents, and employs more minds for the instruction and
amusement of the world; it increases the pleasures of society by
multiplying the topics upon which the two sexes take a common interest;
and makes marriage an intercourse of understanding as well as of
affection by giving dignity and importance to the female character. The
education of women favors public morals; it provides for every season of
life as well as for the brightest and the best; and leaves a woman when
she is stricken by the hand of time, not as she now is, destitute of
everything and neglected by all, but with the full power and the
splendid attractions of knowledge,—diffusing the elegant pleasures of
polite literature, and receiving the just homage of learned and
accomplished men."


As to the oft repeated commonplace of noodledom that higher education
puts an end to domestic economy and deteriorates the noblest qualities
of womanhood, the same clear-headed writer asks: "Can anything ... be
more perfectly absurd than to suppose that the care and perpetual
solicitude which a mother feels for her children, depends upon her
ignorance of Greek or mathematics; and that she would desert an infant
for a quadratic equation—that Cimmerian ignorance can aid parental
affection, or the circle of the arts and sciences produce its
destruction—that the moment you suffer women to eat of the tree of
knowledge the rest of the family will very soon be reduced to the same
kind of aërial and unsatisfactory diet?"


Still more insistent on the necessity of the broadest and deepest
education for woman—education in science as well as in art and
literature—is the Most Rev. Archbishop, J. L. Spalding, who by his
writing and lectures has done so much for the cause of the higher
education of both men and women. In an eloquent and pregnant discourse,
pronounced in the Church of the Gesù in Rome, in March, 1900, he told
his vast audience—composed of the élite of the Eternal City—that:


"If we are to have a race of enlightened, noble, and brave men, we must
give to woman the best education it is possible for her to receive. She
has the same right as man to become all that she may be, to know
whatever may be known, to do whatever is fair and just and good. In
souls there is no sex. If we leave half the race in ignorance, how shall
we hope to lift the other half into the light of truth and love? Let
woman's mental power increase, let her influence grow, and more and more
she will stand by the side of man as a helper in all his struggles to
make the will of God prevail. From the time the Virgin Mother held the
Infant Saviour in her arms, to this hour, woman has been the great lover
of Christ and the unweary helper of His little ones; and the more we
strengthen and illumine her, the more we add to her sublime faith and
devotion the power of knowledge and culture, the more efficaciously
shall she work to purify life, to make justice, temperance, chastity,
and love prevail. She is more unselfish, more capable of enthusiasm for
spiritual ends, she has more sympathy with what is beautiful, noble, and
godlike than man; and the more her knowledge increases, the more shall
she become a heavenly force to help spread God's kingdom on earth."
[Pg 419]
Agassiz, Mrs. L. Louis Agassiz, His Life and Correspondence. Boston,
1893.
Agnesi, Maria Gaetana. Instituzioni Analitiche. Milan, 1748.
----. Propositiones Philosophicæ. Milan, 1738.
Anzoletti, Luisa. Maria Gaetana Agnesi. Milan, 1900.
Arrighi, G. L. Storia del Feminismo. Florence, 1911.
Asse, Eugène. Lettres de la Marquise du Châtelet. Paris, 1882.
Athenæus. The Deipnosophists; or the Banquet of the Learned, Bohn
Edition. London, 1907.
Becq de Fouquières, L. Aspasie de Milet. Paris, 1872.
Bede, Venerable. Historia Ecclesiastica Gentis Anglorum. London, 1848.
Bièvre, Le Comte de. Histoire des Deux Aspasies. Paris, 1736.
Bigoni, D. Guido. Ipazia, Alessandrina. Venice, 1887.
Birch, Una. Anna van Schurman. London, 1909.
Blackwell, Elizabeth. Pioneer Work in Opening the Medical Profession to
Women. London, 1895.
Bonnet, J. Vie d'Olympie Morata. Paris, 1850.
Bremmer, C. S. Education of Girls and Women. London, 1897.
Briand, E. M. Histoire de Sainte Radegonde, Reine de France. Paris,
1898.
Broca, Paul. Mémoires d'Anthropologie. Paris, 1871-1888.
Burckhardt, J. Die Cultur der Renaissance in Italien. Leipsic, 1899.
Candolle, Alphonse de. Histoire des Sciences et des Savants depuis Deux
Siècles. Genève, 1885.[Pg 420]
Castiglione, Baldassare. Libro del Cortigiano. Milan, 1890.
Chabaud, L. Mesdames de Maintenon, de Genlis et Campan. Leur Rôle dans
l'Éducation Chrétienne de la Femme. Paris, 1901.
Châtelet, Marquise du. Principes Mathématiques de la Philosophie
Naturelle. Paris, 1759.
Chiappelli, A. Saggi e Note Critche. Bologna, 1895.
Coudreau, Mme. H. Voyage au Maycurú. Paris, 1903.
----. Voyage au Rio Curuá. Paris, 1903.
Curie, Pierre, Mme. Traité de Radio-activité. Paris, 1910.
Delambre, J. B. Histoire de l'Astronomie. Paris, 1817.
Denifle, H. Die Entstehung der Universitäten des Mittelalters. Berlin,
1885.
Denifle Et Chatelain. Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis. Paris,
1889-1891.
Diogenes Laertius. Lives and Opinions of the Ancient Philosophers, Bohn
Edition. London.
Dieulafoy, Mme. At Susa the Ancient Capital of the Kings of Persia,
Narrative of Travel through Western Persia and Excavations made on the
Site of the Lost City of the Lilies, 1884-1886. Philadelphia, 1890.
----. La Perse, la Chaldée et la Susane. Paris, 1887.
D'istria, Dora. Des Femmes par une Femme. Paris, 1865.
Donaldson, James. Woman: Her Position in Ancient Greece and Rome among
the Early Christians. London, 1907.
Drane, Augusta T. Christian Schools and Scholars. London, 1881.
Druon, H. Œuvres de Synesius, Évêque de Ptolemais, Traduites
entièrement pour la première Fois en Francais et Précédées d'une Étude
Biographique et Littéraire. Paris, 1878.
Dupanloup, Mgr. La Femme Studieuse. Paris, 1895.
Eckstein, Lena. Women Under Monasticism. Cambridge, 1896.[Pg 421]
Ellis, Havelock. Man and Woman. London, 1898.
Fantuzzi, Giovanni. Notizie degli Scrittori Bolognesi. Bologna, 1781.
Favaro, Antonio. Galileo Galilei e Suor Celeste. Florence, 1891.
Fénelon, François de Salignac de la Mothe. de L'éducation Des Filles.
Paris, 1881.
Finot, J. Problems of the Sexes. New York, 1913.
Fiorelli, Jos. Pompeinarum Antiquitatum Historia. Naples, 1860-1864.
Frankland, Mr. and Mrs. Percy. Pasteur. London, 1898.
Gasquet, Aidan. Henry VIII and the English Monasteries. London, 1895.
Gibson, Margaret Dunlop. How the Codex was Found. Cambridge, 1893.
Gicosa, Piero. Magistri Salernitani Nondum Editi. Turin, 1891.
Girard, Paul. L'Éducation Athénienne an Ve et IVe Siècle avant Jésus
Christ. Paris, 1889.
Gladstone, W. E. Studies on Homer and the Homeric Age. Oxford, 1858.
Grimaux, E. Lavoisier, 1743-1794, d'après sa Correspondence, Ses
Manuscrits, Ses Papiers de Famille et d'Autres Documents Inédits. Paris,
1896.
Hall, G. Stanley. Adolescence. New York, 1904.
Hamel, F. An Eighteenth Century Marquise. A Study of Émilie du Châtelet
and Her Times. New York, 1911.
Harless, C. F. Die Verdienste der Frauen um Naturwissenschaft and
Heilkunde. Göttingen, 1830.
Harrison, Jane E. Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion. Cambridge,
1903.
Hawes, Harriet Boyd. Gournia, Vasilike and Other Prehistoric Sites on
the Isthmus of Hierapetra, Crete. Philadelphia, 1908.
Henschel, G. E. T. Daremberg, C., e Renzi de, S. Collectio Salernitana,
Ossia Documenti Inediti e Trattati di Medicina[Pg 422] Appertenti alla la
Scuola Medica Salernitana. Naples, 1852-1859.
Herrade de Lansberg. Hortus Deliciarum. Strasburg, 1901.
Herschel, Mrs. John. Memoirs and Correspondence of Caroline Herschel.
London, 1879.
Hertzen Et Rossi. Inscriptiones Urbis Romæ Latinæ. Berlin, 1882.
Hildegardis, S. Causæ et Curæ. Leipsic, 1903.
----. Opera Omnia, Edition Migne. Paris, 1882.
----. Nova S. Hildegardis Opera. Ed. J. B. Card. Pitra. Paris, 1882.
Hill, Georgiana. Women in English Life. London, 1896.
Hunt, Caroline L. The Life of Helen H. Richards. Boston, 1912.
Huxley, L. H. Life and Letters of Thomas H. Huxley. New York, 1900.
Jerome, St. Epistolæ, Edition Vallarsi. Verona, 1734-42.
Jex-Blake, Sophia. Medical Women. Edinburgh, 1886.
Jourdain, Charles. Excursions Historiques et Philosophiques à travers le
Moyen Age. Paris, 1888.
Kendall, Phebe M. Maria Mitchell, Life, Letters and Journals. Boston,
1896.
Kingsley, Mary H. Travels in West Africa. London, 1897.
----. West African Studies. London, 1899.
Kirchhoff, A. Die Akademische Frau. Berlin, 1897.
Labé, Louize. Œuvres de. Paris, 1871.
Lagrange, F. Histoire de Sainte Paule. Paris, 1870.
Laigle, Mathilde. Le Livre de Trois Vertus de Christine de Pisan et son
Milieu Historique et Litéraire. Paris, 1912.
Lalande, Jerome. Bibliographie Astronomique. Paris, 1803.
Lamy, E. La Femme de Demain. Paris, 1912.
Lange, Helene. Higher Education of Women in Europe. New York, 1890.
Laurie, S. C. Historical Survey of Pre-Christian Education. London,
1900.[Pg 423]
Lecky, W. E. History of European Morals. New York, 1905.
Lefevre, M. La Femme à travers l'Histoire. Paris, 1902.
Leffler, Anna Carlotta. Sónya Kovalévsky, Her Recollections of
Childhood, with a Biography. New York, 1895.
Lepinska, Melanie, Mlle. Histoire des Femmes Médecins. Paris, 1900.
Lewis, Agnes Smith. In the Shadow of Sinai. Cambridge, 1898.
Ligier, Hermann. De Hypatia Philosopha et Eclectismi Fine. Dijon, 1879.
Lourbet, J. La Femme devant la Science. Paris, 1896.
Lungo, Isodoro del. Women of Florence. London, 1907.
Macpherson, Geraldine. Memoirs of the Life of Anna Jameson. London,
1878.
Maistre, Comte Joseph de. Lettres Et Opuscules Inédits. Paris, 1851.
Marini, Gaetano. Archiatri Pontifici. Rome, 1784.
Mason, O. T. Woman's Share in Primitive Culture. London, 1895.
----. Origin of Inventions. London, 1895.
Maulde la Clavière, R. de. The Women of the Renaissance. New York, 1901.
Mazzuchelli, Giammaria. Gli Scrittori d'Italia. Brescia, 1758.
Medici, Michele. Compendio Storico della Scuola Anatomica di Bologna.
Bologna, 1857.
Menagius, Ægidius. Historia Mulierum Philosopharum. Amsterdam, 1692.
Meyer, H. F. Geschichte der Botanik. Königsburg, 1856.
Michælis, A. A Century of Archæological Discoveries. New York, 1908.
Mill, John Stuart. The Subjection of Women. London, 1909.
Möbius, P. J. Ueber die Anlage zur Mathematik. Leipsic, 1907.
Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley. Letters and Works of, Bohn Edition. London,
1887.[Pg 424]
Montalambert, Comte de. Monks of the West. London, 1896.
Myers, Annie N. Woman's Work in America. New York, 1891.
Nuttall, Zelia. The Fundamental Principles of Old and New World
Civilizations. Cambridge, Mass., 1901.
Nolhac, Pierre de. Pétrarque et l'Humanisme. Paris, 1892.
Œlsner, Elise. Die Leistungen der deutschen Frau in den letzen
vierhundert Jahren auf wissenschaftlichem Gebiete. Guhrau, 1894.
Ozanam, A. F. Documents Inédits pour servir à l'Histoire Littéraire de
l'Italie. Paris, 1850.
Plato's Dialogues, Jowett's Translation. London, 1892.
Poestion, J. C., Griechische Dicterinnen. Wien, 1876.
----. Griechische Philosophinnen. Norden, 1885.
Rashdall, H. The Universities of Europe in the Middle Ages. Oxford,
1895.
Rebière, A. Les Femmes dans la Science. Paris, 1897.
Reich, Emil. Woman through the Ages. London, 1908.
Renaud, A. Histoire Nouvelle des Arts et des Sciences. Paris, 1878.
Renzi de, Salvatore. Storia Documentata della Scuola Medica di Salerno.
Naples, 1857.
Rodocanachi, E. La Femme Italienne à l'Epoque de la Renaissance. Paris,
1907.
Rousselot, Paul. Histoire de l'Éducation des Femmes en France. Paris,
1883.
Sabbadini, Remigio. Vita di Guarino Veronese. Genoa, 1891.
Sainte-Beuve, Charles-Augustin de. Nouvelle Galerie de Femmes Célèbres.
Paris, 1872.
Sarti, Mauri, et Fattorini, Mauri. De Claris Archigymnasii Bononiensis
Professoribus a Sæculo XI usque ad Sæculum XIV. Bologna, 1888-1896.
Schliemann, H. Ilios, the City and Country of the Trojans. New York,
1881.[Pg 425]
Schmidt, A. Sur l'Age de Pericles. 1877-79.
Sertillanges, A. D. Féminisme et Christianisme. Paris, 1908.
Simon, Jules. La Femme du Vingtième Siècle. Paris, 1892.
Socrates, Scholasticus. Ecclesiastical History. London, 1848.
Somerville, Mary. Personal Recollections from Early Life to Old Age.
Boston, 1874.
Stanton, Theodore. The Woman Question in Europe. New York, 1884.
Stupuy, H. Œuvres Philosophiques de Sophie Germain. Paris, 1896.
Symonds, J. A. A Short History of the Renaissance in Italy. London,
1893.
Thierry, A. Saint Jerome, La Société Chrétienne à Rome et l'Émigration
Romaine en Terre Sainte. Paris, 1867.
Tiraboschi, G. Storia della Letteratura Italiana. Milan, 1822.
Veitch, J. Memoir of Sir William Hamilton. Edinburgh, 1869.
Vivès, Joannes Ludovicus. De Tradendis Disciplinis. Colon, Agr., 1536.
Wallace, R. Eleanor Ormerod, Economic Entomologist, Autobiography and
Correspondence. London, 1904.
Wharton, H. T. Sappho. London, 1898.
Wolf, J. C. Mulierum Græcarum Quæ Oratione Prosa Usæ Sunt Fragmenta et
Elogia Græce et Latine. London, 1739.
----. Poetriarum Octo, Erinnæ, Myrus, Myrtidis, Corinnæ, Telesillæ,
Praxillæ, Nossidis, Anytæ, Fragmenta et Elogia. Hamburg, 1734.
----. Sapphus, Poetriæ Lesbiæ, Fragmenta et Elogia. Hamburg, 1733.
Woodward, W. H. Vittorino da Feltre and Other Humanist Educators.
Cambridge, England, 1905.
Wright, T. Womankind in Western Europe. London, 1869.
Zuccante, Giusseppe. Fra il Pensiero Antico e il Moderno. Milan, 1905.[Pg 426]
Women Inventors to whom Patents have been granted by the United States
Government, Compiled under the Direction of the Commissioner of Patents.
Washington, D. C., 1888.
Histoire Lettéraire de la France, Commencée par des Religieux
Bénédictins de S. Maur et Continuée par des Membres de l'Institut.
Paris, 1793-1906.
[Pg 427]

Abelard, 141, 142.

Abella, physician, 286.

Abrégé de Navigation, Lalande's, 182.

Academy of ancient Athens, admission of women to, 10.

Academy of the Lincei, Donna Caetani-Bovatelli, dean of, 326.

Academy of Science, French. See French Academy of Science.

Acta Mythologica Apostolorum in Arabic, translated by Agnes Lewis, 331 footnote.

Adams, (Mrs.) Abigail, quoted, 100.