# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2010
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	E. V. Zenker, Anarchism
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/31903/31903-h/31903-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

In those memorable days when the "International" separated into two
heterogeneous parts, we already find the majority of the Italian
Socialists adopting the standpoint of Bakunin; indeed the Italians,
even before the Hague Congress, took sides in favour of Bakunin
against the "Authority-Communists" of Marx. This first Anarchist
movement became no more important in Italy than elsewhere, and an
attempt at riot in April, 1877, near Benevento, headed by Cafiero and
Malatesta, gave an impression of childishness and comicality rather
than of menace. It was put down by a handful of soldiers; Malatesta
and Cafiero were taken prisoners, but set free. The severe repressive
measures afterwards adopted by the Government kept Anarchism down for
some time.
In Spain, also, at the beginning of the seventies, there was—as was
the case with all the Romance countries—a strong Bakuninist party,
which was said to have amounted to 50,000 men in 1873. During the
Federalist risings the Anarchists made common cause with the
Intransigeants, and succeeded in taking possession of several cities
for a short time. Their successes, however, did not last long, and
they were only able to hold out till 1874 in New Carthagena, where
they had finally to surrender after a regular siege by the Government
troops. The Anarchist societies and newspapers were suppressed,
and the severest measures taken against Anarchists, which only
roused them to the most sanguinary form of propaganda. The
Anarchists declared that if they were to be treated as wild
[Pg 277]
beasts, they would act as such, and cause death and destruction to the
Government and to any existing form of society at any time, in any
place, and by any means.
In Belgium about this period there was also a great increase of
Proudhonish Anarchism, which, later on, as in Switzerland, Italy, and
Spain, attached itself to Bakunin, and at the congress at The Hague
formed the centre of the opposition to the Marxists. The rapid growth
of Social Democracy in Belgium during the second half of the seventies
almost extinguished Anarchism there.
If we wish to characterise briefly this first period of the Anarchism
of action, a period terminated decisively by the year 1880, we should
define it as the process of separation between the Socialist and the
Anarchist tendency. Karl Marx, who had already come into opposition
with the "Father of Anarchism," and had attacked his "philosophy of
want" with the bitter criticism of "want of philosophy," noted the far
greater danger which threatened Socialism from the clever agitator
Bakunin, and entered into a life-and-death struggle against him.
Although there was a large personal element in this conflict, it was
really more than a personal struggle between two opponents. There was
a deep division among the proletariat themselves, separating
them—unconsciously for the most part—into two great and
irreconcilable camps; the first battle had been fought, and the result
was decidedly not in favour of the Anarchists. Towards the end of
[Pg 278]
the seventies we notice everywhere, except perhaps in France, where social
parties were strongly marked, a remarkable retrogression in Anarchism.
It appeared as if, after playing the part of an episode, it was to
disappear from the political stage.
In view of the fact that the history both of practical and theoretical
Anarchism is a history pure and simple of the most violent opposition
to Social Democracy inside its own camp, it shows both ignorance and
unfairness to make Socialists bear the blame of Anarchist propaganda.
It is undeniable that Anarchism can only flourish where Socialism is
generally prevalent. But that does not imply much, and no special
wisdom is needed to find the reason for this phenomenon. But that is
all. It is just as indisputable a fact, that Anarchism only flourishes
where Social Democracy is feeble, divided, and weak, and that it
always is unsuccessful in its efforts where the Social Democratic
party is strong and united, as in Germany. All attempts to plant
Anarchism in Germany have failed, not because of the preventive and
repressive measures of the Government, but because of the strength of
the party of Social Democracy. In England where there is a Socialist
movement among the working classes, with a definite aim, Anarchism has
remained merely an imported article; in Austria both parties have for
years fought fiercely, and in proportion as one rises the other sinks.
In Italy there are notorious centres of the Anarchism of action in
Leghorn, Lugo, Forli, Rome, and Sicily. In Milan and Turin, where
Social Democracy has established itself on the German
[Pg 279]
pattern, and has great influence among the lower classes, there are hardly any
"Anarchists of action." On the other hand, France, where the Socialist
party by being broken up into numerous small fragments is condemned to
lose its influence, is the headquarters of Anarchism. But anyone who
is not satisfied with these facts need only look at the causes of the
most significant turning-points which the history of modern Anarchism
has to offer, the London Congress of 1881, when the Anarchism of
action raised its Gorgon head, officially adopted the programme of the
propaganda of action, when the system of groups in every country was
accepted, and that era of outrages began which, instead of promoting
the work of the self-improvement of society, rather alienates it under
the pressure of a dreadful terrorism. To-day a small group, which in
number hardly equals a single one of the famous twelve nationalities
of Austria, has succeeded in making the whole world talk of them,
while the parliaments of every nation pass their laws with reference
to this group, and often in aiming their blows against Anarchists
strike those who are merely followers of a natural evolution.
And, it may be asked, On what day or by what act was so fortunate a
chance offered to Anarchism? The occasion was the German Socialist
law. This fact is indisputable.
It was only in the natural order of things that, in 1878, when the
German policy of force happened partially to paralyse the legal agitation
of the Social Democrats by exceptional legislation, a radical group
[Pg 280]
arose among the Socialist working classes which, led by the agitator
Most, always an extremist, and Hasselmann, drew from these
circumstances the lesson that now, being excluded from constitutional
agitation, they must devote all their powers to prepare for
revolution. This preparation, Most declared, should consist in the
arming of all Socialists, energetic secret agitation to excite the
masses, and, above all, revolutionary acts and outrages. The agitation
was to be carried on by quite small groups of at most five men. Like
Bakunin, Most, who, on being expelled from Berlin early in 1879,
emigrated to London, where he founded his journal Freedom, had gone
on in advance of the general Socialist movement, and for a time
proceeded with it; but, like Bakunin too, he had been disowned and
violently attacked by the Social Democratic party, when he showed the
Anarchist in him so openly. The immediate consequence of Most and
Hasselmann's programme was the formal expulsion of both agitators from
the party by the secret congress at Wyden, near Ossingen, in
Switzerland.
But just because of the disposition engendered by the Socialist law,
this decision was quite powerless to stifle the Most and Hasselmann
movement. On the contrary, Most's following grew from day to day,
aided in no small degree by his paper Freedom, written in the
glowing language of the demagogue, and now calling itself openly an
"Anarchist organ." When Most came to London, he soon took the
lead of the "Social Democratic Working Men's Club," then a
thousand strong, the majority of which, after
[Pg 281]
the separation of the more moderate members who did not like the new
programme, went over to Most's side. From these adherents Most formed
an organisation of the "United Socialists," in which the
"International" was to be revived again upon the most radical basis.
The seat of this organisation was to be London, and from thence a
Central Committee of seven persons was to look after the linking
together of revolutionary societies abroad. Side by side with this
public organisation, Most formed a secret "Propagandist Club," to
carry on an international revolutionary agitation and to prepare
directly for the general revolution which Most thought was near at
hand. For this purpose a committee was to be formed in every country
in order to form groups after the Nihilist pattern, and at the proper
time to take the lead of the movement. The activity of all these
national organisations was to be united in the Central Committee in
London, which was an international body. The organ of the organisation
was to be the Freedom. The following of this new movement grew
rapidly in every country, and already in 1881 a great demonstration of
Most's ideas took place at the memorable International Revolutionary
Congress in London, the holding of which was mainly due to the
initiative of Most and the well-known Nihilist, Hartmann.
Already, in April, 1881, a preliminary congress had been held in
Paris, at which the procedure of the "parliamentary Socialists" had
been rejected, since only a social revolution was regarded as a
remedy; in the struggle against present-day society
[Pg 282]
all and any means were looked upon as right and justifiable; and in
view of this the distribution of leaflets, the sending of emissaries,
and the use of explosives were recommended. A German living in London
had proposed an amendment involving the forcible removal of all
potentates after the manner of the assassination of the Russian Czar,
but this was rejected as "at present not yet suitable." The congress
following this preliminary one took place in London on July 14 to 19,
1881, and was attended by about forty delegates, the representatives
of several hundred groups.
"The revolutionaries of all countries are uniting into an
'International Social Revolutionary Working Men's Association' for the
purpose of a social revolution. The headquarters of the Association is
at London, and sub-committees are formed in Paris, Geneva, and New
York. In every place where like-minded supporters exist, sections and
an executive committee of three persons are to be formed. The
committees of a country are to keep up with one another, and with the
Central Committee, regular communication by means of continual reports
and information, and have to collect money for the purchase of poison
and weapons, as well as to find places suitable for laying mines, and
so on. To attain the proposed end, the annihilation of all rulers,
ministers of State, nobility, the clergy, the most prominent
capitalists, and other exploiters, any means are permissible, and
therefore great attention should be given specially to the study of
chemistry and the preparation of explosives, as being
[Pg 283]
the most important weapons. Together with the chief committee in London
there will also be established an executive committee of international
composition and an information bureau, whose duty is to carry out the
decisions of the chief committee and to conduct correspondence."
This Congress and the decisions passed thereat had very far-reaching
and fateful consequences for the development of the Anarchism of
action. The executive committee set to work at once, and sought to
carry out every point of the proposed programme, but especially to
utilise for purposes of demonstration and for feverish agitation every
revolutionary movement of whatever origin or tendency it might be,
whether proceeding from Russian Nihilism or Irish Fenianism. How
successful their activity was, was proved only too well by now
unceasing outrages in every country.
The London Congress operated as a beacon of fire; scarcely had it
uttered its terrible concluding words when it found in all parts of
Europe an echo multiplied a thousand-fold. Anarchism, which was
thought to be dead, celebrated a dread resurrection, and in places
where it had never existed it suddenly raised its Gorgon head aloft.
The reason is mainly to be found in the fact that all the numerous
radical-social elements which had not agreed with the tactics of the
Social Democrats in view of Government prosecutions, now adopted
Most's programme without asking in the least what the Anarchist
theory was or whether they believed in it. The two catchwords
of the Anarchism of action, Communism and Anarchy,
[Pg 284]
did not fail to have their usual effect upon the most radical and
confused elements of discontent. Communism is, to speak plainly, only
"the absolute average"; and as there are large numbers of men who fall
even below the average both mentally, morally, and materially,
Communism can have at any time nothing terrible in it for these
people, and even represents to them a highly desirable Eldorado.
Collectivism is the impractical invention of a man of genius, that may
be compared to a mechanical invention that consists of so many screws,
wheels, and springs that it never can be set going. But Communism
seems an easy expedient for the average man; it can always reckon upon
a public; certainly one is always to be found. By Anarchy, of course,
the mob understands always only its own dictatorship, and this remedy,
too, always has a great attraction for the uneducated masses. But as
regards the tactics commended by the London Congress, it was
completely adapted to the mental capacities of the representatives of
"darkest Europe." The "new movement" could thus count upon success,
especially as skilful agitators like Kropotkin, Most, Penkert,
Gautier, and others devoted to it all their remarkable powers. This
success was gained with surprising rapidity.
In Paris in 1880 Anarchism was almost extinguished; its organ, the
Révolution Sociale, had to cease when Andrieux, the
Prefect of Police, who had supplied it with money, left his
appointment, and supplies were stopped. The party was disorganised
both in Paris and the provinces, and the Jurassic
[Pg 285]
Federation was nearly extinct. Immediately after the London Congress,
the "Revolutionary International League" was established, an active
intercommunication was kept up with London, and an eager agitation was
developed. In consequence, however, of the strong opposition of the
other Socialists, this League remained weak, and scarcely numbered a
hundred members. On the other hand, Anarchism increased all the more
in the great industrial centres of the provinces. In the South were
founded the Féderation Lyonnaise and the Féderation
Stéphanoise, which, especially after Kropotkin took over the
leadership and cleverly took advantage of the discords prevailing
among other Socialists (e. g., at the congress of St. Etienne), made
astonishing progress in Lyons, the main centre of the movement, St.
Etienne, Roanne, Narbonne, Nîmes, Bordeaux, and other places.
According to Kropotkin, these unions already numbered in a year's time
8000 members. In Lyons they possessed an organ, which, like Most's
Freedom, appeared under all kinds of titles in order to elude the
police, and which openly advocated outrages and gave recipes for the
manufacture of explosives.
The consequences of this unchecked agitation soon became visible. The
first opportunity was given by the great strikes which broke out at
the beginning of 1882 in Roanne, Bezières, Molières, and other
industrial centres of Southern France, and were used by the Anarchists
for their own purposes. A workman, Fournier, who shot his employer
[Pg 286]
in the open street, was honoured in Lyons by the summoning of a meeting
to present him with a presentation revolver. For the national fête on
the 14th July, 1882, a larger riot was planned to take place in Paris,
for which purpose help was also sought from London. But as there
happened to be a review of troops in Paris on that date, the
Anarchists contented themselves with issuing a manifesto "to the
Slaves of Labour," concluding with the words: "No Fêtes! Death to the
Exploiters of Labour! Long Live the Social Revolution!" In autumn,
1882, riots broke out in Montceau-les-Mines and Lyons, in which
violent means were employed, including dynamite. Next spring (March,
1883), there and in Paris great demonstrations of the "unemployed"
took place in the streets, combined with robbery and dynamite
outrages, and on July 14th there were sanguinary encounters with the
armed forces of the State in Roubaix and elsewhere, when the populace
was incited to arise against the bourgeoisie, "who" (it was said)
"were indulging in festivities while they had condemned Louise Michel,
the champion of the proletariat, to a cruel imprisonment."
The French Government now thought it no longer possible to look on
quietly at these proceedings, and sought to secure the agitators,
which proved no light task. Of the fourteen prisoners accused of
complicity in the riots of Montceau-les-Mines, only nine were condemned
to terms of imprisonment of one to five years or less important
counts. On the other hand, at the Lyons trial of 19th January, 1883,
[Pg 287]
only three out of sixty-six were acquitted; the others, including
Kropotkin, his follower Gautier, a brilliant orator and fanatical
propagandist, Bordas, Bernard, and others, were condemned to
imprisonment with the full penalty on the strength of the law of March
14, 1872, against the "International." Almost all the accused,
including Kropotkin, openly confessed that both intellectually and in
deed they were the originators of the excesses at Lyons and
Montceau-les-Mines, and that they were Anarchists, but denied the
existence of an international organisation, and protested against the
application of the law of the 14th March, 1872.
Similarly the Government succeeded in securing the ringleaders of the
demonstrations in Paris. At the same time the Government endeavoured
to check the Anarchist agitation by administrative methods; but
nothing could stay the progress of the new movement that had started
since the London Congress. France is the headquarters of Anarchism,
Paris contains its leading journals, over all France there exists a
network of groups; the propaganda of action here celebrated its
saddest triumphs, as is only too well shown by the cases of Ravachol,
Henry, and Caserio.
Switzerland, the original home of the Anarchism of action, now gives
rise to but little comment. Immediately after the London Congress
Kropotkin developed his most active agitation in the old Anarchist
centre, the Lake of Geneva district. On July 4, 1882, at Lausanne,
at an annual congress of some thirty delegates, Kropotkin estimated
the number of his adherents at two thousand. Lausanne
[Pg 288]
Congress adopted the same attitude as the London Congress, and took
the opportunity on the occasion of the international musical festival
at Geneva, August 12 to 14, 1882, to hold a secret international
congress there. At this the question of the separation of the
Anarchists from every other party was discussed. As a matter of fact
this separation had long since taken place; the long-drawn struggle
between Marxists and Bakuninists had caused a complete division
between the Social Democrats and Anarchists; latterly even the
adherents of Collectivism, the Possibilists, and other groups had
separated from the Anarchists; and thus the Geneva Congress merely
gave expression to the complete individualisation of the new movement,
and it was decided to make the new programme officially known in a
manifesto. This manifesto ran:
"Our ruler is our enemy. We Anarchists, i. e., men without any
rulers, fight against all those who have usurped any power, or who
wish to usurp it. Our enemy is the owner who keeps the land for
himself, and makes the peasant work for his advantage. Our enemy is
the manufacturer who fills his factory with wage-slaves; our enemy is
the State, whether monarchical, oligarchical, or democratic, with its
officials and staff of officers, magistrates, and police spies. Our
enemy is every thought of authority, whether men call it God or devil,
in whose name the priests have so long ruled honest people. Our enemy
is the law which always oppresses the weak by the strong, to the
justification and apotheosis of crime. But if the landowners,
[Pg 289]
the manufacturers, the heads of the State, the priests, and the law are
our enemies, we are also theirs, and we boldly oppose them. We intend
to reconquer the land and the factory from the landowner and the
manufacturer; we mean to annihilate the State, under whatever name it
may be concealed; and we mean to get our freedom back again in spite
of priest or law. According to our strength, we will work for the
annihilation of all legal institutions, and are in accord with
everyone who defies the law by a revolutionary act. We despise all
legal means because they are the negation of our rights; we do not
want so-called universal suffrage, since we cannot get away from our
own personal sovereignty, and cannot make ourselves accomplices in the
crimes committed by our so-called representatives. Between us
Anarchists and all political parties, whether Conservatives or
Moderates, whether they fight for freedom or recognise it by their
admissions, a deep gulf is fixed. We wish to remain our own masters
and he among us who strives to become a chief or leader is a traitor
to our cause. Of course we know that individual freedom cannot exist
without a union with other free associates. We all live by the support
one of another, that is the social life which has created us, that is
the work of all, which gives to each the consciousness of his rights
and the power to defend them. Every social product is the work of the
whole community, to which all have a claim in equal manner. For we are
Communists; we recognise that unless patrimonial, communal, provincial,
[Pg 290]
and national limits are abolished, the work must be begun
anew. It is ours to conquer and defend common property, and to
overthrow governments by whatever name they may be called."
In spite of the severe repressive measures taken against the Swiss
Anarchists in consequence of the outrages in the south of France, in
which they were rightly supposed to be implicated, they held their
annual congress from July 7 to 9, 1883, at Chaux-de-Fonds, at which
the establishment of an international fund "for the sacrifice of the
reactionary bourgeoisie," the disadvantage from the Anarchist
standpoint of a union of revolutionary groups, and the necessity of
the propaganda of action were decided upon.
The beginnings of German Anarchism in Switzerland date from the
characteristic year 1880, when the division among German Socialists
(arising from Most's influence) was felt among the Swiss working
classes also. In the summer of 1880 Most himself was in Switzerland,
and succeeded in collecting round him a small following, which, as
early as October, felt itself strong enough to hold on the Lake of
Geneva a sort of opposition congress to the one at Wyden, in order to
declare its decisions null and void. At the same time the Freedom
was recognised as the organ of the party. The London Congress gave a
new impulse to the agitation. Proceedings were at once taken to
realise in Switzerland the London programme; groups were formed,
and connection made between them by special correspondents
(trimardeurs), a propaganda fund established,
[Pg 291]
and messages sent to Germany inciting to commit outrages as
opportunity offered. In consequence of this active agitation, the
Anarchist groups in France and N. E. Switzerland continually
increased, and when in 1883 Most's Freedom no longer could be
published in London, it appeared in Switzerland under the editorship
of Stellmacher, who was afterwards executed in Vienna, until Most,
after performing his sentence of imprisonment in London, transferred
it with him to New York. In this year (1883) the growth of Anarchism
was so rapid that its adherents even succeeded in gaining the majority
in many of the German working-men's clubs or in breaking them up. In
August, 1883, the Anarchists held a secret conference in Zürich,
which declared Most's system of groups to be satisfactory; drew up a
new plan for extending, as far as possible and with all possible
safety, the spread of Anarchist literature; and considered the
establishment of a secret printing-press. The activity of the Swiss
Anarchists consisted mainly in smuggling Anarchist literature into
Germany and Austria, while the Jurassic Federation again concerned
itself chiefly with doing the same for Southern France. Both parties
now had the most friendly relations one with another.
Swiss Anarchism leads us directly to Germany and Austria. Germany may be
termed the most free from Anarchists of any country in Europe. In the seventies
a few groups had been founded here from Switzerland, and by means of the
Arbeiterzeitung (Working-Mens' Journal), appearing in Bern,
[Pg 292]
and conducted by Reinsdorf, a former compositor and
enthusiastic agitator, an attempt was made to convert the working
classes of Germany to Anarchism. But owing to the strength of Social
Democracy in this country, all Reinsdorf's efforts at agitation were
in vain. Even the superior skill of Johann Most could only produce
very feeble and transitory results. When he openly professed
Anarchism, and was expelled from the Social Democratic party, a small
following remained to him in Germany; but in the German Empire only a
dozen or so groups were formed (chiefly in Berlin and Hamburg) which
adopted Most's programme; but their numbers did not rise above two
hundred, and they remained quite unimportant.
The effects, however, of Most's agitation in Switzerland were all the
more strongly felt in Austria, the classic land of political
immaturity and insecurity. To-day the Austrian Empire is almost free
from Anarchists; other elements have come to take up the rôle of
fishing in troubled waters. But at the time of the general increase of
Anarchism, after the London Congress, Austria-Hungary was one of the
strongholds of Anarchism. A former house painter, Josef Penkert, a man
who had given himself a very fair education by his own efforts, and
was Most's most eager pupil, conducted the agitation in Vienna and
Pesth. Groups sprang up, and the agitation was so strong that the new
Social Democratic party was soon relegated to the background.
Everywhere Anarchist papers arose—in Vienna the Zukunft
(Future) and the Delnicke Listy, in Reichenberg
[Pg 293]
the Radical, in Prague the Socialist and the Communist, in
Lemberg the Praca, in Cracow the Robotnik and the Przedswit,
imported from Switzerland. The chief organs of Austrian Anarchism,
however, flourished on the other side of the river Leitha, where the
press laws were interpreted more liberally than in the west of the
kingdom. In Hungary there were numerous Anarchist journals, some of
which, like the Pesth Socialist, preached the most sanguinary and
merciless propaganda. This was acted upon in Vienna, under the
guidance of Penkert, Stellmacher, and Kammerer, in such a way that
Most's Freedom, which was smuggled in in large quantities, was
delighted at it. In 1881 Anarchist meetings had collisions with the
authorities. The money for the agitation was obtained by robbery, as
the trial of Merstallinger proved. The most prominent Anarchist
speakers were examined judicially in consequence of this trial, which
took place in March, 1882, but had to be acquitted, which naturally
only increased the confidence of the propagandists. The Socialists
succeeded no better in making headway against this rapidly increasing
movement. The "General Workmen's Conference," sitting at Brünn on
the 15th and 16th of October, 1882, certainly passed an open vote of
want of confidence against the Anarchist minority, but a resolution to
the effect that Merstallinger's offence was a common crime, that the
tactics preached by the Anarchists ought to be rejected as unworthy of
Social Democrats, and that all adherents of such tactics were to be
regarded as enemies and traitors
[Pg 294]
to the people—this was rejected after a hot debate.
All this naturally increased the confidence and recklessness
of the Anarchist agitation. Secret printing-presses were busily
engaged spreading incendiary literature, which advocated the murder of
police officials and explained the tactics suitable for this purpose.
On the 26th and 27th October, 1883, at a secret conference at Lang
Enzersdorf, a new plan of action was discussed and adopted, namely, to
proceed with all means in their power to take action against
"exploiters and agents of authority," to keep people in a state of
continual excitement by such acts of terrorism, and to bring about the
revolution in every possible way. This programme was immediately acted
upon in the murder of several police agents. On December 15, 1883, at
Floridsdorf, a police official named Hlubek was murdered, and the
condemnation of Rouget, who was convicted of the crime, on June 23,
1884, was immediately answered the next day by the murder of the
police agent Blöct. The Government now took energetic measures. By
order of the Ministry, a state of siege was proclaimed in Vienna and
district from January 30, 1884, by which the usual tribunals for
certain crimes and offences were temporarily suspended, and the
severest repressive measures were exercised against the Anarchists, so
that Anarchism in Austria rapidly declined, and at the same time it
soon lost its leaders. Stellmacher and Kammerer were executed,
Penkert escaped to England, most of the other agitators were fast
in prison, the journals were suppressed and the groups broken
[Pg 295]
up. The same occurred in Hungary, which had only followed the fashion
in Austria, for in Hungary the social question is by no means so acute
and the public movement in it is merely political.
At present Anarchism in Germany and Austria is confined to an (at
most) harmless doctrinaireism, and it will be well to accept with
great reserve any statements to the contrary; for neither those who
were condemned at the last Anarchist trial at Vienna, nor the Bohemian
Anarchist and Omladinist trials, nor the suspected persons who have
recently migrated to Germany, appear to have been more than half
conscious of Anarchism, nor do they appear to have had any
international associations.
In Belgium, also, after the passing of the German Socialist laws, a
difference of opinion became manifest among the working classes, which
gave new life to Anarchism, almost extinct as it was at the end of the
seventies. The "German Reading Union" in Brussels split into two
parties, the more radical of which was filled with Most's ideas and
eagerly agitated for the dissemination of his Freedom. As this
radical tendency had found many supporters among the German
Socialists, it made itself noticeable at the Brussels Congress of
1880. The keener became the struggle between the Most-Hasselmann and
the Bebel-Liebknecht parties, the more sharply defined became the
opposition in the ranks of the Belgian working classes. The Radicals
united into a "Union Révolutionnaire"; founded their own
party organ, La Persévérance, at Verviers;
and declared themselves in favour of the London Congress as
[Pg 296]
against that at Coire. The others held quarterly advisory congresses
at Brussels, Verviers, and Ceresmes, at which it was agreed to revive
the "International Working-Men's Association" on a revolutionary basis
and not to limit the various groups in their autonomy. These meetings
also adopted the resolution which the German members in Brussels had
suggested about the employment of explosives. But in spite of the
active agitation, and the founding of the "Republican League" to show
the activity of the Anarchists as opposed to the Socialist "Electoral
Reform League," Anarchism in Belgium made no progress, mainly on
account of internal dissension, and the annual congress arranged for
1882 did not even take place. In spite of the most active propaganda,
circumstances have not altered in Belgium during the last ten years.
We must be careful not to set down to the Anarchists the repeated
dynamite outrages which are so common during the great strikes in
Belgium, although in certain isolated cases, as in the dynamite affair
at Gomshoren, near Brussels, in 1883, the hand of the Anarchists
cannot be mistaken.
England, the ancient refuge of political offenders, although it has
sheltered Bakunin, Kropotkin, Reclus, Most, Penkert, Louise Michel,
Cafiero, Malatesta, and other Anarchist leaders, and still shelters
some of them; although London is rich in Anarchist clubs and
newspapers, meetings and congresses, yet possesses no Anarchism
"native to the soil," and has formed at all times rather a kind of
exchange or market-place for Anarchist ideas, motive
[Pg 297]
forces, and the literature of agitation. London is especially the headquarters
of German Anarchism; the English working classes have, however, always
regarded their ideas very coldly, while the Government have always
regarded the eccentric proceedings of the Anarchists, as long as they
confined themselves merely to talking and writing, in the most logical
spirit of the doctrine of laisser faire. Certainly, when Most went a
little too far in his Freedom, the full power of the English law was
put in motion against him, and condemned him on one occasion to
sixteen, and on another to eighteen months' imprisonment with hard
labour. But of greater effect than this punishment was the fact that
in all London no printer could be found to set up the type for
Freedom. Thereupon Most left thankless Old England grumbling, and
went to the New World, where, however, he was, if possible, taken even
less seriously.
Spain was the only country where Anarchism, even under the new
impulse of the London Congress, really kept in the main to its old
Collectivist principles. In consequence of the movement proceeding
from the London Congress, the Spanish Anarchists called a national
congress at Barcelona on September 24 and 25, 1881, at which, in the
presence of one hundred and forty delegates, a programme and statutes
of organisation were drawn up and a "Spanish Federation of the International
Working-Men's Association" was founded. Its aim was to be the political,
economic, and social emancipation of all the working classes by the
[Pg 298]
establishment of a form of society founded upon a Collectivist basis,
and guaranteeing the unconditional autonomy of the free and federally
united communes. The only means of reaching this aim was declared to
be a revolutionary upheaval carried out by force. The organisation
sketched out at the Barcelona Congress is quite in Proudhon's spirit;
the arrangement of its members was to be a double one, both by trades
and districts, and both divisions had mutually to enlarge each other.
The basis of the trade organisation was to be formed by the single
local groups; these were to be united into local associations, these
into provincial associations, and these again into a national
association, the "Union." Monthly, quarterly, and yearly conferences,
and the committees attached to them, were to form the decisive and
executive organs of these associations. Parallel with the arrangement
by trades was to be the territorial arrangement, all the local trade
associations of the same district being formed into one united local
association, this again into provincial associations, these into the
national association of the whole country, i. e., into the
"Federation"; and here again local, provincial, and national
congresses performed all executive functions as local, provincial, and
national committees. The National Committee established by the
Congress developed immediately an active agitation, so that at the
next congress at Seville (24th to 26th September, 1883), attended by
254 delegates, the Federation numbered already 10 provincial, 200
local unions, and 632 sections, with 50,000 members.
[Pg 299]
Their organ, the Revista Social, which appeared in Madrid, possessed
about 10,000 subscribers, although besides this there were several
local journals.
But this rapid growth of the Anarchist movement in Spain was followed
by a retrogression, mainly caused by the increased severity of the
measures taken by the Government in consequence of the terrorism
created by the Andalusian secret society of "The Black Hand" (Mano
Negra), and proceedings were taken against the Anarchists. Their
examination, however, failed to reveal the supposed connection between
the Mano Negra and Anarchism, and the Anarchists, who had been
arrested wholesale, had to be acquitted. The Federation itself had
expressed to every society its disapproval of the "secret actions of
those assassins," and had pointed to the legality and public nature of
their organisation and agitation, as well as to their statutes, which
had received the approval of the authorities. The congress at Valencia
(1883) repeated this declaration. Henceforth Spanish Anarchism
proceeded on peaceful lines, and only in the last few years did it
have recourse to force after the example of the French, as, e. g.,
in the attack on Campos, and the outrage in the Liceo Theatre at
Barcelona.
As to Italy, here also after 1880 Anarchism awoke to new life, as it
did everywhere else, and at the same time broke finally with the
Democratic Socialists. In December, 1886, the Anarchists held a secret
congress at Chiasso, at which fifteen delegates of cities of North
Italy took part. These professed Anarchist Communism, viewed with horror any
[Pg 300]
division au choix, and recommended "the use of every
favorable opportunity for seriously disturbing public order." In
agreement with this the Italians, represented by Cafiero and
Malatesta, took part in the London Congress in the following year. On
their return these two men developed an active agitation, and began a
bitter campaign against the moderate Socialists, especially when their
leader Costa was elected to Parliament, which the Anarchists regarded
as a betrayal of the proletariat to the bourgeoisie. In the year
1883 Malatesta was arrested at Florence, and, with several companions,
condemned by the royal courts, on February 1, 1884, to several years'
imprisonment, it being proved that groups had already been formed in
Rome, Florence, and Naples on the basis of the London programme, and
that these groups had planned and prepared dynamite outrages. Leghorn,
which in the time of the Romans was a refuge for criminals, may be
regarded as the centre of modern Italian Anarchism. "In Leghorn,"
writes one who knows his facts, "the number of the Anarchists of
action is legion. The idea of slaking their inborn thirst for blood on
the 'fat bourgeoisie' could not fail to gain many adherents among
the descendants of that Sciolla, who at the time of the last Grand
Duke founded the celebrated dagger-band and slew 700 people; how many
adherents it gained may be seen from the figures of the last election
(March, 1894), when 3200 electors voted for the Anarchist murderer
Merga." Lugo (the home of Lega), Forli, and Cesena form important
centres of Italian Anarchism. The rôle
[Pg 301]
which it has played in the international propaganda is fresh in the
memory of all, and is sufficiently indicated by the names of Lega and
Caserio.
It will be seen from the foregoing that Anarchism, after retrograding
till the end of the seventies, made unexpectedly rapid progress in
every country after 1880, lasting till about 1884, but after that a
new reaction, or at least a diminution of propaganda, is to be
noticed. The renewed force with which the Anarchism of action has
during the last three years or so made itself felt in the Latin
countries, appears already to present new features; this may be termed
the third epoch of Anarchism. The epoch dating from the London
Congress is characterised by certain party features (federations,
alliances, etc.), which have now quite disappeared.
With Most's departure for America, the central government created by
him—if we can speak of a central government in view of the complete
autonomy of the groups—appears to have completely lost its power, and
when, at the congresses of Chicago (1891) and London (1892), Merlino
and Malatesta moved that some form of leadership of the party should
be established, their motion was rejected, it being pointed out that
it was inconsistent with the main Anarchist principle: "Do as thou
wilt." When nowadays we hear talk of an "International Organisation"
of an Anarchist party and so forth, this must be taken merely in the
very wide meaning of a completely free entente between single
groups.
[Pg 302]
Everything at present rests with the "group," which is, at the same
time, very small and of an extremely fluctuating character. Five,
seven, or at most a dozen men unite in a group according to
occupation, personal relationships, propinquity of dwelling, or other
causes; only after a certain time to separate again. The groups are
only connected with each other almost entirely by means of moving
intermediaries, called trimardeurs, a slang expression borrowed from
the thieves. This organisation completely corresponds to the purely
individual character of their actions; Anarchist riots and
conspiracies are out of fashion; and the outrages of recent years have
arisen almost exclusively from the initiative of individuals. This
circumstance, as well as the whole organisation of the Anarchists, of
course renders difficult any summary proceedings on the part of the
Government of the country; which is probably by no means the least
important reason for the adoption of these tactics by the Anarchists.
As to the numerical strength of Anarchism, different estimates are
given by the Anarchists and their opponents; but all of them are very
untrustworthy. Kropotkin, in 1882, gave the numbers of those living at
Lyons at 3000; those in the basin of the Rhone at 5000; and spoke of
thousands of others living in the south of France. One of the sixty-six
defendants at the Lyons trial wrote: "We are all captured"—a
remarkable difference of numbers compared with Kropotkin's 3000.
Lately, the Paris Figaro has published some data, said to be from an
[Pg 303]
authentic source, about the strength of the Anarchists, and, according
to this journal, about 2000 Anarchists are known to the police in
France, among whom are about 500 Frenchmen and 1500 foreigners. The
majority of these foreign Anarchists consists of the Italians (45 per
cent.), then come the Swiss (25 per cent.), the Germans and Russians
(20 per cent., each), Belgians and Austrians (5 per cent., each),
Spaniards and Bulgarians (each 2 per cent.), and the natives of
several minor States. This proportionate percentage of course only
refers to Anarchists living in France or known there, and cannot be
taken as trustworthy for international numbers. We have in fact
practically no knowledge of its present strength, for it is as often
undervalued as overrated. When this is done by those who are not
Anarchists, it cannot be wondered at, since one of the leaders of the
Anarchism of action in Paris confessed his own ignorance by the
remark: "There are in the world some thousands of us, perhaps some
millions."
[Pg 304]
Legislation against Anarchists — Anarchism and Crime — Tolerance
towards Anarchist Theory — Suppression of Anarchist Crime — Conclusion.
hen about a year ago (1894) the Italian Caserio, a baker's
apprentice, assassinated the amiable and respected President of the
French Republic, probably thinking that he was thereby ridding the
world of a tyrant, the public, in a mood perfectly comprehensible if
not justifiable, was ready to take the severest measures against
anyone suspected of Anarchism. An international convention against the
Anarchists was demanded, but this was almost unanimously rejected by
European diplomatists. Parliaments, however, showed themselves more
subservient to the anxiety of the public than the diplomatists. Italy
gave its Government full powers over administrative dealings with all
suspected persons, and France passed a Press law limiting very considerably,
not only the Anarchist press, but the press generally. Spain had already
[Pg 305]
anticipated this action. Germany took all manner of trouble to frame
exceptional laws, although one cannot quite see how this country was
concerned in the matter. England alone, true to its traditions,
rejected the proposal of the House of Lords to pass exceptional laws
against the Anarchists, Lord Rosebery, who was then Premier, declaring
that the ordinary law and the existing executive organisation were
amply sufficient to cope with the Anarchists.
The question as to which State has pursued the better policy appears
at first extremely difficult to answer. It is believed that we have in
Anarchism something quite new, which has never occurred before,
something monstrous and not human, against which quite extraordinary
measures are permissible. To judge whether this standpoint is correct,
we must, before everything, distinguish carefully the theory from the
propaganda.
The common view—or prejudice—soon disposes of the Anarchist theory:
the anxious possessor of goods thinks it is nothing less than a direct
incitement to robbery and murder; the practical politician merely
regards the Anarchist theory as not worth debate, because it could not
be carried out in practice; and even men of science, as we have seen
in the case of Laveleye, and could prove by other examples, look upon
Anarchist theories merely as the mad and feverish fancies of
extravagant minds.
None of them would much mind if all Anarchist literature were consumed in an
auto da fé and the authors thereof rendered harmless by being sent off
[Pg 306]
to Siberia or New Caledonia. Such judgments are easily passed, but
whether one could settle the question permanently thereby is another matter.
That the theory of Anarchism is not merely a systematic incitement to
robbery and murder we need hardly repeat, now that we have concluded
an exhaustive statement of it. Proudhon and Stirner, the men who have
laid down the basis of the new doctrine, never once preached force.
"If ideas once have originated," said Proudhon once, "the very
paving-stones would rise of themselves, unless the Government has
sense enough to avert this. And if such is not the case, then nothing
is of any use." It will be admitted that, for a revolutionary, this is
a very moderate speech. The doctrine of propaganda, which since
Proudhon's time has always accompanied a certain form of Anarchist
theory, is a foreign element, having no necessary or internal
connection with the fundamental ideas of Anarchism. It is simply a
piece of tactics borrowed from the circumstances peculiar to Russia,
and accepted moreover only by one fraction of the Anarchists, and
approved by very few indeed in its most crude form; it is merely
the old tactics of all revolutionary parties in every age.
The deeds of people like Jacques Clement, Ravaillac, Corday, Sand, and
Caserio, are all of the same kind; hardly anyone will be found to-day
to maintain that Sand's action followed from the views of the
Burschenschaft, or Clement's from Catholicism, even when we
learn that Sand was regarded by his fellows as a saint, as was
Charlotte Corday and Clement, or even when learned Jesuits like Sa,
[Pg 307]
Mariana, and others, cum licentia et approbatione superiorum, in
connection with Clement's outrage, discussed the question of regicide
in a manner not unworthy of Netschajew or Most.
We may quote the remarks of a specialist[59]
upon the connection between politics and criminality. "History is rich in
examples of the combination of criminal acts with politics, wherein sometimes
political passion and sometimes a criminal disposition forms the chief
element. While Pompeius the Sober has all honest people on his
side, his talented contemporaries, Cicero, Cæsar, and
Brutus have as followers all the baser sort, men like Clodius and
Cataline,[60]
libertines and drunkards like Antonius, the bankrupt Curio, the mad
Clelius, Dolabella the spendthrift, who wanted to repudiate all his
debts by passing a law. The Greek Clephts, those brave champions of
the independence of their home, were, in times of peace, brigands. In
Italy the Papacy and the Bourbons in 1860 kept the brigands in their
pay against the national party and its troops; and Garibaldi had on
his side in Sicily the Maffia, just as in Naples the Liberals were
supported by the Camorra. This alliance with the Camorra is not even
yet quite dissolved, as the occurrences in Naples at the time of the
recent disturbances in the Italian Parliament have shown, nor
will matters probably improve. Criminals usually take a large
share in the initial stages of insurrections and revolutions,
[Pg 308]
for at a time when the weak and undecided are still hesitating, the impulsive
force of abnormal and unhealthy natures preponderates, and their example calls
forth epidemics of excesses.
"Chenn, in his remarks upon revolutionary movements in France before
1848, has shown that political passion gradually degenerated into
unconcealed criminal attempts; thus the precursors of Anarchism at
that time had for leader a certain Coffirean, who finally became a
raving Communist, and exalted thieving into a socio-political
principle, plundered the merchants with the aid of his adherents,
because in his opinion they cheated their customers; by thus doing
they believed they were only making perfectly justifiable reprisals,
and at the same time converting the plundered ones into discontented
men who would join the revolutionary cause. This group also occupied
themselves in the manufacture of forged bank notes, which led in 1847
to their being discovered and severely punished after the real
Republicans had disowned them. In England at the time of the
conspiracies against Cromwell, bands of robbers collected in the
neighbourhood of London, and the number of thieves increased; the
robber-bands assumed a political colouring and asked those whom they
attacked whether they had sworn an oath of fidelity to the Republic,
and according to their answer they let them go or robbed and
ill-treated them. Companies of soldiers had to be sent to repress
them, nor were the soldiers always victorious. Hordes of vagabonds,
bands of robbers, and societies of thieves in unheard-of numbers also
[Pg 309]
appeared as forerunners of the French Revolution. Mercier states that
in 1789 an army of 10,000 vagabonds gradually approached Paris and
penetrated into the city; these were the rabble that attended the
wholesale executions during the Reign of Terror and later took part in
the fusilades at Toulon and the wholesale drownings at Nantes; at the
same time the revolutionary troops and militia were, according to
Meissner, merely organised bands who committed every kind of murder,
robbery, and extortion. The criminals who happened to be caught
occasionally during the Revolution sought to save themselves by the
cry of à l'aristocrate; when on trial they behaved in the most
audacious manner, and grinned at the judges when condemned, and the
women behaved most shamelessly. In 1790 only 490 accused, and in 1791
not more than 1198, were sent to the Conciergerie. A similar state of
affairs prevailed in the Commune of 1871. Among the population then in
Paris, deceived as they were in their patriotic hopes, unnerved by
inglorious combats, weakened by hunger and alcohol, no one cared to
bestir themselves but the unruly elements, the déclassés, the
criminals, the madmen, and the drunkards who imposed their will upon
the city; that these were the main elements in the rising is shown by
the slaughter of helpless captives, by the refined cruelty of the
murderers, who compelled their victims to jump over a wall, and shot
them while doing so, while others were riddled by bullets; thus one
citizen received sixty-nine bullets, and Abbé Bengy had sixty-two
bayonet wounds."
[Pg 310]
The foregoing examples could easily be increased in order to show that
the criminal tactics of the Anarchists are nothing new. If they are
more formidable and more monstrous than those of the religious
dissenters of the Renaissance or the political criminals of the
Revolutionary period, the reason lies in the age in which we live. We
mean that those who use the progress of modern mechanics, chemistry,
technical science, and so on, solely in order to increase the terror
inspired by organised murder, and to make the furies of war
invincible, ought not to be so surprised if the revolutionaries in
their turn no longer content themselves with old-fashioned weapons,
but seek to utilise also the achievements of modern chemistry.
Exampla trahunt. The Anarchist propaganda should not be judged so
severely; new and wonderful as it appears to the majority, it is by no
means so in reality; it is the stock piece of all revolutionaries,
somewhat modernised and adapted to a new age and a new doctrine.
Certainly the Anarchist doctrine is something new, if you will; but we
consider this means little if it merely expresses the fact that these
new demands exceed all previous changes in society. This is too
trivial to justify the application of exceptional measures and the
suspension of the principle of tolerance to all opinions. The
Anarchists are not, after all, so very original; they are a modernised
version of the Chiliasts of more than a thousand years ago, and differ
from them only as the mental conception of the present differs from
that of Irenæus. For he sought to justify his dreams by an
[Pg 311]
appeal to religion, while the Anarchists appeal to modern science. That is
all. But if we blame for its intolerance, and stigmatise as belonging to
the "dark ages," the age that persecuted the Chiliasts with fire and
sword, we certainly ought not to show a still greater intolerance to
the Chiliasts of our own day.
But it may be said that this fantasy, this Anarchist theory, is far
more dangerous than all the other errors that have preceded it; it
wishes to abolish property, reduce the family to Hetairism, and so
forth. We hope we have shown clearly in the preceding pages that, at
bottom, all Anarchist theories, even Kropotkin's, are very harmless,
and would merely result in leaving everything as before, merely
changing the present compulsory system into a voluntary one. A large
group of Anarchists, indeed the most extreme, are pure Individualists,
even maintaining individual property; how this could be maintained
without some legal guarantee is a question for themselves; but it is
evident that the Anarchist theory would alter the existing state of
things much less than the social-democratic theory; for the latter
demands the cessation of Individualist economy, and would punish any
opposition to its views as a crime, just as we punish theft to-day.
It is the same with marriage. Anarchists of all parties merely
wish the family to be changed into the "family group"; but
that means that everything could practically remain unchanged;
only the legal guarantees and privileges associated with marriage
must be abolished. We will neither discuss the morality,
[Pg 312]
or lack of it, nor the practicability or impracticability of this
idea; but in this the Anarchists go no further than what Fichte, or
that moderate liberal, Wilhelm von Humboldt, or even F. A. Schlegel,
the poet of Lucinde, have demanded as regards natural marriage; and
Schlegel certainly is somewhat of the national-Christian-Socialism
type. In any case, here, too, Socialism with its more drastic measures
is more formidable, for even if it would respect the sexual
group—which may be doubted in view of the artificial
organisation of work in the social State—yet the character of
the "family" would quite disappear owing to the Socialists' violent
interference with the care and bringing up of children. It is
certainly characteristic in this respect that the authoritative
Socialists regard even Anarchism as merely a modern form of the
Manchester Liberal School, sneering at Anarchists as "small
bourgeoisie," and representing them as quite harmless against the
reforms planned by themselves.
But whether it is more or less dangerous need not be considered, when
it is a question of whether an opinion is worth discussion. If an
opinion contains elements which are useful, serviceable, or necessary
for the majority of the members of society, these opinions will be
realised in practice without regard to whether danger thereby
threatens or does not threaten single forms or arrangements of present
society. Exceptional legislation may check criticism of unhealthy or
obsolete forms of society, but cannot hinder the organic development
of society itself; for society will then only develop through a
[Pg 313]
series of painful catastrophes instead of by a gradual evolution;
catastrophes which are the consequence of opinions which have not had
free discussion. It would be more than sad if we had to demonstrate
the truth of these views again to-day, although our own age, or at
least, we Continentals, seem in our condemnation of Anarchism to have
lost all calmness, and to have abandoned those principles of
toleration and Liberalism of which we are generally so proud. It has
been rightly said that the freedom of conscience must include not only
the freedom of belief, but also the freedom of unbelief. In that case
the right of freedom of opinions must not be confined merely to the
forms of the State: one should be equally free to deny the State
itself. Without this extension of the principle, freedom of thought is
a mockery.
We therefore demand for the Anarchist doctrine, as long as it does not
incite to crime, the right of free discussion and the tolerance due to
every opinion, quite without regard to whether it is more dangerous,
or more probable, or more practicable than any other opinion; and this
we do not merely from a priori and academic reasons, but in the best
interests of the community.
We consider the Anarchist idea unrealisable, just as is any other
scheme based only on speculation; we think Proudhon's picture of
society quite as Utopian as Plato's, and certainly none the less a product
of genius. Moreover, we are convinced that grave complications have already
arisen in society owing to the fanatical pursuit of these Utopian ideas, and
[Pg 314]
still greater ones will arise; and yet we do not belong to
those who deplore the appearance of these ideas, or who
believe that serious and permanent danger is threatened to the
development of society by the Anarchist idea. This, indeed, would be
the place in which to write a chapter on the value of the error; but
we must leave this to writers on ethics, and content ourselves with
pointing out that the development of culture does not depend mainly
upon the truth or falsehood of ruling ideas. As we have often said in
these pages in our criticism of the Anarchists, life is not merely the
fulfilment of philosophic dreams or the embodiment of absolute truths;
on the contrary, it can easily be proved from history that error and
superstition have rather been the most potent factors in human
development. When discussing Stirner's views, we have shewn the
cardinal error that lies in the conclusion that only the absolutely
true is useful and admissible in practice. Certainly, philosophy has
taught us the insufficiency of all a priori proofs of the truth of
the conception of God; critical science has shown us its empirical
origin, and taught us that our ideas of the soul, God, and the future
life have proceeded from the most erroneous and crudest attempts to
explain certain physiological and psychological phenomena: but even if
the conception of the Deity were the greatest error committed by mankind,
it is yet incontestable that this conception has produced and still
produces the greatest blessings for mankind. We have taken up this
standpoint against the Anarchists, and now it may turn out in their favour;
[Pg 315]
for, if it is not a question of doing away with the State altogether,
merely because (as Stirner discovered, though he was not the first to
do so) it is not sacred, nor absolute, nor real in the philosophic
sense, so one need not consider an idea absolutely worthless, and
therefore unworthy of discussion merely because it arises from and
leads to errors.
Anarchism is certainly one of the greatest errors ever imagined by
man, for it proceeds from assumptions and leads to conclusions which
entirely contradict human nature and the facts of life.
Nevertheless, it also has its purpose in social evolution, and that
not a small one, however frightened at this certain timid spirits may
be. What is this mission? In so small a space as is now left us, it is
hard to answer this without causing misunderstandings to arise on
every side. But after what has been said, it will readily be perceived
that Anarchism will be a factor in overcoming Socialism, if not by
Anarchy yet at least by freedom.
A military trait runs through the whole world; the great wars and
conquests of the last few decades and present international relations
which compel most European states to keep their weapons always ready;
all this has called forth a military strain of character, a necessity
for defence based upon guardianship and compulsory organisation, which
is increased by a similar need for defence in the province of
economics, as a consequence of previous economic and social phenomena.
This feature is seen in the universal endeavour to increase the power
of the State at the expense of the individual, and to solve
[Pg 316]
economic problems in the same way as one organises an army. State Socialism,
the Socialism of the chair, and the Christian Social movement prove
the simultaneity of this characteristic of the age in every circle of
modern society; the Social Democratic party merely represents the
group to whose impulse we must ascribe the fact of governments
including Socialism in their programme, of professors inoculating
young intelligences therewith from their chairs, of Rome eagerly
seizing it as a welcome instrument wherewith to revive her faded
popularity; and the fact of politicians, who still call themselves
liberal, giving up, often without a struggle, one position after the
other in the defence of economic freedom.
We will not go so far as to brand every concession to the Socialist
spirit of our time as blamable and harmful. After almost a century of
continually increasing economic freedom, after the old form of
society, with its ranks and institutions, has been completely broken
up by Liberalism, an increase of social discipline, a rallying of
mankind round new social standpoints, is perfectly natural. But it is
just as natural that evolution will not be able to proceed in the
one-sided direction begun by Socialism. Already the most unpleasant
phenomena are visible. The power of the State profits most of all by
the Socialist movement, which it combats as Social Democracy; the rights of the
individual retire to the background; in the "industrial army," as in the military
force, the individual is only a number, a unit; the sense of freedom has almost
[Pg 317]
disappeared from our age. Freedom in its signification as to culture and
civilisation is now completely misunderstood and underrated, and even
considered an idle dream. But the gloomiest feature of Socialism is a
renaissance of the religiose spirit and all the disadvantages
it entails. The religiose attitude, as I have shown
elsewhere,[61]
is connected with an inclination for tutelage, and places the individual
in quite a secondary position. In an age when the weak are only too surely
convinced of the impossibility of maintaining themselves in the midst
of the social whirlwind, when everyone seeks to join some community or
society, it is easy to make religious proselytes. People mostly
console a nation that has a low position in the economic scale with
religion, as we console the sick. To those who suffer so bitterly from
the inequality of power and wealth in our social system, there is
shown a prospect of a future eternal recompense; and those who are
continually seeking the support of some power higher than themselves
are referred to the Highest Power of all. That always convinces them.
The Socialist and the religious view of the world are one and the
same; the former is the religion of the absolute, infallible, all-mighty,
and ever-present State. The reawakening of the religious spirit simultaneously
with the growth of Socialist parties is no mere chance. Socialism has
slipped on the cowl and cassock with the greatest ease, and we have
every reason to believe that this sad companionship is by no means
[Pg 318]
ended; the regard for personal freedom will decrease more and more;
the tendency towards authority and religion will increase; the
comprehension of purely mental effort will continue to disappear in
proportion as society endeavours to transform itself into an
industrial barrack. Whether the end of it all will be the Social
Democratic popular State, or the Socialist Absolute Monarchy, matters
but little. In any case, before things reach this point, a
counteracting tendency will make itself felt from the needs of the
people, which will endeavour to force evolution back into the opposite
path. The old implacable struggle between the Gironde and the Mountain
will again be renewed; and the impulse in this contest of the future
will come from Anarchism, which is already preparing and sharpening
the weapons for it. That Socialism will be overthrown by the
introduction of Anarchism we do not believe; but the conquest will be
won under the banner of individual freedom. The centralising tendency
and the coercive character of the system of doing everything in
common, without which Socialism cannot have the least success, will
naturally and necessarily be replaced by Federalism and free
association. In these two distinctive features of a future reaction
against a Socialism that would turn everything into one vast army, we
recognise those two demands of theoretical Anarchism which are capable
of realisation, and capable of it because they are not dogmas, like
absolute freedom, but only methods.
Thus it appears not a priori but a posteriori,
that the Anarchist theory must not be considered as absolutely
[Pg 319]
worthless because in itself it is an error and in its main demand is
impracticable. Our opinion is that it contains at least as many useful
elements as Socialism; and if to-day governments, men of learning, and
even bishops proceed without alarm upon the path of Socialism, then a
discussion of Anarchist theory should not be so coolly waved aside.
But it is entirely different as regards the criminal propaganda of
action. If Anarchists wish to spread their opinions abroad, there are
quite sufficient means for doing so in civilised society. No one can
be allowed the right of giving a sanguinary advertisement to his views
by the murder of innocent visitors to a café or a theatre; still less
have Anarchists the right, when they appeal to force, to complain if
force is used against them.
It is perfectly fair that the State should proceed against criminal
propaganda by legal measures, and that Anarchist criminals should
suffer for their action, the punishment which a country inflicts even
if it be the death penalty. There is no difference of
opinion[62]
as regards this view except among Anarchists themselves, who arrogate to
themselves the right to kill, but deny it to the State. There remain
only two points that we might add.
[Pg 320]
First of all, exceptional legislation should be avoided. It is in no
way justified. Just as the motive of Anarchism to any offence affords
no extenuating circumstances, so, too, it should not make matters
worse. Secondly, we should not indulge in the vain hope that Anarchism
itself, or the criminal results of it, can be combated by mere
condemnation of Anarchist criminals, however just or unjust the
sentence may be. Punishment appears to fanatics who long for the
martyr's crown, no longer a deterrent but an atonement. In France in
less than two years, Ravachol, Henry, and Vaillant were guillotined;
but that did not deter Caserio in the least from his mad act.
Numerous Anarchist crimes are to be regarded merely as means to
indirect suicide, a method by which those who commit them may end
lives that are a burden to them, while they lack the courage to commit
suicide directly. Lombroso, Krafft, Ebbing, and others cite a long
list of political criminals who must certainly be regarded as such
indirect suicides.
We will not enter the controversial province of criminal pathology,
although it seems certain that in the criminal deeds of the Anarchism
of action a large share is taken by persons pathologically diseased or
mentally affected. For these also punishment loses its deterrent effect.
Taken all in all, one cannot expect any other result from the punishment
of Anarchist criminals, except the moral one of having defended the rights
of society. On the other hand, the Anarchists regard the justification
[Pg 321]
of one of their own party as the strongest means of propaganda, and it
cannot be denied that the Ravachol cult resulting from the execution
of that common criminal, Ravachol, caused a considerable accession of
strength to Communist Anarchism. The State cannot, of course, allow
itself to look on at Anarchist crimes and "to shorten its arm"; but it
must not delude itself that it will remove such crime or stop the
Anarchist movement by means of the guillotine.
Does this mean that society is helpless in face of Anarchism? It is,
if it possesses only force to suppress and not the power to convince;
if society is only held together by compulsion, as the present State
partly is, and the Socialist State would be still more, and threatens
to fall to pieces if the apparatus of compulsion were given up; if the
State, instead of trying to redress the unfortunately unalterable
natural inequality of its members, only intensifies them by legalising
all kinds of new inequalities, and if it regards its institutions, and
especially the law, as instruments for the unalterable conservation of
all present forms of society with all their imperfections and
injustices. If right is done, and right is uttered arbitrarily, in a
partisan and protectionist method; if equality before the law is
disregarded by those who are called to defend the law; if belief in
the reliability of the indispensable institutions of authority is
lightly shaken by these very institutions themselves, then it is no
wonder if men despair of the capability of the State to practice or to
maintain right; and if the masses, always ready to generalise,
[Pg 322]
deny right, law, State, and authority together. We have already pointed
out repeatedly that Anarchism cannot be explained by pauperism alone.
Pauperism justifies Socialism; but this movement against authority,
which certainly does not bear in all cases the name of Anarchism, but
which is to-day more widely spread than is often imagined, can only be
explained by a confused mass of injustice and wrongdoing, of which the
bourgeois State is daily and hourly guilty towards the weak.
The average man does not much mind his rich fellow-man riding in his
carriage while he himself cannot even pay his tram fare; but that he
should be abandoned by society to every chance official of justice, as
a prey that has no rights, while justice often falters anxiously
before those who are shielded by coats of arms and titles,—that makes
his blood boil, and causes him to seek the origin of this injustice in
the institution itself instead of in the way it works. How many
Anarchists have become so merely because they were treated as common
criminals when they happened to have the misfortune to be suspected of
Anarchism? How many became Anarchists because they were outlawed by
society on account of free and liberal views?
Anarchism may be defined etiologically as disbelief in the suitability of
constituted society. With such views there would be only one way in which we
could cut the ground from under the Anarchists' feet. Society must anxiously
watch that no one should have reason to doubt its intention of letting
[Pg 323]
justice have free sway, but must raise up the despairing, and by all
means in its power lead them back to their lost faith in society. A
movement like Anarchism cannot be conquered by force and injustice,
but only by justice and freedom.
[1]
Many words, but little light; a spark of wit, but no truth.
[2]
Cesare Lombroso, The Anarchists, a Study in Criminal Psychology and
Sociology. (German translation by Dr. Hans Kneller, after the 2d
edition of the original. Hamburg, 1895.)
[3]
Rupticism, Pietism, and Anti-Semitism at the Close of the Nineteenth
Century, a study in social history. Vienna, 1894.
[4]
Amalrich of Bena, near Chartres, was, about 1200 A.D., a professor of
theology at Paris. He had to defend himself before Pope Innocent III.
on a charge of pantheistic teaching, and then recanted. His follower,
David of Dinant, however, continued his work after his master's death
(in 1206 or 1207), and this caused a condemnation of Amalrich's
teaching by the Synod of Paris in 1210, and by the Lateran Council in
1215, and also led to a severe persecution of the Amalrikites.
[5]
E. Bernstein and K. Kautsky, Die Vorläufer des Neueren
Socialismus, Stuttgart, 1895. Part i., pp. 169 and 216.
[6]
Vorläufer des Neueren Socialismus, Pt. i., p. 230.
[7]
"Der Wideräufferen vosprung, fürgang, Secten v.s.w. ...
beschreiben durch Heinerrychen Bullingern...." Zurich, 1561. Fol. 32.
[8]
Or, from the Greek, chiliad; and hence the word chiliasm, expressing
the belief in a millennium.
[9]
"Cette liberté commun est une consequence de la nature de
l'homme. Sa première loi est de veiller à sa propre
conservation, ses premiers soins sont ceux qu'il se doit à
lui-même: et sitôt qu'il est en âge de raison, lui
seul étant juge des moyens propres à le conserver,
devient par là son propre maitre."—Rousseau.
[10]
London, 1795, 2 vols.
[11]
Jean Grave says in his book, La Société Mourante, p.
21: "In the year 1793 one talked of Anarchists. Only Jacques Roux and
the 'suragés' appear to have been those who saw the
Revolution most clearly, and wished to turn it to the benefit of the
people; and, therefore, the bourgeois historian has left them in the
background; their history has still to be written; the documents
buried in archives and libraries are waiting for one who shall have
time and courage to exhume them, and bring to light the secrets of
events that are to us almost incomprehensible. Meanwhile, we can pass
no judgment on their programme." Of course we can do so still less.
[12]
J. A. M. Brühle: Die Geheimbunde gegen Rom. Zur Genesis der
italien. Revolution. Prague, 1860.
[13]
Das Elend der Philosophie: An Answer to Proudhon's Philosophie des
Elends. Stuttgart, 1892 (German ed.).
[14]
Qu'est-ce que la Propriété? p. 102.
[15]
Qu'est-ce que la Propriété? p. 202.
[16]
After Proudhon's paper, Le Réprésentant du Peuple, had
published the statutes of the Exchange Bank, he tried in numerous
articles to explain the mechanism and necessity of it. These articles
have been collected in a book, and appeared under the title,
Résumé de la Question Sociale, Banque
d'Échange.
[17]
The scheme appeared in Proudhon's posthumous works.
[18]
It must not be forgotten that the people expected in Louis Napoleon
"the social emperor," and that he had in earlier times played upon
this expectation. Compare his work on The Abolition of Pauperism,
German translation by R. V. Richard. Leipsic, 1857. Volume ii.
[19]
Stirner's chief work, The Individual and his Property (Der Einzige
und sein Eigenthum, Leipsic, 1845), has been reprinted by P. Reclam,
at Leipsic, with a good introduction by Paul Lauterbach. The
literature about Stirner is almost exclusively confined to a few
scattered remarks in larger works, which are not always very
appropriate. J. H. Mackay is said to be working at a biography of
Stirner. The monograph by Robert Schellwien, Max Stirner und
Friedrich Nietzsche (Leipsic, 1892), is quite worthless for our
purpose.
[20]
Stammler, Die Theorie des Anarchismus, Berlin, 1894, p. 42.
[21]
"Zur Geschicte des Anarchismus," Neue Freie Press, 26th July 1894 (No. 10,748).
[22]
It is characteristic that even the German followers of Proudhon, as,
e. g., Marr, Grün, and others, had a very poor opinion of
Stirner, and never dreamed of any connection between his views and
those of Proudhon.
[23]
Grün wrote many works on literature and the history of
art, and also Louis Napoleon Bonaparte, the Sphinx on the French
Throne (3d ed., 1866); France before the Judgment Seat of Europe
(1860); Italy (1861), etc.
[24]
Die sociale Bewegung, p. 433. Darmstadt, 1845.
[25]
Wilhem Marr, Das junge Deutschland in der Schweiz, p. 135. Leipsic, 1846.
[26]
Underground Russia, 3d edition, pp. 34 ff. and 41. London, 1890.
[27]
Karl Blind, "Väter des Anarchismus" (Persönliche
Erinnerungen), 4 feuilletons in the Neue Freie Presse, 1894.
[28]
There is a kind of autobiography for the period 1849-60, by Bakunin
himself in a letter, dated from Irkutsk (8th December, 1860) to
Herzen. Michael Bakunin's Social-Political Correspondence with
Alexander Iw. Herzen and Ogarjow, with a biographical introduction,
appendices, and notes by Professor Michael Dragomanoff. Authorised
translation from the Russian, by Dr. Boris Minzés, Stuttgart,
1895 (Bibl. russischer Denkwürdigkeiten, edited by Dr. Th.
Schiemann, vol. vi.), No. 6, pp. 29 and 99.
[29]
Compare the chapter on "The Spread of Anarchy."
[30]
Testut Oscar, Die Internationale, ihr Wesen und ihre Bestrebungen.
[31]
Friedrich Engels, Die Bakunisten an der Arbeit, Denkschrift
über den Aufstand in Spanien im Winter, 1873; reprinted in
Internationales aus dem Volkstaate (1871-75), Berlin, 1894.
[32]
For Netschajew, cf. the article "Anarchism" in Wurm's Volks-lexicon,
vol. i., and in the Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften,
Jena, 1890, vol. i.; also E. von Laveleye, Socialism of the Present
(German ed. by Ch. Jasper, Halle, A.D. S., 1895). All these, however,
are based almost exclusively on the information in the memoir,
L'Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste et l'Association
Internationale des Travailleurs: Report and documents published by
order of the International Congress at The Hague (London and Hamburg,
1873)—a very one-sided party brochure of the Marxists against
the Bakuninists, which has been proved wrong on more points than one.
We regret all the more that we are limited to this source of
information.
[33]
The expression "go among the people" has since become a well-known Nihilist term.
[34]
The Catechism is reproduced in the before-mentioned memoir,
L'Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste, viii. (L'Alliance en
Russie et le Catéchisme Révolutionnaire), pp. 90-95.
[35]
See his life in Stepniak, u. s., pp. 90-101.
[36]
He was living in Kent in 1897.—Trans.
[37]
The chief work of Kropotkin is La Conquête du Pain, Paris,
1892. (The chapter on agriculture was printed separately as a pamphlet
in 1892.) We quote below his numerous smaller writings in the editions
which we possess, without vouching for the chronological order or
completeness of the list. Les Paroles d'un Révolté,
1885; Revolutionary Governments (trans. from German to French,
Anarchist Library, vol. i.); Un Siècle d'Attente, 1789-1889,
Paris, 1893; La Grande Révolution, Paris, 1893; Les Temps
Nouveaux (conference at London), Paris, 1894; Jeunes Gens, 4th ed.,
Paris, '93; La Loi et l'Autorité, 6th ed., Paris, '92; Les
Prisons, 2d ed., Paris, '90; L'Anarchie dans l'Évolution
Socialiste, 2d ed., Paris, '92; Esprit de Révolte, Paris,
'92, 5th ed.; le Salariat, 2d ed., Paris, '92; La Morale
Anarchiste, 1890; "Anarchist Communion: its Basis and Principles"
(republished by permission of the editor of the Nineteenth Century),
London, 1887.
[38]
L'Anarchie, p. 26.
[39]
At the Peace Congress at Bern in 1869, Bakunin defended himself
against the reproach of Communist tendencies, saying: "I abominate
Communism, because it is a denial of freedom, and I cannot understand
anything human without freedom. I am no Communist, because Communism
concentrates all the forces of society in the State, and lets them be
absorbed by it, because it necessarily results in the centralisation
of property in the hands of the State; whereas I wish to do away with
the State, to utterly root out the principle of the authority and
guardianship of the State, which, under the pretence of improving and
idealising men, has hitherto enslaved, oppressed, exploited, and
ruined them. I wish for the organisation of society and of collective
and social property from below upwards, by means of free association,
and not from above downwards by means of authority, be it what it may.
In demanding the abolition of the State, I mean to abolish the
inheritance of property by an individual, i. e., of property that is
only a matter of the State's arrangement, and is only a consequence of
the principle of the State itself. In this sense I am a Collectivist
and by no means a Communist."
[40]
In Anarchy, p. 13.
[41]
Les Temps Nouveaux, p. 21.
[42]
Quoted in Ratzel's F. Völkerkunde, vol. ii., p. 668. Leipsic and Vienna, 1890.
[43]
Cf. Wolkenhauer, Elisée Reclus (Globus, vol. lxv., No. 8,
Feb., 1894). Reclus's Anarchist writings are: Produit de la Terre et
de l'Industrie, 1885; Richesse et Misère; Évolution et
Révolution, 6th ed., Paris, 1891; and À mon
Frère le Paysan, Geneva, 1894.
[44]
This is seen, inter alia, by the number of persons wandering about
seeking food—"a vagabond proletariat." In 1886 no less than
4,951,000 were wandering more than thirty versts from their dwellings.
Even the women have to leave the villages to seek support elsewhere,
and the number of women and children who thus are compelled to seek
work at a distance is increasing every year. Thus, e. g., in the
district of the Government of Wjatka, in 1874, 2.68 per cent.; in
1883, 6.46 per cent.; in 1885, 7.22 per cent. of the women capable of
work did this. Often whole families wander about, and women with
children at the breast are no uncommon sight among the troops of
wandering workmen. (Westländer, A., Russland vor einem
Regime-Wechsel, Stuttgart, 1894, p. 28.)
[45]
Her books, Le Livre de Misères and Prise de Possession,
were not procurable by me, and I had to depend upon Ossip Zetkin's
sketch of her in Charakterköpfen aus der französischen
Arbeiterbewegung, pp. 40-48, Berlin, 1893, and the Volkslexikon, l.
c.
[46]
Cf. F. Dubois, Le Péril Anarchiste, pp. 93-120;
mostly superficial, but good on this topic.
[47]
I have only seen Malatesta's dialogue Between Peasants
in a French translation: Entre Paysans, Traduit de l'Italien, 6th
ed., Paris, 1892.
[48]
Now collected as Studien über Proudhon, Stuttgart, 1893.
[49]
Döle, Eugen Dühring, etwas von dessen Charakter,
Leistungen, und reformatorischen Beruf, Leipzig, 1893. Compare also
Fr. Engel's, Dühring's Umwälzung der Wissenschaft, 3d ed.
Stuttgart, 1894.
[50]
See, for a study of his views, the popular publication, Einiges
Christenthum, Berlin, 1893, and the weekly paper (since 1894),
Versöhrung (Reconciliation).
[51]
Die Anarchisten, etc.; Zürich Verlagsmagazin; a
popular edition has also appeared in Berlin; also an English
translation. Boston, 1891; and in French, Paris, 1892.
[52]
Even in a philosophic sense, Nietzsche's Anarchism is a
mere fable. Schellwien truly remarks: "Max Stirner replaces freedom by
individuality, by the evolution of the individual as such, but he
cannot shew that anything else would happen but the oppression of the
weaker individuality by the stronger; a state of things in which not
individuality but brute force would reign. Friedrich Nietzsche draws
this conclusion, and would have this oppression of the weak by the
strong; he would have the aristocratic will of the stronger, who in
his eyes are alone the good. He raises the 'will for power' to a
world-principle." Elsewhere Nietzsche positively advocates, e. g.,
the reduction of some men to slavery for the benefit of the
aristocracy of the strong. This sort of thing is hardly Anarchism.
[53]
Die wissenschaftliche revolutionäre Kriegskunst und der Dynamit Führer.
[54]
Anarchy and Voluntarism (The Free Life), vol. ii., p. 99, October, 1894.
[55]
The answer is obvious: the inhabitants of Texas.
[56]
Socialismus und Moderne Wissenschaft, p. 129. Leipsic, 1895.
[57]
The first groups of the "International" in the Romance-speaking
portions of Switzerland had increased so quickly that at a congress in
Geneva in 1869 they united themselves into a league of their own, the
"Romance Federation," in harmony with the "International," to which
members of the "Alliance" and Marxists belonged in almost equal
numbers.
[58]
Révolte, July 8, 1862.
[59]
Lombroso, Die Anarchisten, p. 33. Hamburg, 1896.
[60]
Cataline as a follower of Cicero is a new version of the supposed
facts.—Trans.
[61]
Mysticismus, Pietismus, Anti-Semitismus, am Ende des XIXten
Jahrhunderts, p. 5, foll. Wien, 1894.
[62]
The opinion which would relegate Anarchist criminals to the madhouse
instead of to the guillotine deserves mention. In this connection, in
spite of Neo-Buddhist peculiarities, the little work Anarchismus und
Seine Heilung, by Emanuel (Leipsic, 1894), gives fresh points of
view.
THE SILVER SITUATION IN THE UNITED STATES. By
F. W. Taussig, LL.B., Ph.D., Professor of Political Economy in
Harvard University; author of "The Tariff History of the United
States." (No. 74 in the Questions of the Day Series.) Second Edition.
Revised and enlarged. 8vo, cloth               $ .75
"Professor Taussig is already-well known by his admirable 'History of
the United States Tariff'; and at a time when currency problems are
attracting attention in Europe, Asia, and America, the appearance of a
treatise from his pen on the history of silver in the United States
during the last decade is peculiarly opportune."—London Times.
"We do not hesitate to say that this book is in all respects as
excellent as it is opportune. It is extremely concise in statement,
and deserves to be read by the learned as well as by the ignorant,
while the times should insure it the widest circulation."—New York
Evening Post.
THE QUESTION OF SILVER. By Louis E. Ehrich (of Colorado).
(Questions of the Day Series, No. 70.) New and revised edition,
with statistics brought down to date. 12mo, paper, 40 cents;
cloth                                                       $ .75
"The author has incorporated much valuable historical information in
the essay on silver and a subsequent reply to his critics, and all who
wish to study the subject will do well to possess themselves of the
work, which will prove highly rewarding to the reader."—Commercial
Advertiser. New York.
THE CURRENCY AND THE BANKING LAW OF CANADA.
Considered with Reference to Currency Reform in the United States.
By William C. Cornwell, President of the City Bank of Buffalo.
8vo, paper                                               $ .75
"One of the clearest expositions of the Dominion law with reference to
its bearing on Currency Reform that we have yet seen."—The
Financier.
"A very valuable volume. It will undoubtedly prove to be an effective
contribution to the campaign of currency education."—Buffalo
Courier.
A SOUND CURRENCY AND BANKING SYSTEM: HOW
IT MAY BE SECURED. By Allen Ripley Foote, author of
"The Law of Incorporated Companies Operating under Municipal
Franchises," etc. (No. 81 in the Questions of the Day Series.) 8vo,
cloth                                                          $ .75
"He attributes the depression in business to the ignorance of the
people on monetary questions.... Mr. Foote's arguments are logical,
and the whole discussion shows a wide knowledge of all monetary
questions. It is to be hoped that our troubles may be solved in the
simple way which Mr. Foote points out."—Detroit Free Press.
A HISTORY OF MODERN BANKS OF ISSUE. With an Account
of the Economic Crises of the Present Century. By Charles A.
Conant. 8vo                                           $3.00
"We can only express our hearty appreciation of the book as a whole.
It is extremely interesting. It cannot but be useful, and to us it is
very cheering. Mr. Conant's book, from beginning to end, is a proof
that sound currency is evolved necessarily from the progress of an
industrial and commercial people. We have unhesitating, unfaltering
faith in the progress of the people of our country in industry and
commerce, and that sound currency will therefrom be evolved."—N. Y.
Times.
AMERICA AND EUROPE. A Study of International Relations.
I.—The United States and Great Britain: Their True
Governmental and Commercial Relations. By David
A. Wells.

II.—The Monroe Doctrine.  By Edward J. Phelps, late
Minister to Great Britain.
III.—Arbitration in International Disputes.  By Carl
Schurz.
(No. 87 in the "Questions of the Day" Series.)
Together, 1 vol. 8vo, 75 cents.
"This is an extremely interesting book, a book which should make for
peace."
COMPARATIVE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW. An Analysis of the Administrative
System, National and Local, of the United States, England, France, and
Germany. By Frank J. Goodnow, Professor of Administrative Law in the
University Faculty of Political Science, Columbia College in the City
of New York. Two volumes, 8vo (each complete in itself, with index),
price per volume, $2.50.
Volume I.—Organization. Volume II.—Legal Relations.
"A work of great learning and profound research ... remarkable alike
for analytical power and lucidity of method ... unique and of
permanent excellence."—New York Tribune.
OUTLINES OF ROMAN LAW. Comprising its Historical Growth
and General Principles. By William C. Morey, Ph.D. 12mo, $1.75
"The work possesses more than ordinary interest, for it marks an epoch
in American legal literature."—Albany Law Journal.
"The whole work is executed with care and accuracy, and shows a wide
knowledge of modern scholarship."—Boston Advertiser.
THE FOREIGN POLICY OF GREAT BRITAIN. By
Montague Burrows, Professor of Modern History, University of
Oxford. 8vo, $3.00.
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF MODERN
EUROPE. From the Congress of Vienna to the Present Time. By
Charles M. Andrews, Associate Professor of History in Bryn Mawr
College. To be completed in two volumes. Sold separately. With
maps. 8vo, gilt tops, per volume, $2.50.
Part I.—From 1815-1850.
Part II.—From 1850 to the Present Time. (In preparation.)
THE NICARAGUA CANAL AND THE MONROE DOCTRINE. A Political History of
the Various Projects of Interoceanic Transit across the American
Isthmus, with Special Reference to the Nicaragua Canal, and the
Attitude of the United States Government Thereto. By Lindley M.
Keasbey, Associate Professor of Political Science, Bryn Mawr College.
With maps. 8vo.
INTERNATIONAL LAW. A simple statement of its Principles. By Herbert
Wolcott Bowen, United States Consul-General at Barcelona, Spain. 12mo.
1. Some quotes are opened with marks but are not closed. Obvious ones
have been silently closed, while those requiring interpretation have
been left open.
2. The original text includes Greek characters. For this e-version
these letters have been replaced with transliterations.
3. The following misprints have been corrected:
          "divison" corrected to "division" (page 40)
          "agains" corrected to "against" (page 53)
          "from" corrected to "form" (page 93)
          "that" corrected to "than" (page 131)
          "russicher" corrected to "russischer" (page 152)
          "the the" corrected to "the" (page 165)
          "Arbeiterfwegung" corrected to "Arbeiterbewegung" (page 206)
          "Socialty" corrected to "Sociality" (page 222)
          "pesecution" corrected to "persecution" (page 225)
          "Edigy" corrected to "Egidy" (page 230)
          "aer" corrected to "der" (page 235)
          "completly" corrected to "completely" (page 316)
          "iself" corrected to "itself" (page 318)
8. Other than the corrections listed above, printer's inconsistencies
in spelling, punctuation, hyphenation, and ligature usage have been
retained.

[Pg iii]
n the day of the bomb outrage in the French Parliament I gave an
impromptu discourse upon Anarchism to an intelligent audience anxious
to know more about it, touching upon its intellectual ancestry, its
doctrines, propaganda, the lines of demarcation that separate it from
Socialism and Radicalism, and so forth. The impression which my
explanations of it made upon my audience was at the same time
flattering and yet painful to me. I felt almost ashamed that I had
told these men, who represented the pick of the middle-class political
electorate, something entirely new to them in speaking of matters
which, considering their reality and the importance of the question,
ought to be familiar to every citizen. Having thus had my attention
drawn to this lacuna in the public mind, I was induced to make a
survey of the most diverse circles of the political and Socialist
world, both of readers and writers, and the result was the resolve to
extend my previous studies of Anarchism (which had not extended
[Pg iv]
much beyond the earliest theorists), and to develop my lecture into a
book. This book I now present to my readers.
The accomplishment of my resolve has been far from easy. What little
literature exists upon the subject of Anarchism is almost exclusively
hostile to it, which is a great drawback for one who is seeking not
the objects of a partisan, but simply and solely the truth. One had
constantly to gaze, so to speak, through a forest of prejudices and
errors in order to discover the truth like a little spot of blue sky
above. In this respect I found it mattered little whether I applied to
the press, or to the so-called scientific Socialists, or to fluent
pamphleteers.
Laveleye, for instance, does not even know of Proudhon; for him
Bakunin is the only representative of Anarchism and the most
characteristic; Socialism, Nihilism, and Anarchism mingle together in
wild confusion in the mind of this social historian. Garin, who wrote
a big book, entitled The Anarchists, is not acquainted with a
single Anarchist author, except some youthful writings of Proudhon's
and a few agitationist placards and manifestoes of the modern period.
The result of this ignorance is that he identifies Anarchism
completely with Collectivism, and carries his ridiculous ignorance
so far as to connect the former Austrian minister Schäffle, who
[Pg v]
was then the chief adviser of Count Hohenwart, in some way or other
with the Anarchists. Professor Enrico Ferri, again, exposes his
complete ignorance of the question at issue sufficiently by branding
Herbert Spencer as an Anarchist. In fact, the only work that can be
called scientifically useful is the short article on "Anarchism" in
the Cyclopædia of Political Science, from the pen of Professor
George Adler. All pamphlets, articles, and essays which have since
appeared on the same subject are, conveniently but uncritically,
founded upon this short but excellent essay of Adler's. Since the
extraordinary danger of Anarchist doctrines is firmly fixed as a dogma
in the minds of the vast majority of mankind, it is apparently quite
unnecessary to obtain any information about its real character in
order to pronounce a decided, and often a decisive, judgment upon it.
And so almost all who have hitherto written upon or against Anarchism,
with a few very rare exceptions, have probably never read an Anarchist
publication, even cursorily, but have contented themselves with
certain traditional catchwords.
As a contrast to this, it was necessary, for the purposes of a
critical work upon Anarchism, to go right back to its sources and to
the writings of those who represented it. But here I found a further
difficulty, which could not always be overcome. Where was I to get
these writings? Our great public libraries, whose pride it is to
possess the most complete collections possible of all the
texts of Herodotus or Sophocles, have of course thought
[Pg vi]
it beneath their dignity to place on their shelves the works of
Anarchist doctrinaires, or even to collect the pamphlet literature for
or against Anarchism—productions which certainly cannot take a very
high rank from the point of view either of literature or of fact. The
consequence of this foresight on the part of our librarians is that,
to-day, anyone who inquires into the development of the social
question in these great libraries devoted to science and public study
has nothing to find, and therefore nothing to seek. I have thus been
compelled to procure the materials I wanted partly through the
kindness of friends and acquaintances, and partly by purchase of
books—often at considerable expense,—but always by roundabout means
and with great difficulty. And here I should like specially to
emphasise the fact that it was the literary representatives of
Anarchism themselves who, although I never concealed my hostility to
Anarchism, placed their writings at my disposal in the kindest and
most liberal manner; and for this I hereby beg to offer them my
heartiest thanks, and most of all Professor Elisée Reclus, of
Brussels.
But if I thus enter into details of the difficulties which
met me in writing the present book, it is not with the object
of surrounding myself with the halo of a pioneer. I only wish to
lay my hand on a sore which has no doubt troubled other authors also;
and, at the same time, to explain to my critics the reason why
there are still so many lacunæ in this work. I have, for
instance, been quite unable to procure any book or essay by
[Pg vii]
Tucker, or a copy of his journal Liberty, although several
booksellers did their best to help me, and although I applied
personally to Mr. Tucker at Boston. It was all in vain. Ut aliquid
fecisse videatur, I ordered from Chicago M. J. Schaack's book,
Anarchy and Anarchists, a History of the Red Terror and the Social
Revolution in America and Europe: Communism, Socialism, and Nihilism,
in Doctrine and in Deed. After waiting four months, and repeatedly
urging things on, I at last received it, and soon perceived that I had
merely bought a pretty picture book for my library for my five
dollars. The book contains, in spite of its grandiloquent title, its
six hundred and ninety-eight large octavo pages, and its "numerous
illustrations from authentic photographs and from original drawings,"
not a single word about the doctrine of Anarchism in general, or
American Anarchism in particular. The author, a police official, takes
up a standpoint which is certainly quite explicable in one of his
position, but which is hardly suitable for a social historian. To him
"all Socialists are Anarchists as a first step, although all
Anarchists are not precisely Socialists" (see page 22),—which is
certainly praiseworthy moderation in a police officer. He calls
Ferdinand Lassalle "the father of German Anarchism as it exists
to-day" (page 23); on the other hand he has no knowledge of Tucker (of
Boston), the most prominent exponent of theoretical Anarchism in
America. This, then, was the literature which was at my disposal.
As regards the standpoint which I have taken in this
[Pg viii]
book upon questions of fact, it is strictly the coldly observant and
critical attitude of science and no other. I was not concerned to
write either for or against Anarchism, but only to tell the great mass
of the people that concerns itself with public occurrences for the
first time what Anarchism really is, and what it wishes to do, and
whether Anarchist views are capable of discussion like other opinions.
The condemnation of Anarchism, which becomes necessary in doing this,
proceeds exclusively from the exercise of scientific criticism, and
has nothing to do with any partisan judgment, be it what it may. It
would be a contradiction to adopt a partisan attitude at the very time
when one is trying to remind public opinion of a duty which has been
forgotten in the heat of party conflict.
But I do not for a moment allow myself to be deluded into thinking
that, with all my endeavours to be just to all, I have succeeded in
doing justice to all. Elisée Reclus wrote to me, when I informed him
of my intention to write the present book, and of my opinion of
Anarchism, that he wished me well, but doubted the success of my work,
for (he said) on ne comprend rien que ce qu'on aime. Of this remark
I have always had a keen recollection. If that great savant and gentle
being, the St. John of the Anarchists, thinks thus, what shall I have
to expect from his passionate fellow-disciples, or from the
terror-blinded opponents of Anarchism? "We cannot understand what we
do not love," and unfortunately we do not love unvarnished truth.
[Pg ix]
Anarchists will, therefore, simply deny my capacity to write
about their cause, and call my book terribly reactionary; Socialists
will think me too much of a "Manchester Economist"; Liberals will
think me far too tolerant towards the Socialistic disturbers of their
peace; and Reactionaries will roundly denounce me as an Anarchist in
disguise. But this will not dissuade me from my course, and I shall be
amply compensated for these criticisms which I have foreseen by the
knowledge of having advanced real and serious discussion on this
subject. For only when we have ceased to thrust aside the theory of
Anarchism as madness from the first, only when we have perceived that
one can and must understand many things that we certainly cannot like,
only then will Anarchists also place themselves on a closer human
footing with us, and learn to love us as men even though they often
perhaps cannot understand us, and of their own accord abandon their
worst argument, the bomb.
E. V. Zenker.
[Pg x]
[Pg xi]
[Pg xiv]
[Pg 1]
"A hundred fanatics are found to support a theological or metaphysical
statement, but not one for a geometric theorem."
Cesare Lombroso.
[Pg 2]
[Pg 3]
Forerunners and Early History Definitions — Is Anarchism a
Pathological Phenomenon? — Anarchism Considered Sociologically —
Anarchist Movements in the Middle Ages — The Theory of the Social
Contract with Reference to Anarchism — Anarchist Movements during the
French Revolution — The Philosophic Premises of the Anarchist Theory
— The Political and Economic Assumptions of Anarchism.
narchy means, in its ideal sense, the perfect, unfettered
self-government of the individual, and, consequently, the absence of
any kind of external government. This fundamental formula, which in
its essence is common to all actual and real Theoretical Anarchists,
contains all that is necessary as a guide to the distinguishing
features of this remarkable movement. It demands the unconditional
realisation of freedom, both subjectively and objectively, equally in
political and in economic life. In this, Anarchism is distinct from
[Pg 4]
Liberalism, which, even in its most radical representatives, only
allows unlimited freedom in economic affairs, but has never questioned
the necessity of some compulsory organisation in the social
relationships of individuals; whereas Anarchism would extend the
Liberal doctrine of laisser faire to all human actions, and would
recognise nothing but a free convention or agreement as the only
permissible form of human society. But the formula stated above
distinguishes Anarchism much more strongly (because the distinction is
fundamental) from its antithesis, Socialism, which out of the
celebrated trinity of the French Revolution has placed another figure,
that of Equality, upon a pedestal as its only deity. Anarchism and
Socialism, in spite of the fact that they are so often confused, both
intentionally and unintentionally, have only one thing in common,
namely, that both are forms of idolatry, though they have different
idols, both are religions and not sciences, dogmas and not speculations.
Both of them are a kind of honestly meant social mysticism, which,
anticipating the partly possible and perhaps even probable results of
yet unborn centuries, urge upon mankind the establishment of a terrestrial
Eden, of a land of the absolute Ideal, whether it be Freedom or
Equality. It is only natural, in view of the difficulty of creating
new thoughts, that our modern seekers after the millennium should look
for their Eden by going backwards, and should shape it on the lines of
stages of social progress that have long since been passed by; and in
this is seen the irremediable internal contradiction of both movements:
[Pg 5]
they intend an advance, but only cause retrogression.
Are we, then, to take Anarchism seriously, or shall we pass it by
merely with a smile of superiority and a deprecating wave of our hand?
Shall we declare war to the knife against Anarchists, or have they a
claim to have their opinions discussed and respected as much as those
of the Liberals or Social Democrats, or as those of religious or
ecclesiastical bodies? These questions we can only answer at the
conclusion of this book; but at this point I should like to do away
with one conception of Anarchism which is frequently urged against it.
Those who wish nowadays to seem particularly enlightened and tolerant
as regards this dangerous movement, describe it as a "pathological
phenomenon." We have done our best to make some sense of this
mischievous, though modern, analogy, but have never succeeded, in
spite of Lombroso, Kraft-Ebing, and others undeniably capable in their
own department. The former, in his clever book on this
subject,[2]
has confused individual with social pathology. When Lombroso completely
identified the Anarchist theory and idea—with which he is by no means
familiar—with the persons engaged in Anarchist actions, and made an
attempt (which is certainly successful) to trace the political
methods of thought and action of a great many of them to
[Pg 6]
pathological premises, he reached the false conclusion that Anarchism
itself was a pathological phenomenon. But in reality the only
conclusion from his demonstration is that many unhealthy and criminal
characters adopt Anarchism, a conclusion which he himself admits in
this remark, that "Criminals take part specially in the beginnings of
insurrections and revolutions in large numbers, for, at a time when
the weak and undecided are still hesitating, the impulsive activity of
abnormal and unhealthy characters preponderates, and their example
then produces epidemics of excesses." This fact we fearlessly
acknowledge; and it gains a special significance for us in that the
Anarchists themselves base their system of "propaganda by action" upon
this knowledge. But if we are therefore to call this phenomenon a
symptom that Anarchism itself is a pathological phenomenon, to what
revolutionary movement might we not then apply this criterion, and
what would it imply if we did?
I have stated, and (I hope) have shown
elsewhere[3]
what may be understood by "pathological" social phenomena, namely, an
abnormal unhealthy condition of the popular mind in the sense of a general
aberration of the intellect of the masses, as is possibly the
case in what is known as Anti-Semitism. But even in this limited
sense it appears quite inadmissible and incorrect to call
Anarchism a pathological phenomenon. Let us be fair and
straightforward, if we wish to learn; let us be just, even if
[Pg 7]
we are to benefit our most dangerous enemies; for in the end we shall
benefit ourselves. With Anarchism there is no question of transitory
anomalies of the public mind, but of a well defined condition which is
visibly increasing and which is necessarily connected with all
previous and accompanying conditions; it is a question of ideas and
opinions which are the logical, even if in practice inadmissible,
development of views that have long been well known and recognised by
the majority of civilised men. A further test of every unhealthy
phenomenon, namely, its local character, is entirely lacking in
Anarchism; for we meet with it to-day extending all over the world,
wherever society has developed in a manner similar to our own; we meet
it not merely in one class, but see members of all classes, and
especially members of the upper classes, attach themselves to it. The
fathers, as we may call them, of the Anarchist theory are almost
entirely men of great natural gifts, who rank high both intellectually
and morally, whose influence has been felt for half a century, who
have been born in Russia, Germany, France, Italy, England, and
America, men who are as different one from another as are the
circumstances and environment of their respective countries, but who
are all of one mind as regards the theory which we mentioned at the
beginning of this chapter.
And that is what Anarchism undoubtedly is: a theory, an idea, with
all the failings and dangers, but also with all the advantages
which a theory always possesses, with just as much, and only as
[Pg 8]
much, validity as a theory can demand as its due, but at any rate a
theory which is as old as human civilisation, because it goes back to
the most powerful civilising factor in humanity.
The care for the bare necessities of life, the inexorable struggle for
existence, has aroused in mankind the desire for fellow-strugglers,
for companions. In the tribe his power of resistance was increased,
and his prospect of self-support grew in proportion as he developed
together with his fellows into a new collective existence. But the
fact that, notwithstanding this, he did not grow up like a mere animal
in a flock, but in such a way that he always—even if often only after
long and bitter experience—found his proper development in the
tribe—this has made him a man and his tribe a society. Which is the
more ancient and more sacred, the unfettered rights of the individual
or the welfare of the community? Can anyone take this question seriously
who is accustomed to look at the life and development of society in the
light of facts? Individualism and Altruism are as inseparably connected
as light and darkness, as day and night. The individualistic and the
social sense in human society correspond to the centrifugal and
centripetal forces in the universe, or to the forces of attraction
and repulsion that govern molecular activity. Their movements must
be regarded simply as manifestations of forces in the direction of the
resultants, whose components are Individualism and Altruism. If, to
use a metaphor from physics, one of these forces was excluded, the body
[Pg 9]
would either remain stock-still, or would fly far away into infinity.
But such a case is, in society as in physics, only possible in
imagination, because the distinction between the two forces is itself
only a purely mental separation of one and the same thing.
This is all that can be said either for or against the exclusive
accentuation of any one single social force. All the endeavours to
create a realm of unlimited and absolute freedom have only as much
value as the assumption, in physics, of space absolutely void of air,
or of a direction of motion absolutely uninfluenced by the force of
gravity. The force which sets a bullet in motion is certainly
something actual and real; but the influence which would correspond to
this force, this direction in the sense in which the physicist
distinguishes it, exists only in theory, because the bullet will, as
far as all actual experience goes, only move in the direction of a
resultant, in which the impetus given to it and the force of gravity
are inseparably united and appear as one. If, therefore, it is also
clear that the endeavour to obtain a realm of unconditional freedom
contradicts ipso facto the conception of life, yet all such
endeavours are by no means valueless for our knowledge of human
society, and consequently for society itself; and even if social life
is always only the resultant of different forces, yet these forces
themselves remain something real and actual, and are no mere
fiction or hypothesis; while the growing differentiation of society
shows how freedom, conceived as a force, is something actual,
although as an ideal it may never attain full realisation. The
[Pg 10]
development of society has proceeded hand in hand with a conscious or
more often unconscious assertion of the individual, and the
philosopher Hegel could rightly say that the history of the world is
progress in the consciousness of freedom. At all events, it might be
added, the statement that the history of the world is progress in the
consciousness of the universal interdependence of mankind would have
quite as much justification, and practically also just the same
meaning.
The circumstance that, apart from the events of what is comparatively
a modern period, the great social upheavals of history have not taken
place expressly in the name of freedom, although they have
indisputably implied it, only proves that in this case we have to deal
not with a mere word or idea, but with an actual force which is active
and acting, without reference to our knowledge or consciousness of it.
The recognition of individual freedom, and much more the endeavour to
make it the only object of our life, are certainly of quite recent
date. But these presuppose a certain amount of progress in the actual
process of setting the individual free in his moral and political
relationships, which is not to be found in the whole of antiquity, and
still less in the middle ages.
It is not possible to point to clearer traces of Anarchist influences
in the numberless social religious revolutions of the close of the
middle ages, without doing violence to history, although, as in all
critical periods, even in that of the Reformation,—which certainly
[Pg 11]
implied a serious revolt against authority,—there was no lack of
isolated attempts to make the revolt against authority universal, and
to abolish authority of every kind. We find, for instance, in the
thirteenth century, a degenerate sect of the "Beghards," who called
themselves "Brothers and Sisters of the Free Spirit," or were also
called "Amalrikites," after the name of their
founder.[4]
They preached not only community of goods but also of women, a perfect
equality, and rejected every form of authority. Their Anarchist
doctrines were, curiously enough, a consequence of their Pantheism.
Since God is everything and everywhere, even in mankind, it follows
that the will of man is also the will of God; therefore every
limitation of man is objectionable, and every person has the right,
indeed it is his duty, to obey his impulses. These views are said to
have spread fairly widely over the east of France and part of Germany,
and especially among the Beghards on the
Rhine.[5]
The "Brothers and Sisters of the Free Spirit" also appear during the
Hussite wars under the name of "Adamites"; this name being given them because
[Pg 12]
they declared the condition of Adam to be that of sinless innocence.
Their enthusiasm for this happy state of nature went so far that they
appeared in their assemblies, called "Paradises," literally in Adamite
costume, that is, quite naked.
But that, in spite of all this, the real Communism of this sect went
no farther than a kind of patriarchal Republicanism, certainly not as
far as actual Anarchy, is proved by the information given by Æneas
Sylvius: that they certainly had community of women, but that it was
nevertheless forbidden to them to have knowledge of any woman without
the permission of their leader.
There is one other sect met with during the Hussite wars in Bohemia,
which bears some similarity to the Anarchical Communism of the present
day, that of the Chelčicians.[6]
Peter of Chelčic, a peaceful Taborite, preached equality and
Communism; but this universal equality should not (he said) be imposed
upon society by the compulsion of the State, but should be realised
without its intervention. The State is sinful, and an outcome of the
Evil One, since it has created the inequality of property, rank, and
place. Therefore the State must disappear; and the means of doing away
with it consists not in making war upon it, but in simply ignoring it.
The true follower of this theory is thus neither allowed to take any office under
the State nor call in its help; for the true Christian strives after good of
his own accord, and must not compel us to follow it, since God desires good to be
[Pg 13]
done voluntarily. All compulsion is from the Evil One; all dignities
or distinctions of classes offend against the law of brotherly love
and equality. This pious enthusiast easily found a small body of
followers in a time when men were weary of war after the cruelties of
the Hussite conflicts; but here, too, his theory developed in practice
into a kind of Quietism under priestly control, an austere Puritanism,
which is the very opposite of the personal freedom of Anarchism.
Once more the Anarchist views of the Amalrikite appear at the
beginning of the sixteenth century among the Anabaptists in the sect
of the "Free Brothers," who considered themselves set free from all
laws by Christ, had wives and property in common, and refused to pay
either taxes or tithes, or to perform the duties of service or
serfdom.[7]
The "Free Brothers" had a following in the Zürich
highlands, but they were of no more importance than the other sect, we
have mentioned; utterly incomprehensible to those of their own time,
they formed the extreme wings of the widespread Communist movement
which, coming at the same time as the Reformation in the Church,
separates the (so-called) middle ages from modern times like a
boundary line. We observe in it nothing but the naïvely logical
development of a belief that is common to most religions: the assumption
of a happy age in the childhood of mankind (Golden Age, Paradise,
[Pg 14]
and so on), when men followed merely the laws of reason (Morality,
God, or Nature, or whatever else it is called), and needed no laws or
punishments to tell them to do right and avoid wrong; when mankind, as
every schoolboy knows from his Ovid,—
The transition from this primeval Anarchy to the present condition of
society has been presented by religion, both Græco-Roman and
Judaic-Christian, as the consequence of a deterioration of mankind
("the Fall"), and as a condition of punishment, which is to be
followed, in a better world and after the work of life has been well
performed, by another life as Eden-like as the first state of man, and
eternal. But it must not be forgotten that Christianity was at first a
proletarian movement, and that a great part of its adherents certainly
did not join it merely with the hope of a return to the original state
of Paradise in a future world. Perhaps (thought they) this Paradise
might be attainable in this world. It can be seen that the Church had
originally nothing to lose by at least not opposing this hope of a
millennium[8];
and so we see not only heretics like Kerinthos, but also pillars of orthodoxy, like Papios
of Hieropolis, Irenæus, Justin Martyr, and others, preaching the doctrine of the
[Pg 15]
millennium. In later times, indeed, when the Church had long since ceased
to be a mainly proletarian movement, and when Christianity had risen
from the Catacombs to the palace and the throne, the hopes of the poor
and oppressed for an approaching millennial reign lost their harmless
character, and "Millennialism" became ipso facto heresy. But this
heresy was, as may be understood, not so easy to eradicate; and when,
in the closing centuries of the middle ages, the material position of
large classes of people had again become, in spite of Christianity,
most serious and comfortless, Millennialism awoke again actively in
men's minds, and formed the prelude, as well as the Socialist
undercurrent, of the Reformation. Some Radical offshoots of this
medieval Millennialism we have already noticed in the "Brothers and
Sisters of the Free Spirit," the Adamites, Chelčicians, and "Free
Brothers."
The presuppositions of this flattering superstition are so deeply
founded in the optimism of mankind, that it remained the same even
when divested of its religious, or rather its confessional, garment;
and could be no more eradicated by the Rationalistic tendency that
arose after the Reformation than by the interdict of Rome or the
brutal cruelties of ecclesiastical justice.
If we look more closely into the doctrine of the so-called contrat
social, which was destined to form the programme of the French
Revolution, we again recognise without much difficulty the fundamental
ideas of the Millennialists, hardly altered at all. A
[Pg 16]
Paradise without laws, existing before civilisation, which is considered
as a curse, and another like unto it, when "this cursed civilisation" is
abolished, is what a modern Anarchist would say. The names only are
different, and are taken from the vocabulary of Rationalism, instead
of from that of religious mythology. Instead of divine rights men
spoke now of the everlasting and unalterable rights of man; instead of
Paradise, of a happy state of nature, in which there is, however, an
exact resemblance to Ovid's golden age, the transition into the
present form of society was represented to be due to a social contract
or agreement, occasioned, however, by a certain moral degeneracy in
mankind, only differing in name from the "Fall." In this case, also,
Anarchy is regarded as underlying society as the ideal state of
nature; every form of society is only the consequence of the
degeneration of mankind, a pis aller, or, at any rate, only a
voluntary renunciation of the original, inalienable, and unalterable
rights of man and nature, the chief of which is Freedom.
In the further development of this main idea the believers in the
contrat social have been divided. While some, foremost among whom
is Hobbes, declared the contract thus formed once and for all as permanent
and unbreakable, and hence that the authority of the sovereign was
irrevocable and without appeal, and thus arrived at Monarchism pure
and simple; others, and these the great majority, regarded the contract
merely as provisional, and the powers of the sovereign as therefore
limited. In this case everyone is not only free to annul the contract
[Pg 17]
at any time and place himself outside the limits of
society,[9]
but the contract is also regarded as broken if the
sovereign—whether a person or a body corporate—oversteps
his authority. Here the return to the primeval state of Anarchy not
only shines, as it were, afar off as a future ideal, but appears as
the permanently normal state of mankind, only occasionally disturbed
by some transitory form of social life. This idea cannot be more
clearly expressed than in the words which the poet
Schiller—certainly not an advocate of bombs—puts into the
mouth of Stauffacher in William Tell:
How nearly the doctrine of the "social contract" corresponds to the
idea of Anarchy is shown by the circumstance that one of the first
(and what is more, one of the ecclesiastical) representatives of this
doctrine, Hooker, declared, that "it was in the nature of things not
absolutely impossible that men could live without any public form of
government." Elsewhere he says that for men it is foolish to let
[Pg 18]
themselves be guided, by authority, like animals; it would be a kind
of fettering of the judgment, though there were reasons to the
contrary, not to pay heed to them, but, like sheep, to follow the
leader of the flock, without knowing or caring whither. On the other
hand, it is no part of our belief that the authority of man over men
shall be recognised against or beyond reason. Assemblies of learned
men, however great or honourable they may be, must be subject to
reason. This refers, of course, only to spiritual and ecclesiastical
authority; but Locke, who followed Hooker most closely, discovered
only too clearly what the immediate consequences of such assumptions
would be, and tried to avoid them by affirming that the power of the
sovereign, being merely a power entrusted to him, could be taken away
as soon as it became forfeited by misuse, but that the break-up of a
government was not a break-up of society. In France, on the other
hand, Étienne de la Boëtie had already written, when oppressed by the
tyranny of Henry II., a Discours de la Servitude Volontaire, ou
Contr'un (in 1546), containing a glowing defence of Freedom, which
goes so far that the sense of the necessity of authority disappears
entirely. The opinion of La Boëtie is that mankind does not need
government; it is only necessary that it should really wish it, and it
would find itself happy and free again, as if by magic.
So we see how the upholders of the social contract are separated into
a Right, Central, and Left party. At the extreme right stands Hobbes, whom
[Pg 19]
the defenders of Absolutism follow; in the centre is Locke, with
the Republican Liberals; and on the extreme left stand the pioneers of
Anarchism, with Hooker the ecclesiastic at their head. But of all the
theoretical defenders of the "social contract," only one has really
worked out its ultimate consequences. William Godwin, in his Inquiry
concerning Political Justice,[10]
demanded the abolition of every form of government, community of
goods, the abolition of marriage, and self-government of mankind
according to the laws of justice. Godwin's book attracted remarkable
attention, from the novelty and audacity of his point of view. "Soon
after his book on political justice appeared," writes a young
contemporary, "workmen were observed to be collecting their savings
together, in order to buy it, and to read it under a tree or in a
tavern. It had so much influence that Godwin said it must contain
something wrong, and therefore made important alterations in it before
he allowed a new edition to appear. There can be no doubt that both
Government and society in England have derived great advantage from
the keenness and audacity, the truth and error, the depth and
shallowness, the magnanimity and injustice of Godwin, as revealed in
his inquiry concerning political justice."
Our next business is to turn from theoretical considerations of the
contrat social to the practice based upon this catchword; and to look
for traces of Anarchist thought upon the blood-stained path of the
[Pg 20]
great French Revolution—that typical struggle of the modern spirit of
freedom against ancient society. We are the more desirous to do this,
because of the frequent and repeated application of the word Anarchist
to the most radical leaders of the democracy by the contemporaries,
supporters, and opponents of the Revolution. As far as we in the
present day are able to judge the various parties from the history of
that period,—and we certainly do not know too much about it,—there
were not apparently any real Anarchists[11]
either in the Convention or the Commune of Paris. If we want to find
them, we must begin with the Girondists and not with the Jacobins, for
the Anarchists of to-day recognise—and rightly so—no
sharper contrast to their doctrine than Jacobinism; while the
Anarchism of Proudhon is connected in two essential points with its
Girondist precursors—namely, in its protest against the sanction
of property and in its federal principle. But, nevertheless, neither
Vergniaud nor Brissot was an Anarchist, even though the latter, in his
Philosophical Examination of Property and Theft (1780), uttered a
catchword, afterwards taken up by
[Pg 21]
Proudhon. At the same time, they have no cause and no right to
reproach the "Mountain" with Anarchist tendencies.
Neither Danton nor Robespierre, the two great lights of the
"Mountain," dreamed of making a leap into the void of a society
without government. Their ideal was rather the omnipotence of society,
the all-powerful State, before which the interests of the individual
were scattered like the spray before the storm; and the great
Maximilian, the "Chief Rabbi" of this deification of the State,
accordingly called himself "a slave of freedom." Robespierre and
Danton, on their side, called the Hebertists Anarchists. If one can
speak of a principle at all among these people, who placed all power
in the hands of the masses who had no votes, and the whole art of
politics in majorities and force, it was certainly not directed
against the abolition of authority. The maxims of these people were
chaos and the right of the strongest. Marat, the party saint, had
certainly, on occasion, inveighed against the laws as such, and
desired to set them aside; but Marat all the time wanted the
dictatorship, and for a time actually held it. The Marat of after
Thermidor was the infamous Caius Gracchus Babœuf, who is now
usually regarded as the characteristic representative of Anarchism
during the French Revolution—and regarded so just as rightly, or
rather as wrongly, as those mentioned above. Babœuf was a more
thorough-going Socialist than Robespierre; indeed he was a Radical
Communist, but no more. In the proclamation issued by Babœuf for the 22d
[Pg 22]
of Floreal, the day of the insurrection against the
Directoire, he says: "The revolutionary authority of the people will
announce the destruction of every other existing authority." But that
means nothing more than the dictatorship of the mob; which is rejected
in theory by Anarchists of all types, just as much as any other kind
of authority. That the followers of Babœuf had nothing else in view
is shown by the two placards prepared for this day, one of which said,
"Those who usurp the sovereignty ought to be put to death by free
men," while the other, explaining and limiting the first, demanded the
"Constitution of 1793, liberty, equality, and universal happiness."
This constitution of 1793 was, however, Robespierre's work, and
certainly did not mean the introduction of Anarchy.
Echoes and traditions of Babœuf's views, often passing through
intermediaries like Buonarotti, are found in the Carbonarists of the
first thirty years of our own century, and applied to this (as to so
many other popular movements) the epithet "Anarchical," so glibly
uttered by the lips of the people. But among the chiefs, at least, of
that secret society that was once so powerful, we find no trace of it;
on the contrary they declared absolute freedom to be a delusion which
could never be realised. Yet even here, though the fundamental dogma
of Anarchism is rejected, we notice a step forward in the extension of
the Anarchist idea. It was indeed rejected by the members of that
society, but it was known to them, and what is more, they take account
of it, and support every effort which, by encouraging individualism
[Pg 23]
to an unlimited extent, is hostile to the union of society as such.
Thus we even find individual Carbonarists with pronounced Anarchist
views and tendencies. Malegari, for instance, in 1835, described the
raison d'être of the organisation in these
words[12]:
"We form a union of brothers in all parts of the earth; we all strive
for the freedom of mankind; we wish to break every kind of yoke."
Between the time when these words were spoken and the appearance of
the famous What is Property? and the Individual and his Property,
there elapsed only about ten years. How much since then has been
changed, whether for better or worse, how much has been cleared up and
confused, in the life and thought of the nations!
Feuerbach described the development which he had passed through as a
thinker in the words: "God was my first thought, Reason my second, Man
my third and last." Not only Feuerbach, but all modern philosophy, has
gone through these stages; and Feuerbach is only different from other
philosophers, in having himself assisted men to reach the third and
final stage. The epoch of philosophy that was made illustrious by the
brilliant trinity of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibnitz, however far it
may have departed or emancipated itself from the traditions of
religion, not only never deposed the idea of God, but actually for the
first time made the conception of the Deity the starting-point
[Pg 24]
of all Thought and Existence. The philosophy which abolished this, whether we
consider Locke and Hume the realists, or Kant and Hegel the idealists,
is philosophy of intellect; absolute reason has taken the place of an
absolute God, criticism and dialectics the place of ontology and
theocracy. But in philosophy we find the very opposite of the
mythological legend, for in it Chronos instead of devouring his
children is devoured by them. The critical school turned against its
masters, who were already sinking into speculative theology again,
quite forgetting that its great leader had introduced a new epoch with
a struggle against ontology; and losing themselves in the heights of
non-existence, just as if they had never taken their start from the
thesis, that no created mind can comprehend the nature of the Being
that is behind all phenomena. From such heights a descent had to be
made to our earth; instead of immortal individuals, as conceived by
Fichte, Hegel, and Schelling, the school of Feuerbach, Strauss, and
Bauer postulated "human beings, sound in mind and body, for whom
health is of more importance than immortality." Concentration upon
this life took the place of vague trancendentalism, and anthropology
the place of theology, ontology, and cosmology. Idealism became
bankrupt; God was regarded no longer as the creator of man, but man as
the creator of God. Humanity now took the place of the Godhead.
The new principle was now a universal or absolute one; but, as with Hegel,
universal or absolute only in words, for to sense it is extremely real, just as
[Pg 25]
Art in a certain sense is more real than the individual. It was the
"generic conception of humanity, not something impersonal and
universal but forming persons, inasmuch as only in persons have we
reality." (D. F. Strauss.)
If philosophic criticism were to go still farther than this, there
remained nothing more for it than to destroy this generalisation, and
instead of Humanity to make the individual, the person, the centre of
thought. A strong individualistic and subjective feature, peculiar to
the Kantian and post-Kantian philosophy, favoured such a process.
Although in the case of Fichte, Hegel, and Schelling this feature had
never outstepped the limits of the purely comprehensible, yet such a
trait makes philosophy infer a similarly strongly developed feature of
individualism in the people, especially as at that time it was so
closely connected with popular life. Moreover, at that period there
was a great desire (as we see in Fichte and his influence on the
nation) to translate philosophy at once into action; and so it was not
remarkable that a thinker regardless of consequences should introduce
the idea of individualism into the field of action, and regard this
also as suitable for "concentration of thought upon this present
life." Herewith began a new epoch; just as formerly human thought had
proceeded from the individual up to the universal, so now it descended
from the highest generalisation down again to the individual; to the
process of getting free from self followed the regaining of self.
Here was the point at which an Anarchist philosophy
[Pg 26]
could intervene, and, as a matter of fact did intervene, in Stirner.
In another direction also, and about the same time, the critical
philosophy had reached a point beyond which it could not go without
attacking not only the changing forms, but also the very foundations
of all organisations of society which were then possible. However far
the Aufklärer, the Encyclopædists, the heedless fighters in the
political revolution, and the leading personages in the spiritual
revolution, had gone in their unsparing criticism of all institutions
and relationships of life, they had not as yet, except in a few
isolated cases, attacked Religion, the State, and Property, as such in
the abstract.
However manifold and transitory their various forms might be, these
three things themselves still seemed to be the incontrovertible and
necessary conditions of spiritual, political, and social life, merely
the different concrete formulæ for the one absolute idea which could
not be banished from the thought of that age.
But if we approach these three fundamental ideas with the probe of
scientific criticism, and resolutely tear away the halo of the
absolute, it does not on that account seem necessary for us to declare
that they are valueless or even harmful in life. We read Strauss's
Life of Jesus, and put it down perhaps with the conviction that the
usually recognised sources of inspired information as to revealed
religion and the divine mission of Christianity are an
[Pg 27]
unskilful compilation of purely apocryphal documents; but are we on that account
to deny the importance of Judaism and Christianity in social progress
and ethics? Or again, I may read E. B. Tyler's Primitive Culture and
see the ideas of the soul and God arise from purely natural and (for
the most part) physiological origins, just as we can trace the
development of the skilful hand of Raphael or Liszt from the
fore-limbs of an ape; but am I from that to conclude that the idea of
religion is harmful to society? It is just the same with the ideas of
the State and Property. Modern science has shown us beyond dispute the
purely historical origin of both these forms of social life; and both
are, at least as we find them to-day, comparatively recent features of
human society. This, of course, settles the question as to the State
and Property being inviolable, or being necessary features of human
society from everlasting to everlasting; but the further question as
to how far these forms are advantages and relatively necessary for
society in general, or for a certain society, has nothing to do with
the above, and cannot be answered by the help of a simple logical
formula. But though this fact seems so clear to us, it is even to-day
not by any means clear to a great portion of mankind. And how much
less clear it must have been to thinkers at the beginning of this
century when thought was still firmly moulded upon the conception of
the Absolute. To them there could only be either absolute Being or
absolute Not-Being; and as soon as ever critical philosophy destroyed
the idea of the "sacredness" of the institutions
[Pg 28]
referred to (Property and the State), it was almost unavoidable that it should
declare them to be "unholy," i. e., radically bad and harmful. The
logic which underlies this process of thought is similar to that which
concludes that if a thing is not white it must be black. But it cannot
be denied that just at this time—during the celebrated dix ans
after the Revolution of July—many circumstances seemed positively to
favour such an inference.
Not only were economic conditions unsatisfactory (though pauperism
alone will never produce Anarchism), but even hope and faith had gone.
Idealism was bankrupt, not only in the political but also in the
economic world. Full of the noblest animation, and with the most
joyous confidence, the French nation had entered upon the great
Revolution, and all Europe had looked full of hope towards France,
whence they expected to see the end of all tyranny and—since such
things at that time were not well understood—the end of all misery.
We may be spared the detailed description of the transition by which
this hope and these childish expectations, this Millennialism, were
bitterly disillusioned, and how the excitement of 1789 to 1791 ended
in a great wail of woe; and that too not only in France, where
absolute monarchy post tot discrimina verum had merely changed into
an absolute empire, but also in Germany, whose princes hastened to
recall the concessions made under the pressure of the Revolution. The
monarchs of Europe then celebrated an orgie of promise-breaking, from
which even to-day the simple mind of the people revolts with
[Pg 29]
deep disgust. It need only be remembered how in the Napoleonic wars of
Germany noble princes exploited the flaming enthusiasm and the naïve
confidence of their people for their own dynastic purposes, and then,
after the downfall of the Corsican, drove them back again through the
old Caudine yoke. If, after such unfortunate experiences, the people,
and especially the insatiate elements amongst them, had retained any
remains of confidence in help from above, it must have perished in the
sea of disgust and bitterness at the Revolution of July.
In a struggle for a free form of the State, which lasted almost half a
century, the proletariat and its misery had grown without cessation.
They had fought for constitutional monarchy, for the Republic, and for
the Empire; they had tried Bourbons and Bonapartes and Orleanists;
they had gone to the barricades and to the field of battle for
Robespierre, Napoleon, and finally for Thiers; but of course their
success was always the same: not only their economic position, but
also the social condition of the lower masses of the people had
remained unchanged. It was recognised more and more that between the
proletariate and the upper classes there was something more than a
separation of mere constitutional rights; in fact, that the privileges
of wealth had taken the place of the privileges of birth; and the more
the masses recognised this the more did their interest in purely
political questions, and, above all, the question as to the form of
the State, sink into the background, while it became more and more
clearly seen that the equality of constitutional
[Pg 30]
rights was no longer real equality, and that the attainment of equality
necessitated the abolition of all privileges, including also the privilege
of free possession or of property. Henceforth, therefore, every revolutionary
power attacks no longer political points but the question of property,
and even though all movements did not proceed so far as to open
Communism, yet they were animated by the main idea that the question
of human poverty was to be solved only by limitation of the right of
free acquisition, possession, and disposal of property.
The dogma of the sanctity of property was in any case gone for ever.
But still the last dogma, that of the inviolability of the State,
remained. The Franco-German Socialists of the third and fourth decades
of our century, Saint-Simon, Cabet, Weitling, Rodbertus, down to Louis
Blanc himself, did not think of denying the State as such, but had
thought of it as playing the principal part in the execution of their
new scheme of organisation of industry and society. But the very
character of the new reforming tendencies necessitated an unlimited
preponderance of State authority which would crush out the freedom of
decision in the individual. And a directly opposite tendency, opposed
to all authority, could appear, therefore,—though certainly from the
nature of the case necessary,—at first only as a very feeble
opposition.
The principle of equality was not disputed, but the use of brute force
through the power of the State was regarded with horror in the form in
which the followers of Babœuf, the enthusiasts for Utopianism,
[Pg 31]
preached it. The necessity for an organisation of industry was not
denied, but men began to ask the question whether this organisation
could not proceed from below upwards till it reached freedom? Already
Fourier's phalanxes might be regarded as such an attempt to organise
industry through the formation of free groups from below upwards; an
attempt to which the Monarchists and Omniarchists are merely an
exterior addition. If we leave out of consideration the rapid failure
of the various Socialistic attempts at institutions based upon the
foundation of authority, yet the sad experiences of half a century
filled with continual constitutional changes would have sufficed to
undermine the respect for authority as such. Absolute monarchy as well
as constitutional, the Republic just as much as Imperialism, the
dictatorship of an individual just as much as that of the mob, had all
alike failed to remove pauperism, misery, and crime, or even to
alleviate them; was it not then natural for superficial minds to
conclude that the radical fault lay in the authoritative form of
society in the State as such? did not the thought at once suggest
itself that a further extension of Fourier's system of the formation
of groups on the basis of the free initiative of the individual might
be attempted without taking the State into account at all? But here
was a further point at which a system of social and political
Anarchism might begin with some hope of success, and here it actually
did begin with Proudhon.
[Pg 32]
Biography — His Philosophic Standpoint — His Early Writings — The
"Contradictions of Political Economy" — Proudhon's Federation — His
Economic Views — His Theory of Property — Collectivism
and Mutualism — Attempts to Put his Views into Practice — Proudhon's
Last Writings — Criticism.
he man who had such a powerful, not to say fateful, influence upon
the progress of the proletarian movement of our century was himself
one of the proletariat class by birth and calling.
Pierre Joseph Proudhon was born 15th January, 1809, in a suburb of
Besançon. His father was a cooper, his mother a cook; and Pierre
Joseph, in spite of his thirst for knowledge, had to devote himself to
hard work, instead of completing his studies; he became a proofreader
in some printing works at Besançon, and as a journeyman printer
wandered all through France. Having returned to Besançon, he entered
the printing house again as a factor. In the year 1836 he founded,
with a fellow-workman in the same town, a little printing shop,
[Pg 33]
which, however, he wound up after his partner had died in 1838, being
determined to change the occupation he had followed so far, for
another for which he had already long been preparing by diligent study
both during his wanderings and in his leisure hours in past years.
Proudhon's activity as an author began in the year 1837. The Academy
at Besançon had to award a three years' scholarship, which had been
founded by Suard, the secretary of the French Academy, for poor young
men of Franche-Comte who wished to devote themselves to a literary or
scientific career. Proudhon entered as a competitor, and won the
scholarship. In the memoir of his life, which he drew up for the
Academy, he said: "Born and reared in the midst of the working
classes, to which I belong with my heart and in my affections, and
above all by the community of sufferings and aspirations, it will be
my greatest joy, if I receive the approval of the Academy, to work
unceasingly with the help of philosophy and science, and with the
whole energy of my will and all my mental powers, for the physical,
moral, and intellectual improvement of those whom I call brothers and
companions, in order to sow amongst them the seeds of a doctrine which
I consider as the law of the moral world, and hoping to succeed
in my endeavours, to appear before you, gentlemen, as their
representative." As to the studies to which he devoted himself
in Paris for several years after receiving the scholarship, Proudhon
relates himself that he received light, not from the socialistic
schools which then existed and were coming into fashion, not from
[Pg 34]
partisans or from journalists, but that he began with a study of the
antiquities of Socialism, a study which, according to his opinion, was
absolutely necessary in order to determine the theoretical and
practical laws of the social movement.
It gives us a somewhat strange sensation to learn that Proudhon, the
father of Anarchism, made these sociological studies in the Bible; and
this Book of books is even to-day the most important source of empiric
sociology. For no other book reflects so authentically and elaborately
the development of an important social Individualism, and in
Proudhon's time the Bible (in view of the complete lack of
ethnographic observations which then prevailed) was also almost the
only source of studies of this kind. And if also it must be admitted
that these studies could not fail to be one-sided, yet it cannot be
denied that Proudhon proceeded in a way incomparably more correct than
most social philosophers have done either before or since, for they
have built up their systems generally by deductive and dogmatic
methods.
An essay which Proudhon wrote upon the introduction of Sunday rest,
from the point of view of morality, health, and the relations of a
family estate, brought him a bronze medal from the Academy, and he was
able afterwards to say with truth: "My Socialism received its baptism
from a learned society, and I have an academy as sponsor"; certainly a
remarkable boast for one who denied all authority.
Proudhon appears to have travelled very quickly along
the road which led from the regions of faith
[Pg 35]
to the metaphysics prevailing at that time; and already he
took for his criterion—as he tells us later in his
Confessions—the proposition (drawn up according to the
Hegelian theory, that everything when it is legalised at the same time
brings its opposite with it), "that every principle which is pursued
to its farthest consequence arrives at a contradiction when it must be
considered false and repudiated; and that, if this false principle has
given rise to an institution, this institution itself must be regarded
as an artificial product and as a Utopia." This proposition Proudhon
later on formulated as follows: "Every true thought is conceived in
time once, and breaks up in two directions. As each of these
directions is the negation of the other and both can only disappear in
a higher idea, it follows that the negation of law is itself the law
of life and progress, and the principle of continual movement." Here,
indeed, we have Proudhon's whole teaching; with this magic wand of
negation of law he thought he could open the magic world of social
problems, and heal up the wounds of the social organisation.
"My masters," said Proudhon to his friend Langlois in the year 1848,
"that is those who woke fruitful ideas in me, are three: first of all,
the Bible, then Adam Smith, and finally Hegel." Proudhon always boasted
of being Hegel's pupil, and Karl Marx maintained that it was he who,
during his stay in Paris in the year 1844, in debates which often lasted
all night long, inoculated Proudhon (to the latter's great disadvantage)
with Hegelianism, which he nevertheless could not properly study owing to
[Pg 36]
his ignorance of the German language. A well-known anecdote attributes
to Hegel the witty saying that only one scholar understood him and he
misunderstood him. We do not know who this scholar was, but it might
just as well have been Marx as Proudhon, for that which both of them
took from the great philosopher, and applied as and how and when they
did, is common to both: namely, the dialectic method applied to the
problems of social philosophy.
The similarity between them in this respect is so striking that one
might call both these embittered opponents the personal antitheses of
the great master, Hegel. As for the rest, Proudhon's inoculation with
Hegelianism, which was afterwards continued by K. Grün and
Bakunin, must have been very marked and continuous, for we shall
constantly be meeting with traces of it as we go on. Powerful as was
the influence of Hegel upon Proudhon, the Anarchist was but little
affected by the fashionable philosophy of his contemporary and
fellow-countryman, A. Comte; which is all the more remarkable since it
is Comte's Positivism which, proceeding along the lines of Spencer's
philosophy, has in no small degree influenced modern Anarchism, while
echoes of the Comtian individualist doctrine are even to be found in
the German contemporary of Proudhon, Stirner; echoes which, although
numerous, are perhaps unconscious. Proudhon attached himself, as
already mentioned, specially to the Hegelian dialectic and to the
doctrine of Antitheses. Using this criterion, Proudhon
[Pg 37]
proceeded to the consideration and criticism of social phenomena; and
just as beginners and pupils in the difficult art of philosophy,
instead of contenting themselves with preliminary questions, attack
the very kernel of problems, with all the rashness of ignorance, so
Proudhon also attacked, as his first problem, the fundamental social
question of property, taking it up for the subject of his much-quoted
though much less read work, What is Property? (Qu'est-ce que la
Propriété?—First essay in Recherches sur le
Principe du Droit et du Gouvernement). Proudhon has been judged and
condemned, though, and wrongly, yet almost exclusively, by this one
essay, written at the beginning of his literary career. Friends and
foes alike have always contented themselves with regarding the
celebrated dictum there uttered, Property is Theft, as the Alpha and
the Omega of Proudhon's teaching, without reading the book itself. And
because it has been thought sufficient to catch up a phrase dragged
from all its context, so it has happened that Proudhon to-day,
although he is one of the most frequently mentioned authors, is hardly
either known or read. Although the question of property forms the
corner-stone of all Proudhon's teaching, yet it would be wrong to identify
it with his doctrine entirely. And it is no less wrong to represent
the first attempt which Proudhon made to solve so great a problem
as the whole of his views about property, as unfortunately even serious
authors have hitherto done almost without exception, and especially
those who make a special study of him, such as Diehl. As a matter
[Pg 38]
of fact, Proudhon has carefully and elaborately set forth his
theory of property in several other works which are mixed up for the
most part with his other numerous writings, and has left behind a
fragment of a book on the theory of property, in which he meant to
produce a comprehensive theory of property as the foundation of his
whole work. We must, therefore, in order not to anticipate, leave a
complete exposition of Proudhon's theory of property to a later
portion of this book, hence we will merely glance at the work, What
is Property? and also at another study which appeared in 1843 called
The Creation of Order in Humanity, which shows the second, or I
might say, the political side of Proudhon's train of thought in its
first beginnings, and of which Proudhon himself said later, that it
satisfied neither him nor the public, and was worse than mediocre,
although he had very little to retract in its contents. "This book, a
veritable infernal machine, which contains all the implements of
creation and destruction," he said in his Confessions, "is badly
done, and is far below that which I could have produced if I had taken
time to choose and arrange properly my materials. But however full of
faults my work may now appear, it was then sufficient for my purpose.
Its object was to make me understand myself. Just as contradiction had
been useful to me to destroy, so now the processes of development
served me to build up. My intellectual education was completed, the
Creation of Order had scarcely seen the light, when, with the
application of the creative method which followed immediately upon it, I
[Pg 39]
understood that in order to obtain an insight into the revolution
of society the first thing must be to construct the whole series of
its antitheses, or the system of opposites."
This was done in the book which appeared at Paris in two volumes in
1846, The System of Economic Contradictions, or the Philosophy of
Misery, which deserves to be called his masterpiece, both because it
contains the philosophic and economic foundations of his theory in a
perfectly comprehensive and clear exposition, and because it is
impossible to understand Proudhon without a knowledge of these
contradictions. In his first work upon property, Proudhon had
represented it as something equivalent to theft. But now we have
another doctrine proposed: that Property is Liberty. These two
propositions were thought by Proudhon to be proved in the same way.
"Property considered in the totality of social institutions has, so to
speak, two current accounts. One is the thought of the good which it
produces, and which flows directly from its nature; the other is the
disadvantages which it produces, and the sacrifices which it causes,
and which also result directly, just as much as the good, from its
nature. In property evil, or the abuse of it, is inseparable from the
good, just as in book-keeping by double entry the debtor is
inseparable from the creditor side. The one necessarily implies the
other. To suppress the abuse of property means to extinguish it, just
as much as to strike out an entry on the debtor side means also
striking it out on the creditor side of an account." He proceeded
[Pg 40]
in the same way with all "economic categories." Labour, he tells us in
the Contradictions more explicitly, is the principle of wealth, the
power which creates or abolishes values, or puts them in proportion
one to another, and also distributes them. Labour thus in itself, at
the same time, is a force that makes for equilibrium and productivity,
which one might think should secure mankind against every want. But in
order to work, labour must define and determine itself—that is,
organise itself. What are, then, the organs of labour, that is, the
forms in which human labour produces and fixes values and keeps off
want? These forms or categories are: division of labour, machinery,
competition, monopoly, the State or centralisation, free exchange,
credit, property, and partnership.
However much labour in itself is the source of wealth, yet those means
which are invented for the purpose of increasing wealth, become,
through their antagonism and through that antithetical character,
which, according to Proudhon, lies in the very nature of all social
forms, just as many causes of want and pauperism. Labour gains by its
division a more than natural fertility, but, at the same time, this
divided labour, which debases the workman, sinks, owing to the manner
in which this division is carried out, with great rapidity below its
own level and only creates an insufficient value. After it has
increased consumption by the superfluity of products, it leaves them
in the lurch owing to the low rate of pay; instead of keeping off want
it actually produces it.
[Pg 41]
The deficiency caused by the division of labour is said to be filled
by machinery, which not only increases and multiplies the productivity
of labour, but also compensates for the moral deficiency caused by the
division of labour, and supplies a higher unity and synthesis in place
of the division of labour. But according to Proudhon this is not the
case; with machinery begins the distinction between masters and
wage-earners, between capitalists and workmen. Thus mankind, instead
of being raised up by machinery from degradation, sinks deeper and
deeper. Man loses both his character as a man, and freedom, and
becomes only a tool. Prosperity increases for the masters, poverty for
the men; the distinction of caste begins, and a terrible struggle
becomes manifest, which consists in increasing men in order to be able
to do without them. And so the general pressure becomes more and more
severe; poverty, already heralded by the division of labour, at last
makes its appearance in the world, and henceforth becomes the soul and
sinews of society.
As opposed to its aristocratic tendencies, society places freedom or
competition. Competition emancipates the workman and produces an incalculable
growth in wealth. By competition the productions of labour continually
sink in price, or (what comes to the same thing) continually increase
in quality: and since the sources of competition, just like mechanical
improvements and combinations of the division of labour, are infinite,
it may be said that the productive force of competition is unlimited as
[Pg 42]
regards intensity and scope. At last, by competition, the production
of wealth gets definitely ahead of the production of men, by which
statement Proudhon destroys the dogma of Malthus, which, we may
remark, was no more proved than his own. But this competition is also
a new source of pauperism, because the lowering of prices which it
brings with it only benefits, on the one hand, those who succeed, and,
on the other, leaves those who fail without work and without means of
subsistence. The necessary consequence, and, at the same time, the
natural antithesis of competition is monopoly. It is that form of
social possession without which no labour, no production, no exchange,
and no wealth would be possible. It is most intimately connected with
individualism and freedom, so that without it we can hardly imagine
society, and yet it is, quite as much as competition, anti-social and
harmful. For monopoly attracts everything to itself—land,
labour, and the implements of labour, productions and the distribution
thereof—and annihilates them; or it annihilates the natural
equilibrium of production and consumption; it causes the labourer to
be deceived in the amount of his reward, and it causes progress in
prosperity to be changed into a continual progress in poverty.
Finally, it inverts all ideas of justice in commerce.
The State, in its economic relations, should, according to Proudhon,
eventuate in an equalisation between the patricians and the
proletariat; its regulations (such as taxation) should, in the first
place, be an antidote against the arrogance and
[Pg 43]
excessive power of monopoly; but even the institution of the State fails
in its purpose, since taxes, instead of being paid by those who have
wealth, are almost exclusively paid by those who have not; the army,
justice, peace, education, hospitals, workhouses, public offices, even
religion,—in short, everything which is intended for the advance,
emancipation, and the relief of the proletariat being first paid for
and supported by the proletariat, and then either turned against it or
lost to it altogether.
It would be useless to repeat what Proudhon says about the beneficial,
and at the same time fateful, consequences both of free-trade and its
opposite. Who does not know the arguments which even to-day are used
by politicians and savants in the still undecided controversy for and
against it?
In this system of contradiction, then, in this antithesis of society,
Proudhon believed he had discovered the law of social progress, while
as a matter of fact he had only given a very negative proof (though he
certainly would hardly have acknowledged it) that there is not in
economics any more than in ethics anything absolute, and that "benefit"
and "harm" are relative terms which have nothing in common with the
essence of things; and it is just as wrong in the one case to regard
the existing social order as the best of all possible worlds, as it is
in the other to regard any one economic institution as a social panacea,
or to blame one or the other for all the evils of an evil world. Such a
confession of faith might easily be considered trivial, and it might
[Pg 44]
even give rise to a supercilious smile if it required nothing less
than the doctrine of antithesis taught by Kant and Hegel to be brought
in to prove what are obviously matters of fact. But perhaps it is just
this superficial smile which is the justification of Proudhon, who had
to fight a severe and not always victorious battle for an apparently
trivial cause. We do not forget how helplessly the age in which he
lived was tossed to and fro in all social questions, from casuistical
Agnosticism to arbitrary Dogmatism; from extreme Individualism to
Communism, from the standpoint of absolute laisser faire to the
uttermost reliance on authority. In placing these two worlds in sharp
contrast one to another, Contradictions, with all its acknowledged
faults and errors, performed an undeniable service; and this
book—against which Karl Marx has written a severe
attack—will retain for all time its value as one of the most
important and thorough works of social philosophy. In any case, the
net result of the lengthy discussion, in view of the purpose which
Proudhon had before him, was absolutely nil. Proudhon certainly
endeavoured in his dialectic method to find a solution of antitheses,
and to come to some positive result; but even this solution, which was
to have been the great social remedy, is, when divested of its
philosophical garments, such a general and indefinite draft upon the
bank of social happiness that it could never be properly paid.
"I have shewn," said Proudhon, at the close of his Contradictions, "how
society seeks in formula after formula, institution after institution, that
[Pg 45]
equilibrium which always escapes it, and at every attempt always
causes its luxury and its poverty to grow in equal proportion. Since
equilibrium has never yet been reached, it only remains to hope
something from a complete solution which synthetically unites
theories, which gives back to labour its effectiveness and to each of
its organs its power. Hitherto pauperism has been so inextricably
connected with labour, and want with idleness, and all our accusations
against Providence only prove our weakness." This solution of the
great problem of our century by the synthetic union of economic and
social antithesis, or, as Proudhon calls it in another place, by a
scientific, legal, immortal, and inseparable combination, is certainly
a beautiful and noble philosophy. It cannot be denied that herewith
Proudhon, who, in all his works, raged furiously against Utopians, has
none the less created a Utopia of his own, not, indeed, by forcibly
urging mankind through an ideal change, but by attempting to mould
life into an ideal shape without, like others, appealing to force, or
venturing to organise the forces of terror, in order to accomplish his
ideal.
Just as Proudhon differed from the ready-made Socialism of his age by
a conception which he opposed to pauperism, so, too, he differed in
the method which he recommended should be adopted for the removal of
pauperism. He certainly accepted the proposition that poverty could
only be removed by the labourer receiving the entire result of his
labour, and that social reform must, accordingly,
[Pg 46]
consist of an organisation of labour. In this he was quite at one with Louis
Blanc, but only in this; for while Louis Blanc claimed for the organisation
of labour the full authority of the State, Proudhon desired it to
arise from the free initiative of the people, without the interference
of the State in any way. This is the parting of the roads between
Anarchism and authoritative Socialism; here they separate once for
all, never to meet again, except in the most violent opposition. This
was the starting-point of Proudhon's Anarchist views. The experiences
of the Revolution of 1848, which, from the social standpoint, failed
entirely, might well have fitted in with these views of his. Proudhon
had taken a very active part in the occurrences of this remarkable
year, as editor of the People, and as a representative of the
Department of the Seine, and in other capacities, and thought that the
cause of the fruitlessness of all attempts to solve the social problem
and to reap the fruits of the Revolution lay in the fact that the
Revolution had been initiated from above instead of from below, and
because the revolutionary principle had been installed in power, and
therefore had destroyed itself. But ultimately the opposition of
Proudhon to Blanc goes back to the fundamental difference alluded to
above.
Society, as Proudhon explains in his Contradictions,
and as he applies his doctrine of politics in his book called the
Confessions of a Revolutionary, written in prison in 1849,
is essentially of a dialectic nature and is founded upon opposites,
which are all mingled one with another, and the combinations of
[Pg 47]
which are infinite. The solution of the social problem he finds in
placing the different expressions of the problem no longer in
contradiction but in their "dialectic developments," so that for
example the right to work, to credit, and to assistance, rights whose
realisation under an antagonistic legislation is impossible or
dangerous, gradually result from an already established, realised, and
undoubted right; and so instead of being stumbling-blocks one to
another they find in their mutual connection their most lasting
guarantee. But since such guarantees should lie in the institutions
themselves the authority of the State becomes neither necessary nor
justifiable for the carrying out of this revolution.
But why should revolution from above be impossible? The doctrine of
antithesis, applied to politics, implies freedom and order. The first
is realised by revolution, the second by government. Thus there is
here a contradiction; for the government can never become
revolutionary for the very simple reason that it is a government. But
society alone—that is, the masses of the people when permeated by
intelligence—can revolutionise itself, because it alone can express
its free will in a rational manner, can analyse and develop and unfold
the secret of its destination and its origin, and alter its beliefs
and its philosophy.
"Governments are the scourge of God, introduced in order to
keep the world in discipline and order. And do you demand that
they should annihilate themselves, create freedom, and make
revolutions? That is impossible. All revolutions, from the
[Pg 48]
anointing of the first king to the declaration of the Rights of Man,
have been freely accomplished by the spirit of the people. Governments
have always hindered, oppressed, and crushed them to the ground. They
have never made a revolution. It is not their function to produce
movements but to keep them back. And even if they possessed
revolutionary science—which is a contradiction of
terms—they would be justified in not making use of it. They must
first let their knowledge be absorbed by the people in order to
receive the support of the citizens, and that would mean to refuse to
acknowledge the existence of authority and power."
It follows through this that the organisation of work by the State—as
was attempted by Fourier, Louis Blanc, and their followers in a more
or less remote degree—is an illusion, and on this theory revolution
can only take place through the initiative of the people
itself—"through the unanimous agreement of the citizens, through the
experience of the workmen, and through the progress and growth of
enlightenment."
We here have laid bare the yawning gulf which lies between Proudhon
and the State Socialism of his time, and over this gulf there is no
bridge. We see how from these premises has been developed gradually
and logically that which Proudhon himself has called Anarchy
(An-arche, without government). The Socialists have made the
statement that the political revolution is the means of which the
social revolution is the end. Proudhon has
[Pg 49]
inverted this statement and regards the social revolution as the means
and a political revolution as the end. It is therefore a great mistake
to consider him, as is always done, as a political economist, for he
was first and foremost a social politician. The Socialists place as
the ultimate object of revolution, the welfare of all, enjoyment; but
for Proudhon the principle of revolution is freedom, that is:
(1) Political freedom by the organisation of universal suffrage, by
the independent centralisation of social functions, and by the
continual and unceasing revision of the constitution.
(2) Industrial freedom through the mutual guarantee of credit and
sale. In other words "no government by men by means of the
accumulation of power, no exploitation of men by means of the
accumulation of capital."
Proudhon thought that the fault of every political or social
constitution, whether it was the work of political or social
Radicalism, that which produces conflicts, and sets up antagonism in
society, lies in the fact that on the one hand the division of powers,
or rather of functions, is badly and incompletely performed, while on
the other hand centralisation is insufficient. The necessary consequence
of this is that the chief power is inactive and the "thought of the people,"
or universal suffrage, is not exercised. Division of functions then
must be completed, and centralisation must increase; universal suffrage
must regain its prerogative and therewith give back to the
[Pg 50]
people the energy and activity which is lacking to them.
The manner in which Proudhon proposed this constitution of society by
the initiative of the masses and the organisation of universal
suffrage cannot be better or more simply explained than in the words
and examples which he himself has used in the Confessions in order
to interpret his views. He says:
"For many centuries the spiritual power, according to the traditional
conception of it, has been separated from the temporal power. I
remark, by the way, that the political principle of the division of
powers, or functions, is the same as the principle of the division of
the departments of industry or of labour. Here already we see a
glimpse of the identity of the political and social constitution. But
now I say that the division of the two powers, the spiritual and
temporal, has never been complete; and that their centralisation,
which was a great disadvantage both for ecclesiastical administration
and for the followers of religion, was never sufficient. A complete
division would take place if the temporal power never mingled in
religious solemnities, in the administration of the sacraments, in the
government of parishes, and especially in the nomination of bishops.
There would then be a much greater centralisation, and consequently
still more regular government, if in every parish the people had the
right to choose their clergymen and chaplains themselves, or even not
to have any at all; if the priests in every diocese chose their bishops; if the assembly
[Pg 51]
of bishops alone regulated religious affairs in theological education
and in divine worship. By this division the clergy would cease to be a
tool of tyranny in the hands of the political power against the
people; and by this application of universal suffrage the Church
Government, centralised in itself, would receive its inspiration from
the people, and not from the Government or from the Pope: it would
continually find itself in harmony with the needs of society and with
the spiritual condition of the citizens. In order thus to return to
organic, economic, and social truth, it is necessary (1) To do away
with the constitutional accumulation of power, by taking away the
nomination of bishops from the State, and separating once for all
spiritual from temporal affairs; (2) To centralise the Church in
itself by a system of elective grades; (3) To give to the
ecclesiastical power, as to all other powers of the State, the right
of voting as its foundation. By this system, that which to-day is
'government' becomes nothing more than administration. And it will be
understood if it is possible to organise the whole country in all its
temporal affairs, according to the rules which we have just laid down
for its spiritual organisation, the most perfect order and the most
powerful centralisation would exist without there being anything of
what we now call the constituted authority of a government.
"One other example: formerly there existed besides the legislative
and executive powers a third, the judicial power. This was an abolition
of the dividing dualism, a first step towards the complete
[Pg 52]
separation of political functions as of the departments of industry. The judicial
functions—with their different specialties, their hierarchy, their
irremovability, their union in a single ministry—testify undoubtedly
to their privileged position and their efforts towards centralisation.
But these functions do not arise from the people upon whom they are
exercised; their purpose is the administration of executive power;
they are not subordinated to the country by election, but to the
Government, president, or princes, by nomination. The consequence is
that the liberties of the people who are judged are given into the
hands of those who are supposed to be their natural judges, like
parishioners into the hands of their pastor, so that the people belong
to the magistrates as an inheritance, while the litigants exist for
the sake of the judge, and not the judge for the sake of the
litigants. Apply universal suffrage and the system of elective grades
to judicial functions in the same way as to ecclesiastic; take away
their irremovability which is the denial of the right of election;
take away from the State all action and influence upon the judges; let
this order, centralised in and for itself, arise solely from the
people, and you have taken away from the State its most powerful
implement of tyranny. You have made out of justice a principle of
freedom and order, and unless you suppose that the people from whom,
by means of universal suffrage, all power must proceed is in contradiction
with itself, and that it does not wish in the case of justice what
it wishes in the case of religion, or vice versa, you may rest
[Pg 53]
assured that the division of power can produce no conflict.
You can confidently establish the principle that division and
equilibrium will in future be synonymous.
"I pass over to another case, to the military power. It belongs to the
citizens to nominate their military commanders in due order, by
advancing simple privates and national guards to the lower grades and
officers to the higher grades in the army. Thus organised the army
maintains its citizen-like sentiment. There is no longer a nation in a
nation, a country in a country, a kind of wandering colony where the
citizen is a citizen amongst soldiers, and learns to fight against his
own country. The nation itself, centralised in its strength and youth,
can, independently of the power of the State, appeal to the public
power in the name of the law, just like a judge or police official,
but cannot command it or exercise authority over it. In the case of a
war the army owes obedience only to the representative assembly of the
nation, and to the leaders appointed by it.
"It is clear that in this, no judgment is passed upon the necessity of
these great manifestations of the social mind, and that if we wish to
abide by the judgment of the people, which alone is competent to
decide as to the importance and duration of its institutions, we can
do nothing better (as has just been said) than to constitute them in a
democratic manner.
"Societies have at all times experienced the need of protecting their
trade and industry against foreign imports; the power or function
which protects native labour in each country and guarantees it a
[Pg 54]
national market, is taxation in the shape of Customs. I will not here
say anything at all about the morality, or want of it, the usefulness
or the harm of Customs duties. I take it as I see it in society, and
confine myself to examining it from the point of view of the
constitution of powers. Taxation, by the very fact that it exists, is
a centralised function. Its origin like its action, excludes every
idea of division or dismemberment. But how does it happen that this
function, which belongs specially to the province of merchants and
those concerned with industry, and proceeds exclusively from the
authority of the Chambers of Commerce, yet belongs to the State? Who
can know better than industry itself wherein and to what extent it
requires protection, where the compensation for the taxation which has
to be raised must come from, and what products require bounties and
encouragement? And as for the Customs service itself, is it not
obvious that it is the business of those interested to reckon up the
expenses of it, while it is not at all suitable for the Government to
make of it a source of emolument for its favourites by procuring an
income for its extravagances by differential taxes?
"Besides the ministries of justice, religion, war, and international
trade, the Government appoints yet others; the ministry for
agriculture, public works, public instruction, and finally to pay for
all these, the ministry of finance. Our so-called division of powers
is only an accumulation of all kinds of powers, our centralisation is
an absorption. Do you not think that the agriculturists, who are already
[Pg 55]
all organised in their communities and committees, would
perform their own centralisation very well, and could guide their
common interests without this being done by the State? Do you not
think that the merchants, manufacturers, agriculturists, the
industrial population of every kind, who have their books open before
them in the Chambers of Commerce, could in the same way, without the
help of the State, without expecting their salvation from its
good-will, or their ruin from its inexperience, organise at their own
cost a central administration for themselves; could debate their own
affairs in general assemblies; could correspond with other
administrations; could pass all their useful decisions without waiting
for the sanction of the President of the Republic; and could entrust
the execution of their will to one amongst themselves, who would be
chosen by his fellows to be the Minister? It is clear that the public
works which concern agricultural industry and trade, or the
departments and the communes, might in future be assigned to the local
and central administrations which have an interest in them; and should
no more be a special corporation in the hands of the State than is the
army, the customs, or monopolies. Or should the State have its
hierarchy, its privileges, its ministry, so that it may carry on a
trade in mining, canals, or railways, may speculate on the Stock
Exchange, grant leases for ninety-nine years, and leave the building
of streets, bridges, dams, water-ways, excavations, sluices, etc., to
a legion of contractors, speculators, usurers, destroyers of morality, and
[Pg 56]
extortioners, who live upon the public wealth by the exploitation
of workmen and wage-earners, and upon the folly of the State?
"Can it not be believed that public instruction could be just as well
made universal, be administered, directed, and that the teachers,
professors, and inspectors could be just as well elected, and the
system of studies would be just as much in harmony with the habits and
interests of the nation if it was the business of municipal and
general councils to appoint teachers, while the universities only had
to grant them their diplomas; if in public instruction, as in the
military career, merit in the lower grades was necessary for promotion
to the higher, if our dignitaries of the university must first have
gone through the duties of an elementary teacher and supervisor of
studies?
"Does one imagine that this perfectly democratic system would do harm
to the discipline of schools, to morality, education, the dignity of
instruction, or the peace of the family?

"And as the sinews of every administration are money, as the budget
is made for the country and not the country for the budget, as the
taxes must every year be granted freely by the representatives of the
people, as this is the original and inalienable right of the people both
under a monarchy and a republic, since the country must first sanction the
income and expenditure before it can be applied by the Government,—does
it not follow that the consequence of this financial initiative, which
is formally recognised as belonging to the citizens in all our
[Pg 57]
constitutions, will consist in the fact that the finance minister, or,
in a word, the whole fiscal organisation, belongs to the country and
not to its ruler; that it depends directly upon those who pay the
budget and not upon those who spend it; that there would be infinitely
fewer abuses in the administration of public money, fewer
extravagances and deficits, if the State had just as little power over
public finances as over religion, justice, the army, taxes, public
works, and public instruction?
"Supposing the heads of the different branches of administration were
grouped together, we should have then a council of ministry or an
executive power which would serve just as well as a State Council.
Place over this a great 'jury,' legislative body, or national
assembly, elected and commissioned directly by the whole of the
country, whose duty it is not to nominate the ministers, for these
receive their office from the members of their special departments,
but to look through accounts, to make laws, to draw up the budget, and
to decide the differences between the different administrations after
having received the report of the Public Minister or the Minister of
the Interior, to which in the future the whole Government will be
reduced,—and there you would have a centralisation which would be all
the stronger the more its different centres were multiplied. You would
have responsibility, which is all the more real because the separation
between various powers is more sharply defined; you would have a
constitution which at the same time is political and social."
[Pg 58]
Here we have the picture of the society of the future, as Proudhon
imagined it when the principles of democracy and, above all, of
universal suffrage have become a reality—the celebrated federative
principle of Proudhon, the inheritance of the most talented party of
any age, the Girondists, locally developed, and to some extent not
without a profound knowledge of politics. It cannot be denied that the
federal principle, as Proudhon here explains it, means the integration
of social force, which in its differentiation meets us sometimes as a
special and sometimes as the common interest, sometimes as
Individualism or again as Altruism. According to this, federation is
nothing more than the translation into politics of the metaphor (which
we formerly used from physics) of the resultants of several component
forces; a metaphor which not only suits the genius of Proudhon, but
also is frequently found in his language. Proudhon was deeply
permeated by the reality of Collectivism, but saw it in the light both
of Physics and Physiology, so that the word "resultants" is with him
more than a metaphor. In this respect Proudhon far surpassed in
insight all the social philosophers of his age, and anticipated the
pioneers of modern sociology. But he contradicted himself, and lost
his special merits by wishing to make out of a social law an absolute
formula; by abandoning the scientific standpoint which he once
attained, and falling back again into dogmatism. If we conceive all
society in the mechanical manner in which Proudhon did; or if we think
(as he did) that we have at least partially discovered the laws of its
[Pg 59]
movement, then all further politics exhaust themselves in an
experimental verification of the laws in question. But to anticipate
any point of the development which one expects, and to regard it as
something absolute, is a process irreconcilable with an exact
scientific method. In brief, Proudhon's federalism is a political
principle; his Anarchism is a dogma, or at best an hypothesis which
cannot even be logically proved from the first-named, for it is not
true, as Proudhon maintains, that the idea of agreement excludes that
of lordship.
But if Proudhon conceives all society in a mechanical manner, it is to
be expected that he would again seek—and find—the same laws that he
saw operating in the political constitution also in economic life.
This is, as a matter of fact, the case. "Agreement solves every
problem"; only agreement in economic life means with him exchange.
"Social agreement," he says, "is in its essence like the agreement of
exchange." Therefore the corner-stone in his economic system is
exchange. But Proudhon transposed into this purely empiric idea a
moral element, by presupposing equality and justice as necessary to
exchange. Economic freedom, he reasons, is free exchange; but an
exchange can only be called free which presupposes the equality of
values, or, in other words, equality and justice. This again
presupposes a just balance and constitution of values—a mutual
balance of all economic and social forces. What, then, is economic
[Pg 60]
freedom? It is equality and justice. And what is the opposite—the
hindrance of these principles? It is inequality, injustice, slavery,
which means property. This is the reason why Proudhon's doctrine of
property stands at the centre of his system, which it by no means
exhausts; it is the reason why he always proceeded from this point,
and always returned to it again. Here we have clearly the reason for
all his numberless and endless mistakes in the province of economics,
the weak point of this otherwise great and noble mind. As we already
have remarked about the Contradictions, Proudhon did not attack
property in itself; he tried to ennoble it and bring it into harmony
with the claims of justice and equality by taking away from it what
to-day is a jus utendi et abutendi, that is, its rights over the
substance of a thing, and the right of devolving it for ever. The
ominous statement "Property is Theft" was directed only against this.
This kind of property (propriété, dominium) was to be replaced by
individual possession (possession individuelle): as to which one
must take care to understand the distinction between "property" and
"possession" in the legal sense.
Proudhon sought in his first and larger work, which is mainly of a
critical nature, to put forward the negative proof that property is
impossible, by inverting all the proofs hitherto brought forward in
its favour, so that instead of justifying the possession of property
they seemed rather to make for freedom. It is, however, quite wrong to
regard this dialectic jugglery as the essence of Proudhon's system.
[Pg 61]
A proof, such as that here proposed by Proudhon, is not only quite
inadmissible as logic, but it cannot even be said that Proudhon
himself (usually so accurate in this respect) turned out here a really
good piece of work. On the one hand he attacks the defenders of
property, who, after all, are not very difficult to controvert; while,
at the same time, his attempt itself does not always succeed. Of
course it does not mean very much when he cleverly riddles the old
argument for property drawn from divine right or the right of nature;
for in any case he was only attacking dead theories. In the attack on
really living arguments, as in the case of his theory of labour, he
does not succeed.
Property cannot be explained by labour because
(1) The land cannot be appropriated,
(2) Labour leads to equality, and in the sight of justice labour, on
the contrary, abolishes property.
The proposition that property, i. e., the right to the substance of
the thing appropriated, cannot be created by labour, because the land
cannot be appropriated, is at least a petitio principii or tautology.
But, leaving that, let us suppose that the land really cannot be
appropriated; yet there is always some kind of property which has
nothing to do with the land. It will not do always to speak of landed
property only, as Proudhon invariably does. Movable property (in weapons,
utensils, ornaments, animals, etc.) precedes immovable property, owing
to its origin, which was only created in imitation of the other much later,
and is entirely property due to work; thus not only property, but not even the
[Pg 62]
origin of the idea of property in men, can be explained from the point
of view of social history otherwise than by work.
If it is right, as one of our most acute thinkers says, to declare
that mankind has placed his tools between himself and the animal
world, then another proposition follows directly from this, namely,
that man has placed property between himself and animals. It is true
that the animal develops as far as the family, for if this also is
founded merely upon thought, it cannot be a conscious one. Property
presupposes a definite mental equipment, which even in the case of
primitive men must be important, implying subjectively an already
clear consciousness of self; objectively a certain capacity for
measuring even the remoter consequences of an action; for the desire
for special possession could only exist with reference to a pronounced
consciousness of the self, and to the recognised purpose and further
utility of an object. Neither of these mental presuppositions are
anywhere fulfilled in the animal world. It need hardly be mentioned
that labour in the technical sense has developed naturally and
gradually from physiological labour and the bodily functions; that is,
that even between the natural implement and the artificial there is no
hiatus.
Espinas says (Animal Communities, by A. Espinas, p. 338):
"Every living being, however lonely its life may be, can in case of
need build itself some protective covering, and that is the beginning
of the artistic impulse (Kunst-trieb), unless, perhaps, this
is to be found in the formation of the organism
[Pg 63]
itself. Leaving out of consideration the tubicolous annelidæ,
the mussels and stone-boring molluscs, the weaving caterpillars, and
finally spiders, even the non-social hymenoptera present, among many
insects, examples of a very skilful adaptation of materials. But it is
equally undeniable that, since the appearance of communities whose
purpose is the rearing of their offspring, the artistic tendency
receives a considerable impulse and produces unexpected marvels. Here
it decidedly abandons its usual procedure in order to take up a new
one. Hitherto the lower animals have, to a great extent, taken the
materials for their places of refuge and their implements from their
own bodies: the former an extension of the organism that produces it;
the latter, as in the case of the spider, only an enlargement of the
animal itself which forms the centre. The productions of the social
artistic impulse, on the other hand, are made out of materials which
are more and more foreign to the substance of the artificer, and are
worked up externally by means which become more and more exclusively
mechanical. Hence it follows that the living body is no longer so
directly interested in the preservation of its work; it can alter and
again build up this structure to an almost infinite extent—in
short, the structure becomes more and more an implement instead of an
organ. That was the inevitable result of animal life, which, being
essentially capable of transference, and presupposing an intercourse
of several separate existences, must necessarily raise itself above
external substances, or else organise
[Pg 64]
them according to the purposes of its life. But must we now conceive
its operations as altogether distinct from those of physiological life?
"If one reflects that unnoticed steps connect the unconscious work
which produces the organ with the conscious work which produces the
implement, then it does not appear so. Speaking exactly, the waxen
cell in which the larvæ of the bee wait for their daily food is
external for every individual of the race, but internal for the whole
of the community; since this forms one single consciousness, or a
collective individuality. The mind of the race is to some extent a
common function, its body a common apparatus; the one is only the
material translation of the other, and the implement performs its
function as faithfully as does the organ. One might even go farther
and maintain that the implement in the full sense of the word is an
organ; for it serves a function that is vital for the community, and
this is exposed to every change, and derives benefit from every growth
which circumstances bring to it."
The work of animals, therefore, only differs in its highest
developments from purely physiological functions, in that the animal
becomes more independent of its implements and of the product of its
labour. Notice, for instance, the progress which is shown in the
series of the mussel's shell, the spider's web, the bee's cell, the
bird's nest, and the mole's burrow. The progressive differentiation
of the products of labour keeps step with the progressive
individualisation of the labourer and with the growing material
independence of the body from its products. Mussel
[Pg 65]
shell, cobweb, and bee's cell are still produced from the secretions
of the body; but while the mussel is inseparable from its shell, the
spider, at least without immediate harm, can be detached from its web;
while the bee is still further emancipated from its structure of
cells. The bird's nest and the mole's burrow have been formed already
by a manipulation of materials foreign to the body, though in the case
of the first still by the help of secretions from the body. In both
cases the animal is almost completely independent of its product.
Still the most complicated product of animal labour is, after all,
connected inseparably with the body of the worker; and to a much less
extent can the animal be separated from its implements; therefore
complete emancipation never takes place in the animal world.
Even in the case of the anthropoid apes the transition to the
instrument and to a product of labour entirely artificial and
perfectly independent of the animal's own body, is only very slowly
completed. This is clear from a consideration of the slow process by
which man has progressed in perfecting the implements which he has
invented. From the action of the bird which beats open a nut with its
beak, or the squirrel which cracks it with its teeth, up to that of
man who, in order to open the nut, makes use of a stone lying near
him, is only a step, and yet by that step the destiny of the genus homo
is settled. The application of natural objects, such as sticks and stones,
to the purposes of daily life, to defence against animals and men, to
hunting, to cutting down fruits, and so on, does not certainly become a
[Pg 66]
habit all at once. Indeed, a very long time elapsed before this
adaptation became a general and even a conscious one, and it was only
possible when the advantages of such objects had been perceived
through many experiences.
It needed a still longer time before man learned to choose between the
various objects offered to him by nature, and understood how to
distinguish a more pointed and sharper or a harder stone from one of
those less useful for his purpose. Perhaps it required the experience
and disappointments of uncounted ages to bring the consciousness of
purpose even up to this point. But when this was once done, when man
could judge as to the usefulness of the implement which nature offered
him, then a further step of progress, and certainly the most important
in this series of developments, was taken. To natural selection
follows immediately artificial. The need for suitable and useful
implements became more general and greater, and at the same time it
became more difficult to satisfy, since nature is not so generous with
objects of this kind, and (as was soon seen) only very few substances
united all these qualities which hitherto had been recognised as
necessary or useful. But by this time individuals who were already
better provided for had made other discoveries; they had, for example,
in cracking a nut, broken a stone with which they cracked it, and
noticed that the broken pieces had greater sharpness and pointedness
on their edges than those which nature afforded; or they had found the
pieces of some tree split by lightning, and discovered
[Pg 67]
their greater hardness and capacity for resistance. What was more natural
under the pressure of the necessity, than to produce intentionally those
processes by which the objects afforded by nature became more
usable—to break the stone in pieces or to burn the wood?
And now at last the artificial implement was produced, and all future
progress was but a trifle compared to the development which had gone
before. The wonders of modern technical art are child's-play compared
to the difficulties with which the anthropoid ape succeeded in making
the first stone celt. The most urgent need of primitive life, the
bitterest competition for the necessities of existence, and the
concentration of the highest mental gifts then possessed, were
necessary to guide the sight of primitive man to the remoter
consequences of an action or of a quality. That his sight became
sharper and sharper in proportion as the implement once invented
showed itself to be insufficient, and became more and more
differentiated in its adaptation to the different kinds of labour,
follows as a matter of course. But the decisive action occurred when
the anthropoid ape for the first time mechanically worked up natural
objects, for by doing so he was enabled to exploit nature rationally,
according to his desires and requirements, to emancipate himself from
the limitations of existence as regards place and climate, to break
those chains of partial action which weigh upon everything belonging
to the animal world.
One must take fully into consideration the difficulties
[Pg 68]
under which primitive man made his first tools; but one must, however, realise
still more the immeasurable advantages which proceed from the
possession, and the disadvantages which arise from the want, of a
tool, in order to perceive that man had a vital interest in preserving
permanently by him the objects which he had produced. If in his
inexperience he at first threw away his laboriously acquired treasure
after using it, yet soon the oft-recurring need for it, and the
trouble of remaking it, must have taught him better. And by not
leaving the tool behind him for someone else, he made not only a
tremendous step in advance in the satisfaction of his needs, but also
took a step higher in the social scale of his tribe. The others had
need of him, admired him, feared or flattered him; they perhaps sought
to take his treasured tool away from him; he had therefore to defend
himself against others, and all these facts formed still more strongly
the desire to keep it for himself permanently and exclusively. The
conception of property flashed upon the human mind. It sprang from the
sweat of labour; and human culture begins not with equality but with
property.
This rather lengthy digression has been necessary in order that we may
be able to oppose actual facts to the logical subtlety of Proudhon,
which appears to-day to have a greater power than ever of leading men
astray. The question whether the producer of a stone celt was merely
the user of its advantages (Latin, possessor) or its actual owner
and master; whether he also had the right to the substances of
[Pg 69]
which it was composed, appears, after what we have said above, to be simply
childish. The property, which was absolutely labour-property, was at
once perceived to be such, to be dominium and not merely
possessio; it never occurred to anybody either to doubt it or to
believe it. Now, Proudhon declares that general consent cannot justify
property, because general consent to an injustice cannot form the
basis of justice. But apart from the fact that the innate sense of
justice in society is merely a fiction of Proudhon's, as of all
earlier or later Utopians, this proposition may perhaps belong to
metaphysics or ethics, but certainly not to the empirical science of
sociology. For he who puts on the crown, and whom all agree to obey,
is really king, even if he has waded to the throne through seas of
blood. The question, in so far as it is neither political nor a
justification of his mode of action, is not a legal one but purely
ethical. The answer to this question prejudges nothing either as to
life or society, and history knows cases enough of actions which
cannot be approved from the moral standpoint, and yet have turned out
to the advantage of the community.
The opinion that agrarian communism, or the village community, is the
most primitive form of property and the natural form of society, is
also quite untenable. In the first place, because the word naturally
cannot be taken in the sense that it implies an unalterable normal
condition, or something fixed; for, in reality, naturally means that
which develops itself, and therefore something
[Pg 70]
in the highest degree changeable. In the second place, because tribal
communism is by no means such a primitive condition as the Socialists,
from Rousseau's time downwards, seem to believe, and wish to make
others believe. Rather, a state preceded it, in which only movable
property, the jus utendi atque abutendi re, was known to man.
Races have been found which possess very scanty conceptions of religion,
which have not recognised the family in the widest implication of the
idea; whereas, on the other hand, no race has been found to whom the
idea of property was not known. Certainly in this case it was only a
question of the possession of weapons and ornaments, and so forth;
possession of land, especially as a communal possession, has only been
found among a comparatively small number of primitive peoples, and
implies a very advanced state of social culture. But, however little
this condition is the natural one, [Greek: kat' exochên],
still less is it particularly moral or just.
We know to-day for certain that the rise of communal possession in
land was always inseparably connected with the introduction of
slavery, and that one cannot be thought of without the other. But to
wish to imagine equality in addition to the collective possession of
primitive society is to a great extent a distortion of the facts of
history. Whatever facts we may produce from the actual and not merely
imaginary primitive history of property would be so many arguments
against Proudhon's contention. His economic argument is just as
untenable, that labour should lead to equality. All
[Pg 71]
work, according to Proudhon, is the effective of a collective force,
which is equal to the resultants of the forces of the single
individuals who form the labour group. Consequently, the product of
labour is the property of the whole community, and every worker has an
equal claim to it. This is, briefly, the argument which, from premises
that are possibly correct, draws conclusions that are entirely false.
Proudhon gives the following example: "Two hundred grenadiers placed
the obelisk of Luxor on its pedestal in a few hours, and yet we do not
believe that one man could have performed the same work in two hundred
days. The collective force is greater than the sum of individual
forces and individual efforts. Therefore the capitalist has not
rewarded the labourer fairly when he pays wages for one day multiplied
by the number of day-labourers employed by him."
It will be seen that Proudhon here proceeds from the assumption that
the value of a product of a labour is a firmly established and easily
fixed amount, as John Grey and Rodbertus had taught before him; for
only in this case could it be exactly stated how great the claim is
which belongs to a labourer. In fact, the characteristic feature of
Proudhon's theory of value lies in his endeavour to determine and fix
values; that is, to use his own dialectic jargon, according to the
synthetic solution of the antithesis of value in use and value in
exchange, in which our economic life fluctuates. Supply and demand,
considered by others as the factors which regulate and determine
value, are to him only forms which serve
[Pg 72]
to contrast with one another the value in use and value in exchange,
and to cause these values to combine. From justice, which ought to be
the foundation of society, he concludes the necessity, and from
general obedience of life to law the possibility, of a determination
of values. Even this value, thus determined, will be a variable
amount, a proportionate figure, similar to the index which in the case
of chemical elements gives their combining weights. "But this value
will none the less be strictly fixed. Value may alter, but the law of
values is unalterable; indeed, the fact that value is capable of
alteration only results from its being subject to a law whose
principle is essentially fluctuating, for it is labour measured by
time." (Contradictions, i., "On the Theory of Value.") Value is thus
brought into consideration within the community which producers form
among themselves by means of the division of labour and exchange, the
relation of the proportion of the products which compose riches, and
that which is specially termed the value of a product is a formula
which assigns a proportion of this product in coins in the general
wealth.
Leaving out of the question the moral arrangement of the world, which
even here has contributed to this definition of double meaning, we may ask,
how is this formula, which assigns in coins the proportion of the product
in the general wealth, reckoned? Proudhon has always appealed only to the
realisation of the idea through the actual circulation of values on the one
hand, and to the law-abiding character of nature on the other. Upon the point
[Pg 73]
of "realisation" we shall have something to say later. But the
law-abiding character of life is, however, just as much an algebraical
expression as the "proportion of the product." Supposing both are not
disputed, what follows, then? If I know the exact formula for the
direction and velocity of a projectile, shall I now be able to protect
myself from every bullet by merely getting out of its way? The
introduction of statistical methods into the general formula for
special values Proudhon has himself excluded as incorrect. The
question settles itself. Society goes on of its own
accord—laissez aller, laissez faire—everything remains
in the old way. In addition to this mistake, we find that there is in
Proudhon's mind great confusion with regard to the two ideas of time
of labour and value of labour.
"Adam Smith takes as a measure of value sometimes the time necessary
to produce a commodity and sometimes the value of labour," says Marx
in his celebrated polemic against Proudhon.[13]
"Ricardo discovered this error by clearly proving the difference between
these two modes of measurement. Proudhon, however, goes even farther than
the error of Adam Smith, by identifying two things which Smith has only
brought into juxtaposition. To find the right proportion according to which
the labourers should have their share in the products of their labour,
or, in other words, to determine the relative value of labour, Proudhon
seeks some measure for the relative value of commodities. To determine
[Pg 74]
the measure for the relative value of commodities he cannot
invent anything better than to give us as an equivalent for a certain
quantity of work, the total of the products made by it; which leaves
us to suppose that the whole of society consists of nothing but
labourers, who receive as wages what they themselves produce. In the
second place, he maintains the equal value of the working days of
different labourers as an actual fact; in a word, he seeks the measure
for the relative value of commodities in order to discover the equal
payment of labourers, and assumes the equality of payment as a settled
fact, in order to proceed to search for the relative value of
commodities."
If we turn back to the question, What is property? we find this
confusion of ideas is answerable for his unsuccessful attempt to prove
that labour must create equality and annihilate property. Here, too,
the equality of the working days is assumed, and therefore the
equality of wages is demanded. But, then, immediately this working day
is changed into his work done in a day (tâche sociale journalière).
"Let us assume," says he, "that this social day's work amounts to the
cultivation or weeding or harvesting of two square decametres, and the
mean average of all the time necessary for these amounts to seven
hours. One labourer will finish it in six hours; another in eight
hours; the majority will work seven hours; but so long as each performs
the amount of work required of him, he deserves the same wages as all
the others, however long he may have worked at it." Here time of work has
[Pg 75]
imperceptibly changed into quantity of work, and wages are given, not
according to the measure of equal working times but according to the
measure of equal performances. Proudhon here seeks for a solution by
saying that the more capable workman, who performs his day's work in
six hours, should never have the right to usurp the day's work of a
less capable labourer, under the pretext of greater strength and
activity, and thus rob him of work and bread; it is advantage enough
derived from his greater capacities that, by this shortening of his
time of labour, he has greater opportunity to work for his own
personal education and culture, or to enjoy himself, and so on. But
Proudhon must be driven even from this last corner of refuge by the
question, What will take place if anyone will perform only the half of
his day's work? Proudhon says: "That is all right; obviously half of
his wages are sufficient for that man. What has he to complain of if
he is rewarded according to the work which he has performed? and what
does it matter to others? In this sense it is right and proper to
apply the text, 'to each according to his work'; that is the law of
equality."[14]
But this is to retract all along the line. Proudhon, who assumes the
equality of all working days, and has made it the basis of his theory
of value, must now admit the dependence of wages upon the performance
of work, and admit also, although reluctantly, the statement of St.
Simon, "to each according to his work," which he had set out to
[Pg 76]
refute. He ought to have gone still farther and said: "If anyone will
not do any work, what happens then? Obviously the man needs no wages;
why should the others then trouble about it?—it is the law of
equality." But what becomes then of the equality to which work was
said to lead? Further, what about the impossibility of proving the
right of property through work? All Proudhon's arguments in proof of
the impossibility of property are mere dialectic sword-play which
hardly anyone takes seriously. Proudhon does not even criticise actual
circumstances, but proves that, following his ideal assumptions (which
in any case exclude property), property is impossible.
The supposed result of his book he sums up in the Hegelian formula:
"Communism, the first form and the final destiny of society, is the
first terminus of social development, the thesis; property, the
contradictory opposite to communism, forms the second terminus, the
antithesis; it remains for us to determine the third terminus, the
synthesis, and then we have the required solution. The synthesis
results necessarily from the correction of the thesis by the
antithesis. It is therefore necessary to examine closely its
peculiarities, and to exclude that which there is in them hostile to
society. The two that remain will, when united, form the true formula
of human social life."[15]
Karl Marx, who made very merry over Proudhon's dialectic, thought he
had played his trump card against the capitalistic method of production
[Pg 77]
in almost the same way, namely, with the Hegelian
proposition of the negation of negation. If they both explained
themselves by bringing forward, besides the dialectic proof, also an
historical and economic one for their contentions, the answer is that
historic proof cannot be brought forward for Proudhon's synthetic
conception of property or for Marx's method of production, since
history only concerns itself with the past or the present; whereas
such conditions as they imagine exist only in the future, and can only
be derived from the past or present conditions by the dialectic
method, and only can be assumed as hypotheses.
This standpoint unites Proudhon and Karl Marx, the Anarchists and the
Social Democrats; they both call each other Utopians, and both are
right.
Proudhon in his book upon property did not answer the question put in
its title, What is Property? as he had promised in the introduction.
From his statement "property is theft," which was uttered with so much
éclat, and of which, according to his own account at least, he was
prouder than if he had possessed all the millions of Rothschild—from
this paradox one might conclude, and certainly the great majority of
his readers do conclude usually that Proudhon was an enemy of property
in general. That is not at all the case. "What I have been seeking
since 1840 in defining property," said he much later (in Justice,
i., p. 302), "and what I wish to-day, as I have repeated over and over again, is
[Pg 78]
certainly not abolition of property. For this would be to
fall into Communism with Plato, Rousseau, Louis Blanc, and other
opponents of property, against whom I protest with all my strength.
What I demand from property is a balance." But all his life Proudhon
was unable to dispel the misunderstanding which he carelessly brought
upon his doctrine in his first writing by a talented paradox. We say
carelessly, for the concluding answer which Proudhon gives to the
question, "What is property?" was, even in his first work, not
"property is theft" but "property is liberty;" only the use of all his
great scientific apparatus was quite superfluous, because it was in no
way connected with the chief purpose of his book. Proudhon might just
as well have placed the supposed conclusion, the Ten Commandments of
his economic doctrine, at the beginning of his book, for they were
arrived at not by the method of science but of speculation. These Ten
Commandments run:
(1) Individual possession is the fundamental condition of social life;
five thousand years of the history of property prove it; property is
the suicide of society. Possession is a right; property is against all
right; suppress property and maintain possession, and you would by
this one main alteration transform everything—laws, government,
economy, statesmanship; you would make evil disappear from the earth.
(2) Since the right of occupation is the same for all, possession
changes according to the number of possessors; thus property can no
longer be created.
[Pg 79]
(3) Since the result of labour remains the same for the whole of the
community, property, which arising from the exploitation of others and
from rent, disappears.
(4) Since every human work necessarily arises from a collective force,
every piece of property becomes both collective and indivisible—to be
exact, labour annihilates property.
(5) Since every capacity for any occupation, including all the
instruments of labour and capital, is collective property, the
inequality of treatment and of goods, which rests upon the inequality
of capabilities, is injustice and theft.
(6) Trade necessarily presupposes the freedom of the contracting
parties and the equivalence of the products exchanged; but since value
is determined by the amount of time and expense which each product
costs, and since freedom is inviolable, the workers remain necessarily
equal in reward as also in rights and duties.
(7) Products are only exchanged again for products; but since every
bargain presupposes the equality of products, profit is impossible and
unjust. Take heed to this, the first and the most elementary principle
of economics, and pauperism, luxury, servitude, vice, crime, and
hunger will disappear from our midst.
(8) Men are already, before they fully agreed to do so, associated
from the physical and mathematical law of production; the equality of
external conditions of existence is thus a demand of the justice of
social right, of strict right; friendship, respect,
[Pg 80]
admiration, and recognition alone enter into the province of equity
or proportion.
(9) Free association, or freedom which limits itself to expressing
equality in the means of production and equivalence in articles of
exchange, is the only possible, the only right, and the only true form
of society.
(10) Politics is the science of freedom; the government of men by men,
under whatever name it may be concealed, is servitude; the highest
consummation of society is found in the union of order and anarchy.
We will only select from this Decalogue of Collectivist Anarchism one
dogma, the seventh; because it contains a fundamental error of
Proudhon's, which must continually produce other errors. "Products,"
he says, "are only exchanged for products; but since every bargain
presupposes the equality of products, profit is impossible and not
right." By this proposition the question of pauperism and everything
evil is to be solved, and, in fact, Proudhon even made some attempts
to realise the theory contained therein. But that every bargain
presupposes the equality of products in any other than the sense
determined by supply and demand, is untrue; yet even this equality is
not regarded by Proudhon as such. He understands thereby equivalence
or the equality of values, which again is determined by the time of
labour, and accordingly he makes it a presupposition of a free bargain
that only products which represent equal times of labour can be
exchanged. Thus a hat which took six hours to
[Pg 81]
make, should be exchanged for a poem which was written in the same
time. And if we are startled by the incorrectness of this assumption,
what can be said for the converse of this statement, namely, that
products of equal value, i. e., such as represent equal times of
labour, must be accepted at any time in place of payment, just as
money is accepted to-day? Proudhon ascribed the utility of money as a
universal medium of exchange to the supposed circumstance that its
value was fixed or established, and concluded therefrom that whenever
the value of other commodities was determined, they would have the
same utility as money; thus, that it would be possible to exchange at
any time a watch which represented three days' work for a pair of
boots which had been made in the same time. And to complete this
economic and logical confusion, Proudhon once again inverts history,
and makes the just and free exchange of products and the circulation
of values the starting-point for the determination of values, and
thereby also the foundation of his realm of justice, freedom, and
equality, in which economic forces have free play.
If values circulate themselves, then too they determine themselves,
and thus only is there a just bargain; profit is impossible, so too is
the accumulation of capital and property. Since all have equal share
in production as in consumption, commodities will always be where
they are needed, and they will always be needed where they exist;
supply and demand will equal one another, value in use and value
in exchange will be the same, value is determined,
[Pg 82]
and the circle (which is in any case a vicious circle) is completed.
Land, like all the means of labour, is a collective possession. Every
one will enjoy the full results of his labour, but no one will be able
to heap up riches because profit in any form is impossible. Men will
collect through their own free choice in productive groups, which
again will be in direct intercourse one with another, and will
exchange their products as may be required, without profit. Common
interests will be determined by Boards of Experts, who will be chosen
by the members of these groups by means of universal suffrage. The
total of all these boards, which are completely autonomous, forms the
only existing and only possible administration. Governments become
superfluous, since the economic life must entirely absorb political
life. And since there will be no property and no distinction of rich
and poor, there will also be no rule of one man over another, there
will be no criminals, judicial and civil power, militarism and
bureaucracy become superfluous and disappear of themselves. In spite
of anarchy (i. e., no government), or rather because of it, the
greatest, the only order will prevail.
In fact, if anything ever deserved the name ideal it is this reform of
society sketched by Proudhon, to which he himself has given the name
"Mutualism." He did not suspect or notice that he had done nothing
more than express the abstract formula of existing relationships, the
most general conception of the liberal scheme of economics. Things
happen in our own world just as Proudhon wished in his
[Pg 83]
kingdom of the future, only there are a few insignificant factors of
friction, extensions of co-efficients, and so on, which he, if he had been
familiar with scientific methods, would have added as "corrections" to
his universal formula. The present world is related to his as any one
triangle is to the triangle absolute. The triangle which is neither
obtuse-angled, nor acute-angled, nor right-angled, neither equilateral
nor isosceles, nor of unequal sides, whose sides and angles are not
confined to any particular measurement, may certainly be a real
triangle and contain no contradiction in itself (which is by no means
the case in Proudhon's realm of justice), but this triangle cannot be
drawn or even imagined. This is the old dispute of nominalists and
realists, a piece of scholasticism long since obsolete applied to the
problems of modern society, and not even worth refutation, least of
all worthy of any man who has once correctly recognised the reality of
human society, and made it the guiding motive of his thought.
On two occasions Proudhon seemed to have the alluring opportunity of
being able to realise his Utopian visions. The first was in the time
of the Revolution. In February, 1849, he founded the People's Bank
(Banque du Peuple),[16]
which was to take the initiative in free economic organisation,
[Pg 84]
and, according to Proudhon's expectations, would have introduced "free
society" if, at the decisive moment, he had not been sent for three
years to the prison of Saint Pélagie for a political offence,
and the Bank was therefore compelled to liquidate. The second
opportunity occurred in the year 1855. Napoleon had asked for opinions
as to how the Palais de l'Industrie, in which the Paris Exhibition
had been held, could be used after its close as an institution of
public utility. Among those to whom this question was addressed we
find Proudhon, who answered it with the project of a permanent
exhibition,[17]
which was to be conducted by a society proceeding from very much the
same point of view as the People's Bank. This project was, of course,
left unnoticed, and Proudhon became deeply disgusted and discouraged
at this new disappointment.
The People's Bank, like its subsequent second edition, the Permanent
Exhibition Company, was to be founded (in Proudhon's Hegelian method
of expression) upon the identity of the shareholders and their
clients. The producers who had a share in the People's Bank were to
deliver their products to the bank, which would control and determine
the prices of those commodities by assessors, the prices being
determined only with reference to the time of labour spent upon them
and the necessary expenses of production; profit was forbidden since
the bank was not to operate upon its own account. The producer received
upon delivery of his goods "exchange bonds," in return for which he then could
[Pg 85]
take from the bank other commodities. As the bank also granted its
customers loans without charging interest, money and interest would
become unnecessary, trade would gradually be carried on only by means
of the bonds of the bank, and thus would be brought about the harmony
of social intercourse of which Proudhon dreamed.
The Permanent Exhibition Company was to be a new edition of the
People's Bank, perfected and enlarged in every direction. Since the
shareholders of this company consisted of producers, and their purpose
was above all the sale and interchange of products, so therefore the
subscription for the formation of the capital was not to be, as in the
case of other companies, merely in money, but was to be nine-tenths in
products, which were to be sold by the company, and the receipts of
the sale were then to be credited to the shareholders. As the State
was to become surety for the interest on these shares, Proudhon
thought that these must become actual money, representing rights to
dividend, which could only lose their value by the destruction of the
company's depot for goods. Against the goods which were deposited with
it or the sale of which it undertook, as well as against the bills
which were given to it to discount, the company was to issue, together
with the cash which it had at disposal, general bonds of exchange (la
bons généraux d'échange) which would represent the goods stored in it
and realised by it, and should give the claim to an equal value in
goods which the holder of the bond could take from the storehouses as he
[Pg 86]
wished. These bonds were to be the circulating money of the
company, and were to be accepted by it instead of cash payments in all
transactions with goods or with bills. The circulating paper of the
company, held by it at par, owing to the fact that it could be
exchanged into money or the goods of the company upon presentation,
would become the great lever of its operations and the irresistible
instrument of its power. The company was to undertake banking and
commission business of all kinds, grant credit in money and goods, and
support industry, trade, and agriculture.
All objects deposited with this society, including gold and silver,
and especially all articles composing its balance, were to be arranged
in an exchange tariff, which would be continually changeable, and the
object of which was to secure the equivalence of values. "Certainly
every rise in the exchange of an article would be balanced by an
equivalent fall of exchange in one or more articles, if one regards
the existing total sum, one-tenth being allowed in fluctuations either
up or down. The differences in time in the balance would be entered in
a special balance book which would finally equalise itself from time
to time."
That is the project; and its author gives the following example: Since
the company carries on no business on its own account, and neither
acquires nor possesses products itself, and thus does not lose money
on the rise or fall, it is only guided in directing the course of
prices by one object, viz., to moderate one by the other, and to create a
[Pg 87]
permanent and a daily compensation; thus, if demand arises
for one product while it falls off for one or several others, the
company raises the price of the first 4 per cent., and at the same
time lowers, according to the quantity of the first, the price of the
other in such a way that the compensation is as exact as possible.
Because it is difficult to reach this mathematical exactitude, a
certain margin is allowed, which again, compensating itself from time
to time, never can amount to the assets of the society. If we assume,
for the sake of example, that the price of gold has fallen—that is,
that gold is freely offered, while silver has risen, that is, is more
in demand—the company, since its bills are discounted with its own
notes, will give 100 francs of its money for 105 francs of gold, equal
to 100 francs in silver; or, to express myself more exactly, for a
weight of gold which is only one-twentieth higher than five
twenty-five franc pieces, and the weight of silver which is only
one-twentieth lower than twenty-five franc pieces. From this
compensation no profit accrues to the company; it has only intervened
with its own money in order again to re-establish equilibrium.
From this process of compensation carried on by the company, which was
to be applied in like manner to all products, raw materials and food
stuffs, and so on, Proudhon hoped for that much talked of and much
promising fixity of values, since all products would (so to speak) be
monetised and made into money, and would maintain the highest degree
of circulating power. Branches of the company
[Pg 88]
over all France and a complete public administration were to complete
the system, which should have as its object the organisation and
centralisation of exchange of products in return for products,
according to the formulæ of J. B. Say, with as little money as
possible, as few intermediaries as possible, with the least possible
expense, and for the exclusive benefit of producers and consumers.
It hardly need be observed that the rise and prosperity of these
institutions must stand or fall by the correctness of the assumption
of fixed values and of the monetisation of all products. Proudhon's
opponents wished to make out, that in view of this knowledge his
sudden arrest and imprisonment in Saint Pélagie, by which he was
divested of all responsibility for the liquidation of the company, was
not altogether unwished for by him. But this is contradicted by the
attempt which was renewed later on to realise the project of the
People's Bank. We have, indeed, no cause to suspect Proudhon's good
faith in the matter; on the other hand, the supposed originality of
this idea of his is all the more open to suspicion, because in all
essential particulars it reminds us too closely of the "labour paper
money" of Rodbertus that was to be issued by the State after the
determination of values, an idea with which Proudhon's economics had
many points in common. There is a still greater similarity between
Proudhon's projects and the Boards of Trade thought of by Bray ten
years before the beginning of the People's Bank; and it is also like
John Gray's Central Bank.
[Pg 89]
In later years Proudhon not only outwardly, owing either to compulsion
or prudence, renounced all immediate realisation of his intentions,
but even became convinced and expressed his conviction in his work
upon the federative principle (Du Principe Fédératif, 1852), that
ordered anarchy was an ideal, and as such could never be realised, but
that nevertheless human society should strive to attain it by means of
federative organisations, as he had sketched it in his earlier
writings. Even in this period of mental maturity, when removed from
political agitation, he remained the sworn enemy and direct opponent
of the Communists, and wished to see the great problem of the best
arrangement of society solved, not by universal levelling down, but by
the general perfection and development of society; not by revolution
from which he had gained nothing but disgust and disillusionment, but
by evolution. "If ideas will rise up," he used to say, "then even the
paving stones would rise up themselves if the Government were so
imprudent as to wait for this."
With true prophetic insight Proudhon perceived the fact that even in
human society revolution is everything; with a clearness of vision
such as none before him, and only very few after him, have possessed,
he always insisted upon the organic character of human society and the
natural continuity between animal and human social life; and in this
lies his greatness, which will never be diminished by any of his
numerous errors. But while he thus with one foot for the first time
trod upon the ground of a new discovery, with the other he stood on the
[Pg 90]
standpoint of social philosophy of previous centuries. He could
neither externally nor internally disassociate himself from its
baseless assumptions of a social contract, the absolute rights of man,
a moral order of the universe, and similar ethical views of politics;
and herein lies the contradiction upon which his great mental talents
were shipwrecked. If we once regard human society as Proudhon did, as
something real, the product of nature which is moved and develops
itself according to the laws of the rest of nature, then we have once
for all given up the right to mark out for it a line of development
determined merely by speculation, or to demand from it that it should
move towards any particular goal, however well-intentioned it may be.
A breeder may produce in his pigeons or fowls a certain kind of
feather or a certain form of pouting, but he cannot change the pigeon
into a hen. The artificial selection of breeding is all that man can
do (pour corriger la nature) against the free progress of natural
development. This is not so insignificant as one may be inclined to
believe at the first glance. The latter belongs to the category of
Ovid's Metamorphoses, and of that Utopian social philosophy which
began with Plato, and in all human probability will not end for a long
time. Proudhon wished to unite both, one with another,—to unite
water with fire. Like all Utopians, he desired—he who all his
life, in his numerous writings, so frequently confuted and sneered at
them—that the human race might be metamorphosed in order to
accept unanimously his ideas about society. For that the
[Pg 91]
men of his day were not fit for a true democracy—that is, for
anarchy—he was honest enough to admit.
"Nothing is in reality less democratic than the people," said he,
occasionally, and he did not allow himself the least delusion as
regards their slavish love for authority. For that very reason, he
thought democracy must be changed into "demopædy," and a complete
revolution of a popular spirit must be caused by education. But to
prove that, even with the help of democracy, people would not be ripe
for pure democracy, or, rightly speaking, for anarchy, we can quote an
authority which he never doubted, namely, himself. In an access of
pessimism, he said once, "I have thought I have noticed (may
philosophy pardon me for it!) that the more reason develops in us the
more brutal becomes passion when once it is let loose. It appears then
that the angel and the biped brute which together compose our human
nature in their intimate union, instead of mingling their attributes,
only live side by side with one another. If progress leads us to that,
of what use is it?" This is a bad look-out for the great moral
revolution upon which Proudhon more and more based all his hopes.
Proudhon has had the most varied judgment passed upon him. Some have
treated him as an obscure pamphlet writer. Louis Blanc calls him a
prizefighter; Laveleye, in a history of Socialism, only considers him
worth mentioning in order to call his ideas "the dreams of a raving
idiot"; Karl Marx denies him either talent or knowledge; many have
considered him as a Jesuitical hypocrite; others,
[Pg 92]
again, his followers and representatives, have called him the greatest
man of the century. Ludwig Pfau called him the clearest thinker that
France had produced since Descartes. But the spectacle is by no means
new. In reality, but little courage and wit are to-day needed to
acquire the applause of an ignorant multitude which has no idea of
Proudhon's train of thought by the condemnation of the father of
Anarchism. "Justice must be done to all, even to Louis Napoleon,"
exclaimed Proudhon, to the great astonishment orbis et urbis after
the coup d'état; and not to take a lower standard than the
father of Anarchism, we exclaim also, "Justice must be done to all,
even to Proudhon."
The most usual reproach which is cast against Proudhon is that he is
contradictory and confused. This reproof is generally made by people
who know no more about Proudhon than the paradox "Property is Theft,"
and from this one expression call him confused and contradictory.
Proudhon saw very clearly the end before his eyes, strove to attain it
unfalteringly and steadily, and amid all the variety of the
developments in which he preached his ideas to the world for a quarter
of a century, never betrayed one iota of its contents. The
contradiction from which his work suffered lay deeper. It lay in the
form of his thought, and partly in the period to which he belonged.
Placed on the boundary line between two epochs of social science and
of social forms, one of which is marked by dogma and the other by
induction, he had not the strength to break completely
[Pg 93]
with one or give himself up completely to the other. His whole life and
thought was a constant fight against dogma in every form. He fought against
social Utopianism as against religious dogmatism, and fought against
the dogmatism of property as against political authority; he sought to
transform Socialism upon severely scientific and realistic lines, and
to free it from all the fetters of dogmatic religion; and yet, just as
Rousseau did, he placed at the head of his system a dogma: "Man is
born free"; and at the conclusion of it the teleological phrase of a
moral order of society—two propositions which can never be proved by
experience, but rather contradict all experience.
In the same way this internal contradiction is shown in the principal
work of his last period, the Justice dans le Révolution et dans
l'Église, in which Proudhon endeavours to show these two separate
worlds in their marked difference one from another without suspecting
that he himself fluctuated between both.
After he, as a logical idealist, had denied all external force and all
authority, and nevertheless as a realist had supported society as the
unalterable condition of human life and civilisation, he seeks at the
same time to save anarchy and society by a new bond between
individuals who have been set free and find this in some internal
necessity and internal authority, in a principle which acts upon the
will like a force, and determines it in the direction of the general
interest independently of all consideration of self-interest.
[Pg 94]
And so the man, who had put away from himself everything of an
absolute and a priori nature because he declared a purely empirical
foundation of social science to be the source of all immorality,
arrived at the assumption of an innate, immanent justice as the first
principle of society which he, with the arbitrariness of a catechism
writer, declared to be "the first and most essential of our faculties;
a sovereign faculty which, by that very fact, is the most difficult to
know, the faculty of feeling and affirming our dignity, and
consequently of wishing it and defending it as well in the person of
others as in our own person."
As Proudhon, in spite of the fact that he was always opposing
Utopianism, nevertheless fell into the chief error of the Utopians,
so, too, finally he shared the destiny of Auguste Comte, upon whom
during his life he had rather looked down. Both had started with a
sworn antagonism to every speculative foundation of social philosophy,
and both finally adopted a deus ex machina in order to preserve the
world that was falling into individual pieces before them from a
complete atomisation. With Comte it is called "love," with Proudhon
"justice." The distinction between the two is somewhat childish. Both
perceived the standpoint of evolution, the mechanical conception which
overcomes all deviations, without assigning to it the part which it
deserves. One may safely say that if Proudhon had been brought into
connection with the doctrine of evolution, he would have been one of
the leading sociologists. He had an infinitely keen
[Pg 95]
sense of the most secret motions of the social soul, but he believed
that he might not approach it lovingly in its nudity of nature, and
therefore degraded it to a Platonic idea, after having affirmed its
utmost reality. This was an action like that of Kronos, the curse of
which never departed from his thought.
To this was added a very scanty and transitory acquaintance with
political economy which allowed the practicability of his ideas to
appear to him in the easiest light, but which, when he was opposed to
one so thoroughly acquainted with it as Karl Marx, placed him in the
most piteous position.
One of the commonest reproaches which is made against Proudhon, and
which is partly a personal one, refers to his attitude towards
Napoleon III. In the little political catechism which is found in his
Justice, Proudhon answered the question "Whether Anarchy can be
united with the dynastic principle," in the following way: "It is
clear that France till now was not of opinion that freedom and dynasty
were incompatible ideas. When the old monarchy called together the
States General it kindled the Revolution. The constitution of 1791 and
those of 1814 and 1830, proved the desire of the country to reconcile
a monarchical principle with the democracy. The popularity of the
First Empire was one argument more for the possibility of this
supposition; the people believed they found in it all their preconceived
ideas, and apparently surrender was reconciled with progress. Thus men
satisfied their habits of subjection under a lordship, and their need
[Pg 96]
for unity; they exercised the danger of a president dictator or an
oligarchy. When in 1830 Lafayette defined the new order of affairs as
'a monarchy surrounded by republican arrangements,' he perceived the
identity of the political and economic order. While the true republic
consists in the equilibrium of forces and efforts, people pleased
themselves by seeing a new dynasty hold the balance and guaranteeing
justice. And finally, this theory is confirmed by the example of
England (although equality is unknown there), and by the new
constitutional states. No doubt the union of the dynastic principle
with that of freedom and equality in France has not produced the
fruits that were expected from it, but that was the fault of
Governmental fatalism; the mistake was made just as much by the
princes as by the people. Although dynastic parties since 1848 have
shown themselves by no means friendly to revolution, the force of
circumstances will again bring them to it, and as France at all stages
of her fortunes has always liked to give herself a ruler and to
manifest her unity by a symbol, so it would be exaggeration to deny
even now the possibility of a restoration of the dynasty. We have
heard Republicans say, 'He will be my master who shall wear the purple
robe of equality,' and those who speak thus form neither the smallest
nor the least intelligent portion; but it is also true that they did
not wish for a dictatorship. At any rate, one must admit that there
are no symptoms of a restoration in the near future. And what makes us
suppose that the dynastic principle
[Pg 97]
is, at least, under a cloud, is the fact that the pretenders and their
advisers have no heart for the affair. 'After you, gentlemen,' they
appear to say to the Democrats. But after the democracy there will not
remain much for a dynasty to pick up, or the economic equilibrium
would be false. Non datur regnum aut imperium in œconomiæ."
This certainly reasonable and moderate point of view, which proceeds
from the perception that in an organic society the caprice of one
individual cannot possibly stop or disturb the course of the social
function, and that king or emperor accordingly could at most be a
symbol, is also at the bottom of the book on social revolution. In the
coup d'état of the 2d of December, Proudhon only saw a stage of the
great social revolution, the manifestation of the will of the people,
striving in the direction of social equalisation; although perhaps
mistakenly, and challenged Louis Napoleon, whose coup d'état
he had prophesied, condemned, and sought to prevent, to show himself
worthy of public opinion, and to use the mandate given him by destiny
and by the French people in the sense that it was entrusted to
him.[18]
Proudhon probably did not believe, when he was writing the Sociale
Révolution, by any means too much in the willingness of Napoleon to
take upon himself such a mission as he assigned to him. The
[Pg 98]
language of the book is in any case very reserved, and there is no trace
of the apotheosis of the author of the coup d'état.
Nevertheless some have wished to represent this as Proudhon's
intention; his early release from the prison in which the little book
was written as the immediate effect, and as being the thanks of the
Emperor, thus representing Proudhon as a mercenary time-server. But
this is not in accordance with the facts. Proudhon remained in his
imprisonment almost till the very last day of his sentence, and the
attitude of the authorities towards his writings afterwards does not
seem to show that any relationship, even a secret one, existed between
Proudhon and Napoleon. Proudhon might write what he liked, it was
confiscated; in vain he applied for permission to be allowed to issue
his paper, Justice; a book which no longer showed the violence of
his youth brought him three more years' imprisonment again, which he
only escaped by a rapid flight to Belgium, and in the general amnesty
of the year 1859 he was specially excepted from its conditions. When
the Emperor in 1861, as a special favour, granted him permission to
return home before the proper time, Proudhon proudly refused this
favour, much as he wished to be in Paris, and only returned there at
the expiration of the three years' period, at the end of 1863. These,
at least, are no proofs that the author of What is Property?
allowed himself to be brought over by the man on the 2d December.
But Proudhon was not to breathe the air of his native land much
longer. Broken by the troubles of persecution,
[Pg 99]
he died, after a long illness, on the 19th June, 1865, in the arms of
his wife, who, like himself, belonged to the working classes, and with
whom he had led a life full of harmony and love.
[Pg 100]
Germany in 1830-40 and France — Stirner and Proudhon — Biography
of Stirner — The Individual and his Property (Der Einzige und
sein Eigenthum) — The Union of Egoists — The Philosophic Contradiction
of the Einziger — Stirner's Practical Error — Julius
Faucher — Moses Hess — Karl Grün — Wilhelm Marr.
n the first half of the forties, almost about the same time, but
completely independent one from another, there appeared, on each side
of the Rhine, two men who preached a new revolution in a manner
totally different from the ordinary revolutionist, and one from which
at that time even the most courageous hearts and firmest minds shrank
back. Both were followers of the "royal Prussian Court philosopher"
Hegel, and yet took an entirely different direction one from the
other: but both met again at the end of their journey in their
unanimous renunciation of all political and economic doctrines
hitherto held; in their thorough opposition to every existing and
imagined organisation of society upon
[Pg 101]
whatever compulsion of right it might be founded; and in their desire
for free organisation upon the simple foundation of rules made by
convention or agreement—in their common desire for Anarchy.
The contemporaneous appearance of Proudhon and Stirner is of as much
importance as their, in many ways, fundamental difference. The first
circumstance shows their appearance was symptomatic, and raises it
above any supposed or probable outcome of chance; Stirner and Proudhon
support each other mutually with all their independence, and with all
their difference one from another. As to this, it cannot be denied
that it is to be traced, first and foremost, to the totally different
environment in which the two authors grew up.
Ludwig Pfau, in a talented essay, has sought to derive the literary
peculiarities of Proudhon from the Gallic character and from his
French milieu. But even besides the purely literary aspect, Proudhon
shows all the gifts and all the weaknesses of his people and of his
time; he shares with all Frenchmen their small inclination to real
criticism, but also their faculty of never separating themselves from
the stream of practical life; and thus, before everything, we perceive
in Proudhon's earlier works a strong tendency towards the part of an
agitator. L. Pfau asserts that it is a specific peculiarity of the
French nation, with all their notorious sentiment for freedom, "to
discipline their own reluctant personality, and subject it to the
common interest"; and therein lies, perhaps, the reason why
Proudhon, although an enthusiastic advocate of personal
[Pg 102]
freedom, never wished this to be driven to the point of the disintegration
of collective unity and to the sacrifice of the idea of society.
Stirner is the German thinker who is carried away by the unchecked
flow of his thoughts far from the path of the actual life into a misty
region of "Cloud-cuckoo-land," where he actually remains as the "only
individual," because no one can follow him. There is no trace in
Stirner's book of any intention of being an agitator. As far as
political parties are mentioned in it, they do appear as such, but
merely as corollaries of certain tendencies of philosophic thought.
Stirner keeps himself even anxiously apart from politics, and a
certain dislike to them is unmistakable in him. All parties have in
his eyes only this in common, that they all strive to actualise
conceptions and ideas which lie beyond them, whether these be called
God, State, or humanity. Stirner stands in the same relation to the
philosophic tendencies of his own and earlier times. He sees them all
run into the great ocean of generality the absolute, nothingness. The
distinction between Saint Augustine and L. Feuerbach is for him purely
a superficial and not an essential one; for the "man" of the latter is
as foreign to him as the "God" of the former. And so Stirner carries
his disinclination to politics, as being inimical to the philosophy of
his time, almost to disgust, being herein a genuine son of his country
and of his period.
Upon the philosophic exaltation and the speculative "foundation period"
of the beginning of the century there had followed a severe depression; to
[Pg 103]
the over-eager expectations which had been placed in
philosophy there followed just as severe a disappointment; to the
metaphysical orgy there followed a moral headache, which might be
designated not inaptly by the motto which Schopenhauer gave in mockery
to Feuerbach's philosophy, so well suited to his time—
The political attitude of the forties was very much the same. The
national enthusiasm, the wars of freedom, and the sanguine hopes which
had attended the downfall of the Corsican, had, like the expectations
aroused by the Revolutionists of the days of July, ended in miserable
disaster. The touching confidence which a nation, all too naïve in
politics, had placed in its princes had been shamefully deceived and
abused. All dreams of union and freedom seemed to be extinguished for
a long time, and the flunkeyism which was unfortunately only too
rampant in the nation, ran riot, while frank souls stood aside in
disgust. The more eager the spiritual enthusiasm had been on the
threshold of two centuries, the deeper now did apathy weigh upon men's
spirits in the period of the forties. The fuller men's souls had been
of surging and stormy ideals, and wishings and vague longings of all
kinds, the emptier did they now become, and not only Stirner could
with justice give to his "only individual" the motto, "I have placed
my all on nothing," but it
[Pg 104]
was the motto of all Germany at that time. And yet in one thing
Stirner is the type of his people as contrasted with Proudhon. He is
the most complete example of the German who lacks that proud
self-sacrificing view of the life of the community, that feeling of
the inseparability of the individual from the mass of his
people—which is the token of the French,—but who at all
times has suffered from a separatism that destroys everything. He is
the typical representative of that nation to whom its best sons have
denied the capacity of being a nation, but which has therefore been
able to produce more striking individualities than all other civilised
nations of the time.
Caspar Schmidt—for this is Stirner's real name[19]—was born at
Baireuth on the 25th October, 1806, and, like Strauss, Feuerbach,
Bruno Bauer, and other thinkers of the same kind, devoted his time to
theological and philosophic studies. After completing these, he took
the modest position of a teacher in a high school, and in a girls'
school in Berlin. In 1844 there appeared, under the pseudonym "Max
Stirner," a book called The Individual
[Pg 105]
and his Property, with the dedication which, under these circumstances,
is touching: "To my Darling, Marie Döhnhardt." The book appeared like a meteor;
it caused for a short time a great deal of talk, and then sank into oblivion for
ten years, till the growing stream of Anarchist thought again came
back to it in more recent times. A History of the Reaction, written
after the year 1848, is esteemed as a good piece of historical work;
and, besides this, Caspar Schmidt also produced translations of Say,
Adam Smith, and other English economists. On the 26th of June, 1856,
he ended his life, poor in external circumstances, rich in want and
bitterness. That is all that we know of the personality of the man who
has raised the idea of personality to a Titanic growth that has
oppressed the world.
Stirner proceeds from the fact, the validity of which we have placed
in the right light at the beginning of this book, that the development
of mankind and of human society has hitherto proceeded in a decidedly
individualistic direction, and has consisted predominantly in the
gradual emancipation of the individual from his subjection to general
ideas and their corresponding correlatives in actual life, in the
return of the Ego to itself. Starting from the school of Fichte and
Hegel, he pursued this special individualistic tendency till close
upon the limits of caricature; he formally founded a cultus of the
Ego, all the while being anxious that it should not return again to
the region of metaphysical soap-bubbles, and leave its psychological and
practical sphere. On the contrary, Stirner appears to be rather inclined
[Pg 106]
to Positivism, and to consider the details of life and of
perception as real, and as the only ones whose existence is justified.
All that is comprehensible and general is secondary, a product of the
individual, the subject turned into an object, a creation that is
looked upon and honoured by the creator as the only actual reality,
the highest end—indeed, as something sacred. In the origin of this
generalisation, as well as in emancipation from it, Stirner perceives
the course of progressive culture.
The ancients only got so far as generalisations of the lower order;
they lived in the feeling that the world and worldly relationships
(for example, the natural bond of blood) were the only true things
before which their powerless self must bow down. Man, in the view of
life taken by the ancient world, lived entirely in the region of
perception, and therefore all his general ideas, even the highest type
of them, not excluding Plato's, retained a strongly sensuous
character.
Christianity only went a step higher with its generalisations out of
the region of the senses; ideas became more spiritual and less
corporeal in proportion as they became more general. Antiquity sought
the true pleasure of life, enjoyment of life; Christianity sought the
true life; antiquity sought complete sensuousness, Christianity
complete morality and spirituality; the first a happy life here, the
latter a happy life hereafter; antiquity postulated as the highest
moral basis, the State, the laws of the world; Christianity postulated
God, imperishable, everlasting Law. The ancient world did not get
[Pg 107]
beyond the rule of formal reason, the Sophists; Christianity put the
heart in the place of reason, and cultivation of sentiment in that of
one-sided cultivation of the intellect. Nevertheless, this is,
according to Stirner (as has already been mentioned), the same
process, the objectivisation of the Self, which comes out of
itself, and considers itself as some foreign body striving
upwards—unconscious self-deification.
Even in the Reformation Stirner recognises nothing more than the
continuation of the same process. Up to the time of the period
preceding the Reformation, reason, that was condemned as heathenish,
lay under the dominion of dogma; shortly before the Reformation,
however, it was said, "If only the heart remains Christianly minded,
reason may after all have its way." But the Reformation at last places
the heart in a more serious position, and since then hearts have
become visibly less Christian. When men began with Luther "to take the
matter to heart," this step of the Reformation led to the heart being
lightened from the heavy burden of Christianity. The heart becomes
from day to day less Christian; it loses the contents with which it
occupies itself, until at last nothing remains to it but empty
"heartiness," general love of man, the love of humanity, the
consciousness of freedom. It need hardly be mentioned that this view
of history is quite arbitrary and distorted. Who requires to be told
that the Reformation was, perhaps, the greatest historical act in favour
of the individual, because it freed him from the most powerful of all
[Pg 108]
authorities, from the omnipotence of the Roman dogma? With the
Reformation the conscious movement for freedom received its first
great impulse.
But Stirner places the reverence of the ancients for the State, the
reverence of the Christian for God, and of modern times for humanity
and freedom, all upon the same level,—they all seem to him ghosts,
spectres, possession by spirits and hauntings,—and he seeks to
establish the same conclusion as regards the ideas of truth, right,
morality, property, and love,—the so-called sacred foundations of
human society. They are all ghost-imaginations of our own mind,
creations of our own Ego, before which the creator of them bows in the
impotence of ignorance, considering them as something unalterable,
eternal, and sacred, to which every activity of the creative idea is
placed in contrast as Egoism.
"Men have got something into their heads which they think ought to be
actualised. They have ideas of love, goodness, and so on, which they
would like to see realised; and therefore they wish for a kingdom of
love upon earth in which no one acts out of self-interest, but
everyone from love. Love shall rule. But what they have placed in
their heads, how can it be called other than 'a fixed idea'
(idée fixe)? Their heads are haunted by spectres. The most
persistently haunting spectre is Man himself. Remember the proverb,
'The way to ruin is paved with good intentions.' The proposal to
actualise humanity in itself, to become wholly human, is of just the
same disastrous character, and to it belong
[Pg 109]
the intentions of becoming good, noble, loving, and so forth."
The dominion of the idea, whether it is religious or humanitarian or
moral, is for Stirner mere priest-craft; philanthropy is merely a
heavenly, spiritual, but priest-imagined love. Man must be restored,
and in doing so we poor wretches have ruined ourselves. It is the same
ecclesiastic principle as that celebrated motto, Fiat justitia,
pereat mundus; humanity and justice are ideas and ghosts to which
everything is sacrificed. The enthusiast for humanity leaves out of
consideration persons as far as his enthusiasm extends, and walks in a
vague ideal of sacred interest. Humanity is not a person but an
ideal—an imagination.
All progress of public opinion or emancipation of the human mind, as
hitherto proceeding, is accordingly for Stirner worthless labour, a
mere scene-shifting. As Christianity not only did not free mankind
from the power of ancient spectres, but rather strengthened and
increased them, so too the Reformation did not remove the chains of
mankind a hair's-breadth. "Because Protestantism broke down the medieval
hierarchy, the opinion gained ground that hierarchy in general had been
broken down by it, while it was quite overlooked that the Reformation was
even a restoration of a worn-out hierarchy. The hierarchy of the middle
ages had been only a feeble one, since it had to allow all possible
barbarity to persons to go on unchecked with it, and the Reformation
first steeled the strength of the hierarchy. When Bruno Bauer said: 'As
[Pg 110]
the Reformation was principally the abstract separation of the
religious principle from art, government, and science, and thus was
its liberation from those powers with which it had been connected in
the antiquity of the Church and in the hierarchy of the middle ages,
so also the theological and ecclesiastical movements that proceeded
from the Reformation were only the logical carrying out of this
abstraction or separation of the religious principle from other powers
of humanity';—and so I see on the contrary that which is right,
and think that rule of the mind or mental freedom (which comes to the
same thing) has never been before so comprehensive and powerful as at
the present time, because now, instead of separating the religious
principle from art, government, and science, it is rather raised
entirely from the kingdom of this world into the realm of the spirit
and made religious."
From the same point of view he considers the whole of the mental
attitude introduced by the Reformation.
"How can one," he says, "maintain of modern philosophy and of the
modern period that they have accomplished freedom when it has not
freed us from the power of objectivity? Or am I free from despots when
I no longer fear a personal tyrant, but am afraid of every outrage
upon the loyalty which I owe to him?"
This is just the case in the modern period. It only changes existing
objects, the actual ruler and so on, to an imagined one, that is, into
ideas for which the old respect not only has not been lost but has
[Pg 111]
increased in intensity. If a piece was taken off the idea of God and
the devil in their former gross realism, nevertheless only so much the
more attention has been devoted to our conceptions of them. "They are
free from devils, but evil has remained." To revolutionise the
existing State, to upset the existing laws, was once thought little
of, when it had once been determined to allow oneself to be no longer
imposed upon by what was tangible and existing; but to sin against the
conception of the State and not to submit to the conception of
law—who has ventured to do that? So men remained "citizens" and
"law-abiding, loyal men"; indeed, men thought themselves all the more
law-abiding in proportion as they more rationalistically did away with
the previous faulty law in order to do homage to the spirit of law. In
all this it is only the objects that have changed but which have
remained in their supremacy and authority; in short, men still
followed obedience, lived in reflection, and had an object upon which
they reflected, which they respected, and for which they felt awe and
fear. Men have done nothing else but changed things into ideas of
things, into thoughts and conceptions, and thus their dependence
became all the more innate and irrevocable. It is, for example, not
difficult to emancipate oneself from the commands of one's parents, or
to pay no heed to the warnings of an uncle or an aunt, or to refuse
the request of a brother or a sister; but the obedience thus given up
lies easily upon one's conscience, and the less one gives way to
individual sentiments, because one
[Pg 112]
recognises them from a rational point of view, and from our own reason
to be unreasonable, the more firmly does one cleave conscientiously to
piety and family love, and with greater difficulty does one forgive an
offence against the idea which one has conceived of family love and
the duty of piety. Released from our dependence upon the existing
family life, we fall into the more binding submission to the idea of
the family; we are governed by family spirit. And the family, thus
raised up to an idea or conception, is now regarded as something
"sacred," and its despotism is ten times worse, because its power lies
in my conscience. This despotism is only broken when even the ideal
conception of the family becomes nothing to me. And as it is with the
family, so it is with morality. Many people free themselves from
customs, but with difficulty do they get free from the idea of
morality. Morality is the "idea" of custom, its spiritual power, its
power over the conscience; on the other hand, custom is something too
material to have power over the spirit, and does not fetter a man who
is independent, a "free spirit."
Humanity strives for independence, and strives to overcome everything
which is not a self, says Stirner; but how does this agree with the
above-mentioned spread of the power of the mental conception and of
the idea? To-day mankind is less free than before; so-called
Liberalism only brings other conceptions forward; that is, instead of
the divine, the human; instead of ecclesiastical ideas, those of the
State; instead of those of faith, those of science; or
[Pg 113]
general statements, instead of the rough phrases and dogmas, actual ideas
and everlasting laws.
In the movement for emancipation in modern times Stirner distinguishes
three different varieties, the political, social, and humanitarian
Liberalism.
Political Liberalism, according to Stirner, culminates in the thought
that the State is all in all, and is the true conception of humanity;
and that the rights of man for the individual consist in being the
citizen of the State. Political Liberalism did away with the
inequality of rights of feudal times, and broke the chains of
servitude which at that period one man had forced upon another, the
privilege upon him who was less privileged. It did away with all
special interests and privileges, but it by no means created freedom;
it only made one independent of the other, but yet made all the most
absolute slaves to the State. It gave all power of right to the State,
the individual only becomes something as a citizen, and only has those
rights which the State gives him. Political Liberalism, says Stirner,
created a few people, but not one free individual. Absolute monarchy
only changed its name, being known formerly as "king," now as
"people," "State," or "nation."
"Political freedom says that the polis, the State, is free; and
religious freedom says that religion is free, just as freedom of conscience
means that the conscience is free; but not that I am free from the State,
from religion, or from conscience. It does not mean my freedom, but the
freedom of some power which governs and compels me; it means that
[Pg 114]
one of my masters, such as State, religion, or conscience, is free.
State, religion, and conscience, these despots make me a slave, and
their freedom is my slavery." "If the principle is that only facts
shall rule mankind, namely, the fact of morality or of legality, and
so on, then no personal limitations of one individual by the other can
be authorised—that is, there must be free competition. Only by
actual fact can one person injure another, as the rich may injure the
poor by money—that is, by a fact, but not as a person. There is
henceforth only one authority, the authority of the State; personally
no one is any longer lord over another. But to the State, all its
children stand exactly in the same position; they possess 'civic or
political equality,' and how they get on one with another is their own
affair; they must compete. Free competition means nothing else than
that everyone may stand up against someone else, make himself felt,
and fight against him."
At this point (wherein Stirner by no means recognises immediate or
economic individualism) social Liberalism—that which we to-day call
social Democracy or communal Socialism—separates from the political.
With a cleverness which we cannot sufficiently admire, Stirner
proceeds to show that these directions which are so totally opposed
are essentially the same, and regards the latter merely as the logical
outcome from the former.
"The freedom of man is, in political Liberalism, the freedom from persons,
from personal rule, from masters; security of any individual person, as
[Pg 115]
regards other persons, is personal freedom. No one can
give any commands; the law alone commands. But if persons have become
equal, their positions certainly have not. And yet the poor man needs
the rich, and the rich man needs the poor; the former needs the money
of the rich, the latter the work of the poor. Thus no one needs anyone
else as a person; but he needs him as a giver, or as one who has
something to give, as a proprietor or possessor. Thus what he has,
that makes a man. And in having or in possession people are unequal.
Consequently, so social Liberalism concludes, no one must possess,
just as, according to political Liberalism, no one must command—that
is, as here the State alone has the power of command, so now society
alone has the power of possessing." As in political Liberalism, the
State is the source of all right; the individual only enjoys so much
of it as the State gives him, so the social State, now called society,
is also the only master of all possessions, and the individual must
only have so much as society lets him share in. "Before the highest
Ruler," says Stirner in his rough language, "before the only
Commander, we all become equal—equal persons, that is, nonentities.
Before the highest owner of property we all become vagabonds alike.
And now one person is, in the estimation of another, a vagabond, a
'havenought,' but then this estimate of each other stops, we are all
at once vagabonds, and we can only call the totality of communist
society 'a conglomeration of vagabonds.'"
That which Stirner, finally, under the name of
[Pg 116]
humanitarian Liberalism, places side by side with the two tendencies just
mentioned has nothing to do, generally speaking, with the political and material
relations of mankind, and is the philosophical Liberalism of
Feuerbach, who places freedom of thought in the same position as his
predecessors put freedom of the person. "In the human society which
humanitarianism promises," says Stirner, "nothing can be recognised
which any person has as something 'special,' nothing shall have any
value which bears the mark of a 'private' individual. In this way the
circle of Liberalism completes itself, having in humanity its good
principle, in the egotist and every 'private' person its evil one; in
the former its God, in the latter its devil. If the special or private
person lost his value in the State, and if special or private property
ceased to be recognised in the community of workers or vagabonds, then
in human society everything special or private is left out of
consideration, and when pure criticism shall have performed its
difficult work, then we shall know what is private, and what one must
leave alone in seines Nichts durchbohrendem Gefühle." Political
Liberalism regulated the relations of might and right, social
Liberalism wishes to regulate those of property and labour,
humanitarian Liberalism lays down the ethical principles of modern
society.
As may be seen, Stirner does not recognise the efforts and endeavours
of all these tendencies to which we ascribe the complete transformation of
[Pg 117]
Europe in the last century, but, on the contrary,
is prepared to perceive in them rather an intensification of the
servitude in which the free Ego is held. The more spiritual, the more
interesting, the more sublime and the more sacred ideas become for
men, the greater becomes their respect for them, and the less becomes
the freedom of the Ego as regards them. But as these ideas are merely
creations of man's own spirit,—fiction and unreal forms,—all the
so-called progress made by Liberalism is regarded by Stirner as
nothing else than increasing self-delusion and constant retrogression.
True progress evidently lies for him only in the complete emancipation
of the Ego from this dominion of ideas that is in the triumph of
egotism. "For Individualism (egotism) is the creator of everything,
just as already genius [a definite egotism] which is always
originality, is regarded as the creator of new historical productions.
Freedom teaches us: set yourselves free, get rid of everything
burdensome; but it does not teach you who you yourselves are. Free!
free! so sounds its cry, and you eagerly follow it; become free from
yourselves, and renounce yourselves. But Individualism calls you back
to yourselves, and says: 'Come to yourself!' Under the ægis of freedom
you become free from many things, but become subject again to some new
thing; you are free from the Evil One, but abstract evil still
remains. As individuals you are really free from everything, and what
clings to you you have accepted. That is your choice and your wish.
The individual is the one who is born free, the man who is free by birth. The
[Pg 118]
'free man,' on the other hand, is he who only looks for
freedom, the dreamer, the enthusiast." Freedom is only possible
together with the power to acquire it and to maintain it; but this
power only resides in the individual. "My power is my property; my
power gives me property; I am myself my own power, and am thereby my
own property." This is, in a nutshell, Stirner's positive doctrine.
Right is power or might. "What you have the power to be, that you have
the right to be. I derive all right and justification from myself
alone; for I am entitled to everything which I have power to take or
to do. I am entitled to overthrow Zeus, Jehovah or God, if I can; if I
can not, these gods will always retain their rights and power over
me; but I shall stand in awe of their rights and their power in
impotent reverence, and shall keep their commands and believe I am
doing right in everything that I do, according to their ideas of
right, just as a Russian frontier sentry considers himself justified
in shooting dead a suspicious person who runs away, because he relies
upon a 'higher authority,' in other words, commits murder legally. But
I am justified in committing a murder by myself, if I do not forbid it
to myself, if I am not afraid of murder in the abstract as of
'something wrong.' I am only not justified in what I do not do of my
own free will, that is, that which I do not give myself the right to
do. I decide whether the right resides in me; for there is some right
external to myself. If it is right to me, then it is right. It is
possible that others may not regard it as right, but that is
[Pg 119]
their affair, not mine, and they must take their own measures against it.
And if something was in the eyes of the whole world not right, and yet
seemed right to me, that is, if I wished it, even then I should ask
nothing from the world: thus does everyone who knows how to value
himself, and each does it to the extent that he is an egotist, for
might goes before right, and quite rightly too."
All existing right is external to the Ego; no one can give me my
right, neither God, nor reason, nor Nature, nor the State; as to
whether I am right or not there is only one judge and that is myself;
others at most can pass a judgment and decide whether they support my
right and whether it also exists as a right for them. Law is the will
of the dominating power in a community. Every State is a despotism,
whether the dominant power belongs to one, to many, or to all. A
despotism would remain then, if, for example, in the national assembly
the national will, that is to say, the individual wills of each
person, really had overwhelmingly expressed itself, including also my
own will; if then this wish becomes law I am bound to-morrow by what I
wished yesterday, and then I thus become a servant, even though it be
only the servant of myself. How can this be changed? "Only by my
recognising no duty, neither letting myself bind nor be bound. If I
have no duty then I also know no law." Wrong goes side by side with
right, crime with legality. The unfettered Ego of Stirner is the
never-ceasing criminal in the State; for only he who denies his
"self," and who practises self-denial is acceptable
[Pg 120]
to the State. And thus with the disappearance of right comes also the
disappearance of crime.
"The dispute about the right of property is violently waged. The
Communists maintain that the earth belongs properly to him who
cultivates it; and the products of the same to those who produce them.
I maintain it belongs to him who knows how to take it, or who does not
let it be taken from him or let himself be deprived of it; if he
appropriates it, not merely the earth but also the right to it belongs
to him. This is the egotistical right, that is, it is right for me,
and therefore it is right." How far Stirner is separated from Proudhon
is shown most clearly in the question of property. Proudhon denied
property because it was incompatible with justice. Stirner denies
justice, and maintains property upon the grounds of the right of
occupation. Proudhon declared that property was theft, but Stirner
entirely reverses the phrase, and answers to the question, What is my
property?—"Nothing but what is in my power." To what property am I
entitled?—"To that which I entitle myself." "I give myself the right
to property by taking property or by giving myself the power of the
proprietor, a full power or title."
The theory of occupation or seizure here appears to us in all its
brutality. Nevertheless, even here Stirner is not frightened at the
most extreme consequences of this theory, nor at the thought that one
would have to defend one's property daily and hourly with a weapon in one's
hand; and he is therefore inclined to make some concession to a voluntary
[Pg 121]
form of organisation. "If men reach the point of losing
respect for property, each will have property; just as all slaves
become freemen as soon as they regard their master no longer as
master. Union will then multiply the means of the individual, and
secure for him the property he has acquired by fighting. In the
opinion of the Communists the community should be the only proprietor.
The converse of this is, I am the proprietor, and merely come to some
agreement with others about my property. If the community does not do
right by me, I revolt against it, and defend my property. I am an
owner of property, but property is not sacred." The regulation of
society by itself is accepted by Stirner just as little as in the
question of property, when it comes to the question of obtaining for
the labourers a full reward of their labour. "They must rely upon
themselves and ask nothing from the State," he answers. Only to a
third very difficult question does this thoroughgoing theorist fail in
an answer. He declares pauperism to be "lack of value of myself, when
I cannot make my value felt; and, therefore, I can only get free from
pauperism if I make my value felt as an individual, if I give myself
value, and put my own price upon myself. All attempts at making the
masses happy, and philanthropic associations arising from the
principle of love, must come to grief, for help can only come to the
masses through egotism, and this help they must and will procure for
themselves. The question of property cannot be solved in such a legal
way as the Socialists, and even the Communists,
[Pg 122]
imagine. It can only be solved by the war of all against all. The poor
will only become free and be owners of property by revolting, rising,
and raising themselves. However much is given them, they will always
wish to have more; for they wish nothing less than that, at last,
there shall remain nothing more to give. It will be asked: But what
will happen then, when those who have nothing take courage and rise?
What kind of equalisation will be made? One might just as well ask me
to determine a child's nativity; what a slave will do when he has
broken his chains one can only wait and see."
Step by step Stirner departs from Proudhon; the latter demands, in
order to create his paradise, a balance, the former lays down the
principle of natural selection as the highest and only law in social
matters. The fight, the struggle for existence, which Proudhon strove
to recognise in economic life, here enters upon its rights in all its
brutality. The realisation of the self is, for Stirner, the key to the
solution of the problems of work, property, and pauperism. He will
have no division of goods, no organisation of labour. For Proudhon
every piece of work is the result of a collective force, for Stirner
the most valuable works are those of "individual" artists, savants,
and so on, and their value is always to be determined only from the
egoist standpoint.
To the question whether money should be maintained or done away
with among egoists, he answers: "If you know a better medium of
exchange, all right; but it will always be 'money.' It is not
[Pg 123]
money that does you harm, but your lack of power to take it. Let your
power be felt, nerve yourselves, and you will not lack
money—your money, the money of your own coining. But working I
do not call letting your power be felt. Those who only 'seek for work,
and are willing to work hard,' prepare for themselves inextinguishable
lack of work." What we now-a-days call free competition, Stirner
refuses to regard as free, since everyone has not the means for
competing. "To abolish competition only means to favour members of
some craft. The distinction is this: in a craft, such as baking,
baking is the business of the members of the craft; under a system of
competition it is the business of anyone who likes to compete; but in
societies it is the business of those who use what is baked; thus, my
or your business, not the business of the members of the craft, nor of
the baker who has a concession given him, but of those in the union or
society." Here for the second time we meet with the idea of a union,
without Stirner expressing himself exactly about its character. Only
in one other place does he happen to speak about the ideas of this
union. He says the end of society is agreement or union. A society
also certainly arises through union, but only in the same way as a
fixed idea arises from a thought, namely, by the fact that the energy
of the thought, thinking itself the restless absorption of all rising
thoughts, disappears from thought. When a union has crystallised
itself into a society, it has ceased to be an active union; for the
act of union is a ceaseless uniting of individuals, it has become
[Pg 124]
a united existence, has come to a standstill, has degenerated into a
fixity; it is dead as a union; it is the corpse of union, and of the
act of union; that is, it is a society or community. What is known as
"party" is a striking example of this.
Stirner admits that union cannot exist without freedom, being limited
in all manner of ways. But absolute freedom is merely an ideal, a
spectre, and the object of the union is not freedom, which it, on the
contrary, sacrifices to individualism, but its object is only
individualism. "Union is my creation, my implement, sacred to me, but
has no spiritual power over my mind, and does not make me bow down to
it; but I make it bow down to me, and use it for my own purposes. As I
may not be a slave of my maxims, but without any guarantee expose them
to my own continual criticism, and give no guarantee of their
continuance, so, still less, do I pledge myself to the union for my
future, or bind my soul to it; but I am and remain to myself more than
State or Church, and consequently infinitely more than the union."
Just as we again recognise in this loose and always breakable union
(although Stirner does not say so) that union whose mission he had declared
it to be "to render secure property gained by force," to arrange the
relations of production and consumption, and at the same time to create
a certain unity of the means of payment; so, too, we have in this "union
of egoists," as its author called it, all the constructive thought that
Stirner's book either can or does contain. For a man who only acknowledges one
[Pg 125]
dimension, and only operates with one, considering everything not
contained therein as non-existing, cannot form any of the combinations
of which life consists, without coming into hopeless conflict with his
principles. This Stirner has done, in spite of the vague and imaginary
nature of his "union of egoists."
As Stirner had to acknowledge that this union or society cannot exist
without freedom being limited in every way, he declared—since after
all he requires union for some things—"absolute freedom" a creature
of the imagination, as the opposite to "individuality," which is the
main thing. But can it be believed that Stirner has set up an
"absolute freedom" all of his own making, to place it in contrast with
individuality. In other words, freedom is merely the possibility of
living one's individuality, of being an "individual" in Stirner's
sense. Freedom is the absence of every outside influence; it may be
understood in an exoteric or esoteric sense; and throughout his whole
book Stirner has done nothing but strip the "Ego" from every sign of
outside compulsion; he has made it the "only one" by freeing it with
relentless logic from everything external. He has depicted this act of
liberation as the goal of all culture; and it finally emerges that all
this story of the "only Ego" is a delusion, for "union" excludes
"absolute individuality" as well as "absolute freedom"—because the
two are identical.
Stirner, indeed, only spoke of an "absolute freedom"
to represent it as a fiction of the imagination,
[Pg 126]
and on the other hand only of an individuality. Now his union does not
exclude individuality and freedom, but only absolute individuality.
But this last Stirner cannot admit, because it also he regards merely
as a "spectre," an "obsession," a "fixed idea." But whether he admits
it or not, what is Stirner's "individual" but an idea, something
absolute? Stirner had begun with the intention of slaying Feuerbach's
idea of "man" as a retrograde idealist fallacy, and of creating, like
Prometheus, a new man, the Unmensch, in the Ego completed into a
microcosm, and, as such, complete in itself, separate and independent.
But that is, as a matter of fact, not the "no-man" but the superhuman
Prometheus himself, the idea of Man which he attacked in Feuerbach.
"Might," he says in one part of his book, "goes before right, and
rightly too." This is exactly the logical scheme of the whole book.
Away with everything absolute! Individuality goes before every idea,
just because it is itself the absolute idea of the much-despised
Hegel.
But suppose we do not take into consideration this fundamental contradiction.
Let us suppose there is none, and that all Stirner's other assumptions are
indisputable, that God, Humanity, Society, Right, the State, the
Family are all classed in one category, as were abstractions and
creations of my own "Ego," what follows? That these ideas, now that
they have lost their absolute character, are no longer to be reckoned
as factors in the organisation of life? It is so, if one regards only that
which is absolute as entitled to exist; but Stirner would drive everything
[Pg 127]
absolute from its very last positions. And does it follow further from
the circumstance that one of these factors has lost its controlling
influence over mankind that all the others, because they too are not
absolute, should be denied all practical significance? Put in concrete
form, the question stands thus: (1) Has the idea of Deity lost its
practical significance, because it has been divested of its absolute
character, and its purely empiric origin has been recognised? and (2)
If the idea of Right is no more an absolute one than the idea of
Deity, does it follow that the influence of Right must be placed upon
the same plane as the influence of conscience?
As to the first point, I am relieved from any answer in view of the
thorough treatment of these questions by the light of modern
investigation. The second question I prefer to leave to some
professional jurist, who knows the nature of law, and at the same time
has every intention of doing justice to Stirner.
Dr. Rudolf Stammler says,[20]
after showing that the necessity of the influence of Law for human
society cannot be proved a priori: "It is the theory of Anarchism
which must lead us with special force to a train of thought that has
never yet appeared in the literature of legal philosophy, although it
makes clear, in a manner universally valid, the necessity of legal
compulsion in itself and justifies legal organisation. For the
antithesis of our present mode of social life, based on law and right,
is, as conceived by Anarchism as its ideal and goal, the union and
[Pg 128]
ordering of men in freely formed communities, and entirely under rules
framed by convention. Though the individual Anarchist may regard a
union of egoists as a postulate, or may desire fraternal Communism,
yet each must determine for himself his connection with such a
community. Let him enter freely into the supposed agreement and break
it again as seems good to him, it is still the stipulations of the
agreement that bind him as long as the agreement exists; an agreement
which he must first enter into and can at any time break regardless of
conditions by a new expression of his will. From this it is that this
kind of organisation, which forms the core of the theory of Anarchism,
is only possible for such of mankind as are actually qualified and
capable of uniting with others in some form of agreement. Those who
are not capable of acting for themselves, as we jurists say, such as
the little child, those who are of unsound mind, incapacitated by
illness and old age, all these would be entirely excluded from such an
organisation and from all social life. For as soon as, for example, an
infant has been taken into this society and subjected to its rules,
the compulsion of law would have been again introduced, and authority
would have been exercised over a human being without the proper rules
for his assent being observed. The Anarchist organisation of man's
social life therefore fails, inasmuch as it is possible only for
certain special persons, qualified empirically, and excludes others
who lack these qualifications. I therefore conclude the necessity of
legal compulsion, not from the fact that without
[Pg 129]
it the small and weak would fare but badly; for I cannot know this for
certain beforehand and as a general rule. Nor do I deduce the
recognised and justified existence of legal arrangements from the fact
that only by these can the 'true' freedom of each individual be
attained without the interference of any third person; for that would
not be justified by the facts of history, and would certainly not
follow from formal legal compulsion in itself. Rather, I base the
lawfulness of law and the rightness of right, in its formal state,
upon the consideration that a legal organisation is the only one open
to all human beings without distinction of special fortuitous
qualifications. To organise means to unite under rules. Such a
regulation of human relationships is a means to an end, an instrument
serving the pursuit of the final end of the highest possible
perfection of man. Hence only that regulation of human society can be
universally justified which can embrace universally all human beings
without reference to their subjective or different peculiarities. Law
alone can do this. So even under a bad law legal compulsion in itself
retains its sound foundation. Its existence does not cease to be
justified, nor is it even touched, by any chance worthlessness of the
concrete law in question: it is firmly founded, because it alone
offers the possibility of a universally valid, because universally
human, organisation. Therefore social progress can only be made by
perfecting law as handed down by history, according to its content,
and not by abolishing legal compulsion as such."
[Pg 130]
These conclusions block the way for the mischievous misapplications of
distorted expressions of an exact thinker such as Ihering. Ihering
certainly took away ruthlessly the ideological basis of law, but he
never denied or attacked necessity of legal compulsion as Stirner did.
We might just as well ascribe to Darwin the intention of disowning man
because he set forth man's natural descent.
It is of just as little use to claim that past master of sociology,
Herbert Spencer, in support of Stirner's views, because Spencer too
recognises the purely egoistical origin of law and of social
organisation. Egoism and Anarchism are not so mutually interchangeable
as Stirner thinks. The question is, first of all, whether egoism after
all really finds its account in the "union of egoists." It has been
already more than once remarked that here too, as in the case of
Proudhon, we only have to do, at bottom, with the logical extension of
the present order of society that rests on free competition. "Make
your value felt" is still to-day the highest economic principle; and
he whose value, whose individuality consists in knowledge alone
without an adequate admixture of worldly wisdom, would probably fare
no better in the more perfect Anarchist world than the poor
schoolmaster Caspar Schmidt in our bourgeois society, who suffered
all the pangs of hunger and greeted Death as his redeemer.
Stirner did not form any school of followers in Germany
in his own time, but Julius Faucher (1820-78)
[Pg 131]
who was known as a publicist and a rabid Freetrader, represented his
ideas in his newspaper Die Abendpost (The Evening Post), published
in Berlin in 1850. This paper was, of course, soon suppressed, and the
only apostle of Stirner's gospel thereupon left the Continent and went
to England, to turn to something more practical than Anarchism, or (to
use Stirner's own jargon) to realise his "Ego" more advantageously.
How strange and anomalous Stirner's individualism appeared even to the
most advanced Radicals of Germany in that period appears very clearly
from a conversation recorded by Max Wirth,[21]
which Faucher had with the stalwart Republican Schlöffel, in an
inn frequented by the Left party in the Parliament of Frankfort.
"Schlöffel loved to boast of his Radical opinions, just as at
that time many men took a pride in being as extreme as possible among
the members of the Left. He expressed his astonishment that Faucher
held aloof from the current of politics. 'It is because you are too
near the Right party for me,' answered Faucher, who delighted in
astonishing people with paradoxes. Schlöffel stroked his long
beard proudly, and replied, 'Do you say that to me?' 'Yes,'
continued Faucher, 'for you are a Republican incarnate; you still want
a State. Now I do not want a State at all, and, consequently, I am a
more extreme member of the Left than you.' It was the first time Schlöffel
had heard these paradoxes, and he replied: 'Nonsense; who can emancipate us
[Pg 132]
from the State?' 'Crime,' was Faucher's reply, uttered with an
expression of pathos. Schlöffel turned away, and left the
drinking party without saying a word more. The others broke out
laughing at the proud demagogue being thus outdone: but no one seems
to have suspected in the words of Faucher more than a joke in
dialectics." This anecdote is a good example of the way in which
Stirner's ideas were understood, and shows that Faucher was the only
individual "individual" among the most Radical politicians of that
time.[22]
On the other hand, Proudhon's doctrines, which in their
native France could not find acceptance, gained a few proselytes among
the Radical Democrats, and especially among the Communists of
Switzerland and the Rhine.
Moses Hess was, among Germans, the first to seize hold upon the word
"Anarchy" fearlessly and spread it abroad. This was in 1843, thus
shortly after the appearance of Proudhon's sensational book on
property, where the word was first definitely adopted as the badge of
a party. Hess was born at Bonn in 1812, and was meant for a merchant's
life, but turned his attention to studies picked up later, more
especially to Hegelian philosophy, and entered upon the career of
literature. In the beginning of the forties he propounded in his works
on The Philosophy of Action and Socialism
[Pg 133]
a confused programme, in which the Communism of Weitling was curiously
intermingled with the views of Proudhon. In 1845 he expressed his
views in a paper called The Mirror of Society
(Gesellschaftspiegel), that appeared later in 1846, under the title
of The Social Conditions of the Civilised World, and represented the
extreme views of Rhenish Socialism. Moses Hess died in obscurity in 1872.
Hess went farther than Proudhon, in that he differed from Proudhon's
carefully thought-out and measured organisation of society by
demanding, under Anarchy, the abolition of the influence, in social,
mental, and moral life, not only of the State and the Church, but also
in like manner of any or all external dominion. All action, he
declared, must proceed exclusively from the internal decision of the
individual acting upon the external world, and not vice versa.