# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2014
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    H. J. Mozans, Up the Orinoco and down the Magdalena
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45848/45848-h/45848-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

    “In angry sea, in sudden storm,
I thee invoke, our star benign.”
 ↑
21 Compare
the reception of Ulysses by Eumæus, in the fourteenth book of the
Odyssey, where the old servant of the wandering hero is made to
say to his unknown master:—
“Guest! If one much worse
Arrived here than thyself, it were a curse
To my poor means, to let a stranger taste
Contempt for fit food. Poor men, and unplac’d
In free seats of their own, are all from Jove
Commended to our entertaining love,
But poor is th’ entertainment I can give,
Yet free and loving.”
Crevaux, op. cit., p. 556, remarks anent this
subject: “On pratique largement
l’hospitalité dans les grandes
solitudes.” ↑
22
“Videmus lunam et stellas consolari
noctem.”—Confessionum, Lib. XIII, Cap.
XXXII. ↑
23 Codazzi
also refers to this and other similar phenomena in his Geografia Statistica di Venezuela, pp. 29 and 30, Firenze,
1864. ↑
24
Among the Indians of Guiana, p. 384, by Everard T. Im
Thurn. ↑
25 The
Bolivian Andes, p. 201, London and New York, 1901.
Padre Figueroa, in his Relaciones de
las Misiones en el País de los Maynas, writes of similar
phenomena observed among the Andes near the Amazon. ↑
26 Since
writing the above I have discovered that both Antonio Raimondi of Lima,
Peru, and Col. Geo. E. Church had arrived independently at a similar
conclusion to my own. “The Andes,” writes Col. Church,
“at least within the tropics, are at times a gigantic electric
battery, and so highly charged that they are very dangerous to
cross.”—The Geographical Journal, pp. 341, 342,
April, 1901. ↑
No sooner had our launch reached the landing place,
than we bounded ashore, eager for information about our mules and their
drivers. We asked the sable matron who, with her equally sable
daughters, waited at the brink to greet us, if the mules had come. She
replied laconically, “No, Señor.” “Have you
heard anything about them?” “No, Señor.”
“Is there anyone here,” and I glanced at the swarthy youth
hard by, “that would be willing, if well rewarded, to go forward
and hasten the arrival of men and mules?” “No,
Señor.”
What was to be done? We could not continue our journey alone and
afoot, even if we were disposed to leave our baggage behind us. And it
soon became evident that it would not be safe to remain long at
Barrigón. There was but one rude hut there, and that was
surrounded by mud and pools of water covered by “Spawn, weeds and
filth
and leprous-scum”—certainly not a very inviting place to
abide any length of time.
Besides, the family had nothing to eat, at least they said they had
not, except a few platanos, and these they required for their own use.
We had almost exhausted the supply we had brought from Trinidad, and
the little that was still left, we intended for our three-days trip to
Villavicencio. We were not sure that we could get anything on the way,
and we did not wish to run any risk of being without food where it
might be most needed.
Something had to be done, and that quickly, if we did not wish to
expose ourselves to the pangs of hunger and the danger of fever in that
filthy, miasmatic hole. In the dry [196]season, we might return to
Cabuyaro, where we could secure horses or mules, and go thence to our
next objective point, Villavicencio. During the rainy season, however,
this was impossible. We had been told the night before, that several of
the caños and rivers between Cabuyaro and Villavicencio were
quite impassable, as there were neither bridges nor ferries, and that
the currents were so swift that it was quite out of the question for
man or beast to cross them by swimming.
We were certainly in a quandary, if not in a very serious
predicament. It was useless to go backwards, unless we wished to return
to Orocué, and thence to Trinidad. Even if we returned to Orocué,
we could not get a steamer down the river for several months, and to
make the long trip to Ciudad Bolivar in a bongo was not to be thought
of. We were confronted by the first really grave difficulty of our
journey, and when we considered all the circumstances, it was enough to
depress the stoutest heart.
“But why had not our men and mules arrived,” we asked ourselves
time and again? Our telegram
ordering them had been received and satisfactorily answered. Just
before leaving Orocué we had sent a second telegram advising our
vaqueano—guide—when he should meet us but we had not
awaited a reply, taking it for granted that there would be no hitch in
our plans. It now occurred that we had acted unwisely in not waiting
for a response to our second telegram, so as to be sure that it had
been received and was properly understood.
The telegraph line to Orocué had only recently been put
up—just a few weeks before our arrival there—and had never
been in satisfactory working order. In fact, owing to a break in the
wire, which lasted a fortnight, we had not been able to get into
communication with Villavicencio—the place whence our mules were
to come—until a few days before we started for Barrigón.
Might there not have been another interruption in the line after we
sent our second message? And did this message ever reach [197]its
destination? It is true that a week had elapsed since our departure
from Orocué, and, if the line had been severed, it might have
been repaired.
But then again this was far from certain. The wire passed through
dense and interminable forests—where there were no roads of any
kind—and it might require several days to reach the break after
it was located. And then after our vaqueano got our telegram it would
require three days for him to go from Villavicencio to Barrigón,
supposing that he had the mules and saddles in readiness. If they were
not ready there would be another delay in starting. Altogether the
outlook was far from reassuring. Our animals and men might arrive at
any hour, and then again we might be obliged to wait for them for
weeks.
While occupied in these far from comforting reflections, we
remembered that the mail from Bogotá to Orocué was due.
The men who would bring it would also bring a certain amount of freight
for various points on the Meta. Here, then, was a ray of hope. If our
own men and animals should fail us, we might be able to prevail on the
mail carriers to give us the necessary means of transportation for
ourselves and baggage. This consideration tended to relieve somewhat
the suspense which was the most unpleasant feature of our hapless
situation. We resolved, accordingly, to take a more optimistic view of
things, and to trust to our star which, so far, had ever been in the
ascendant.
What had greatly contributed to the gloominess of the outlook on our
arrival at Barrigón was the thought that we should be obliged to
leave our launch—where we were so comfortable—for the
dismal, steaming pest-hole on the river’s bank. We did not for a
moment think of asking for shelter in the filthy shack occupied by the
negro family. That would be tantamount to courting
paludismo—malarial fever—in its worst form.
Fortunately, we had a good tent with us, and in this we could be
shielded from sun and rain, and, at the same time, escape some of the
unsanitary [198]features that rendered this spot so forbidding
and dangerous. It was really the first place that we had yet visited
from which we instinctively shrank and from which we wished to depart
at the earliest possible moment.
While thus preoccupied and devising ways and means for rendering our
enforced detention at this spot as endurable as circumstances would
permit, our captain, God bless him! observing our distress, came to us,
and with a kindness and courtesy we can never forget, said,
“No se preocupen, Señores, la lancha
quedará aquí hasta que vengan las bestias.” Do
not worry, gentlemen, the launch will remain here until the arrival of
your animals.
What a relief this kind and considerate act was—performed when
and where it counted for so much to us—only those can realize who
have been placed in similar situations. Everything was now as well
provided for as might be, except food. Where that was to come from was
a mystery, as we did not wish to draw on the very limited supply we had
brought with us.
Our first meal consisted of plátanos—some boiled and
some fried—with a cup of black coffee. I had never eaten a dozen
bananas in any form before coming to South America, but I gradually
became accustomed to them, although I never relished them. Here,
however, there was nothing else in sight, except two or three ducks
that were quacking about the green, miasmatic pools that surrounded the
negro shanty. We endeavored to purchase these, but, although we offered
the old dame several times what they were worth, she would not part
with them. No African ever held on more tenaciously to his fetish or
rabbit-foot than did this swart Ethiopian hag of Puerto Nuevo to her
prized webfeet.
For our dinner we fared better. Fortunately and quite unexpectedly,
someone succeeded in landing a large and delicious fish, which was
quite sufficient to furnish a meal for ourselves and crew. A new source
of food-supply was now indicated, but try as we would, it was
impossible to [199]catch another fish—large or small. The
impetuous current of the muddy river was decidedly adverse to our
rising piscatorial hopes. But we determined not to worry on account of
our lack of success as anglers. “Sufficient for the day is the
evil thereof.” Providence, we were sure, would provide for the
morrow. Probably our men and mules would arrive. If not, the mail
carriers would undoubtedly come, and then no Deus ex machina
would be necessary to extricate us from our embarrassing situation.
A dreary day passed and a more dreary night. What with the suspense
and the lack of proper food, and the confinement to a disagreeable spot
in the impenetrable forest, our position was such as not to encourage
slumber by night or rapturous admiration of tropical flora during the
day. Nevertheless, we still instinctively felt that relief would not be
long in coming.
The second morning we had our usual desayuno of black coffee and
plátanos. And to our amazement, there was added to this simple
fare a fine roast chicken. Where did it come from? We had seen no
chickens anywhere about the premises, and could not have been more
surprised if it had dropped from the blue sky. I asked the captain, and
he quietly replied with a smile, “Un poco de diplomacia. Nada
mas.” A little diplomacy. Nothing more. Ever considerate
about our comfort and needs, he had instituted a search for provisions,
and learned that the la vieja—the old woman, as he called
her—had some chickens concealed not far from the house, and,
whether by persuasion or threats, he would not say, he induced her to
part with one of them, and intimated that the same diplomacy he had
employed in getting the first, would, if necessary, avail in securing
others. The outlook was still brightening, and we now felt more than
ever that our deliverance was near.
Shortly after midday, while we were taking our usual siesta in the
launch, we were suddenly startled by an unearthly noise. All the dogs
and whelps of the place and all the “curs of low
degree”—and there were many of [200]them—began to bark at once. And then in
the forest near by there was such shouting and screaming on the part of
men and boys, accompanied by the neighing of horses and the braying of
mules, that it seemed that a troop of guerrillas was bearing down upon
us. Never before had we heard anything like it, except possibly a Sioux
or Navajo war whoop. They seemed to desire to frighten us to death
before attacking us vi et armis. But no music could have been
more grateful to our ears than were those discordant notes emitted by
man and beast. We knew at once what it all meant, and, almost before we
could reach the top of the bank, our animals and men were all gathered
in the small free space in front of the cabin, and with them were the
bearers of the Bogotá mail. There were about thirty mules and
horses, and more than a dozen men.
We had telegraphed for mules only, as we did not think we should be
able to get horses, but to our delight we found that we were to have
two good saddle horses for our personal use, besides the mules destined
for our baggage. As, however, both men and animals needed rest, after
their long tiresome trip from Villavicencio, it was deemed best to
defer our departure until the following morning. The animals were then
turned loose to browse on whatever they could find to appease hunger,
and their masters were soon ensconced in their hammocks, slung wherever
they could find a suitable place for them.
It was arranged with our vaqueano that we should all be ready for
our journey across the llanos de madrugada—at early
dawn—the following morning. We had a long day’s ride before
us, as the nearest stopping place, where we could hope to find food and
shelter, was at a place called Barrancas, where was the house of the
owner of a large hato—cattle farm.
Bright and early, then, the next morning, our peons and vaqueano
were busy saddling our horses and packing our baggage on the backs of
the mules. The mail bongo from Orocué—which had left that
place ten days before we did[201]—arrived a few hours before
our departure, and all mail matter was hurriedly put on the backs of
other mules by those in charge of the mail destined for Bogotá
and intervening points.
It was not without a pang that we bade farewell to our devoted crew,
who had done so much to render our voyage on the Meta and Humea as
pleasant as it was memorable. From the ever-courteous and thoughtful
captain to our good-natured and obliging Guahibo, we were always the
recipients of delicate attentions of every kind. We might travel far
before again meeting with men so kind and so sympathetic as were those
four whom it was our good fortune to meet in an isolated village of
far-off Colombia. “God bless you all!” we said in parting.
“Nothing is too good for you.”
During the first hour after starting we had to struggle through what
the natives call the montaña. It had nothing mountainous
about it, as the name would seem to indicate, but was a dark, nearly
impervious wood almost on a level with the waters of the Humea. In the
dry season, I doubt not, the path through this forest would present no
difficulty, but during the rainy season it was next to impassable.
Everywhere there was deep, sticky mud and deeper pools and dirty
stagnant water. Often our horses sank to the saddle-girths in the
tenacious slime, and it was only by the greatest effort that they were
able to extricate themselves. At times, where the mud and water were
unusually deep, we were forced, for short stretches, to make our way
through the pathless forest. Then every step was impeded by branches
and lianas and progress was next to impossible. Finally, with great
difficulty for the animals and not a little danger to ourselves, we
succeeded in effecting our exit from this terrible montaña, and,
before we were aware of it, we found ourselves on high and dry ground
on the edge of a beautiful, smiling prairie of apparently limitless
extent.
What a relief it was to get once more into the
open—[202]into the broad llanos of Colombia—where we
could have an unimpeded view for miles in every direction. We had been
in the depths of the forest so long, getting only occasional glimpses
of the llanos on our way up the river, that we felt like a prisoner
given his liberty after a long term of confinement. Not that we had not
enjoyed the forests while we were in them. Far from it. We had enjoyed
every moment of the time spent in studying their richness and beauty.
But now that we had reached the llanos, to which we had so long looked
forward, and were no longer confined to the limited quarters of our
launch; now that we were on our willing steeds and could move as we
chose in any direction and as far afield as fancy might suggest, we
experienced a sense of freedom and agility that surprised ourselves. We
felt as if we had suddenly been transferred to another world, so
different was our new environment from that in which we had spent so
many weeks.
Never did the earth seem so green or the sky so blue, or the sun so
bright; never did the face of nature appear so ravishingly beautiful as
on that glorious May morning near the picturesque Humea. And away to
the west, partly veiled by haze and cloud, loomed up higher than ever
those vast mountains of majesty and mystery that seemed to overhang the
world. Yes, we were slowly but surely approaching the Andes, and in a
few days more, Deo volente, we should be scaling its
dizzy heights and exulting in the splendid panoramas that would be
presented to our enchanted gaze.
The landscape before us was indeed beautiful, entrancing as a
vision, fair as the Happy Valley of Rasselas. Exulting in a new sense
of freedom, and stirred by many overmastering emotions, we could but
exclaim with Byron,
“Beautiful!
How beautiful is all this beautiful world!
How glorious in its action and itself!”
[203]
I have called the part of the llanos we were then entering a
prairie, but it was far more beautiful than any of our plains known by
that name. It was more like the palm-besprent delta of the Nile than
the tame and almost treeless reaches of land which characterize so much
of our western prairies. Here and there were coppices of graceful
shrubs made melodious by feathered songsters whose notes were new to
us, but everywhere, at no greater distance from one another, were our
old friends that had accompanied us all the way from the mouth of the
Orinoco—the ever-attractive moriche palms.
We saw also several other species of palm that excited our interest,
but none more so than the strange corneto palm. Like various species of
the Oenocarpus and Iriartea, it is remarkable for its
adventitious or secondary roots, which, springing from the trunk in
large numbers, lift it above the ground, and give it the appearance of
a large column supported on a cone of smaller columns inclined to it
obliquely. These roots vary from a fraction of an inch to several
inches in diameter. They have at times a length of from six to ten feet
and embrace a space of ground from five to eight feet in diameter. They
are frequently covered by vines and parasites so as to form a natural
bower which is used as a retreat by wild animals. Even the Indians have
recourse to these fantastic arbors as a place of refuge during rain
storms.
Here, as in the land of the Aruacs, the moriche palm is not only a
thing of beauty, but, for the Indians, a source of comfort and joy.
This and other palms, notably a kind of date palm, and the
Cumana, which bears a fruit similar to the wild olive, supply
the Indians, during certain months of the year, with all the food they
consume. Speaking of the palm, Padre Rivero declares it to be
“the earthly paradise of the Guahibos and Chiricoas. It is their
delight, their general larder, their all. It is the subject matter of
their thoughts and conversations. About it they dream, [204]and
without it life would possess no joy for them.”1
Like the cocoa palm, “By the Indian Sea, on the isles of
balm,” of which Whittier so sweetly sings, the palm on the Meta
and its affluents, as well as on the lower Orinoco, is for the child of
the forest
“A gift divine,
Wherein all uses of man combine,—
House and raiment and food and wine.”
When contemplating the bountiful provisions of Nature
in favor of the inhabitants of the tropics, as evinced in various
species of food-producing palms, we are forcibly reminded of the
statement of Linnæus that the first home of our race was
somewhere in the tropics. “Man,” says this illustrious
botanist, “dwells naturally within the tropics, and lives on food
furnished by the palm tree; he exists in other parts of the world and
subsists on flesh and cereals.”2
The llanos in places are quite level, and intersected by numerous
caños and streams. Some of them are so large that they could
easily be converted into navigable canals for small craft. In other
places the plains are undulating and are ideal grazing lands during the
rainy season. There is always an abundance of water, even in the dryest
summer, and the numerous groves and clumps of trees suffice to furnish
shade at all times for the largest herds.
A Traveler’s Lodge in the
Llanos of Colombia.
We had not proceeded far when we met a large herd of cattle in care
of herdsmen quietly reposing beneath some umbrageous moriche palm or
singing some favorite Llanero [205]song. Contrary to what we
expected, the cattle were not so wild as those we had seen in Venezuela
and, although we passed within a few yards of them, they barely noticed
us. They were quite as tame as any one would find in the pasture lands
of an Illinois farm.
But what a fine breed of cattle they were and in what splendid
condition! They were as fat, sleek and large as any we had ever seen on
the plains of Texas or Nebraska, and would, I am sure, command as high
prices in the stockyards of Chicago.
We were deeply impressed with the future possibilities of the
Venezuelan grazing lands, but we are now convinced that even a greater
future awaits the llanos of Colombia when properly exploited. To extend
the Cucuta railway so as to place Casanare and Villavicencio in
connection with Lake Maracaibo would be a far less difficult and costly
undertaking than many other railroad enterprises in South America that
have been carried to a successful issue, and that, too, when the
traffic hoped for was far less than it would be in this instance. Such
an extension, which would not need to be more than two or three hundred
miles in length, would put the Colombian llanos in direct communication
with the chief ports of the United States and Europe. By using fast
steamers, freight could then be carried from the heart of the llanos to
Mobile or New York in a week. What an immense development of the cattle
industry this would at once effect is beyond calculation. It would be a
greater source of revenue to the Republic of Colombia than all its
mines combined.
At the first blush this project may appear Utopian to those who are
unfamiliar with the country or who have never given thought to the
feasibility of the enterprise. Colombia, to most people in the United
States, is little better known than the territory of the Congo. Even to
the Colombians themselves, the llanos—la parte oriental,
as they call it—is a terra incognita. Outside of the
Llaneros—cattle men—who have interests there, it is rarely
[206]visited by any one connected with the
administration of the government. To reach the llanos from
Bogotá means a long and tiresome journey across the eastern
Cordilleras, and few are willing to undertake such a trip out of
curiosity or for the purpose of informing themselves about the
resources of this distant and neglected part of their country.
And yet, far away as they may seem, the llanos are not half so
distant from the United States as England is, and, with the steamship
and railway facilities above indicated, they could be brought as near
to New York in time as is London at the present.
Probably a more economical way of reaching the llanos would be by
the Orinoco and the Meta. During the rainy season, as we have seen,
boats of light draft, but of considerable tonnage, can safely traverse
these rivers as far as Cabuyaro or Barrigón. A few hundred tons
of dynamite judiciously applied would effect a wonderful change for the
better in the beds of the two rivers named, and would render navigation
quite safe for the whole, or at least a greater part of the year.
When we note the magnitude of the beef trade between Australia and
the Argentine and the different ports of Europe, we are amazed to
observe that so little has been attempted towards developing a similar
but a more profitable trade with regions that are comparatively at our
doors. If these fertile and favored lands, instead of belonging to a
country long known, and looked at askance by capitalists and business
men, were a new discovery, there would be as great a rush towards them
on the part of colonists as there has frequently been to those Indian
lands that have, from time to time, been opened to white settlers in
Oklahoma and elsewhere in the West.
Now that our people are beginning to realize that the cattle in the
United States are not increasing in proportion to the demands of its
rapidly-growing population, they [207]may be induced to turn their
eyes towards the vast plains of our two sister republics of Colombia
and Venezuela, where there is, all the year round, abundant pasturage
of the richest kind for millions of cattle. There are vast fortunes
awaiting those who are willing to venture into these long-neglected
fields.
According to the reports of our Bureau of Animal Industry, the
United States has been for some years past suffering from fever ticks
and other plagues an annual loss of more than sixty million dollars.
This fact, coupled with the increasing demand for beef, renders it
imperative to seek for an adequate supply elsewhere. The cheapest and
best place in which to secure this extra supply is, me judice,
in the marvelous llanos so near our own country, which should, in the
manner indicated above, be brought much nearer than they are at
present.
I know that people will hesitate about investing in countries whose
governments are as unstable as those of the two nations mentioned, and
where foreign investors have found so little encouragement and
sympathy. There is, however, reason to believe that the age of
revolutions is coming to an end, and that it will, in the near future,
be succeeded by the reign of law. Peace congresses, arbitration
agreements, the spread of education, and the construction of railroads
have produced splendid results in other parts of the world, where
progress had long been unsatisfactory, and who will say that we may not
hope to see the same beneficent results realized in Venezuela and
Colombia? If all else fail, it is quite certain that our government
will know how to safeguard the rights of those of its citizens who may
have interests in these countries about whose validity there can be no
question. Now that all are so desirous of seeing improved commercial
relations established between the United States and the various
countries of Latin America, it would seem to be a matter of prime
importance not any longer to ignore the golden opportunities that in
the regions bordering the [208]Caribbean have so long eluded
American energy and enterprise.
It was about four o’clock in the afternoon when we arrived at
Barrancas. We found here a good-sized house with an open
shed—enramada—near by. This latter structure is used
as a shelter for farming implements, harness, saddles, etc., and as a
place where peons and herdsmen may swing their hammocks and sleep
during the night. The house, to our surprise, had a tile roof, the
first we had seen since leaving Ciudad Bolivar.
The proprietor of the hato, whose home and family were in
Bogotá, received us cordially and did everything in his power to
make us comfortable. He also gave us his own room, which had a board
floor, another novelty to us. We were soon provided with a frugal
repast, after which we were entertained by our host’s experiences
on the llanos. He was one of eighteen children of the same mother. He
and his eleven brothers own a number of ranches and have many thousand
cattle in different parts of the republic.
“During the last war,” he said, “the soldiers
appropriated a thousand of our steers.” “Did you put in a
claim to the government for damages?” I asked. “Yes,”
he replied, “but it did no good. I never got a centavo and
never expect to. If I had been a foreigner, especially if I had been an
American, I should have received compensation for my loss. The
government always pays foreign claims when just, but the citizens of
the country must be satisfied with promises. It always promises to
reimburse us for any losses sustained during revolutions but the fact
is that we never get anything more substantial than
promises.”
The labor problem was as serious with him as with a Kansas farmer
during harvest time. “Es muy dificil conseguir
brazos aquí,”—it is very difficult to secure
laborers here—he told me in a tone of sadness. “So many men
lost their lives during the last war, that the country is now suffering
for a lack of working men.” [209]
And yet, notwithstanding his losses and his troubles, our host was a
thoroughly loyal Colombian. He loved to talk about his country, its
marvelous resources, and the great future in store for it. He spent
most of the year in the capital, coming to Barrancas only for a few
weeks at a time, and that only when business demanded his personal
supervision.
I was curious to learn from him, a Llanero, and therefore an expert
horseman, the shortest possible time in which the trip could be made to
Bogotá from Barrigón. Some books I had read stated that
the distance from the head of navigation on the Meta—and we had
reached that point—to Bogotá was only twenty miles, while
certain Venezuelans I had met had assured me that the trip could be
made in two days. His answer was conclusive. “The shortest
possible time without a relay of horses,” he said, “is four
days. To attempt to cover the distance in less time would be fatal to
the horse. I never try to reach Bogotá from here in less than
four days, and even this means hard riding.”3
“But what brings you up the Orinoco and the Meta at this
season of the year,” he enquired. “You are certainly
[210]the first Americans to come here—rio
arriba—up the river. Others may have come to the llanos from
the capital, but, if they did, I am not aware of it. And why did you
select the rainy season for your journey? Why did you not wait until
summer, when it is dry, and when the roads are in better
condition?” We then explained to him that no boats ascended the
Meta during the summer season and that we were thus forced to come
during the winter. Strange as it may appear, this had never occurred to
him. And yet he was an intelligent man and well informed about his
country and presumably about the means of communication with the
countries adjacent.
The Colombian Llanero is a most interesting character. He is
absolutely unique among his countrymen. The only people with whom he
can be compared are the inhabitants of the Apure plains and the Gauchos
of the Argentine pampas. Like these he regards as “fortunate the
man who has received from heaven the means of safeguarding life and
property—a good horse and a good lance.”4 Having
these two essentials of defense and offense, he is happy and
independent.
This is readily understood from his manner of life, which is quite
akin to that of the Arabian nomad. The desert in which he lives and his
eternal struggle against a physical environment that is as savage as it
is grandiose; his occupation as a herdsman and his roving life in the
boundless plain, have given the Llanero a character that is as original
as it is interesting.
As a son of the desert, he is a lover of music and poetry, and will
spend an entire night or several consecutive nights dancing, playing
his rude guitar, scarcely larger than the hand that twangs it, or a
huge banjo, and singing verses either of his own composition, or those
of some other poet [211]of the plains. For strange as it may
appear, poets abound in the llanos as scarcely anywhere else. They may
be unable to read or write but they are nevertheless able to produce
songs—tonos or trovas llaneras—that
are frequently marked by rare beauty and depth of feeling. Considering
their limitations, their faculty for versification is often really
remarkable, and it is not unusual to find among them a singer that will
improvise with as much facility as an Italian improvisatore.
The Llaneros have a poetry of their own which they never abandon.
They compose what they sing and sing what they compose. And, although
they cannot as yet point to one of their poets who has had the
advantages of education and culture, they can, nevertheless, point with
pride to many of their number who have produced metrical compositions
of marked excellence and power of expression. The pity is that so far
we have no anthology of these poets of the plains. There is certainly a
rich field here for research awaiting some lover of the fresh and the
novel in literature and it is to be hoped that some one may soon
explore a domain that is so promising in results.
Their favorite compositions are ballads or rhymed romances, called
galerones, which are sung as recitatives. They closely resemble
the popular rhymed romances of Spain, and refer generally to deeds of
prowess performed by their own heroes in their constant struggles with
the wild and unsubdued nature in which their life is cast. In these
galerones valor and not love is the protagonist. Love, in the
metrical compositions of the plains, is always a secondary
character.
Two stanzas from a poem entitled En Los
Llanos—On the Plains—will exhibit the character of
these poems, and show, at the same time, that the Llanero has a keen
eye for the beautiful and sublime in nature and that his heart is open
to the sweetest sentiment and the deepest piety and reverence.
[212]
“Lejos, muy lejos del hogar querido
Paréceme que estoy en un desierto,”
“Far, far away from my hearth,” he
laments, “meseems I am in a desert.” And he gives his
reason.
“Cuando entre vivo rosicler la aurora
Muestra la fresca faz en el Oriente
En vano busco a mi gentil señora,
En vano á la hija que mi alma adora,
Para besarlas ambas en la frente.”5
For the Llanero a view of the beauty and grandeur of
his surroundings is a call to prayer, as is evinced by the following
lines:
“O que prodigios! que beldad! El hombre
Debil se siente y pobre en su presencia.
No hay nada aqui que el corazón no asombre,
En todo escrito está de Dios el nombre,
Todo pregona aquí su
Omnipotencia.”6
Before daylight next morning, the vaqueano knocked at
our door, announcing that it was time to rise, as we had another long
ride before us and must start early. Coffee was soon ready for us and
also a roast chicken. The latter, however, was prepared in such a way
that we did not relish it. Then it was, indeed, that we missed our
Indian cooks of the Meta. We asked for some milk for our coffee, but
although surrounded by large herds of cattle, there was not a drop of
milk in the house. When we expressed surprise at this, the cook
replied: “We never milk the cows here. We leave the milk for the
calves.”
I had often had a similar experience in the large ranches
[213]of the trans-Missouri region and was not,
therefore, specially surprised at the answer. However, a little
persuasion induced one of the peons to secure us a calabash of milk,
although his task was not an easy one. The cows, unaccustomed to being
milked, refuse to stand still, and in this instance, the peon had to
tie one of them to a tree. Even then, he was obliged to call in the aid
of an assistant before he could get the milk we craved.
On the cattle farms of Venezuela, where the cows are quite wild, it
is necessary to throw a noose around the horns of the animal to be
milked, and for one of the dairymen to hold it secure by a long pole,
while another does the milking in the usual way. Our peon, fortunately,
was not obliged to resort to such a drastic, time-consuming method.
Although it had rained heavily the greater part of the night, there
was no indication that the downpour would soon cease. On the contrary,
it looked as if it were to continue raining all day. Fortunately, we
were provided with good waterproof ponchos, and were prepared for any
aguacero—heavy shower—that Jupiter Pluvius might
choose to send from the heavy, lowering clouds that, pall-like,
overcast the sky.
Before we left Orocué, at the suggestion of the prefect of
the place, we had telegraphed to Villavicencio for a couple of
bayetones—a special kind of poncho—and these our
vaqueano had delivered to us at Barrigón.
To the inhabitants, especially the Indians of South America, and
more particularly those living in the Cordilleras, the poncho is what a
mantle was to an Irishman in the days of the poet Spenser. “When
it rayneth it is his pent howse; when it blowes it is his tent; when it
freezeth, it is his tabernacle. In sommer he can weare it loose, in
winter he can weare it close; at all times he can use it, never heavy,
never cumbersome.” In a word, this “weede is theyr howse,
theyr bedd, and theyr garment.”7 [214]
The poncho or bayeton,8 usually made of wool, in fully
six feet square with a hole in the centre to admit the head. Our
bayetones—called “nabby-tonys” by C.—were
really double ponchos, made by sewing together two blankets, one red,
the other blue. When the weather is damp and cloudy, the blue side is
exposed, whereas it is the red that is kept outside when the sun is
shining. The wearers of this useful garment have learned by experience
that these two colors are differently acted upon by heat and light and
they accordingly adjust it so as to secure the maximum of comfort. The
manta is a lighter covering made of white linen and is sometimes
highly embroidered. It is used when the sun’s rays are more
intense, because it reflects the solar rays better than the red woolen
garment. It is, however, rather an ornament than a necessity, and its
use is confined almost entirely to the better classes.
Provided with a poncho, a hammock and a many-pocketed
saddle—which are almost as indispensable as his horse—the
Llanero is always at home. The two former, he carries in a bundle
behind his saddle, where they are always ready for him at a
moment’s notice. In camping out he slings his hammock in any
convenient place, and, if it be in the open, the poncho is, by means of
a rope, held over it in such wise that he can defy the most violent
storm of the tropics, and sleep as soundly and be as well protected
from the rain as if he were under his own roof-tree.
Our trail was one of the numerous cattle paths that intersect the
llanos in every direction. The one we followed was a narrow ditch
filled with from one to two feet of water. Our vaqueano, who was in the
lead, trotted along as if we were following a dry path, and we had to
keep up with him or be lost. It was then that we realized the
impossibility of traveling over these extensive plains without a guide,
especially on a cloudy day during the rainy season. As well might one
try to cross the ocean without a compass as attempt to make one’s
way over the [215]llanos without a vaqueano. There was so many
caños—those natural channels, like deep ditches,
connecting streams and rivers—and morasses to cross that were
quite impassable except in certain places known only to the Llaneros,
who are thoroughly familiar with the country, that a stranger traveling
alone would soon find progress quite impeded.
To attempt to reach one’s destination by relying on the oral
directions of a Llanero would be quite hopeless. They would, probably,
be worded somewhat as follows:
“Continue your course over the savanna—arriba,
arriba—up, up, until you reach that bunch of cattle you see
yonder. You see them, don’t you?” queries the Llanero. They
are some cows and young bullocks, lost in the distance. Not having an
Indian’s keenness of vision you discern absolutely nothing, and
yet, unwilling to admit the fact, you declare that you distinguish them
perfectly. Your informant then vouchsafes further information which, if
you carefully heed and are able to follow, will without fail, conduct
you to your desired goal. “Then,” he continues, “go
to a clump of algarroba trees, but leave that aside and veer towards a
group of palms which you will see from there. When you reach the palm
group, coast along the foothills, across the Caño del Cayman,
for that is the name of the caño, until you come to the
Caño del Tigre. Next, you come to a copse of bamboos, and then
after that to the Caño de Chaparro Negro. Near it you will find
the Paso del Caño. Cross it and you will come to a
morichal at your left, but leave it behind, and continue a
little to the right for half an hour, and you will see the place you
are looking for.”
Years ago I had received similar directions from an old woman in the
mountains of Conamara, but there, all I had to do was to keep on the
road, and stop at the place I was seeking when I reached it. In the
llanos, where there are no roads, outside the hundreds of cattle paths
extending in every direction, it would be natural for the traveler,
[216]depending on directions like the above, promptly
to lose himself.
Fortunately, we had a good vaqueano, one who knew every cowpath and
caño and clump of trees between Barrigón and
Villavicencio, and we felt thoroughly at ease under his guidance. At
times, it is true, we found it somewhat difficult to keep up with him.
He seemed to have reserved the speediest animal for himself, or he knew
better how to keep up a sustained trot than we did. But, be that as it
may, we managed never to permit him to vanish from sight.
As we were riding over the plains we observed a large number of
vultures—Gallinazos—on a tree near our path. Hard by was
the carcass of an ox, that had just died, on which a single king
vulture—Sarcoramphus Papa—like the one we fancied
that preyed on the liver of Tityus—was making his morning repast.
The Gallinazos appear to stand in awe of the king vulture, and were
patiently waiting till he was satiated before making any attempt to
appease their own voracious appetites. The two species are never seen
to feed on the same carcass together. We saw several other such vulture
banquets on our way, but never did we see so many of these scavengers
congregated around the same carrion.
After six hours of hard riding, most of the time in a heavy rain, we
reached Los Pavitos. It consisted of a small bamboo hut and a number of
sheds. Here we dismounted for our midday meal, which consisted of a few
boiled eggs, and a cup of café à la
llanera—that is, coffee without milk or sweetening of any
kind—sin dulce—as the natives phrase it—and
some crackers that we had in an improvised haversack.
The family living in the hut consisted of three persons—man,
wife and their little daughter, a sweet child of about four years of
age. Both mother and child were neatly dressed, and had a genteel
appearance that was in marked contrast with their surroundings. The
child wore [217]a tidy pink dress, tastefully ornamented, and
seemed as if she had just come from the class-room of a convent school.
The family impressed us as having seen better days, and had evidently
not lived always so far away from their fellows.
Near the house stood a large calabash tree, bearing the largest
fruit of the kind we had yet observed. Some of the specimens of this
tree looked not unlike green pumpkins, and were fully from ten to
twelve inches in diameter. It is well named the crockery tree, because,
in the tropics, it supplies to a great extent the kitchen utensils
which are elsewhere made from clay.
Within a few steps of the tree mentioned was a broad, murmuring
stream—shaded on both sides by large, overhanging trees—of
pure crystal water. It was the first time in many weeks that we had
seen clear, flowing water, and then was brought home to us, as never
before, the truth of old Captain John Hawkins’ expressive words
that there is nothing “so toothsome as running water.”
While on the Orinoco and the Meta, we always had with us large
earthenware filters, for it was not safe to drink the muddy waters of
these rivers, often containing more or less decaying animal matter.
The last thing we did before leaving our launch was to fill our
canteen with filtered water. But more than a day had elapsed since
then, and our supply was exhausted. We accordingly proceeded to
replenish our canteen with water from the neighboring stream, but, as
soon as the lady of the house saw what we were about, she begged us to
permit her to render us this little service. “I know where the
water is best,” said she, and, taking the canteen, she waded out
almost to the middle of the stream and in a few moments returned with a
new supply of water fresh from the Andes.
As we prepared to leave, mother and child—the father was sick
abed with malaria—both expressed their regret that we could not
remain longer. “We feel greatly honored,” [218]the
good woman said, “by your visit, and, if you ever come this way
again, you must be sure to come to Los Pavitos. Dios
guarde á VV. y feliz viaje.” May God protect you and
may you have a happy journey.
Such were the parting words of this gentle soul in the wilderness,
words of tenderest charity and sweetest benediction. For hours
afterwards her touching accents seemed like music in our ears, and the
image of her lovely child, her darling niñita, nestling
by her side, with her little hands waving us a fond adieu, was before
our eyes long after we had left the llanos far behind us.
What was it in these gentle creatures, whom we saw for only a few
moments, that appealed to us so strongly? Was it that secret bond of
sympathy—highly intensified by circumstances and
environment—that makes all the world akin? Was it the same
sentiment that touched the artistic soul of Raphael, when, on passing
through an Italian village, he saw the mother and child whom he has
immortalized in his Madonna della Sedia. Or were we
just then in the mood that impelled Goethe to indite his soul-subduing
ballad Der Wanderer? Perhaps. Let the reader judge
from the following stanza:—
“Farewell!
O Nature, guide me on my way!
The wandering stranger guide,
“To a sheltering place,
From north winds safe!
“And when I come
Home to my cot
At evening,
Illumined by the setting sun,
Let me a woman see like this,
Her infant in her arms!”
After leaving Los Pavitos, we still had a three-hours
ride ahead of us before reaching Las Palmas, where we [219]purposed stopping for the night. Fortunately, it
had ceased raining and our trail was now in a much better condition
than it had been since leaving Barrancas.
It contributed much to our comfort, too, that we were able to
complete our day’s journey under sun-proof clouds. So far we had
not suffered the slightest inconvenience from the exaggerated heat of
the plains. Some of our Ciudad Bolivar friends had told us that the
heat of the llanos was so intense that it would be necessary, if we
would avoid sunstroke, to travel by night. As a matter of fact, the
temperature was never above 80° F. During the greater part of the
time it was several degrees below this figure. Besides, to attempt to
cross the llanos in the rainy season, during the pitch-dark nights that
usually prevail, would be like trying to find one’s way through a
Cimmerian bog. Not even the most experienced vaqueano would venture on
such a foolhardy journey.
We arrived at Las Palmas just as the rays of the setting sun were
beginning to throw a veil of crimson and purple over the distant
summits of the Cordilleras. Here we met with the same cordial reception
as elsewhere on the llanos. As, however, there was not room enough in
the small choza and enramada for our entire party, we had
recourse to our portable tent, which we always had with us for such
emergencies. When we enquired of our host what he could offer us for
comida, he sadly replied he had nothing but bananas, which were
at our disposition. There were no eggs or chickens, and, although there
were herds of cattle all around us, it was quite impossible to get a
draught of milk. The cows would not permit anyone to milk them.
We then remembered that we yet had in our haversack a small tin box,
still unopened, of sliced Chicago bacon. This, with some crackers, was
all that was left of the little store of provisions that we had brought
with us. It was not without grave misgivings that we proceeded to open
this remnant of our food-supply. We had, on several former occasions,
found that our canned goods were unfit [220]for use, and what if
the contents of this last box should be spoiled? It meant that we
should be reduced to extremely short rations until we should reach
Villavicencio, and there was no certainty when that would be. We had
still another montaña to pass, many rivers and
caños to cross, and, above all, the terrible Ocoa, which, on
account of the floods that had been overflowing its banks during the
past week, our vaqueano said, might delay us for several days.
But the good God, who takes care of the birds of the air and clothes
the lily of the field, had not forgotten us. We found the contents of
the box as fresh and wholesome as when first enclosed in the far-off
metropolis on Lake Michigan, and very pleasant was it, as the reader
can imagine, for us, who had so long fared on chicken, eggs and
bananas, to have a change in our aliment, in the form of sweet, nutty,
breakfast bacon and that, too, from the glorious land of the Stars and
Stripes.
Early the next morning we were again in the saddle. Before bidding
us adieu our kindly host expressed his regret that he was unable to
give us better entertainment. He wished us to understand that it was
through lack of means and not of good will. “Dispense la mala posada,” excuse our poor lodging house,
he said—and his wife and daughter, a fair young girl just
entering her teens, re-echoed his apologies and in accents that left no
doubt as to their sincerity.
During the latter part of the night at Las Palmas, there was a
genuine tropical aguacero—the heaviest downpour that we
had yet witnessed. When we started from there the next morning it was
still raining heavily, and with no indication that there was to be a
change until late in the day, if then. Now, more than ever, we
congratulated ourselves on having secured our bayetones just when they
were so much needed. They were all they had been represented to be and
more. Although we had already spent many hours in continuous rainfalls,
not a drop of moisture had yet reached our persons, and we had remained
as dry as [221]if we had traveled under a cloudless sky. The
raincoats we had brought with us, although guaranteed to be the best
waterproofs made, would never have served the purpose that our
bayetones answered so admirably.
A Shelter on the Banks of the
Ocoa.
Our Camp in the
Llanos.
After about an hour’s ride, we entered a montaña
similar to the one near Barrigón, but greater in extent. The mud
was not so deep, but there were more caños and streams to cross.
Some of them were quite deep, and in a few instances, the current was
so strong that our horses had difficulty in keeping themselves on their
feet. Several times we turned to our vaqueano to enquire if a
particularly large stream was the much-dreaded Ocoa. “No, Señores,” he always replied; “El Ocoa es más grande”—the Ocoa is
larger.
We noticed that he was quite pensive and apparently as much
preoccupied about the Ocoa as we were ourselves. He then informed us
that he had learned at Las Palmas that the Ocoa had been impassable for
several days past, and he feared we should be detained there for some
time. Just then we came to the largest and widest torrent that we had
yet met. We effected the passage of this with the greatest difficulty,
and not without considerable risk to both mount and rider. After we had
safely gotten across I turned again to our guide and said: “That
is surely the Ocoa, is it not?” “No,
Señor, el Ocoa es todavia más grande y más
bravo.” No, Sir, the Ocoa is still larger and more
turbulent.
Finally, after we had been about three hours in the montaña,
the rain continuing all the while without cessation; after we had
narrowly escaped being mired several times, or being carried away by
several of the impetuous water courses that obstructed our
path—there were by actual count more than thirty of them; after a
long struggle against the dread that was so greatly depressing our
vaqueano, and trying to take an optimistic view of our situation, we
had our attention directed to a loud roaring noise immediately in front
of us. We knew at once what that [222]meant, and did not need the
information then volunteered by our guide, “He
aquí el Ocoa, Señores.” That is the Ocoa,
Sir.
A few minutes more and we were on its banks. Swollen to an unusual
height by the recent heavy rainfalls in the Andes, it was now a raging,
roaring mountain torrent that had attained the magnitude of a
tumultuous river which swept everything before it. It must have been
such a torrent that the poet Schiller had before his mind’s eye
when he wrote The Diver, of which the following stanza is a
part:—
“And it seethes and roars, it welters and
boils,
As when water is showered upon fire;
And skyward the spray agonizingly toils
And flood over flood sweeps higher and higher,
Upheaving, downrolling, tumultuously,
As though the abyss would bring forth a young
sea.”
C., who had never witnessed in Trinidad such
exhibitions of storm and flood, was in despair. Our peons, finding
their worst forebodings an actuality, were distressed and disconsolate.
If they could but reach the other side of the river, they would be
almost in sight of their homes from which they had been absent for more
than a week.
“How long shall we be obliged to wait before we can
cross?” someone timorously inquired. “If it does not rain
any more,” the reply came, “we may get over to-morrow
evening. If there is another aguacero in the mountains, Dios
sabe,”—God knows—“how long we may be
detained here.” Just then, one of the peons who claimed superior
knowledge about the behavior of such rios bravos as the one
before us, gave it as his candid opinion, that, even if there were no
further rain, it would be quite impossible to effect a passage inside
of three days.
To one unfamiliar with the suddenness with which mountain streams
become raging torrents,9 and the quickness [223]with
which they subside, these declarations of opinion were depressing
enough. I had, however, spent many years among the Rocky and Sierra
Madre mountains, and had often had occasion to study the modus
operandi of the cloud-bursts that are there of so frequent
occurrence. Besides this, while our peons were disputing among
themselves as to what was best to be done in our embarrassing
situation, I had been carefully observing the height of the water line
and found, to my great delight, that it was gradually becoming lower.
After making a few measurements, I found that, if there were no further
rainfall, we should be able to cross to the other side before
sundown.
As it was now long past noon, and we had had nothing to eat since
early morning, it was suggested that we take a little luncheon, while
waiting for the river to become fordable. Suiting the action to the
word, a fire was started, our kit of kitchen utensils was drawn from
its sack, and in a short time we had a large cup of fragrant, black
coffee, and the remnant of our breakfast bacon fried in a manner to do
credit to a New York chef. We still had a few soda crackers, and
these, together with the coffee and bacon, furnished us with a repast
that left nothing to be desired.
Having no doubt about our ability to reach Villavicencio before
nightfall, we gave all the remaining eatables to our vaqueano and
peons. They thankfully partook of the coffee and crackers, but a mere
taste of the bacon quite satisfied them. They had evidently never eaten
any before and, far from relishing it, found it positively distasteful.
They had yet to acquire a taste for bacon as others acquire a taste for
snails and frogs’ legs. They still had with them a few
platanos—their staff of life—which they roasted, and with
these and the crackers and coffee we gave them they fared even better
than usual.
After luncheon was finished, it was found that the river had fallen
enough to justify an attempt to cross it. Great caution, however, was
necessary to prevent any possible mishap. First, the largest and
strongest mule in the drove [224]was relieved of his burden and
forced to cross the river alone. He examined it very suspiciously and
at first hesitated about entering the water. But he was so belabored
with sticks and clubs that the poor beast had no alternative. After he
had started towards the other side the peons all kept up such an
unearthly yell that he was afraid to venture back. After a terrific
struggle he succeeded in reaching the opposite bank.
The current was evidently still too strong to warrant another
experiment of this kind. So we waited about a half an hour, when a
second mule—a smaller one—was driven into the water. He had
barely reached the middle of the river when he was lifted off his feet,
and carried some distance down stream. It looked, for a few moments, as
if he was going to be lost, but, by vigorous exertion, he got on his
feet again, and stood in mid-river breasting the full force of the
current and looking piteously towards his masters for assistance. But
they merely jeered at him vociferously and asked him if he wished to
return to Barrigón.
Seeing no help forthcoming, the terrified brute made a supreme
effort and succeeded in getting back to the bank from which he had
started. There he stood for a while panting heavily, after the
strenuous efforts he had made, but all the while looking wistfully at
his companion on the opposite bank of the Ocoa. After he was somewhat
rested, and before any one realized what he was about to do, the mule
was again in the water, making, of his own accord, a second attempt to
reach the other side of the river, where his companion was awaiting
him. After battling with the current for some minutes, he was
successful in his venture, for which he received the unstinted applause
of his masters. No sooner had he emerged from the water than he gave a
long, loud bray of victory which awoke the echoes in the woods for
miles around. The whole performance was so comical that it provoked
roars of laughter from our entire party. As an illustration of
mule-headedness in a good [225]cause, in face of apparently
insuperable difficulties, it was superb.
Having proved the fordableness of the river by mules, the peons
determined to match their own strength against the still-impetuous
current. Accordingly, one of their number, a giant in strength, taking
the end of a hundred-foot lariat between his teeth, carefully entered
the water, and, after successfully buffeting the angry billows, landed
on the opposite bank, whence the two mules had watched his struggles
with apparent interest and sympathy.
Now that the lariat was firmly stretched between the two banks, and
that the river was still falling, it was a matter of only a short time
to transfer the remaining mules and the baggage to the other side.
The jurungos10—a Llanero epithet for
strangers—were the last to cross. Elevating our feet as much as
possible, to avoid getting wet, we were soon in mid-stream. The motion
of the water in one direction while our horses were struggling in the
other, had a tendency to induce vertigo, but as we had to be on the
alert every instant, in order to preclude all danger of miscarriage, we
soon found ourselves happily landed, with the dread Ocoa at last in our
rear.
It was now only a short ride to Villavicencio, over comparatively
dry and slightly rising ground. Ere the sun had dropped behind the
Andes we had alighted before our lodging house near the plaza on the
main street of the town. Our host, who was awaiting us at the door,
gave us a most cordial greeting, but seemed to be much surprised and
embarrassed. He then explained that he had misunderstood the telegram
that he had received from [226]Orocué announcing our
arrival and requesting him to have
piezas—rooms—reserved for us. “I inferred from
the telegram,” he said, “that you were Colombians and
never, for an instant, dreamed that I should have the honor of
entertaining foreigners. Had I known whom I was to have as my guests, I
should have made more elaborate preparations for your reception. As it
is, I can offer you only an unfurnished room. It is the best I have,
and I trust you will excuse my not making better provisions for your
comfort during your sojourn in our midst. We have no hotels here, and
our people, when traveling, are accustomed to lodge with their friends,
or take an apartment like the one reserved for you.”
The good man’s explanation was quite unnecessary, as we were
more than satisfied with our room. It was large and airy, and, although
devoid of furniture of every kind, it had a clean board floor, and that
was a great deal for travelers, who, like ourselves, had been roughing
it on the Meta and the llanos.
He was much relieved when he saw how easy it was to satisfy his
guests, and without more ado, he proceeded to order dinner for us
without delay. While dinner was preparing we had our dufflebags brought
into our apartment, and, in a very short time, our camp chairs were
unfolded and our cots and bedding arranged for the night. A table was
next brought in from an adjoining house, and soon a young Indian maid
arrived to make the necessary preparations for our evening repast. Our
meals, it had been arranged, were to be served from a restaurant a few
doors away. The señora in charge, and her daughter, who belonged
to an old Colombian family, now in reduced circumstances, left nothing
undone to insure the most satisfactory service possible.
A bountiful dinner, such as we had not had since leaving
Orocué, was soon on the table. There were meats, vegetables and
various kinds of fruits and, what we found specially agreeable, good
wheaten bread. Besides all these [227]viands, there was an
additional and unexpected luxury in the form of a quart bottle of
generous old Bordeaux. It goes without saying that we showed due
appreciation of the señora’s culinary skill. Never did the
dishes of a Parisian restaurateur seem more inviting. Now came to us
with special force the old saying that “appetite is the best
sauce,” and that for travelers like ourselves, “Il vaut mieux découvrir un nouveau plat qu’
un nouveau planète,” it is better to discover a new
dish than a new planet.
As we had resolved to remain a few days in Villavicencio before
essaying the trip across the Cordilleras, we felt a sense of relief, by
anticipation, in the thought that we should not, before daybreak the
following morning, be obliged to hearken, as hitherto, to the usual
announcement of our vaqueano, “Vamonos,
Señores—Gentlemen, it is time to start.”
As we were both quite fatigued, we did not delay long in seeking
repose on our ever-restful cots. And it was but a very short time
before at least one of the travelers was in the land of dreams. And one
of the visions that appeared to him was that of a little child in a
pink frock, standing beside her mother under a totuma tree, near a
crystal stream in the llanos, waving her tiny hand and lisping a sweet
Adiosito to two strangers from beyond the sea, whose
course was towards the western sky, where the giant Andes stood to
salute the approaching lord of day. [228]
1 Op.
cit., p. 4. ↑
2
“Homo habitat inter tropicos, vescitur palmis, lotophagus;
hospitatur extra tropicos sub novercante Cerere
carnivorus.”—Systema Naturæ, Vol. I, p.
24.
Besides the fruit-yielding palms there are others,
like the palmetto or cabbage Palm, that also afford nutritious food.
“The head of the Palmito tree,” says Hakluyt, “is
very good meate, either raw or sodden; it yeeldeth a head which
waigheth about twenty pound, and is far better than any
cabbage.”—Early Voyages, Vol. V, p. 557. Schomburgk
informs us that during his exploration of Guiana it was for weeks his
chief sustenance. ↑
3 It is
surprising what erroneous notions have been and are still entertained
regarding the distance of Bogotá from the head of navigation on
the eastern side of the Andes. Many recent writers place the distance
at twenty miles. Michelena y Rojas, in his Exploración Oficial, p. 293, makes it but four leagues.
Schomburgk, in an article in the Journal of the Geographical
Society, Vol. X, p. 278, assures us that by way of the Meta there
is uninterrupted navigation to within eight miles of Sante Fe de
Bogotá! The fact is that the nearest point to Bogotá to
which vessels of even light draught may ascend by the Meta is
Barrigón, more than one hundred and fifty miles from
Colombia’s capital. Small flat boats and canoes may, through some
of the affluents of the Meta, approach considerably nearer. During the
rainy season they may even reach the foothills of the Andes at the base
of which Villavicencio stands. But from here, the nearest point to the
capital which even the smallest craft can reach to Bogotá, the
distance is still ninety-three miles at the lowest estimate. To
navigate the Rio Negro, as Rojas and others imagine can be done, from
the llanos to Caquesa—thirty-seven hundred feet higher than the
plains—would be no more possible than it would be to row or sail
up an Alpine torrent. From Caquesa to Bogotá is not four
leagues, as Michelena estimates, but full twenty-five
miles. ↑
4
“Dichoso aquel que alcanza
Como rico don del Cielo,
Para defender su suelo
Buen caballo y buena lanza.”
 ↑
5
“When roseate Aurora shows her fresh face in the East, in vain I
seek my gentle spouse, in vain I look for the daughter my soul adores,
to imprint a kiss on their brows.” ↑
6
“O what prodigies! What beauty! Man feels weak and poor in their
presence. There is nothing here that does not amaze the heart. In
everything is inscribed the name of God. Everything proclaims His
omnipotence.” ↑
7 A
View of the Present State of Ireland. ↑
8 Also
called cobija and ruana. ↑
9 The
Chagres river, it is said, occasionally rises twenty-five feet in a few
hours. ↑
10 The
term Jurungo has much the same signification among the Llaneros
as has “tenderfoot” in Australia and the western part of
the United States. Guate, another word of similar import,
frequently heard in the Llanos, is employed to designate a
Serrano—a highlander or mountaineer—while jurungo
refers more specifically to a stranger from Europe or the United
States. Like the word tenderfoot, these two epithets are used in a
certain depreciative sense. ↑
“To sit on rocks, to muse o’er flood and
fall,
To slowly trace the forest’s shady scene,
Where things that own not man’s dominion
dwell,
And mortal feet hath ne’er, or rarely been;
To climb the trackless mountain all unseen.
“This is not solitude; ‘tis but to hold
Converse with Nature’s charms, and see her stores
unrolled.”
—Byron.
Villavicencio, the capital of the National Territory
of the Meta, is situated at the very foot of the Andes, and is an
attractive town of about three thousand inhabitants, many of whom are
Indians. Its altitude above sea level, according to our barometer, is
slightly less than fifteen hundred feet. It is a little more than
ninety-three miles from Bogotá and has an average annual
temperature of 83° F. During our sojourn in the place the
thermometer never rose above 76° F. in the shade, and it was
occasionally several degrees below this point. And, although little
more than seventy-five miles north of the equator, it was so cool at
night that we always used our blankets.
A handsome church is located on one side of the spacious green
plaza. Not far distant is a well-conducted convent school in charge of
nuns recently expatriated from France, in consequence of the laws
enacted against religious orders. The people are never tired sounding
the praises of these good sisters and telling the visitor of the
wonders [229]they have accomplished in behalf of their
children. Here, as elsewhere, “The stone which the builders
rejected; the same shall become the head of the corner.”
Villavicencio, like Cabuyaro, and other places in the llanos, is
eagerly looking forward to the day when it shall be connected by rail
with the national capital and the Meta. For nearly a century and a half
a commercial route connecting Bogotá with the Meta and the
Orinoco has been talked of but nothing has been done to make it a
reality.
In 1783 the archbishop of Sante Fe, Monsignor Cabellero y Gongora,
then viceroy of New Granada, caused a map to be made of the course of
the Meta and the Orinoco to the Atlantic, with a view of developing
commerce by that route, but the all-powerful opposition of Santa Marta
and Cartagena nullified his efforts. Several times since that date the
project has been resumed but each time it had to be abandoned in favor
of the Magdalena, owing to the pressure brought to bear on the
government by the merchants of Cartagena and Santa Marta. There is no
doubt that the route via the Meta and the Orinoco would, in some
respects, possess many advantages over that of the Magdalena, aside
from developing much country now practically neglected.
Unlike Venezuela, Colombia favors free navigation of her rivers by
all nations, and would welcome foreign craft on the Meta as she does on
the Magdalena. Venezuela, however, favors monopolies, and, claiming
absolute control of the Orinoco, has closed the Meta and the other
affluents of the Orinoco to all steamers except those belonging to the
one company which has a monopoly of the trade of the Orinoco and all
its tributaries. How detrimental such a monopoly is, not only to
Colombia but to Venezuela as well, can be seen at a glance. Some of the
greatest resources of both countries are left undeveloped and progress
in any direction is quite impossible.
This matter was taken up at the International Congress of Mexico in
1901, in connection with a plan to render navigation possible through
the interior of the continent [230]of South America from the
Orinoco to the River Plate, but so far nothing has been
accomplished.
The greater part of the eastern portion of Colombia is still
isolated from the rest of the world, and will remain so until Venezuela
shall recognize the fatuity of its short-sighted policy, or until the
great commercial nations shall demand that the navigation of the
Orinoco and its tributaries, like that of the Amazon and its affluents,
be free to all vessels, no matter under what flag they may sail. And as
soon as commerce shall awaken to the fact that an immense field of
untold riches is closed to her activities in the forests and plains of
the Orinoco basin—and that must be ere long—a demand will
be made not only in the interests of South America but also in that of
the entire civilized world.
As an illustration of how Colombia has been made to suffer by the
arbitrary policy of Venezuela regarding waterways, of which both the
sister republics should be beneficiaries, a single instance will
suffice.
Shortly before our arrival in Villavicencio, a company was formed to
supply electricity to the city. As there are no roads between
Bogotá and Villavicencio, which would permit the transportation
of the necessary machinery, the only way available for the introduction
of such heavy freight was by the Orinoco and the Meta. It was
accordingly planned to have the dynamos and other requisites brought by
this route, but, when all was ready for shipment, the projectors of the
enterprise learned that the Venezuelan government—that is,
President Castro—would refuse to grant the necessary permission
for the transportation of the merchandise in question. The idea, then,
of lighting the city by electricity had to be abandoned, and the
capital of the Meta territory is, as a consequence, forced to remain
content with tallow candles and kerosene lamps.
The people of Villavicencio, as elsewhere in Colombia, we found to
be extremely courteous and hospitable. They were eager to hear about
America, and in turn were quite [231]willing to afford all
possible information about their own country, and especially about the
llanos and Llaneros. We soon became acquainted with all the leading
officials and business men, and recall with pleasure the many delicate
attentions they showed us while in their midst. We were invited to
visit their country estates and to examine some new
industries—yet in their infancy—which gave promise of a
bright future.
One of these was the rubber industry. Not content with the trees
that grow spontaneously in the forests in this part of the country, a
certain general—one of many we met here—conceived the idea
of cultivating the rubber tree and had, accordingly, during the
preceding year, set out no fewer than a half million small trees, and
had it in purpose to plant many times this number in the near future.
He said all that he had already planted were doing well, and he had no
doubt about the success of the enterprise. He was most sanguine about
the future of eastern Colombia, and expressed it as his belief that in
a few years Colombia would be as favorably known for her rubber as she
is now for her cacao, coffee and tobacco.
There is no reason why the scientific cultivation of the rubber tree
should not be attended with as good results in Colombia as have so
signalized its culture in Ceylon and the Malay Peninsula. In view of
the destructive system of treating the rubber trees in Brazil and other
parts of South America in collecting the latex, and the increasing
demand for rubber in our various rapidly expanding industries, it would
seem that the rubber plantations, like the one above mentioned, are
sure to yield their owners a handsome profit.
Nothing better illustrates what may be expected in this direction
than the experiment made a few decades ago in India with the cinchona
tree. Previously to the introduction of this tree into India, where
there are now many extensive plantations under cultivation, the sole
source of supply of Peruvian bark was from the tropical slopes of
[232]the Andes. Now, in consequence of the vigorous
competition with India, the cinchona industry in the Andean regions is
only a fraction of what it formerly was, and, unless something can be
done to arrest its rapid decline, it will soon have lost its importance
as an article of export from the Cordilleras.
We spent three days in Villavicencio and enjoyed every hour of the
stay among its kindly people. We had thus an opportunity of securing
much needed repose, and of preparing ourselves for our arduous trip
across the cloud-reaching Andes. We might have continued, without
interruption, our journey from the plains to Bogotá, but it
would have been highly imprudent to make the attempt. A sudden change
from the lowlands to Andean heights, and from the heat of the llanos to
the frigid blasts of the paramos, is something of which the native has
an instinctive dread. He accordingly makes his journey by slow stages,
so as to become acclimated on the way. In driving cattle from the
llanos to Bogotá several weeks are deemed necessary, as
otherwise many of them would expire on the road. They appear to be much
more affected than man by rapid changes of altitude and
temperature.
We had been warned time and again by well-meaning persons about the
risk we incurred by so soon attempting to cross the Cordilleras, after
spending so much time in the lowlands of the Orinoco and the Meta.
“You should,” we were told, “spend several weeks on
the road, stopping a few days at each posada on the way. Only in this
wise can you become acclimated, and render your system proof against
the certain dangers of violent changes of temperature and altitude. As
you approach the summit of the Andes you will see the sides of the
trail strewn with the bleached bones of cattle and horses that have
succumbed to the cold and the rare atmosphere of this elevated region.
More than this, you will see hundreds of crosses by the wayside marking
the spots where over-venturesome travelers were
emparamados—frozen—by the arctic cold of the
[233]paramos, and where they found their last resting
place. And so strong is the wind on the cumbre—the
summit—of the mountain range that people are sometimes blown into
the yawning chasm that adjoins the dreadful pass.”
To confirm their statements they reminded us of the fearful losses
in men and animals sustained by Bolivar when he led his army from the
plains of Varinas to the lofty plateau of Cundinamarca; how hundreds of
men and horses perished from the intense cold on the elevated pass
through which they vainly tried to force their way, and how the entire
army was exposed to extermination by the combined action of arctic cold
and hurricane blasts.
We made no reply to these well-meant warnings, but we could not help
recalling similar words of caution before we started on our journey up
the Orinoco and the Meta. Then the dangers to be apprehended were from
the climate—from intense heat and a pestiferous atmosphere; from
wild animals and wilder men. Now it was danger of an opposite
kind—danger from cold, of being frozen, or of contracting
pneumonia, which in those great altitudes is certain death.
Aside from a few uncomfortable nights—which, with a little
care, might have been obviated—caused by the active
zancudo and the coloradito—we had escaped all the
predicted dangers of the lowlands, and we now felt reasonably sure that
we should be equally fortunate in eluding those that were said to await
us in the regions of everlasting snow. We were better equipped for
making the trip than the poor, ill-clad natives from the llanos, and we
could regulate our vesture to suit the temperature. Snow and frost had
then no terrors for us, and as we had been accustomed to sudden changes
of altitude, without experiencing any evil effects, we felt we had
nothing whatever to apprehend.
On the third morning after our arrival in Villavicencio we were
ready to start for Bogotá, and expected to make the journey of
ninety-three miles in three days. We had [234]secured mules that
were used to mountain travel. Those that we had in crossing the llanos
would never have answered our purpose. Our vaqueano and peons were
serranos—mountaineers—thoroughly familiar
with the route we were to take. They all seemed to be good, reliable
young men, and we felt that the last stage of our journey, before
reaching Bogotá, would be quite as enjoyable as any that we had
already completed.
After many cordial expressions of good wishes on the part of the
crowd assembled to witness our departure, and repeated exclamations on
all sides of “Felíz viaje!”—a
happy journey—and “Dios les guarde á
VV!”—God protect you—we said our last adios to
all and turned toward the Andes. “Vamos con
Dios,” ejaculated our vaqueano. “Y con la
Virgen,” was the response of the peons and the
bystanders.
From the moment we left the door of our temporary lodging, our road
was up grade. As we passed along the street that terminates at the foot
of the mountain, it seemed that all the women and children of the place
were at the doors to get a last view of the
jurungos—foreigners—whose arrival from the eastern
sea by the great river had been commented on as a more than ordinary
event.
As soon as we had passed the last house of the city, there was a
sudden marked increase in the grade of our trail, and we then felt, for
the first time, that we were in sober earnest beginning the actual
ascent of the Andes. In two hours we had reached Buena Vista, a lovely
spot, eleven hundred and forty feet above Villavicencio.
We had frequently been told in Orocué and elsewhere that we
should have a beautiful view of the llanos from Buena Vista, and that
we would do well to tarry there for a while to enjoy the panorama that
would be visible from this elevated spur of the mountain.
When a South American—especially one familiar with the
mountains—speaks in terms of praise of any particular bit of
scenery, one may be sure that he does not exaggerate. [235]He
is so accustomed to splendid exhibitions of tropical beauty and
mountain grandeur that he passes unnoticed what we of the North should
describe as superb, magnificent, glorious. Such scenes are to him as
common as the gorgeousness of the setting sun and the sublimity of the
starlit heavens are to us and fail to move him for the same reason that
the splendors of sun and sky rarely affect us as they would if but
occasionally visible. They are everyday objects and the pleasure they
should afford palls accordingly.
We were not disappointed in our anticipations regarding the view
from Buena Vista. On the contrary, it far exceeded anything we had
imagined. The sky, with the exception of a few fleecy clouds flitting
athwart it, was clear and the sun was almost in the zenith. Far below
us, and extending away—north, east, south—towards the dim
and distant horizon, were the llanos, every feature of which was
brought out in bright relief by the brilliant noonday sun.
In the foreground was the montaña through which we had passed
just before reaching Villavicencio. Farther afield was a limitless sea
of verdure, interspersed with groups of trees, which offered their
grateful shade to the countless herds that reposed beneath their
wide-spreading branches. In every direction the green savannas were
intersected by caños and rivers which looked like streams of
molten silver. It was, indeed, a panorama of surpassing beauty and
loveliness—of its kind unique in the wide world. It was the
boundless plain in eternal converse with the heavens above. It was the
abode of liberty, and the trysting-place of life—life palpitating
in the sunshine and beneath the emerald borders of the sliver-like
water courses that were all hastening with their tribute from the Andes
to the Meta, which, far off in the southeast, seemed like a line of
union between earth and sky.
We have nothing in our country that can bear comparison with the
matchless picture seen from Buena Vista. [236]The view of the delta
of the Nile—just before harvest time, with its numberless canals
and water courses—from the summit of Cheops, contains some of the
elements of soft tropical beauty so conspicuous in the Buena Vista
landscape; but it lacks the variety, the sweep, the coloring, the
harmonious effects of light and shade, the immensity, and above all the
wondrous setting afforded the latter prospect by the Titanic
Cordilleras.
But the measureless expanse of grassy plain that lies before us is
but an insignificant fraction of the llanos. They extend from the
southern slopes of the Coast Range of Venezuela to the base of the
Parime uplands and the Rio Guaviare; from the Andes to the delta of the
Orinoco. They are thus almost conterminous with the Orinoco basin.
They, indeed, constitute one of the three immense districts into which
the whole of South America is divided. The other two are the Selvas of
Brazil and the Pampas of Argentina, separated from each other and from
the llanos of the north, by low transverse ridges running east and west
from the Atlantic to the Cordilleras.
To geologists these vast lowlands have a special interest, as they
were at one time the bed of an inland sea more extensive far than the
present Mediterranean. Even now, during the rainy season, certain parts
of this immense expanse are covered by fresh water lakes thousands of
square miles in extent. A subsidence of a few hundred feet would again
bring the whole of this illimitable territory down below sea level and
cause again the formation of the great tropical sea that existed in
prehistoric times.
To the student of history a special interest attaches to the llanos
of western Venezuela and eastern Colombia. It was across these plains
and swamps, under the most trying difficulties, that Bolivar led his
half-clad, half-famished army, during his memorable march across the
Cordilleras, before achieving the independence of New Granada in the
famous battle of Boyacá.
But great as was the feat accomplished by Bolivar in [237]traversing the llanos, great as were the
difficulties he had to contend with, they pale into insignificance when
compared with the hardships and achievements of the early descubridores—explorers—of these then unknown
wilds. Bolivar and his men traveled through a country that had been
long settled, and were among friends and compatriots. The early
explorers and conquistadores were, on the contrary, in an unknown land,
among murderous, relentless savages armed with poisoned arrows. They
were in a region where it was often impossible to procure food, and
where several times starvation was imminent. For months at a time they
wandered through dark, tangled forests, cutting a road as they went,
lured on by the hope of fame and fortune. Then they had to feel their
way through deep and treacherous morasses, in which they had to
confront even greater dangers than in the obscure woodlands. But
notwithstanding dangers and difficulties of every kind, they kept
moving forward through woods and swamps, across rivers and mountains,
ever in pursuit of gold and precious stones, and of the fabulous riches
of the Meta and the treasure city of Manoa.
Among these famous descubridores was the German,
George Hohermuth, whom the Spaniards called Jorge de Spira. Starting
from Coró, on the Caribbean, with three hundred and sixty-one
men and eighty horses, he directed his course southwards, where, he was
assured, were inexhaustible treasures of every kind. Crossing the
llanos of Venezuela and New Granada, he must have passed near the
present site of Buena Vista.
During our journey we certainly crossed his line of march, which in
this latitude was probably near the base of the Cordilleras. Spurred on
by an ever-receding ignis fatuus, he continued his march until
he reached the Japura, an affluent of the Amazon, and but a short
distance from the equator. During this frightful journey he crossed the
Arauca, the Apure, the Meta, the Guaviare and other broad and deep
rivers. Of the countless difficulties he encountered [238]in
his long and painful march, no one who is unfamiliar with the character
of forest and plain in the tropics, particularly during the rainy
season, can have the faintest conception. They far transcend anything
experienced by Stanley, or Mungo Park, or any other African explorer.
After more than three years of unheard-of sufferings, he finally
returned to Coró with but a small fraction of the brave men that
had originally formed part of his expedition.
Hohermuth was followed by Philip von Hutten, in 1541, on a similar
expedition, who traveled over almost the same ground as his
predecessor. He, too, must have passed near where Buena Vista now
stands. His undertaking was quite as fruitless as that of Hohermuth and
his losses were greater. He spent more than four years in the llanos
and Cordilleras and, before he could return to his starting point, he
died at the hands of an assassin.
More remarkable still, in some respects, was the expedition of
Nicholas Federmann, who, like Hohermuth and Von Hutten, was in the
service of the Welsers, concessionaires of a large German colony near
Lake Maracaibo. Crossing the llanos, and the numerous rivers that flow
through them, he eventually found himself on the banks of the Meta.
Thence he proceeded west and crossed the Cordilleras, not, however,
without numerous victims—both men and horses—from the
intense cold on the mountain summits. He finally reached the fertile
plain of Bogotá, where occurred that famous and unexpected
meeting of Belalcazar, who had come with another expedition from Quito,
and Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada who, a short time previously, had
arrived with a third expedition from Santa Marta.
It would be interesting to know what was Federmann’s itinerary
after leaving the banks of the Meta, and the exact spot where he
crossed the Cordilleras. This we can only conjecture, as there is no
record of it, but we loved to think, while crossing the Andes on our
way to Bogotá, that we were still following the conquistadores,
and that ours was [239]the same route that had been taken by
Federmann and his brave men more than three and a half centuries
before.1
After leaving Buena Vista, we were exposed to a heavy tropical
downpour that lasted the greater part of the day. Fortunately the rain
did not affect us in the slightest. Our bayetones and waterproof boots
kept us perfectly dry and, as the rain was not chilly, we rather
enjoyed the experience.
Our path during the greater part of the day lay through forests and
along rivers and over mountain torrents. At times it was high up on the
mountain side, thousands of feet above the water courses surging and
foaming at its base. Again it was along the edge of a dizzy precipice,
where a single false step of our mule would have meant instant death to
its rider.
What gave us grave concern at first was the fact that our mules
always persisted in keeping on the side of the track next to the
ravine, no matter how deep or threatening it might be. We tried, until
we were exhausted, to keep them on the opposite side of the trail, but
it was useless. They seemed bent on courting danger, and on seeing how
near [240]they could keep to the verge of the chasm
without plunging into its abysmal depths.
Unfortunately for our peace of mind, we did not then know the Andean
mule as well as we do now. Had we understood him as well at the
beginning of our journey as we did at the end, we should have given him
a free rein, and thereby spared ourselves many nerve-racking moments
and many futile efforts to correct his persistent aberrations. Why a
mule prefers to walk on the brink of a precipice, whenever it has an
opportunity of doing so, rather than keep to what we humans should
consider the safer side of the path, is a mystery I do not profess to
fathom. I simply state the fact. I leave its explanation to experts in
mule psychology.
The country through which we passed was fairly well populated, and
we were never long out of sight of a habitation of some kind. Sometimes
the dwellings were of stone, but more frequently they were of bamboo
daubed with clay and thatched with palm leaf. The people, usually
Indians or half-breeds, were in humble circumstances but we never saw
any evidences of actual want or suffering. “Nunca se
muere de hambre aqui”—No one ever dies of hunger
here—an Indian woman once informed us, when we made inquiry about
the subject. If one should happen to have nothing to eat, his friends
and neighbors supply him with food. They are ever willing to assist one
another, and we were often surprised to see how ready they were to
share their limited store with others, whether in want or not.
Stopping for Luncheon in the
Lower Cordilleras.
A more friendly people we never met than the good people who dwell
on the eastern slopes of the Colombian Cordilleras. They always have a
kindly greeting for every one they meet. No one, not even the youngest
child, will pass you on the road without a cordial “Buenos dias,” “Buenas
tardes,” or “Buenas
noches”—Good day, Good evening, or Good night—as
the case may be. These cheering salutations, that were always
forthcoming, whether we [241]met one or a score, young or old,
made us forget that we were in a foreign land, far from home and
friends, and quite reconciled us to any little discomforts we might
experience along our steep and rugged path. Here among these simple,
unspoiled people the brotherhood of man is not an empty rhetorical
phrase, or a vain poetical figment, but a living, every-day
reality.
How often during our journeyings in the savannas and highlands of
Colombia did we not recall the beautiful couplet of Castellanos
regarding the primitive inhabitants of New Granada!—
“Gente llana, fiel, modesta, clara,
Leal, humilde, sana y obediente.”2
They are the same to-day, especially when removed from
the baleful influence of those who, instead of aiding them, would drag
them down to the lowest depths of degradation and servitude.
But obliging and honest as we always found these people to be, they,
nevertheless, invariably failed us in one particular. We could never,
except occasionally by accident, get from them a correct or
satisfactory answer about the distance from one place to another.
Never shall we forget our experience during our first day’s
journey in the Cordilleras. Our objective point was San Miguel, where
we were told we should find a good lodging house—one of the best
on the road, we were assured—and, as the distance was great, it
was necessary to make extra good time in order to arrive there before
nightfall. The heavy, long-continued rains had made our trail extremely
[242]heavy, and in places almost impassable. The
hours passed and we found ourselves advancing much more slowly than was
desirable. The lowering clouds were massing on the mountain slopes, and
the rain began to fall in torrents. It then began to dawn upon us that
we might not be able to reach our destination in the limited time yet
remaining of the fast-departing day.
Further progress along our dangerous path in the impenetrable gloom,
that would immediately follow sunset, we knew to be impossible. We knew
or thought we knew, about how far we were still from San Miguel, but we
wished to be certain about the distance.
It was now about four o’clock in the afternoon, and it was
imperative for us to reach our posada by six o’clock, if we were
to arrive there at all that day. We accordingly inquired of one of the
many peons we met, who were returning to their homes from their
day’s labor in the fields, how far it was to San Miguel.
“Tres leguas, Señores”—three
leagues, Sirs—was the answer to our question.
This was disheartening. Our mules were now exhausted, and could not
possibly make three leagues in two hours over the terrific track we
were traveling. But there was nothing to do but push on. At the end of
an hour we asked the same question of another peon. “Quatro leguas, Señores”—four leagues, Sirs,
was the reply. This answer was confirmed by several other peons, whom
we also questioned. Matters were becoming serious, but we continued on
in silence, hoping against hope.
About a half hour later we again renewed our query. “Una legua, Señores”—one league,
Sirs—said a bright boy, who was driving a heavily-laden donkey.
It was now dusk, and as dusk in the tropics lasts but a few minutes, we
knew that we should soon be enveloped in total darkness.
A little further on, a woman, with a child in her arms, informed us
that San Miguel was “cerca”—near. This was too
ambiguous for us, as it might mean one league or several leagues.
Asking her how near it was, she replied [243]muy
cerca—very near. This was still unsatisfactory. She then
assured us that it was “cerquita,”
“cerquitita”—diminutives of cerca—3
meaning that the place was extremely near, only a few steps farther.
“Dando la vuelta de la
esquina”—around the corner there—she said,
“is San Miguel, the second house you come to.” Peering into
the darkness before us, we could barely discern what appeared a
projection from the mountain side. We had to be satisfied with this
answer as, try as we would, we could elicit nothing more definite from
our informant.
The darkness was now so dense that we were unable to see even as far
as our mules’ ears. There was then nothing to be done but to give
our animals the rein and trust them to carry us to our destination. As
if guided by a peculiar instinct, they carefully picked their way
through the mud, but we thought they should never get around that
corner towards which we had been directed.
We were now quite exhausted, as we had eaten nothing since morning,
and longed for a place of shelter, where we could find repose. Only
once before, in all my travels, did it seem to take so long to get
around a mountain spur. Years ago, in the mountains of the
Peloponnesus, I had a similar experience, but then the road was good
and the moon was shining. Here there was only a wretched, dangerous
trail, and it was pitch dark.
At the long last, we saw a light glimmering in a hut by the
roadside. This was something. The next house, which [244]was
said to be bard by, should be the long-desired San Miguel.
To reassure ourselves, we asked a woman who was standing at the door
of the cot, where was San Miguel. She did not know. She had never beard
of such a place. It might be at the other side of the mountain, or we
might already have passed it; she could not tell.
“But is there not a posada near here,” I queried,
“or a place where we can remain over night?” “Oh!
yes,” the woman replied, “there is a very good posada just
across the road—that large building right in front of you. You
are looking for la Señora Filomena’s house. That is what
we call it here.” And so it was. A few rods away was San Miguel,
at last. Only the tired, famished traveler in a strange land can
realize how glad we were that the day’s journey was finally at an
end.
We spent a very uncomfortable night at San Miguel, and were glad
when we found ourselves, early the following morning, again in the
saddle, bound for Caqueza, the capital of a district near the summit of
the Cordilleras. “We must make better time than yesterday,”
I said, on starting, to our vaqueano. “Si,
Señor.” “We shall arrive at Caqueza by four
o’clock, shall we not?” “Es imposible,
Señor. It is impossible, Sir.” “Well, then, we
shall arrive by five, shall we not?” “No se
puede, Señor. It cannot be done, Sir.” “At all
events, we must reach Caqueza before dark.” “Tal vez, no—Probably not,” was his final reply,
and we had to let it go at that.
The scenery along our route between San Miguel and Caqueza was much
like that which we had so much admired during the preceding day. The
country was, however, much more thickly populated and we met many more
people on the way. There was always that same cordial greeting, that
had before touched us so deeply, and the same disposition to oblige us
in any way possible.
At one place on the roadside, we saw a young couple, neither more
than eighteen years of age, erecting a little [245]bamboo cot. They were evidently just entering
upon house-keeping, and seemed to be very happy. The labor involved in
the construction of their future home was little and the expense was
nothing. All would be in readiness for occupancy in a day or two after
work begun. Then their little plot of ground, planted with maize, yuca,
plantains and bananas, together with a few domestic animals, would
supply them with all the food required and enable them to enjoy an
idyllic existence far away from the maddening crowd, and quite removed
from
“The weariness, the fever, and the fret
Here, where men sit and hear each other
groan.”
It was evidently some such Arcadian scene that was
before Tennyson’s vision when he, in Locksley Hall, penned the
beautiful lines,
“Ah, for some retreat,”
where
“Slides the bird o’er lustrous woodland,
swings the trailer from the crag—”
“Droops the heavy-blossomed bower, hangs the
heavy-fruited tree—”
and where are
“Breaths of tropic shade and palms in cluster,
knots of Paradise.”
Further on we met another young couple, radiant with
the glow of youth and present happiness, carrying all their household
goods
with them. These were few and simple. The man carried a machete, and a
few rush mats; the woman a few simple culinary utensils consisting
mainly of a metal pot and a few calabash cups and dishes. They were
evidently looking for a site for a home, and probably, a few hours
later had, like the first couple we saw, their simple habitation well
under way.
Of these good people one can repeat what Peter Martyr [246]said
of the aborigines shortly after the discovery of America:
“A fewe thinges contente them, hauinge no
delite in suche superfluites, for the which in other places men take
infinite paynes and commit manie vnlawfull actes, yet are neuer
satisfied, whereas many haue to muche, and none inowgh. But emonge
these simple sowles, a fewe clothes serue the naked; weightes and
measures are not needefull to such as cannot kyll of crafte and deceyte
and haue not the vse of pestiferous monye, the seede of unnumerable
myscheues. So that if we shall not be ashamed to confesse the truthe,
they seeme to lyue in that goulden worlde of the whiche owlde wryters
speak so much; wherin men lyued simplye and innocentlye without
inforcement of lawes, without quarrellinge. Iudges and libelles,
contente onely to satisfie nature, without further vexation for
knowledge of thinges to come.”4
Later on in the day we came across more home-builders, but of quite
a different kind from those above mentioned. Toward noon, we noticed
some distance ahead of us, what appeared to be a greenish black ribbon,
extended along our path. It was about a foot wide and several hundred
feet long. We could not imagine what it could be until we were within a
few yards of it. It proved to be an army of ants on a foraging
expedition. There were millions, if not billions of them. Those on one
side were carrying pieces of leaves about the size of a sixpence. They
formed the green part of the ribbon that we had seen from a distance.
Those on the other side, moving in an opposite direction, constituted
the black part. They were all engaged in getting material for thatching
their curious dome-like homes, which are often of extraordinary
dimensions. Sometimes they are fully thirty or forty feet in
diameter.
We regretted that time did not permit us to examine the length of
their line of march, from their marvelous dwellings [247]to
the trees they were stripping for roofing material. They have been
known to go a mile or more for material suited to their purpose and to
deprive scores of trees of all their leaves in a single day.
To one unfamiliar with the tropics, the depredations committed by
these destructive insects appear incredible. Of an unknown number of
species, they are among the greatest enemies of man in the equatorial
regions. They spare nothing. Gardens and orchards, coffee and sugar,
cassava and banana plantations disappear as quickly before them as
before blight or frost.
In the early part of the sixteenth century, according to
Herrera,5 their numbers in Española and Puerto Rico
were so great and their devastations so extensive and irresistible,
that they threatened to depopulate the islands. Various parts of South
America have also at different times suffered from the same
plague—rivaling the seven plagues of Egypt in the distress and
destruction which marked their path. Had we not had here, and elsewhere
in the tropics, ocular evidence of their prodigious numbers, and been
witnesses of the magnitude of the works due to their united efforts, we
should have classed the accounts left us by the early chroniclers of
the extent of the ravages of the ant plague among works of fiction
rather than records of authentic history.6
The scenery along the mountain ascent was an ever-changing panorama
of rarest beauty and sublimity, such as no pen could describe or brush
portray. It exhibited all the tropical luxuriance of the llanos
together with the wild picturesqueness characteristic of Alpine
heights.
At times we wended our way along the banks of a noiseless river,
which, in solitary grandeur, was sweeping through verdant meads and
beneath arcades of sylvan [248]green, carrying its vivifying
waves to the broad, expectant plains below. The placid scene, dotted
with human habitations, and variegated by bright pastures, the home of
contented flocks and herds, offered to the enchanted gaze, in a single
picture, all the fabled beauties of the glens of Tempe and the dales of
Arcady.
As we mounted higher up on our way, our route was along the verge of
deep, headlong torrents mantled in the shade of overhanging bamboos, or
obscured by the jutting crags and huge beetling rocks of the earthquake
rift mountain. Ever and anon, our ears caught the muffled but incessant
roar of thunderous waterfalls, which plunged from dizzy precipices high
above our heads, both to the right and to the left of our upward
path.
Scarcely had the deafening notes of these tumultuous floods, which
awakened a thousand echoes in the sombre caves and yawning gulfs of the
countless windings and abrupt breaks of the mountain ravines, died
away, before we found ourselves in presence of some murmuring cascade
that might well have adorned the grove around the grotto of Calypso. In
the gleaming crystal basin at its foot, embowered in vernal bloom and
eternal verdure, which diffused an aromatic breath over the passer-by,
was tremulously reflected the plumed crown of the palm tree under which
the weary traveler sought a moment’s rest for his weary frame. At
every turn in our steep and devious path, our eyes were delighted by
some wild, struggling brook, that fretted its way through a
labyrinthine gorge, pranked with verdurous gloom, or charmed by some
wanton rivulet leaping over rocks or forming limpid pools, canopied with
foliage and flowers of rarest fragrance and brightest hue, that
“Forever gaze on their own drooping eyes,
Reflected in the crystal calm.”
It is not an exaggeration to say, that in our journey
from the foot to the summit of the Andes, we passed in [249]rapid review some of earth’s grandest and
most entrancing prospects. Sometimes I was reminded of the mountains
and valleys of the Alps, at others of the peaks and cañones of
the Rocky Mountains. Some cataracts recalled the waterfalls seen
leaping from the lofty precipices of Alaska; others, those that add
such a charm to the manifold wonders of the Yosemite and the
Yellowstone.
But the Andean views can always claim a superiority over all
northern scenes of a similar character, in the marvelous setting
afforded by the ever-verdant and exuberant vegetation of the tropics.
How often did we not wish, during this memorable trip, that we could
command the brush of a Turner or a Poussin or a Claude Lorrain, in
order to bring home with us copies of some of those wonderful pictures
that Nature exhibited to our admiring gaze in her great art gallery of
the Oriental Cordilleras!
The higher we ascended above the lowlands the less dense became the
forests and the less luxuriant the vegetation. At times there were
extended reaches of land that were quite treeless; at others the
surface of the soil was covered with scrubby growths that were in
marked contrast with the splendid sylvan exhibitions to which we had
been so long accustomed. But although the giants of the forest were no
longer visible, there was little diminution of the splendor of the
floral display along our path. In one place, particularly, we were
surprised beyond measure to find the whole side of a mountain spur
covered with a glorious mantle of immaculately white lilies. The scene
was not unlike one of the large lily fields of Bermuda, that supply our
Easter altars with their choicest decorations.
We were greatly delighted to find in the tropics representatives of
the feathered tribe that we were familiar with in the far North. Large
flocks of them annually leave North America and Europe to spend the
winter season in South America and as regularly return to their
northern homes the following summer. Some of them come from far-off
Alaska and extend their flight as far south as [250]Tierra del Fuego. Others spend the summer in
southeast Siberia and then, on the approach of winter, migrate by way
of North America to South Brazil. Among the most numerous of these
marvelous birds of passage are certain species of sandpipers, plovers
and lapwings. The bobolink, known along the Chesapeake as the reedbird,
and dreaded as the ricebird in the rice fields of the South, extends
its migrations as far into South America as southeastern Brazil. Many
of our familiar warblers and sparrows are to be seen during the winter
months in Venezuela and Colombia, while certain cliff and barn swallows
penetrate as far south as Paraguay. On the Orinoco and the Meta, we
recognized many species of ducks that were familiar to us in the United
States, among which were the pin-tail, bald-pate, golden-eye and
blue-winged teal.
“The plovers, sandpipers and kindred species,” writes
Knowlton, “take migratory journeys often of extraordinary length.
Thus the American golden plover, Charadrius dominicus, breeds in
arctic America, some venturing a thousand miles north of the Arctic
Circle, and migrates through the entire length of North and South
America to its winter home in Patagonia, and, curiously, its spring and
fall routes are different. After feasting on the crowberry in Labrador,
they seek the coast of Nova Scotia, where they strike out to sea,
taking a direct course for the easternmost islands of the West Indies,
and thence to the northeastern coast of South America. In spring not
one returns by this route, but in March they appear in Guatemala and
Texas. April finds their long lines trailing the prairies of the
Mississippi Valley; the first of May sees them crossing our northern
boundary, and by the first week in June they appear in their breeding
grounds in the frozen north. The little sanderling, just mentioned, is
almost cosmopolitan in distribution, breeding in the arctic and
sub-arctic regions and migrating in the New World to Chile and
Patagonia, a distance of eight thousand miles, and in the Old World
along the shore of Europe, Asia and [251]Africa. The
Bartramian sandpiper, Bartramia longicauda, nests from eastern
North America to Nova Scotia and Alaska, and goes south in winter to
southern South America. The solitary sandpiper, Totanus
solitarius, breeds mainly to the north of the United States, and
winters as far south as Brazil and Peru. The buff-breasted sandpiper,
Tryngites subruficollis, rears its young in the Yukon district
of Alaska and from the interior of British Colombia to the Arctic
coast, and journeys in winter well into South America. The turnstone,
Arenaria interpres, a little shore bird, about the size of the
song thrush of Europe, is also cosmopolitan, breeding in high northern
latitudes and at other times of the year found along the coasts of
Europe, Asia, Africa, North America, South America to the Straits of
Magellan, Australia and the Atlantic and Pacific islands. It is one of
the species mentioned as making the wonderful flight from the islands
in Bering Sea to the Hawaiian Islands.”7
By what miraculous instinct are they guided in these semi-annual
migrations across half the globe? Who bids them, asks Pope,
“Columbus-like, explore
Heavens not their own, and worlds unknown before?
Who calls the council, states the certain day.
Who forms the phalanx, and who points the
way?”
Have they a special “sense of direction,”
or is their “homing” faculty or power of orientation,
something that is tantamount to a sixth sense?
We now know far more about the migrations of birds than was known
only a few decades ago. We are able to locate many of them during the
various seasons of the year, and are quite certain that they never, as
an ingenious writer of the early seventeenth century maintained, spend
the winter in the moon, where they have no occasion for food; but we
have yet much to learn regarding the causes of [252]their periodic migrations, and the nature of
that instinct that enables them to pass, with unerring precision, from
the arctic to the antarctic regions, and from the Old World to the New.
We are accumulating daily new facts regarding the distant flights of
the birds of passage, but, notwithstanding the many theories, some of
them more fantastic than scientific, that have been advanced to explain
the cause of the migrations of birds; why such migrations were
undertaken in the beginning, why they are still continued, and how
birds are able to find their way, during their marvelous flights from
the arctic to the antarctic—we are still in the dark about many
questions connected with those mysterious migrations, which have
excited the interest of even the most casual observer since the prophet
Jeremiah wrote: “The stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed
time; and the turtle and the crane, and the swallows observe the time
of their coming.”8
Almost before we were aware of it, the sun had begun to paint the
crest of the Andes with bright vermeil and soft purple, and we were
still far from Caqueza—the goal of our day’s journey. With
the exception of the half-hour we had tarried for luncheon at an
attractive posada, called Media Luna, we had been in the saddle all
day, and had pushed forwards as rapidly as the strength of our animals
would permit. We had left our vaqueano and peons in the rear early in
the day, and it was not at all likely that they would be able to reach
Caqueza before the following forenoon.
After a delightful, sunshiny day, the sky, towards sunset, suddenly
became overcast with dark, threatening clouds, [253]and
presently it began to rain. One thing, however, was in our favor, and
that was the trail. It was in a far better condition than that of the
preceding day, but it lay along the breast of a precipitous mountain
slope, at the foot of which, within ear-shot, coursed an impetuous
mountain torrent. The greater part of the way was quite safe, and we
could trust our mules, even in the dark, to keep to the path. But here
and there were treacherous places—loose ground, and landslides
caused by recent rains—which rendered traveling, even in the
daytime, sufficiently difficult. In the darkness, that was every moment
becoming more dense, locomotion was positively dangerous. There was no
house on the way in which we could find shelter for the night. Our
tent, with our other baggage, was in the hands of our dilatory peons.
The only alternatives, then, were pressing on to Caqueza, despite
darkness and danger, or standing still in our trail, where there was
not even a shrub to temper the ever-increasing downpour. We elected to
trust our lives again to our mules, as we had done the previous night.
This seemed to be the lesser of the two evils that confronted us.
We then recalled the hesitating answer that our vaqueano had, in the
morning, given to our query about reaching Caqueza before nightfall. His
“Tal vez, no”—perhaps not, was a
gentle prognostic that it was impossible, at least for the baggage
mules. As a matter of fact, they did not arrive until towards noon the
next day. Their mules had given out, and the vaqueano and peons had to
make shift to spend the night as best they could under an inclement
sky.
The last objects of interest that we descried in the deepening gloom
were a number of peasant cots perched high upon the mountain
sides—much like so many cottages in the higher Alps—and the
junction of two rivers—the Rio Blanco and the Rio Negro. The
rivers specially attracted our attention, as the color of the waters of
the one, the Blanco—white—was in such marked contrast with
the [254]waters of the other, the Negro or black river.
The one owed its color to the white clay soil through which it passed.
The other was rendered black—like the well-known bog-tinctured,
“black waters” of Ireland—by the presence of organic
material. Even long after the waters of the two tributaries had entered
their common channel, they kept quite separate—the black flowing
along one bank and the white along the bank opposite.
It would take too long to enumerate the many difficulties we
encountered, during our long ride in the darkness, before we finally
arrived at Caqueza. Suffice to say that it was several long hours after
nightfall, and that we were both quite exhausted, both by hunger and
fatigue. We never felt time to pass so slowly, as during the last hour
of the day’s journey, when there was danger in every step forward
from the ever-threatening ravine, along the edge of which our path lay,
and we were quite ready to exclaim with Shelley,
“How like death-worms the wingless moments
crawl.”
In the posada where we purposed spending the night,
which was recommended as the best in town, we found sufficient to
appease the pangs of hunger, but we were soon made to realize that we
had another sleepless night before us. In San Miguel our quarters were
damp and our blankets wet, owing to some carelessness on the part of
our peons. In Caqueza the rooms assigned us—and particularly the
beds—could best be described by a single
word—insectiferous. They were a veritable insectarium that served
no scientific or economic purpose. It is but just, however, to record
that this was our first experience of the kind during our journey thus
far in the tropics. Under the circumstances, there was nothing left for
us to do except resignedly to exclaim with the pious
native—Sea por Dios—may it be received by
God in atonement for sin. [255]
1 The
reader who is interested in the famous expeditions of Hohermuth, von
Hutten and Federmann, about which there is little in English that is
satisfactory, is referred to Castellanos, Varones Ilustres
de Indias, Partes II and III; Herrera, Historia de las
Indias, Dec. VI; Oviedo y Baños, Conquista y
Poblacion de Venezuela, Lib I and III; Oviedo y Valdéz.
Historia General y Natural de las Indias, Tom. II,
Lib. XXV; Ternaux—Compans, Voyages, Rélations
et Memoires Originaux pour servir à l’histoire de la
découvarte de l’Amérique, Tom. II, Paris, 1840;
Klunzinger, Antheil der Deutschen an der Andeckung von
Süd-Amerika, Kap. VI, IX and XII, Stuttgart, 1857; Schumacher,
Die Unternehmungen der Augsburger Welser in Venezuela,
Kap. IV, IX and XII, in Tom. II, of a work published in Hamburg, 1892,
Zur Errinnerung an die Endeckung Amerikas; Topf,
Deutsche Statthalter und Konquistadoren in Venezuela,
pp. 18, 19, 33–42, 48–55; Tom. VI, of the Sammlung gemeinverständlicher wissenschaftlicher
Vorträge, Hamburg, 1893; Humbert, L’Occupation Allemande du Venezuela au XVI Siècle,
Période dite des Welser, 1528–1556, Bordeaux, 1905.
The last-named work is illustrated by a valuable map. The subject
possesses an added interest from the fact that it refers to the only
attempt at colonial occupation ever made by Germans in South America.
How different would now be the condition of Venezuela and Colombia if
the Welser colony had been permanent and successful! ↑
2
“Plain folk and faithful, modest and frank,
Loyal, humble, sane and obedient.”
This is particularly true of Indian children.
Writing of them, a Dominican missionary, who had lived among them, and
knew them well, expresses himself as follows:—
“Je ne sais rien d’aimable, de
gracieux, de docile et d’intelligent comme le jeune
Indien”—“I know nothing so amiable, so kindly,
so docile and so intelligent as the young Indian.”—Voyage d’Exploration d’ un Missionaire Dominicain chez
les Tribus Sauvages de l’Equateur, p. 310, Paris,
1889. ↑
3 The
people of Venezuela and Colombia are very fond of using diminutives,
and one must confess that it often gives to their conversation a
peculiar charm and expressiveness. Thus from todo, all
or every, they form todito, toditico;
from cerca, near, they derive cerquita, cerquitita or cerquitica. Instead of Adios they will say
Adiosito, and instead of Yo voy passando
bien, one hears Yo voy passandito bien.
I once gave a young mother a medal for a child she
was holding on her lap, and she at once said, “Muchisimas gracias, hijito, yo pondre la medallita lueguito al
cuellito de la queridita que va andandito asi, no mas.”
“Many thanks, little son”—I was old enough to be her
grandfather—“I shall immediately put the little medal on
the little neck of the little darling, which is in rather delicate
health.” ↑
4 Richard
Eden, op. cit., p. 71. ↑
5
Historia de las Indias Occidentales, Dec. II, Lib. III, Cap.
14. ↑
6 The town
of Santa Rosa, in Ecuador, had to be abandoned because of the swarms of
ants that invaded the place. It is now known as Anagollacta—place
of ants. ↑
7 Birds
of the World, Chap. IV, New York, 1909. ↑
8 So fixed
are the periods of migration, and so punctual is the feathered tribe in
starting on its semiannual flights, that “The Arabs are said to
have been helped in the compilation of their calendars, by noting the
times of the arrival and departure of migratory birds; and the Redskin
in the far Northwest has received much the same aid from the birds of
another continent.”
All things considered, Professor Newton was
probably right when he declared that the migration of birds is
“perhaps the greatest mystery which the whole animal kingdom
presents.” ↑
“Knowest thou the track that o’er the
mountain goes,
Where the mule threads its way through mist and
snows,
Where dwell in caves the dragon’s ancient
brood,
Topples the crag, and o’er it roars the
flood,
Knowest thou it well?
O come with me!
There lies our road—oh, father, let us
flee.”
—Mignon.
Our plan, on leaving Villavicencio, was to reach
Bogotá in three days. This we could easily have accomplished,
had there not been a mistake in the telegram ordering horses to be in
readiness for us on our arrival at Caqueza. The morning after arriving
there, when we inquired for our mounts, we were surprised to learn that
we were not expected until a day later, and that it would not be
possible for us to get animals until the following morning.
“Travelers usually take three days to make the trip from
Villavicencio to Caqueza,” said Sr. N., who was to furnish the
horses, “and I did not think you would attempt to make such an
arduous journey in two days. However, everything will be ready early
to-morrow morning. Besides a day’s rest here, preparatory to
crossing the paramo, will do you no harm. Most people coming up from
the llanos consider it necessary.”
Not desiring to remain longer in the insectarium, in which we had
spent so wretched a night, we removed to an
asistencia—boarding house—in another part of the
town. Here we found clean and comfortable quarters and had reason to
congratulate ourselves on our involuntary detention [256]in
this interesting town. We were both quite jaded from the long ride of
the previous day, and really needed some repose more than we at first
realized.
“But why did we not,” it may be asked, “continue
our journey through to Bogotá on our mules? Are they not the
best and surest-footed animals in the steep mountain trails?”
The reply is best given in the words of our host at Villavicencio,
Sr. N.: “It would never do for such distinguished travelers as
you are—personas tan amables y tan
honorables—to enter the national capital on such lowly
animals as mules. Only common people do this. Custom here makes it
de rigueur for people of the better classes to travel
on horseback. More than this. Our people usually send word ahead to
have a carriage meet them in the suburbs of Bogotá, as they do
not care to enter the city even on horseback. Permit me to order a
carriage to meet you at Santa Cruz, some distance this side of the
capital.”
We thanked him for his kind offer, but replied that, while we should
be glad to defer to the custom of the country, by exchanging our mules
for horses, we should forego the usual formality of entering the city
in a carriage. We were simple, plain travelers and wished to remain
such till the end of our journey.
Caqueza, fully twenty-five miles from Bogotá, is the capital
of a district of the same name and, in location, is not unlike that of
many of the higher mountain towns of Colombia or Switzerland. It is
surrounded on all sides by beautiful mountain ridges and is about five
thousand and six hundred feet above sea level. The temperature at seven
o’clock p. m., the day before our departure, was 72° F., but
at no time during the day was it much higher. In temperature, elevation
and the beauty of the surrounding mountains it is much like Caracas,
and when the long-projected railroad from Bogotá to the llanos
shall have been completed, it will become a commercial centre of
considerable [257]importance. The climate is salubrious and as
equable as that of Bermuda, and the town, counting about two thousand
inhabitants, is just such a place as the traveler from the lowlands
would delight to tarry in, if he were always master of his own
time.
Early the second morning after our arrival in Caqueza, we had bidden
adieu to this interesting town and its hospitable people and were on
our way to the crest of the Andes. Just outside of the town we crossed
the Rio Caqueza, over what looked like the Devil’s Bridge in
ruins. Fortunately, we had grown quite accustomed to such shaky
structures, although, in the beginning, we approached them with the
greatest misgivings. Near San Miguel, for instance, we had to cross a
raging torrent, in a dark, deep ravine, over what was but the semblance
of a bridge, that threatened every moment to collapse. It was in
reality nothing more than three logs laid side by side and covered with
loose twigs and earth. It had no railings or balustrades at the sides,
and the abutments at the two ends had become so loosened by the heavy
rains that it seemed every moment on the verge of tottering into the
abyss below. Even our mules balked at the treacherous structure.
However, after taking a good look at the tumultuous Rio Negro, that was
coursing through the wild gorge beneath, and stretching their long ears
toward the opposite bank, as if to determine thereby what chance there
was of a successful passage, they finally ventured on the bridge, but
it was with fear and trembling. And how light was their step and how
they actually felt their way until they reached terra firma!
From that moment the much-abused mule rose high in our estimation. He
may be obstinate, but he instinctively avoids danger. And when he
concludes to go forward, you may be sure that the danger is more
apparent then real. Subsequent experience only confirmed us in the
impression that we then formed of him.
From the time we crossed the Rio Caqueza, our path was ever upward
towards cloudland. La cumbre—the [258]summit—of the Andes, where we were to
cross it, is about midway between Caqueza and Bogotá, and is
nearly a mile higher than the makeshift of a bridge over the Rio
Caqueza.
We had left Caqueza only a few miles behind us when we found a large
number of market women—young and old—on the road. They were
mostly Indians, all carrying heavy burdens from seventy-five to a
hundred pounds, and, to our surprise, they were all en route to
Bogotá. I do not think we met one going to Caqueza. They were
loaded down with chickens, eggs, fruits and all kinds of garden produce
for the Bogotá market.
But think of carrying such burdens more than twenty miles, and that,
too, over the lofty Cordilleras! And think, too, of the slight pittance
that was often to reward the expenditure of such energy! Nevertheless,
all of these poor people seemed to be quite happy. They were constantly
chatting and singing, as they trudged along the rough, stony path, and
rarely stopped to rest. They were clad in a rough, dark-colored tunic,
something like the peplum or chiton of the ancient Greeks. Most of them
were barefooted, although we saw some who wore alpargatas, a
kind of sandal made from the fibres of the aloe, which flourishes
everywhere in the uplands of Colombia. As in Mexico, so also here, this
plant has from time immemorial furnished the natives many articles of
daily use.
What specially attracted our attention was the number of chickens
and eggs these humble folks carried with them to the market. When we
observed this and noted the number of cattle, horses and other domestic
animals we had seen along our route, and the variety of fruits and
vegetables that were under cultivation, we could not but recall what
Herrera has to say about the absence of these and other things in
pre-Colombian times.
“In the other hemisphere” (America), he writes,
“there were no dogs, asses, sheep, goats, swine, cats, horses,
mules, camels, nor elephants. They had no [259]oranges, lemons,
pomegranates, figs, quinces, melons, vines, nor olives, nor sugar,
wheat nor rice. They knew not the use of iron, knew nothing of
firearms, printing or learning. Their navigation extended not beyond
their sight; their government and politics were barbarous. Their
mountains and vast woods were not habitable. An Indian of good natural
parts being asked what was the best they had got by the Spaniards,
answered: The hen’s eggs, as being laid new every day; the hen
herself must be either boiled or roasted, and does not always prove
tender, while the egg is good every way. Then he added: The horse and
artificial light, because the first carries men with ease and bears his
burdens, and by means of the latter (the Indians having learned to make
wax and tallow candles and oil), they lived some part of the
night! and this he thought to be the most valuable acquisition from
the white people.”1
At the time of the arrival of the Spaniards in South America, there
were no domestic animals except the llama, the alpaca, the guinea pig
and the alco, and these were found only within the limits of the empire
of the Incas.
There was a time, however, long anterior to the advent of
Europeans—during the Pleistocene epoch—when horses2
and the larger members of the camel tribe roamed over the vast plains
of South America, notably in the parts now known as Argentina and
Southern Brazil. It was at this period, too, that flourished in the
same regions those gigantic creatures, now extinct, known as the
mylodon, the ground sloth, the glyptodont, the mastodon, the toxodont
and peculiar sabre-toothed tigers, vast quantities of whose remains
have been found and carefully stored away in our museums. Not far
toward the west of us, at the Campo [260]de
los Gigantes3 in the Savanna of Bogotá—not to
speak of those found in the bluffs along the valley of the
Zulia—abundant fossil remains have been discovered of horses,
taxodonts, glyptodons, and megatheriums. It is, indeed, a remarkable
fact that the South American continent, which has enriched the Old
World with so many valuable medicinal and economic plants, has not
given to it a single useful animal.
After traveling some hours we reached Chipaque, an interesting
mountain town fully half a mile higher above sea level than Caqueza.
Our attention was attracted by an unusually large and beautiful stone
church, which was then undergoing repairs. A great bell, imported from
Europe, had just been put in one of the towers. It was the gift of Gen.
Reyes, then president of the republic, and the good people were not
only proud of their bell but were loud in their praises of the generous
donor.
But where did the money come from for the erection of such a noble
structure? The people all seemed very poor, and quite unable to keep
such an edifice in repair after its completion, not to speak of
supplying the means for building it. We frequently found ourselves
asking this same question in other parts of South America, when
contemplating the large and beautiful ecclesiastical structures that
are often met with where one should least expect to find them. The
builders of them evidently belonged to those ages of faith that have
bequeathed to us those marvels of architecture—the great
cathedrals of Europe. [261]
Something that always afforded us great comfort, and that was rarely
far away, after we left Villavicencio, was the telegraph line. For
weeks we had been far away from it, and, in case of need, it could not
have been reached. It was then that we really felt that we were indeed
a long way off from home and friends. To communicate with them by
letter would then have required the best part of a year, for there was
no regular postal service to which we could have had recourse. With the
friendly and willing telegraph ever near, it was quite different. By
its means we could, in a few hours at most, convey a message to the
most distant parts of the world.
When leaving any given place in the morning our whole
party—peons with baggage, mules included—would be together.
But it was not long until we were far in advance of the vaqueano and
peons, whom we would not again see until evening or, as it sometimes
happened, until the following morning. There was rarely any danger of
losing our path, for the simple reason that there was, as a rule, only
a single path from one place to another. We had, therefore, nothing to
do but to keep to the trail. Occasionally, however, we would come to a
point where it was necessary to choose between two diverging trails.
Then it was that the telegraph line was an invaluable guide. We
followed the trail which it paralleled, and in so doing we never went
astray.
It was now several months since we had received a letter from home.
We had not even seen a newspaper of any kind, and were, consequently,
in utter ignorance of what was occurring in the great and busy world we
had left behind us. But strange as it may seem, the traveler in
Nature’s wilds seems soon to grow indifferent to the
world’s doings. Even those who at home consider the morning and
evening papers indispensable necessities, seem to forget that there are
such things. Nay, they even experience a sense of relief that they have
gotten beyond the reach of post and telegraph, and that, for once in
their lives, they [262]can call their time their own. Indeed, the
absence of the daily paper, with its countless dispatches, far from
being a privation, soon impressed us as a positive blessing.
We enjoyed a sense of freedom—the freedom of the child of the
forest—we had never known before. We were beginning to see how
easy it was to dispense with many things that are so often regarded as
essentials to pleasure and comfort. If we had been unavoidably detained
at some Indian encampment for a few months or found it necessary to
tarry a year or so in one of the little bamboo cottages on the eastern
slope of the Andes, we should not have regarded it as an unmixed evil.
Even as I pen these lines, I have a vivid recollection of a score of
tiny cots along the Rio Negro and the Rio Caqueza, near a purling brook
or a musical cascade, shaded by palms and surrounded by smiling citrus
trees, where it would be a delight to live and commune with Nature at
her best.
I can fully sympathize with Waterton’s longing for the wild
and his love of tropical life. Every lover of nature, who has spent
some time in the heart of the equatorial forests, is affected in the
same way. The wanderlust and abenteuergeist—the love of travel and
adventure—grows on one, it seems, in the wilds of South America
more than elsewhere. Is it because the conquistadores and other early
explorers have impregnated the atmosphere with their spirit, or because
the environment of itself has the power of inoculating the visitor from
the north with the microbe of a life-long wanderleben?
Dicant Paduani.
Recording his impressions of travel in Andean highlands a writer in
the early part of the last century says: “A sense of extreme
loneliness and remoteness from the world seizes on his,” the
traveler’s mind, “and is heightened by the dead silence
that prevails; not a sound being heard but the scream of the condor,
and the monotonous murmur of the distant waterfalls.”4
Peons Fording a River in the
Andes.
[263]
This, undoubtedly, like many similar impressions, is a question of
temperament. As for ourselves we never, for a single moment,
experienced anything even approaching a feeling of loneliness or
remoteness from the world. Probably, like Scipio Africanus, we are
among those who never felt less alone than when alone. Far from feeling
lonely while crossing the Cordilleras, we congratulated ourselves that
we were far away from the beaten track of personally conducted
tourists.
We could not help comparing the splendid panoramas around us with
the noted show places of Switzerland. In the Andes it was the forest
primeval, or the humble cot, or the picturesque village of the
unspoiled and simple people of eastern Colombia, where a foreigner is
rarely seen, but where he is always sure of a cordial welcome. There
were here no tourist resorts, no palatial hotels or restaurants, no
sumptuous chalets or villas—seats of opulence and
luxury—but Nature alone in all her beauty and sublimity, as she
came forth from the hands of her Creator. We were far away from the
land of inclined railroads, leading to every peak, and from macadamized
thoroughfares, along which reckless drivers and wild chauffeurs are
constantly claiming the right of way, regardless of the safety or
convenience of the ordinary wayfarer.
The uplands of the Andes should be the last places in the world
where the thoughtful mind should experience a sense of loneliness, or
be oppressed with tedium or listlessness. There, if anywhere, such a
thing as ennui should be impossible. There is so much to excite the
imagination, and so much to gratify every sense, so much to exhilarate
the weary spirits and to elevate the mind, that one feels oneself in a
kind of mountain elysium, where every moment spent is one of unalloyed
delight.
Never shall we forget the morning preceding our first crossing of
the Cordilleras. The weather was ideal—neither hot nor
cold—and the scenery at every turn was magnificent beyond
compare. While the vegetation was [264]quite different in character
from that of the lowlands, it was, nevertheless, equally attractive and
fragrant. Our route at times lay through a narrow defile with wild
beetling steeps on both sides of us. Ever and anon we passed by natural
bowers, sculptured in the solid rock and entwined with odorous plants
and flowers, that might well serve as trysting places of fays and
elves, or be the favorite resorts of Titania and Oberon. Farther on our
way we descried a dark and romantic chasm which we could fancy might,
under a waning moon, be haunted “by a woman waiting for her demon
lover.” And higher up on a lofty peak, tinged with the roseate
hues of quivering sunlight, C.’s fancy told us was the home of
that race of Oreads
“That haunt the hill-tops nearest the
sun.”
“Small wonder,” said C, “that the
lively fancy of the Indian should have peopled these romantic spots
with the creatures of his imagination, and that he should have woven
legends about objects and phenomena that had specially attracted his
notice. Even we, who see these things for the first time, find
ourselves under the spell of the genius loci. Considering the
beautiful arbors here formed by tree and vine and flower, the fantastic
shapes assumed by rock and mountain spur, the mysterious natural
phenomena that frequently obtrude themselves on his attention, and his
proneness to refer to supernatural agency everything that his untutored
mind is unable to explain, it would be a greater wonder if such legends
did not exist, and if the numerous physical features, that have so
often excited our interest, were left unpeopled by creatures of the
Indian’s fancy.”
The Indian of Colombia may know nothing of our elves and fairies;
sylphs, undines and salamanders; gnomes, kobolds and hobgoblins, but
his fertile imagination has, nevertheless, found similar beings to
people plain and [265]forest and mountain peak. Now, as in the
days of their pre-Colombian ancestors, the Indian loves to regard
stones and rocks and trees of peculiar form or extraordinary size as
the abode of certain spirits, or as being in some way identified with
them. Like the Scandinavians of old, they see their deceased ancestors
in the dense clouds that veil the neighboring hill tops. And like the
peasant in the Hartz mountains, who has a superstitious dread of the
spectre of the Brocken, they quail before a similar apparition
frequently seen in the summits of the Cordilleras. They venerate the
rainbow, and see in volcanoes the abode of beings of power and
destruction.
To them, as to peoples of other parts of the world, the owl is a
bird of ill omen. One of them, called from its cry ya acabo, ya
acabo—it is finished, it is finished—is, when heard
fluttering around the house, regarded as a harbinger of death. Another,
the pavita, is considered as the spirit of some departed
relative who, like the Irish banshee, would warn his kindred against
death or some imminent calamity.
The Llaneros, fearless as they are in most respects, entertain the
greatest dread of espantos, ghosts or apparitions. The bola
de fuego, or the light of Aguirre, the Tyrant, is one of these
ghosts. It is in reality nothing more than a kind of ignis
fatuus, produced by the decomposition of organic matter, but to
their minds, ignorant of the true nature of such gaseous exhalations,
it is the soul of the infamous traitor, Lope de Aguirre, who, in
punishment for his atrocities, has been condemned to wander through the
broad forests and savannas that were the witnesses of his blood-stained
crimes.
In their duendes, if they have not the analogues of pucks and
brownies, they certainly possess a shrewd and knavish sprite, somewhat
like the English Robin Good-Fellow. Among the Llaneros he is noted for
the mischievous pranks he plays in the corrals, when occupied by horses
and cattle, and, if one is to credit the stories of those who live
[266]on the plains, these particular duendes
give the owners of live stock a world of trouble.
The Serranos—mountaineers—have even more wonderful
stories to tell than the inhabitants of the llanos. The most remarkable
of them are connected with certain caves, which are so numerous in the
Eastern Andes, and certain lakes in which, the Serrano assures one, are
occasionally observed phenomena of an extraordinary character.
They are firmly convinced, for instance, of a certain witch or
malignant sorceress, called Mancarita, who carries away lonely
travelers, or those who may have lost their way in the mountains. And
they rehearse the tale of an Indian who concealed a bag of silver under
a certain water fall near a well-known lake. This is guarded by a
serpent or a dragon, but if one will, on St. John’s day, travel
in a state of complete nudity, the paramo of Novagote from one end to
the other, he will be able to get possession of the hidden treasure. In
all these legends, and there are many of them, the Indian has as much
faith as have the children of the North in the fairy stories they hear
in the nursery.
Then there is that “strange, harrowing, long-drawn cry, human
in its tones,” alleged sometimes to be audible in the depths of
the tropical forests, for which no satisfactory explanation has as yet
been given. The Indians say it is “The Cry of a Lost Soul.”
The poet Whittier refers to it in the following verses:—
“In that black forest where, when day is
done,
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A cry as of the pained heart of the wood,
The long, despairing moan of solitude
And darkness and the absence of all good,
Startles the traveller with a sound so drear,
So full of hopeless agony and fear,
His heart stands still, and listens with his ear.
The guide, as if he heard a death-bell toll,
Crosses himself, and whispers, ‘A Lost
Soul.’”
[267]
Some of their stories, however, seem to have some foundation in
fact. Almost every paramero—inhabitant of the
paramo—has a story to tell about seeing lightning or hearing
thunder issue from certain lakes or wells as he was passing by on a
clear night when there was not the slightest indication of rain or
storm. At such times the waters of the lake may become violently
agitated without any apparent cause. One’s vaqueano, on being
asked the reason of such a phenomenon, simply replies, “Está brava la laguna,” or “Truena la laguna—the lake is disturbed, or
thunders.”
The Indian’s answer explains nothing, but the phenomenon seems
to lend itself to an explanation which is as simple as it is natural.
If we suppose these lakes, as we well may, to be in the craters of
extinct volcanoes, in the bottoms of which, owing to slight earth
tremors, rents are made in the rocks that permit the escape of
imprisoned gases, the mystery is at least partially solved. The escape
of gas, in large quantity under great pressure, would account for the
violent agitation of the water. If these gases should become ignited by
the action of the electricity with which, as we have learned, the
summits of the mountains are often very highly charged, we should have
in the flash of the ignited gas what the Indian takes to be lightning,
and in the resulting explosion what he thinks is thunder.
I suggest this view merely as a tentative one, and hope that the
phenomena in question, like those referred to in chapter nine regarding
the luminous displays in the mountain summits, may eventually receive
an explanation that men of science will accept as conclusive. But while
awaiting the final word of empirical science regarding these, and
similar mysterious manifestations of nature, we may, with the simple
Indian, give free rein to our fancy and people the cascades and lakes,
caverns, forests and colossal rock masses with all kinds of
preternatural beings and invest them with the most extraordinary
powers. [268]
To be frank, we were not sorry to get away from the atmosphere of
science, and find a land where the legends and traditions of the people
were akin to those that were the delight of our childhood. For, much as
we love science, we have never been willing to renounce the pleasure of
indulging our imagination, as we did in years long gone by, when the
fairy tale and the myth so captivated our youthful mind. We confess it
freely, we were glad to be among the simple, primitive people of the
Andes, and were deeply interested in their peculiar folklore. It
afforded us, in another form, the pleasure we derived from our first
acquaintance with the creations of Homer, Hesiod and Ovid; and with
such productions as the Niebelungen Lied, Sakuntala, the Knights of the
Round Table and Cid Campeador. All the science, history and philosophy
in the world could not diminish the pleasure we still find in these
creations of fancy. We cherish them as much, if not more, to-day, as we
did when they first became a part of our intellectual life. For this
reason, if for no other, the reader will conceive our unalloyed delight
in being beyond the reach of the reports of physical and psychological
laboratories, wherein nothing is admitted that has not the imprimatur
of Baconian science or Comtian philosophy, both of which lay an
absolute interdict on all the most charming creations of poetry and
romance.
The vista towards the east, as we finally drew near the
cumbre—the long desired summit of the Andes—was
beautiful in the extreme. Below us, to the right and to the left, were
a succession of mountain ridges, some still forest-covered, while
others exhibited the smiling gardens, verdant pastures and humble
dwellings of the inhabitants. Here and there was a picturesque little
village of white-washed stone houses in place of the bamboo dwellings
of the llanos and foothills. On all sides were multitudinous streams
and torrents, that had their birth in the snow fields and ice pinnacles
of the highest points of Sumapaz, and which were vying with one another
in their long race [269]for the broad emerald plains of Casanare
and San Martin.
Above was the clear sapphire-blue sky, save where it was flecked by
fantastic fleeces of glimmering clouds that floated voluptuously among
the lofty peaks of the Cordilleras, and mantled them, in passing, with
their quivering vapors. Then, as if by enchantment, all was changed
with a suddenness that was positively startling. We had reached the
limit of the alisios—trade winds—for the Andes form
a rampart which they never pass. Here they are forced to part with the
last drop of the moisture that they have brought from the distant
Atlantic. But, on the occasion of our passage, they seemed determined
to make one last desperate effort to cross the rock-ribbed barrier. As
if marshaled by Æolus himself, the bright, white, cumulous
clouds, those fair flocks of the west wind, were in a moment
transformed into dark, ominous nimbi.
“Terrible, strange, sublime and beauteous shapes,”
which, gathering their forces, dashed with the fury of the hurricane
against the adamantine crest of the Cordilleras. The tempest lasted but
a few minutes, and then all was as bright and serene as before, and, if
anything, more radiantly beautiful.
Here, in a region empyreal, far away from the noise and turmoil of
our marts of commerce, we breathed an air of purity, and experienced a
sense of freedom that are unknown in the dank, foul and malarial
atmosphere in which so many struggling millions pass the greater part
of their wretched lives. But above all, what most impresses one in
these ethereal heights is the sense of the proximity of God. We could
almost fancy some one breathing into our ear the words of
Tennyson:—
“Speak to Him thou, for He hears, and Spirit can
meet—
Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands and
feet.”
Traveling from the foothills to the summit of the
Cordilleras is like going from the equator to the arctic circle. One
has every variety of climate peculiar to the torrid, [270]temperate and frigid zones, and the fauna and
flora vary with the altitude as they change with the climate.
The inhabitants of the Andean regions have long recognized three
distinct climates, known as those of the tierra
caliente—hot land; the tierra fría—cold
land; and the paramo. Men of science have, for the sake of
convenience, added a third climate, that of the tierra templada,
or temperate land. The altitudes at which these climates are found vary
with the latitude and with certain meteorological conditions, but in
Colombia and near the equator they are quite fixed and accepted as fair
approximations to the truth.
Tierra caliente embraces a zone extending from sea level to a
line one thousand meters higher up. It is pre-eminently the land of
palms, ceibas and milk trees; of totumos and tamarinds, of the vanilla
and ipecacuanha; the algarroba and white cedar; the
sarrapia—Dipteryx odorata—and the poisonous
curare—strychnos toxifera—from which the Indians
make the deadly compound that renders their arrows such certain
messengers of death. It is also the favorite zone for many tropical
fruits such as plantains, bananas, mameys, nisperos, mangos, zapotes,
oranges, lemons, pineapples, and scores of others found only in the
lowlands of the equinoctial regions.
The upper limits of the tierra caliente are indicated by the
disappearance of the cacao tree and certain plants that do not flourish
at an altitude beyond one thousand meters above sea level. The
tierra caliente and the tierra templada are connected by
such well-known plants and trees as sensitive mimosas, bamboos,
cinchonas and tree ferns, although these representatives of the
vegetable world do not attain their full importance until higher
altitudes are reached.
The tierra templada comprises a zone extending from one
thousand to twenty-four hundred meters above sea level. It is in the
lower part of this zone that the bamboo, the most delicate and graceful
of tropical plants, attains [271]its greatest development and gives
its greatest charm to the landscape.
The numerous plants, shrubs and trees of the bean and myrtle
families are seen at their best in the lower half of the tierra
templada. It is here, too, that one meets with the largest and most
beautiful specimens of tree ferns. So gigantic, indeed, are they that
at a distance they are easily mistaken for a moriche palm. Only in the
islands of the Pacific have I ever seen anything to compare with them
in size and luxuriant loveliness.
In this zone the cultivation of coffee replaces that of cacao in the
zone below. I have never seen larger or finer berries anywhere than we
found on the shrubs grown on the eastern declivity of the Cordilleras
near San Miguel. And yet, strange to relate, only a short distance from
this spot, we found it impossible to get a cup of coffee, although we
asked for it at several places. There was chocolate and chicha in
abundance, but no coffee, where it would be, one would think, the most
common beverage. Its absence here reminded us of the difficulty we
found in getting a calabash of milk on the great cattle farms of the
llanos.
At twelve hundred meters above sea level the palm family begins to
lose its importance, although graceful representatives continue to
charm the traveler until he reaches much higher altitudes. But one is,
in a measure, reconciled to the disappearance of palms, that so
delighted one in the lowlands, by the marvelous display made on all
sides by countless species of the convolvulus and gesnerwort families.
Nothing can exceed their exuberance, or their gay and brilliant
flowers, as they mantle the shrubbery by the wayside or peep out from
under the forest trees along one’s path.
The flora comprehended in the zone extending from eighteen to
twenty-four hundred meters above the sea is in reality transitional in
its nature, and partakes of the character of both that of the tierra
templada and the tierra fría. The various species of
cinchona render this zone [272]notable, for it is here and in the
tierra fría that was formerly obtained most of the
quinine of commerce.
Tierra fría extends from twenty-four hundred to three
thousand meters above sea level. Its vegetation, as would be expected,
is entirely different from that of the hot plains and temperate valleys
of the lowlands. One no longer sees the elegant forms of the plantain
and the bamboo, nor the majestic palm and ceiba, nor the graceful and
flexible bejucos and creepers of hotter climes. But, notwithstanding
the absence of all these charming representatives of Flora, it cannot
be said of the vegetation of tierra fría that it is
either poor or devoid of importance. Its dark hardy foliage, may, if
you will, give it the impress of solemnity and melancholy, but the
herbs, shrubs and trees are remarkable, not only for the number of
their species, but also for the beauty of their inflorescence and the
variety and importance of their products. Here flourish the noble red
cedar and the white caoutchouc tree that supplies to commerce the
highly valued rubber known as the Virgen del Para.
The products of our northern lands, such as wheat, barley and
potatoes, and such fruits—all of foreign origin—as the
peach, pear, cherry and apple, together with a number of valuable
garden vegetables, are cultivated in this zone, and with marked
success.
The most important, and in some respects the most remarkable plant
of the tropics is Indian corn—zea mais. It is cultivated
in all the zones from the hot plains of tierra caliente to the
upper regions of tierra fría and constitutes, in one form
or another, the chief food-supply of the inhabitants. There is,
however, a striking difference in the time required for the plant to
reach maturity at the different altitudes. In the hot climates it is
often ready for the harvest in two months after planting—when
several crops a year are obtainable—whereas in the cold uplands
it requires nearly a year to mature.
All the land between the tierra fría and the region of
[273]perpetual snow is called the paramo. It
corresponds to the puna of Peru, Bolivia and Northern Chili. In some
parts of Colombia the paramos are bleak, treeless plains, often
enveloped in dark, cold fogs, or swept by keen blasts of almost arctic
severity. In other parts, they are covered by a hardy Alpine
vegetation, together with grasses and mosses of different species. The
most interesting growths are strange-looking ferns and the woolly
Frailejon—Espeletia grandiflora—which Sievers well
designates as the character-plant of the paramos. The name, Frailejon,
signifies a big monk, and was given the plant by the inhabitants on
account of the fancied resemblance of its felt-like covering to a
monk’s hood. It is usually from six to eight feet high, but it
frequently attains a much greater altitude. It is one of those odd
forms of vegetation that once seen are never forgotten.
No mere account, however, of the wonderful changes witnessed in
passing from lower to higher altitudes can give any idea of the effect
produced on the traveler. Every hour—yea, every minute—on
his upward journey, he is greeted by new forms of vegetable life and
must needs at the same time bid farewell to others that may not
accompany him beyond their own proper zones. But, although
Flora’s children are ever changing, they are always beautiful and
it would be difficult for the botanist to say where they challenge the
most admiration—in the hot plains of the Orinoco and the Meta or
high up on the cheerless and inhospitable paramo.
What we found most astonishing in our three-days journey from the
llanos to the crest of the Cordilleras was the extraordinary number and
diversity of forms of plant life. While we, in our northern woodlands,
do well if we can find a score of different species of trees in the
space of a square mile, we may, within the same limits in a tropical
forest, count species by the hundred. Every few rods, on our way from
Villavicencio to the cumbre of the Andes, we noted the
appearance of some new species of [274]plant, shrub or tree; some
strange vine or epiphyte; some fruit or blossom which we had not
observed before.
Great as were the physical and meteorological changes observable
between the tierra caliente and the paramo, those of the
vegetable world were still greater. At times, during our rapid ascent
from lower to higher altitudes, from llanos to paramo, the changes in
species were so rapid and kaleidoscopic, the transitions so sudden and
unexpected, that our brains were in a whirl and we had to give up in
despair the attempt to keep anything approaching a record of the order
of sequence of the countless vegetable forms encountered along our
path. Considering solely the successive changes in flora and
temperature, our experience in climbing the Cordilleras was like that
which would result from a three-days journey overland from the sultry
valley of the Amazon to the gold-bearing strands of the Yukon or to the
distant shores of the Arctic Ocean.
It was a little after midday when we finally reached the paramo of
Chipaque—that dread paramo of which we had so frequently heard so
many and so extraordinary tales. It was, we had been told, a place of
eternal frost and snow, and of blasts so tempestuous that both men and
animals were sometimes picked up bodily and hurled into a yawning gorge
near the dizzy height which we were obliged to pass. We soon
discovered, however, that most of the stories we had heard of this and
similar paramos, had but little foundation in fact, or were greatly
exaggerated.5 [275]
To begin with, we found neither frost nor snow. As a matter of fact,
snow rarely falls in this paramo. All about us there was an abundance
of vegetation that little comported with the region of arctic
temperature. We found there a number of peasants’ huts and a
large drove of cattle, that were on their way from the llanos to the
Bogatá market. It took them more than two weeks to make a
journey that we had made in three days. But both the cattle and their
drivers—vaqueros—were more sensitive to cold than we
were. For this reason, they had to proceed slowly to accustom
themselves to the lower temperature and the higher altitude. The
peasants living on the paramo, although lightly clad, did not seem to
be affected by the cold. The vaqueros, however, who had come from the
lowlands, seemed to suffer greatly. But no wonder. They made no
provision for so great a change of climate. They wore the same light
garments—probably they had nothing else—in crossing the
Cordilleras, that they had used in the ever-heated llanos. It was not
strange, then, that they should give exaggerated accounts of the cold
of the paramo or of the suffering it induces. It would be surprising if
it were otherwise.
It requires less than half an hour to cross the paramo—so
limited is it in area—and reach the Boquerón6—the name given the short artificial cut,
only a few rods in length—through the crest of the Andes. At this
highest point our thermometer registered 48° F., and the aneroid, a
fine compensated instrument, indicated an altitude of ten thousand five
hundred and sixty feet. This is but little higher than Leadville,
Colo., and considerably lower than some of the railway passes over the
Rocky Mountains. The temperature, owing to the light atmosphere, was so
mild, that we did not even think of throwing our ponchos [276]over
our shoulders, as a protection from the cold that the poor Llanero felt
so keenly.
As we were passing through the Boquerón we were joined by a
young hacendado who had a cattle farm in the neighborhood. After a
friendly greeting he remarked, “Está
sumamente fría”—It is extremely cold. And then,
thinking we were too lightly clad, he said almost pleadingly,
“Cubranse con sus bayetones, otramente se saca una
pulmonia.” Put on your bayetones, otherwise you will get
pneumonia. Then he related how, the preceding year, he had crossed this
pass in a snow storm, contracted pneumonia, was confined to his bed for
months, and barely escaped a premature death.
While he was thus addressing us, a number of Llaneros passed by on
their way from Bogotá to their homes in the warm plains near
Villavicencio. In addition to the usual covering for the head they had
their ears and face protected by a kind of kerchief and seemed to
suffer more from the cold than our hardy northerners would in a Dakota
blizzard. Poor fellows! We pitied them. They were shivering, their
teeth were chattering and they were evidently in great distress. But
the reason was manifest at a glance. Aside from their head gear, they
had nothing on except a pair of short trousers of flimsy material and a
light poncho. They were barefooted, and, to judge from their wan and
pinched features, they were suffering from hunger as well as from
cold.
We had now discovered the origin of the reports so generally
accepted as true in the llanos, regarding the intense cold of the
paramos and of the various Andean passes. Those poor, shivering,
ill-clad, half-famished peons explained all. The same causes evidently
operated in occasioning the great mortality suffered by Bolivar’s
army when it passed, in 1819, from the llanos of the Apure to the
altiplanicies—high tablelands—of New
Granada.7 [277]
The paramo of Pisva, through which the Republican army invaded the
enemy’s country, is less than thirteen thousand8 feet
above sea level, and the passage, therefore, of the Cordilleras, at
this point, was not in itself the difficult undertaking it is so often
represented to have been. The frightful loss of life, usually
attributed to the intense cold of Pisva Pass, was, in reality, due to
the fact that Bolivar’s followers were not properly prepared for
the campaign in which they were engaged. They were half-naked and
half-starved and the wonder is that the hapless army did not suffer far
greater losses than those actually recorded.
“The army endured many sufferings in the passage of the
paramo,” writes Vergara y Velasco, “but it is a grave error
to compare them with those incurred in the passage of the Alps by
Hannibal and Napoleon or in the passage of the Chilean Andes by San
Martin, for in Pisva there is no snow, neither is the altitude so great
as that of many frequented places in our Cordilleras. The expedition,
without having the romance of the others, nevertheless equals them in
results and for the same reason—the ineptitude of the
enemy.”9
The first thing that attracted our attention, on reaching the
western end of the Boquerón, was the large number of flowers, of
divers species, that bedecked both sides of our path. They constituted
a carpet of the most brilliant hues that, with a lovely green boscage,
extended to the very summit of the mountain crest. In form and beauty
they were not unlike the charming blooms that gladden our forests
[278]and meadows in May and June. There was this
difference, however, that the number of species in a given space was
far greater than is ever found in the same space in our northern
climes. Does this close juxtaposition of so many species in the tropics
contribute to the more rapid formation of varieties and new species
than is possible in higher latitudes, where species are fewer and more
widely separated from one another? It would seem so.
We shall never forget the panorama that burst upon our vision as we
made our exit from the Boquerón. It was in such marked contrast
with the view which we had so much admired on the eastern side. On the
east side all was verdure, bloom, and grateful shrubbery, with
occasional clumps of trees. On the western declivity, with the
exception of a narrow reach, already mentioned, near the mountain
crest, all was as treeless and as bare and arid as the sandy plains of
Nevada or Arizona.
But the entire western slope and distant plateau was bathed in
bright sunshine. Not a single cloud flecked the azure canopy above us,
and not a single sound, except the muffled footsteps of our horses,
disturbed the quiet and serenity of our exalted outlook. We were
standing on the crest of the Eastern Cordillera—the range to
which the people of the country have long given the poetical name of
Suma Paz—Supreme Peace.10 Owing to its proximity to the
capital, where it is always in view, it doubtless impressed the popular
fancy more than did the more distant, although loftier and more
imposing, snow-capped masses of Ruiz and Tolima. Seen from
Bogotá, this beautiful range, when tinged with the golden
crimson rays of the setting sun, might well appear as an Olympus, the
abode of the gods in the enjoyment of eternal peace. [279]
There are some geographers who contend that the Cordillera of Suma
Paz is the continuation of the principal chain of the Andes, but, as it
terminates in the adjoining Republic of Venezuela, it seems more
reasonable to maintain that the Western Cordillera is entitled to this
distinction. It is the western range, which, after passing through the
Isthmus of Panama, reappears as the Sierra Madre of Mexico and as the
Rocky Mountains of North America, and continues its course, almost
without interruption, to Bering’s Strait.
It is, however, the Sierra de Suma Paz which separates the two great
hydrographic basins of the Orinoco and the Magdalena. We saw tiny
rivulets, almost at the instant of their birth, and only a few spans
from one another, beginning simultaneously their long journey to the
broad Magdalena to the west and to the mighty Orinoco in the distant
east. Some were to visit the lands which we had already traversed,
others were to pass through a country that still lay before us, but
which we hoped to explore in the very near future.
Although Suma Paz had long been one of the objective points of our
peregrinations, we could not leave it without mingled feelings of
regret and sadness. It stood between us and many delightful scenes and
marked the passing of many delightful days that could never return.
There was also, of course, a feeling of relief experienced, for we had
happily completed the most arduous part of our journey and that, too,
without encountering a single one of the many difficulties and dangers
that had been predicted when in Trinidad and Ciudad Bolivar we
announced our intention of going to Bogotá over the route whose
last lap we were completing.
From the spot where we halted to pluck a few flowers at the mouth of
the Boquerón, as a souvenir of our first passage of the Andes,
we could almost catch a glimpse towards the northwest, of the churches
and public edifices of Colombia’s capital. There was one of the
celebrated [280]camping-grounds of some of the most noted of the
Conquistadores and thither we would hasten with the minimum of delay.
We loved to think that Federmann had crossed the Cordilleras just where
we did. It is certain that, if he did not cross them at this point, it
was not far distant from it.11 All the way from Villavicencio
we felt that we were following in his footsteps, as we had been
following in the footsteps of other conquistadores from the time we had
trod the romantic soil of Tierra Florida. We had, near the foothills of
the Cordilleras, in the neighborhood of Buena Vista, crossed the path
of Hernan Pérez de Quesada, who almost made the circuit of New
Granada in his memorable quest of El Dorado, and we were likely to
cross it again before reaching Bogotá, for on his return from
his expedition, he, as well as Federmann, must have entered the city
near where we did ourselves.
Before leaving our posada at Caqueza we asked a certain Colombian
general how long it took to make the trip to Bogotá. His reply
was, “Cinco horas sin mujeres”—Five
hours without women. To our surprise the women present made no protest
against this unchivalrous reflection on their horsemanship. Probably,
not being accustomed to riding, they felt that his statement was true,
and that it was unwise to call it in question. Had some of our dashing
American horsewomen been present, it is most likely [281]that
the implied challenge would have provoked a spirited retort.
But whatever the women present may have thought, we subsequently had
reason to believe that the man was wrong, but for a reason different
from the one he had given. After leaving Caqueza we had pushed forward
towards the Boquerón as rapidly as our horses—and they
were good animals—could make their way over the terrible path up
the mountain, and it took us more than five hours to reach that point.
Judging from our experience it would have required an extraordinary
strong and spirited horse to carry a man, over such a road as we had to
traverse, to Bogatá in five hours even sin mujeres.
Our path, during the first few miles down the western declivity of
the Suma Paz, was quite as bad as it had been anywhere on the eastern
slope. After, however, we had reached the plateau, about fifteen
hundred feet below the Boquerón, the road became much better and
our mounts could make far better time than was before possible.
Notwithstanding the energy expended in crossing the crest of the Andes,
they were still in fine fettle, and it was only necessary to give them
a loose rein to have them break into a lively gallop, which they seemed
to be able to keep up indefinitely with but little effort.
There was not much of interest to note on this part of the way
except, perhaps, some remarkable effects of erosion near the road a
short distance from the capital. The hard, compact earth was here
carved by the action of rain and running water into the same fantastic
forms, often resembling dolmens and cromlechs, that characterize the
Badlands of South Dakota. We regretted that we were unable to take some
photographs of them, as a number of the formations were of special
geological importance.
The first indication of our near approach to Bogatá was a
two-wheeled cart, drawn by a yoke of oxen, which we passed near the
suburbs of the city. It was the first wheeled vehicle we had seen since
leaving Ciudad Bolivar. Further [282]on we were
startled—and, I may add, delighted—by the piercing sound of
a locomotive whistle. It came from an engine on one of the short
railroads that centre in Bogotá.
At last we were getting back—I will not say to
civilization—but to where the material evidences of civilisation
were more numerous than they had been anywhere on our journey since we
had taken our departure from the Port-of-Spain. As we got still nearer
the city, we met a cavalcade of horsemen who were out for their evening
ride. It was here that we saw, for the first time in Colombia, a
thoroughfare worthy of the name. Our bonny steeds, trusty and true,
seemed to appreciate the improvement in the road as much as we did
ourselves. And, as if put on their mettle by the curveting steeds we
had just passed, they, like the fleet mules of Nausicaa,
“gathered up their nimble feet,” and almost before we
realized it we were in the streets of Bogotá.
It was then a matter of only a few minutes to our hotel, where we
found comforts and conveniences to which we had long been strangers. It
was just eight hours since we had left our modest posada in Caqueza,
with its simple fare and hard board cot, and now we suddenly found
ourselves installed in richly furnished apartments, with brilliant
electric lights and an excellent cuisine. The sudden change in our
environment seemed like an incident in the Arabian Nights rather
than a reality in which we were personally concerned.
“How were you ever able to make such a trip?” queried a
German traveler, shortly after our arrival. I had made all arrangements
to go with a friend from Bogotá to Ciudad Bolivar, but after all
was ready, I was dissuaded by my friends from undertaking a journey on
which I had so long set my heart. They assured me that the trip would
be so difficult and beset with so many dangers of all kinds that I
would run the risk of losing health, and even life, if I persisted in
my purpose. Only at the last moment, when they told me that the roads
were absolutely impassable at [283]this season of the year, did
I give up a project that I had so long cherished. How I envy you. But
it is too late now for me to reconsider my plans, as I must return to
Germany in a few days, and with the knowledge that, against my better
judgment, I was forced to forego the most interesting part of my
itinerary.”
Yes, we had indeed been fortunate in our wanderings. In the
expressive language of a West Indian negro servant, whom we had for a
while in Venezuela, we had always been “good-lucky, never
bad-lucky.” We had no adventures to record and never once felt
that we were in presence of danger. We never carried weapons of any
kind and at no time was there any need for them. During our entire
journey, through plains and among mountains, we felt quite as safe as
if we had been taking a promenade down Broadway or Fifth Avenue, New
York. Roughing it agreed with us perfectly and, far from suffering from
exposure or fatigue, we found ourselves in the enjoyment of better
health at the completion of our journey than at the beginning. Despite
all predictions to the contrary, we had escaped all
“The ministers of pain, and fear,
And disappointment, and mistrust and hate,
And clinging crime.”
and had reached Colombia’s capital, ready, after
a few days’ rest, to enter upon even a longer and a more arduous
journey than the one that we had just so happily terminated.
“But did you not fear sickness on your way?” asked
another German, who had gone over some of the ground we had just
traversed, and who seemed to entertain anything but pleasant
recollections of his experience. “When I traveled in the
interior, far away from doctors and medical assistance of every kind, I
was continually haunted by the thought of contracting fever or some
other dread tropical disease. What would you have done if you had been
[284]stricken with the vomito or berriberri or the
bubonic plague?” Modesty forbade us replying to this question by
saying that “The Lord takes care of his own,” so we
answered in the words of Lucan,
“Capit omnia tellus
Quae genuit; coelo tegitur qui non hubet
urnam.”12
[285]
1
Historia de las Indias, Dec. 1, Cap. V. ↑
2
“Certainly it is a marvelous fact in the history of the
Mammalia,” says Charles Darwin, “that in South America a
native horse should have lived and disappeared, to be succeeded in
after ages by the countless herds descended from the few introduced
with the Spanish colonists!”—Journal of Researches into
the Natural History and Geology of the Countries Visited during the
Voyage of H. M. S. “Beagle” round the World, Chap.
VII. ↑
3
According to the Chibchas, the fossil remains found here were the bones
of a race of giants, hence the name given the locality. Humboldt and
Cuvier, at the beginning of the last century, showed that the larger
bones found were the remains of the Mastodon angustidens.
Similar fossils found in other parts of South America have given rise
to like fables. Cieza de Leon devotes an interesting chapter to a race
of giants whose remains were found at Point Santa Helena, near
Guayaquil. And on the tradition of a race of giants, that at one time
landed at this place, a certain Mr. Ranking, in 1827, published a
fantastic book entitled Researches on the Conquest of Peru and
Mexico by the Mongols, accompanied with Elephants. See La
Cronica del Peru, Cap. LII, of Cieza de Leon. ↑
4
Campaigns and Cruises in Venezuela and New Granada from
1817–1830. ↑
5
“According to what the inhabitants told me,” wrote Mollien,
in the early part of the last century, “when the paramo se
pone bravo is out of humor, then the greatest dangers threaten the
traveler; a wind laden with icy vapors blows with tremendous violence;
thick darkness covers the earth and conceals every trace of a road. The
birds which, on the appearance of a fine day, had attempted the
passage, fall motionless. The traveler seeks to shelter himself under
the stunted shrubs which here and there grow in these deserts; but
their wet foliage obliges him to find another covert. Worn out with
fatigue and hunger, in vain urging on his mules, benumbed with cold, he
sits down to recover his exhausted strength. Fatal repose! His stomach
soon becomes affected as when at sea, his blood freezes in his veins;
his muscles grow stiff, his lips open as if to smile, and he expires
with the expression of joy upon his features. The mules, no longer
hearing their master’s voice, remain standing, till at length
tired, they lie down to die.”—Travels in the Republic of
Colombia, pp. 96, 97, London, 1824. ↑
6
Signifying a large hole, or a wide opening. ↑
7 The
author of Campaigns and Cruises, already quoted, writing of the
pass where Bolivar’s army crossed the Cordillera describes it as
“strewed with the bones of men and animals, that have perished in
attempting to cross the paramo in unfavorable weather. Multitudes of
small crosses are fixed in the rocks by pious hands, in memory of
former travelers, who have died here; and along the path are strewed
fragments of saddlery, trunks and various articles that have been
abandoned, and resemble the traces of a routed army.” Vol. III,
p. 165. ↑
8 The
Guia de la Republica de Colombia, p. 301, por M.
Zamora, Bogotá, 1907, places the altitude at three thousand and
nine hundred metres. ↑
9
Nueva-Geografia de Colombia, Tom. I, p. 985. ↑
10
According to Vergara y Velasco, the name Suma Paz is of Indian, and not
of Spanish origin. If this be true, the name should be written as one
word—Sumapaz. Personally, I prefer to think the name is Spanish.
For this particular range it is a most appropriate
epithet. ↑
11 Padre
Simon says that Federmann, after crossing the Cordillera, tarried for a
while in the province of Pasca. Castellanos declares it was in the
pueblo of Pasca, a small town a short distance south of our route.
According to Vergara y Velasco, the adventurous German conquistador
entered “the Sabana of Bogatá by way of Pasca and
Usme.” Usme is a village that is on the road along which we
passed. Col. Joaquin Acosta tells us the Cordillera was crossed in the
broadest and most rugged part, “where even to-day the most daring
hunters scarcely ever venture. Neither before nor since Federmann have
horses scaled the craggy crests of Pascote and crossed the heights of
Suma Paz and descended thence to Pasca in the valley of
Fusagasuga.” Oviedo informs us that it required twenty-two days
to cross the paramos, which was so extremely cold that sixteen
horses were frozen to death. But whether Federmann crossed Suma Paz
where we did or, as some think, at a point farther south, it is
reasonable to suppose that his route from Villavicencio to
Bogatá was practically the same as our own. ↑
12
“Earth receives againe,
Whatever she brought forth, and they obtaine
Heaven’s couverture, that have no urnes at
all.”
—Lucan’s Pharsalia, Lib.
VII, vv. 319 et seq.  ↑
In the beginning of August, 1538, Gonzalo Jimenez de
Quesada, the conqueror of Cundinmarca, and his followers, after one of
the most remarkable campaigns ever conducted in the New World,
assembled on the present site of Bogatá. Here Quesada dismounted
from his charger, and plucking up some grass by the roots, he announced
that he took possession of that land in the name of the Emperor Charles
V. Having remounted his steed, he drew his sword, and challenged any
one to oppose this formal declaration, which, he declared, he was
prepared to defend at all hazards. As no one appeared to contest his
action, he sheathed his sword, and directed the army notary to make an
official record of what had just been accomplished.
Bogotá was then but a rude village, or, rather, a camp, of a
dozen hastily constructed huts which barely sufficed to shelter the
intrepid sons of Spain. Besides these twelve huts—erected in
memory of the twelve apostles—there had also been constructed a
small wooden, thatch-covered church, on the very site occupied by the
present imposing cathedral of Colombia’s fair capital. The first
mass was said in this church the sixth day of August, a few days after
the ceremony of occupation just mentioned—and this is regarded as
the legal date of the foundation of Bogotá. It was then that the
work of the conquest was technically considered as finished. The work
of colonization was to follow without delay.
It was then that Quesada gave to the future city the name of Santa
Fé.1 Being from Granada, he named the country
[286]he had discovered and conquered Nuevo Reino de
Granada—the New Kingdom of Granada—an appellation it
retained until after the War of Independence, when it received the name
it now bears.
There is, indeed, a striking similarity between the elevated
plateau, watered by the Funza, and the charming vega of Granada,
fertilized by the romantic Genil. To one looking towards the west, from
a spur of the mountain at the foot of which Bogotá is situated,
as Granada is located at the foot of its hills, the ridge of Suba is
seen towards the northwest, just as the sierra of Elvira is seen with
respect to the old Moorish capital. And so it is with the relative
positions of Santa Fé en la Vega and the pueblo of Fontibon. The
illusion is complete, and the similarity between these two famous
places in Spain and Colombia must have impressed themselves on the
receptive mind of the illustrious conquistador with peculiar force.
Even the heights of Suacha, in aspect and position, recall the famous
hill which is known as the Suspiro del Moro from the lament of
Boabdil, the last king of Granada, whose tears evoked from his mother,
the intrepid Sultana, Ayxa la Horra, the caustic words, “Bien hace en llorar como mujer lo que como hombre no supo
defender.”2
Santa Fé, also known as Santa Fé de Bogotá, was
for a long period the capital of the Viceroyalty of New Granada. After
the War of Independence the name was changed to
Bogotá—from Bacatá—the name of the old
Chibcha capital, where the zipa, the most powerful of the Indian
caciques, at the arrival of the Spaniards, had his official residence.
The city is nearly two miles in length and of varying breadth. Its
present population is nearly one hundred and twenty-five thousand. It
is situated on a western spur of the great Cordillera of Suma Paz at an
elevation, according to Reiss and Stübel, of eight thousand six
hundred and sixteen feet above sea level—more than [287]half
a mile higher than the summit of Mt. Washington, the highest point in
New England.
A Valley in the
Cordilleras.
The mean annual temperature is 60° F., but, owing to the rarity
of the atmosphere, and to its being shielded from the wind by the
mountains at whose base it is situated, it seems to be higher than
this. During certain seasons of the year one may experience a
penetrating cold, as long as one remains in the shade, but when one
passes into the sunshine it becomes almost uncomfortably warm. During
the rainy season, the newcomer feels the cold very keenly, but, after a
short residence in the city, one becomes acclimated and then fancies
that he is in the enjoyment of perpetual spring.
We were in Bogotá in the early part of June, during which
time it rained every day. Coming directly from the tierra
caliente, we suffered considerably, especially at night, from the
low temperature and the dampness that prevailed. We were, however,
informed by the natives that the season was unusually severe, and that
such bad weather as we encountered was quite unusual: Velasco y Vergara
—a Colombian—tells that it rains the greater part of the
year, and that the sky is almost always covered by clouds.3
For this reason, the houses suffer from humidity, and rheumatism and
kindred complaints are very prevalent. Otherwise the climate is
considered salubrious.
Bogotá—called by the aborigines Bacatá—is
a city in a state of transition. It has lost, almost entirely, the
mediæval, monastic, mozarabic aspect that characterized it while
it was the tranquil court of the viceroys. But, great as has been the
change that it has undergone during the last few decades, it preserves
much of the quaintness of colonial times. Indeed, it is not difficult,
in certain parts of the city, to fancy oneself carried back to a
typical Spanish town of the time of Charles V or Philip II. As a whole,
however, the Bogotá of to-day does not differ materially in
appearance from a city of the same size in Spain or [288]Mexico. All Latin-American cities are similar in
their leading features, and when you have seen one you have seen
all.
The city is adorned by a number of broad and beautiful streets and
several plazas and parks. Aside from a few government buildings, the
edifices that attract most attention are the monasteries and churches.
The cathedral is a noble building and compares favorably with any
similar structure in South America. The interior had just been
artistically painted and gilded, at the time of our visit, and it
reminded us somewhat of the exquisite finish of St. John Lateran, in
Rome. An object of interest to the traveler, within these sacred
precincts, is the tomb of the illustrious conquistador, Gonzalo Jimenez
de Quesada.
The residences of the people are usually two stories high, with a
balcony on the second story facing the street. All of the older houses,
as well as many of the modern ones, are of the well-known Moorish style
of architecture, with a single large
entrance—porton—and a
patio—courtyard—or two, on which the rooms open.
This style of building is well adapted to tropical climates. It is
comfortable and secures the maximum of privacy. It is in reality, as
well as in fiction, the owner’s castle.
We were surprised to see the number of foreign flowers grown in
these patios. One would naturally expect to find representatives of the
rich and beautiful Colombian flora, but the ladies of Bogotá
seem to prefer the exotic blooms of the temperate zone. We found roses,
camellias, pinks and geraniums in abundance, but rarely any of those
floral beauties that had so frequently excited our admiration on the
way from the llanos to the capital. Our hotel, however, was a notable
exception to this rule. Here we were delighted with a veritable
exhibition of orchids of many species and of the most wonderful forms
and colors. Among them were some truly splendid specimens of oncidiums,
cattleyas and odontoglossums. It was then we thought of some of our
orchid-loving friends of New York, [289]who would have fairly reveled
in such marvels of Flora’s kingdom.
As nearly all the streets are paved with cobblestones, driving is
anything but a pleasure. As a matter of fact, the only passable drive
in the city is the one that leads to the charming little suburb of
Chapinero. This is one of the show places of Bogotá, and its
houses are in marked contrast with those found in the older part of the
city. Most of them are entirely different in style from the enclosed
Moorish structures of which mention has been made. Here one is
introduced to cozy Swiss chalets in the midst of delightful flower
gardens and picturesque French chateaux, that carry one back to the
Seine and the Loire.
Aside from the churches and monasteries, many of which have been
converted into government offices, there were two buildings that
possessed a special interest for us. One of these was the old Colegio
del Rosario—now known as the School of Philosophy and
Letters—founded in 1553, nearly a hundred years before the
University of Harvard. This institution has long been fondly spoken of
by the people of Bogotá as the country’s special
glory—la gloria de la patria. The other building was the
astronomical observatory—the first intertropical structure of the
kind—erected in 1803. After the observatory of Quito, it is said
to be the highest in the world.
Some of the streets and houses have been recently lighted by
electricity, but as yet horses or mules are used as the motive power
for the few street cars that traverse the principal thoroughfares. It
were easy to count the number of private carriages in the city. The
only ones we saw were those of the archbishop and the president of the
republic. Indeed, so rough are the streets that most people prefer
walking to using cabs, except in cases of necessity.
The first two objects to arrest our attention, as we approached
Bogotá from the south, were the chapels of Guadalupe and
Monserrate, the former nearly twenty-two [290]hundred feet above
the city, and the latter about two hundred feet lower. Perched high
upon the flanks of two picturesque mountain peaks, they are conspicuous
objects from all parts of the Savanna. Both of these sanctuaries are
reached by a foot path, but, as yet, no attempt has been made to
connect them with the city by a carriage road. Owing to the altitude
above sea level of these places, a pilgrimage to them is quite a
task—especially to the newcomer, who is unaccustomed to the rare
atmosphere of the locality. But the magnificent view afforded one from
either of these elevated shrines well repays all the effort required to
reach them. It is, in some respects, the most beautiful to be found in
the whole of Colombia. And then, there are besides certain historical
features connected with the panorama spread out before one that make it
doubly interesting.
Standing in front of the church of Guadalupe, we have before us the
beautiful Savanna of Bogotá4—a fertile plain, nine
hundred square kilometers in area. Humboldt, whose opinion has been
adopted by many subsequent writers, regarded this level stretch of land
as the bottom of a lake that formerly existed here, but recent
investigators have called this view in question. Strangely enough, the
Chibcha Indians, at the time of the conquest, had a tradition that the
Savanna was at one time occupied by a lake, but that Bochica, child of
the sun, drained its waters by giving them an exit through the
celebrated falls of Tequendama.5 The general appearance of
the plain, as [291]well as certain geological features, seemed to
confirm this tradition, and it was not until quite recently that any
one ventured to express a doubt about the tradition, or the
long-accepted opinion of the great German savant.
In the morning, when the Savanna is covered by a mist, as often
happens, the observer from Monserrate or Guadalupe does indeed seem to
be looking down upon a vast lake. The hills, which here and there rise
above the fog, look like islands and strengthen the illusion. But this
effect is all dissipated as soon as the sun makes his appearance above
the crest of Suma Paz. One then has before him one of the most lovely
panoramas in the world. The wide verdant expanse is intersected with
rivers and streams, all tributaries of the Funza, and dotted with towns
and hamlets and haciendas, lakes and lakelets, large herds of cattle,
flocks of sheep, troops of horses, mules and burros. All this is
enclosed by lofty ramparts of gneiss and granite, which shield the
inhabitants of city and plain from the tempestuous moisture-laden winds
that would otherwise [292]often sweep over the Savanna with the fury
of a Kansas cyclone.
Aside from the Eucalyptus and Humboldt oak—Quercus
Humboldtii—there are no large trees in the Savanna of
Bogotá. The Eucalyptus, however, is everywhere visible, in the
streets and in the gardens of the capital, along the thoroughfares of
the country and around every house, however humble, and quinta, as far
as the eye can reach. These trees were introduced from Australia only a
few decades ago, and now one finds them in all parts of the republic.
We saw them all along our route from the llanos to Bogatá. The
people, especially those living on the eastern slopes of the Oriental
Andes, are firmly convinced that their presence wards off
paludismo—malaria—and, as a consequence, they are
considered as indispensable around the house as the plantain or
calabash tree.6
There is nothing more delightful than a stroll along the Rio San
Francisco, which flows between Monserrate and Guadalupe and thence
through the city of Bogotá. The scenery is thoroughly Alpine in
character and, at times, picturesque beyond description. As one follows
the narrow path, always near the musical, crystal waters of the
impetuous stream, one is delighted at every step by the appearance of
some new flower of brightest hue, or some strange shrub of richest
foliage. The ground is fairly carpeted with anemones, hepaticæ,
gentians, valerians, geraniums, campanulæ, lupines and
buttercups. Like similar plants on the Alps, and on the heights of our
Rockies, their stems are very short and they seem like so many rosettes
attached to the earth, or the rocks that rise up on both sides of our
narrow path.
One sees well illustrated here the dividing line between
[293]the flora of the paramo and that of the
tierra fría. The plants of the latter creep up timidly
from the Savanna until a certain point, and then, as if afraid to
venture further into the region of frost, halt on the lower edge of the
paramo. In a similar manner the plants of the higher altitudes
cautiously descend to the upper belt of the tierra fría
and there come to a standstill. They meet on a common zone in limited
numbers, but this zone is often extremely narrow. One of the agreeable
surprises to the traveler in the Andes is to note the sudden and
extraordinary changes in the character of the vegetation as he ascends
or descends the mountain near the line of demarcation between two
zones.
The plateau of Guadalupe is the home of two remarkable tree ferns.
One of these is the Cyathea patens, from ten to twelve feet
high, with a beautiful, umbrella-shaped crown. The other is the
Dicksonia gigantea, which, according to the naturalist, Karsten,
is probably the most vigorous and luxuriant tree fern in South America.
Its massive, columnar trunk bears forty and more dark-green fronds,
from three to four feet wide and from six to seven in length. To get a
close view of even one of these noble cryptogams fully repays one for
the arduous climb up to its favorite habitat.
Any city in the United States or Europe, having in its immediate
vicinity such attractions as has Bogotá, would immediately put
them within easy reach of the public. Thus both Monserrate and
Guadalupe would, without delay, be connected with the city by a
funicular railway, and near by would be a number of restaurants and
pleasure resorts.
An electric railway would also be constructed to the great water
falls of Tequendama—the largest in Colombia and among the most
celebrated in South America. Although only thirty-six feet wide, the
main fall is three times the height of Niagara Falls.7 But the
volume of water carried [294]over the precipice of Tequendama
is incomparably less than that which plunges into the colossal
whirlpool of Niagara. In appearance it somewhat resembles Vernal Falls
in the Yosemite Valley, or the lower fall of the Yellowstone. What,
however, gives to the Colombian cataract a beauty all its own is its
setting of luxuriant tropical vegetation. In this respect our northern
waterfalls, however attractive they may be in other respects, cannot be
compared with Tequendama.
Incredible as it may seem, but few Colombians have ever seen the
falls of Tequendama. Although the people of Bogotá love to talk
about them, as among the greatest wonders of their country, it is
rarely that one is found who has actually visited them. And yet they
are not more than twelve miles from the capital. Even the peons living
on the plains only a few miles from the cataract can give the traveler
little or no information as to the best way to reach them. How
different this would all be if the place were easy of access, and if
the visitor, on arriving there, could find the creature comforts to be
obtained in similar places in the United States and Europe!
I have alluded to the interesting historical associations connected
with the city and plateau of Bogotá. It will suffice to speak of
but one of them; but this one is so remarkable that it is like a
chapter taken from the Arabian Nights. I refer to the meeting of
the three distinguished conquistadores, Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada,
Nicholas Federmann and Sebastian de Belalcazar.
Quesada had left Santa Marta in 1536, having under his command,
according to Oviedo, eight hundred men and one [295]hundred horses. He went part of the way by land
and part by the Rio Grande, now known as the Magdalena. After reaching
the Opon, he followed that river as far as it was navigable, and
eventually made his way to the plateau of Bogotá—the land
of the Chibchas.
His march was, in some respects, the most difficult and remarkable
in the annals of the conquest. He had to contend against relentless
savages, dismal swamps and almost impenetrable forests, where he had to
cut his way through the tangled vines and bushes, and where it was
often impossible to make more than a league a day. His men were
decimated by disease and starvation. When he at last arrived at the
Valle de Alcazares, near the present site of Bogotá, he could
count but one hundred infantry and sixty cavalry. But with this handful
of men he had conquered the Chibcha nation, numbering, according to the
old chroniclers, one million people and having twenty thousand soldiers
in the field.
Scarcely, however, was his campaign against the aborigines
successfully terminated, when information was conveyed him of a new
danger in the person of a German competitor, who had just arrived from
the llanos.
Five years previously, Federmann, in the service of the Welsers, had
left Coro in Venezuela, with four hundred well-armed and
well-provisioned men. After wandering over trackless plains and through
dark and almost impenetrable forests, enduring frightful hardships of
all kinds, he finally got word of the Chibchas and of their treasures
of gold and precious stones. He forthwith changed his route and crossed
the Eastern Cordilleras, where the traveler André assures us it
is now absolutely impossible to pass.8
Thus, almost before Quesada was aware that Federmann was in the
country, he was constrained by policy to receive him and his one
hundred ragged and famished followers—these were all that
remained of his gallant band—as his [296]guests. The Spanish
conquistador knew that the German leader would put in a claim for a
part of the territory that they had both been exploring, and which,
until then, each of them had regarded as his own by right of conquest.
He was then naturally eager to effect a settlement with his competitor
on the best terms possible, and get him out of the country with the
least possible delay. Federmann agreed to renounce all his claims in
consideration of his receiving himself the sum of ten thousand pesos,
and of having his soldiers enjoy all the rights of discoverers and
conquistadores accorded to those of Quesada.
Scarcely, however, had these negotiations been happily terminated,
when another and a more formidable rival appeared on the scene, on his
way from the distant South. This was Sebastian de Belalcazar,9
the famous lieutenant of Francisco Pizarro. He was then governor of
Quito and the conqueror of much of the territory now included in
Ecuador and Southern Colombia. Hearing casually of El Dorado and of the
marvelous riches this ruler was reputed to possess, the Spanish
chieftain lost no time in organizing an expedition to the country of
gold and emeralds, of fertile plains and delightful valleys. Setting
out with the assurance of an early and easy victory, and of soon
becoming the possessors of untold wealth and all the enjoyment that
wealth could command, the soldiers, in quest of El Dorado, exclaimed
with unrestrained enthusiasm:
“Nuestros sean su oro y sus placeres,
Gocemos de ese campo y ese sol.”10
But anticipation is not fruition. This the Spaniards
soon learned to their sorrow. Like Quesada and Federmann and their
followers, Belalcazar and his men had to endure frightful hardships
during the long and painful march of [297]many months from
Quito to the plateau of Bogotá. According to Castellanos, who
wrote while many of these adventurers were still living, and who had
received from them directly an account of their privations and
sufferings and the countless obstacles that at times rendered progress
almost impossible, their journey was made through mountains and
districts that were inaccessible and uninhabitable, through gloomy
forests and dense, tangled underbrush; through inhospitable lands and
dismal swamps, where there was neither food nor shelter for man or
beast.11
This extraordinary and accidental meeting of the three
conquistadores, coming from so great distances, from three different
points of the compass, is one of the most interesting episodes in the
history of the conquest. It was a critical moment for the Europeans. If
they had failed to agree, and had turned their arms against one
another, those who would have escaped alive would have been at the
mercy of the Indians, who would at once have rallied their forces to
repel the invaders. But, fortunately, wise councils prevailed and a
clash was averted.
“While the clergy and the religious,” writes Acosta,
“were going to and from the different camps endeavoring to
prevent a rupture, the three parties of Spaniards, coming from points
so distant, and now occupying the three apices of a triangle, whose
sides measured three or four leagues, presented a singular spectacle.
Those from Peru were clad in scarlet cloth and silk, and wore steel
helmets and costly plumes. Those from Santa Marta had cloaks, linens
and caps made by the Indians. Those, however, from Venezuela, like
refugees from Robinson Crusoe’s island, were covered with the
skins of bears, leopards, tigers and deer. Having journeyed more than
thirteen hundred leagues through uninhabited lands, they had
experienced the most cruel hardships. They arrived poor, naked, and
reduced to one-fourth of their original number.
“The three chiefs,” continues Acosta, “were among
the [298]most distinguished men who ever came to America.
Belalcazar, son of a woodman of Extremadura, attained by his talents
and valor the reputation of being one of the most celebrated
conquistadores of South America and was endowed in a degree far above
the other two with political tact and observing genius. As soon as he
became aware of the agreement entered into between Quesada and
Federmann, he nobly waived his rights, and declined to accept the sum
which Quesada offered him. He stipulated only that his soldiers should
not be prevented from returning to Peru, when they might desire to do
so, or when Pizarro should demand them, and that Captain Juan Cabrera
should return to found a town in Neiva, a territory which, along with
Timana, was to be under the government of Popayan, which it was his
intention to solicit from the Emperor. In the meantime he agreed to
accompany Quesada to Spain.”12
The three went to Spain together, as had been arranged, each of them
confident of receiving from the Spanish monarch a reward commensurate
with his labors and services to the crown. Each one aspired to the
governorship of New Granada and used all his influence to secure the
coveted prize.
The net result of their efforts was a sad experience of the vanity
of human wishes. All were disappointed in their expectations. The
guerdon all so eagerly strove for was awarded to another, who had taken
no part in the conquest that had rendered the three aspirants to royal
favor so famous.
Only Belalcazar received any recognition whatever. He was made
adelantado of Popayan and the surrounding territory. As for Quesada and
Federmann, they fell into disfavor. The latter soon disappeared from
public view entirely, but long afterwards, Quesada was able to return
to the land where he had won so many laurels. And it was [299]fitting that, after his death, his remains
should repose in the noble cathedral that adorns the capital of which
he was the founder.13
In adventure and achievement, the three conquistadores above
mentioned take rank with Cortes, Pizarro and Orellana. Given a Homer,
their wanderings and deeds would afford themes for three Odysseys of
intense and abiding interest. Given even an Ercilla, we should have a
literary monument, which, in romantic episode and dramatic effect,
would eclipse the Araucana, the nearest approach to an epic that
South America has yet produced.
The Bogotános have long claimed for their city the
distinction of being the Athens of South America. And considering its
past and present culture, and the attention which the arts, the
sciences and literature have always received there since the foundation
of the capital, few, I think, will be disposed to impugn the justness
of this claim.
Bogotá’s first man of letters was none other than the
licentiate Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada himself—a man who could
wield the pen with as much skill as the sword. Indeed, the detailed
knowledge that we have of many features of his memorable campaigns we
owe to his fertile pen. He is really the first and, in some respects,
the most important chronicler of the events in which he took so
conspicuous a part. How unlike, in this respect, is he not, to Pizarro
and Almagro, who were unable to sign their own names?
Among the other early writers of New Granada was Padre Juan de
Castellanos, the poet-historiographer, who has been so frequently
quoted in the preceding chapters. The extent of his work may be gauged
by the fact that it contains one hundred and fifty thousand
hendecasyllabic verses—more than ten times as many as are in the
Divina Commedia—and more than are found in any
other metrical [300]work, except the Hindu epic known as the
Mahabharata, which contains no fewer than one hundred and ten thousand
couplets.
It is interesting to note that in Colombia, as in Spain, Portugal
and Mexico, the nun in the cloister has found time to devote to
literature as well as to contemplation and works of charity. Among
these successful imitators of St. Theresa, whose works, both in prose
and verse, have long been the admiration of the literary world, may be
mentioned Sor Francisca Josefa de la Concepcion, of Tunga. Although she
wrote in prose, she, by her purity of language and delicacy of
sentiment, is entitled to rank with such distinguished ornaments of the
cloister as Sor Junana Ines de la Cruz, of Mexico; Sor Maria de Ceo, of
Portugal; Sor Gregoria de Santa Teresa, of Seville; and Sor Ana de San
Jeronimo, of Granada, Spain.14
The names of the poets and prose writers of Colombia, that have
achieved distinction, make a long list. Many of them enjoy an
international reputation, and their productions compare favorably with
the best efforts of the writers of the mother
country—Spain.15 [301]
In science, too, Colombia counts many sons who have contributed
greatly to our knowledge of nature. It suffices to recall the names of
such savants as Francisco Antonio Zea, Francisco José de Caldas
and the illustrious Mutis, whom Humboldt called “the patriarch of
the botanists of the New World,” and whose name Linnæeus
declared to be immortal—“nomen immortale quod
nulla aetas unquam delebit.”
There were at one time no fewer than twenty-three colleges in New
Granada. The first of these was founded in 1554, for the education of
the Indians. The following year another one was established for the
benefit of Spanish orphans and mestizos. In one of the colleges was a
special chair for the study of the Muisca language. The Royal and
Pontifical University began its existence in 1627, thirteen years
before the foundation of Harvard College. In 1653 the Archbishop D. Fr.
Cristobal de Torres founded the celebrated College del Rosario, which,
by reason of its munificent endowment, was able to render such splendid
service to the cause of education, and was long recognized as the
leading institution of learning in New Granada.
Although the Viceroyalty of Santa Fe was behind Mexico16 and Lima in the introduction of the printing
press, it claims the honor of establishing the first astronomical
observatory in America, as Mexico was the first to have a botanical
garden, a school of mines, and a school of medicine. [302]It
was also among the first, if not the very first, of the capitals of the
New World to open a public library.
The number of public and private libraries now existing in the city
of Bogotá contribute greatly towards justifying its claim to
being the chief centre of South American culture. Another evidence of
the intellectual atmosphere that obtains there is the number of
secondhand book stores. In browsing among these storehouses of old and
precious tomes I quite forgot, for the time being, that I was so far
from the busy world of action, and could easily fancy myself among the
book shops of Florence, Leipsic or Paris. Indeed, some of the most
prized volumes in my Latin-American library I picked up on the book
stalls of Bogotá.
Mr. R. B. Cunninghame Graham, in his preface to Sr. Triana’s
work, Down the Orinoco in a Canoe, says the capital of Colombia
“is in a way a kind of Chibcha Athens. There all men write, and
poets rave and madden through the land, and only wholesome necessary
revolutions keep their number down.” Again, he declares:
“Bogotá to-day is, without doubt, the greatest literary
centre south of Panama. Putting aside the flood of titubating verse
which, like a mental dysentery, afflicts all members of the
Spanish-speaking race, in Bogotá more serious literary work is
done during a month than in the rest of the republics in a
year.”17
Mr. W. L. Scruggs, sometime American minister to Bogotá,
writes in the same sense. “Most of the educated classes,”
he says, “have, or think they have, the literary faculty. They
are particularly fond of writing what they call poetry, and of making
post-prandial speeches. The average collegian will write
poetry18 by the yard or speak impromptu by the hour. He
never shows the least embarrassment before an audience, and is rarely
at a loss for [303]a word. The adjectives and adverbs flow in
sluices of unbroken rhythm, and the supply of euphonious words and
hyperbolic phrases seems inexhaustible. He always gesticulates
vehemently, and somehow it seems to become him well; for no matter how
little there may be in what he says, somebody is sure to applaud and
encourage him.”
In Colombia there seem to be as many “doctors,” that is,
men who have the degree of Doctor of Laws, as there are generals in
Venezuela. Most of them are politicians, or contributors to the various
newspapers of the country, or “professors”—there are
no pedagogues—in the numerous educational institutions of the
Republic.
The number of newspapers published in Bogotá is
surprising—more than there are in Boston or Philadelphia. Of
course, their circulation is extremely limited. They are
mostly partisan organs—an independent paper being
unknown—or literary journals remarkable, the majority of them,
for long poems, verbose editorials and translations of the latest
French novels.
On the way down from the chapel of Guadalupe, near the opening of
the gorge between the peaks of Monserrate and Guadalupe, one passes
what was once the Quinta Bolivar, a gift to the Liberator by one of his
wealthy admirers. It is now the property of a thrifty Antioquenian, who
has converted it into a tannery. As we pass along the north side of San
Carlos’ palace, which contains the office of the ministry of
foreign affairs, we observe the historic window from which, as a
memorial tablet informs us, Bolivar escaped assassination, Sept. 25th,
1828. In the centre of the principal plaza, called the Plaza Bolivar,
is a bronze statue of the Liberator by Tenerani, a pupil of Canova.
Everywhere in Colombia, as in Venezuela, we are reminded of Bolivar
and find monuments to his memory. In Ciudad Bolivar and in Valencia and
elsewhere there are statues of him. In Caracas there are several, among
them a large equestrian statue which is a replica of one in Lima.
[304]
But the people, in their desire to honor their hero, have not been
satisfied with statues alone. Coins bear his name and image, towns and
states are named after him. More than this, his name has been given to
one of the South American republics—Bolivia—a republic,
formerly a part of Peru—Upper Peru—which owes its very
existence to him.
But who was Simon Bolivar, one will ask, and what has he done to
achieve such distinction and to command recognition in such diverse
ways and in regions so widely separated?
His admirers say that he was the Washington of South
America—the one who secured the independence of the Spanish
colonies, after three centuries of misrule and oppression. According to
them, he was one of the world’s greatest geniuses in military
science, a genius in state-craft, a genius in everything required to
make a great and successful leader of men.
Sr. Miguel Tejera does not hesitate to characterize him as one who
was “Bold and fortunate as Alexander, a patriot like Hannibal,
brave and clement like Cæsar, a great captain and a profound
statesman like Napoleon, honorable as Washington, a sublime poet and a
versatile orator, such was Bolivar, who united in his own mind all the
vast multiplicity of the elements of genius. His glory will shine in
the heaven of history, not as a meteor that passes, and is lost in the
bosom of space, but as a heavenly body, whose radiance is
ever-increasing.”19
Even more extravagant are the claims made for his hero by Don Felipe
Larazabel in his bulky two-tome Vida de Bolivar.
“A noble and sublime spirit, humane, just, liberal, Bolivar
was one of the most gifted men the world has ever known; so perfect and
unique that in goodness he was like Titus, in his fortune and
achievements like Trapan, in [305]urbanity like Marcus Aurelius, in
valor like Cæsar, in learning and eloquence like Augustus....
“He was a poet like Homer, a legislator like Plato, a soldier
like Bonaparte.... He taught Soublett and Heres diplomacy, Santander
administration, Gual politics, Marshal Sucre military art.
“Like Charlemagne, but in a higher degree, he possessed the
art of doing great things with ease and difficult things with
promptness. Whoever conceived plans so vast? Whoever carried them to a
more successful issue? A quick and unerring glance; a rapid intuition
of things and times; a prodigious spontaneity in improvising gigantic
plans; the science of war reduced to the calculation of minutes, an
extraordinary vigor of conception, and a creative spirit, fertile and
inexhaustible, ... such was Bolivar.
“‘Deus ille fuit, Deus, inclyte Memmi.’ He was a
god, illustrious Memmius, he was a god.”20
Col. G. Hippisley, who served under Bolivar in the War of
Independence, does not give such a flattering estimate of the
Liberator. “Bolivar,” he writes, “would willingly ape
the great man. He aspires to be a second Bonaparte in South America,
without possessing a single talent for the duties of the field or the
cabinet.... He has neither talents nor abilities for a general, and
especially for a commander-in-chief.... Tactics, movements and
manœuvre are as unknown to him as to the lowest of his troops.
All idea of regularity, system or the common routine of an army, or
even a regiment, he is totally unacquainted with. Hence arise all the
disasters he meets, the defeats he suffers and his constant obligations
to retreat whenever opposed to the foe. The victory, which he gains
to-day, however dearly purchased ... is lost to-morrow by some failure
or palpable neglect on his part. Thus it is that Paez was heard to tell
Bolivar, after the action at Villa del Cura, that he would move off
[306]his own troops, and act no more with him in
command; adding, ‘I have never lost a battle wherein I acted by
myself, or in a separate command; and I have always been defeated when
acting in connection with you or under your
orders.’”21
Gen. Holstein, who was the Liberator’s chief-of-staff and who
was, therefore, in a position to have intimate knowledge of the man, is
even more pronounced in his strictures on the character and capacity of
the commander-in-chief of the patriot forces.
“The dominant traits in the character of General Bolivar are
ambition, vanity, thirst for absolute, undivided power and profound
dissimulation.... Many of his generals have done far more than he has
to free the country from the Spaniards.... The brightest deeds of all
these generals were performed in the absence of Bolivar. Abroad they
were attributed to his military skill and heroism, while, in fact, he
was a fugitive a thousand miles from the scenes of their bravery, and
never dreaming of their success.... General Bolivar, moreover, has
never made a charge of cavalry nor with the bayonet; on the contrary,
he has ever been careful to keep himself out of danger.”22
Elsewhere in his work, Holstein claims to “prove that Bolivar,
the Republic of Colombia and its chieftains, are indebted to strangers
and their powerful support for their existence, if not as a free, at
least as an independent people.” There were, according to some
estimates, fully ten thousand European soldiers in the republican army,
and among the officers were Englishmen, Germans, Irishmen, Poles and
Frenchmen. It was, according to Holstein, the Irish legion that gained
the great battle of Carabobo, which secured the independence of
Venezuela.23 It was the [307]British legion, declares the
same writer, that won the decisive victory of Boyacá, which
broke the power of the Spaniards in New Granada. Sucre, the victorious
general in the battle of Pichincha, which liberated Ecuador, was also
the victor in the battles of Junin and Ayacucho—the Waterloo of
colonial rule in South America—which gave freedom to Peru.
Bolivar had the honor of gaining both victories, although he was ill
during the battle of Ayacucho, and a hundred miles from the field of
action during the struggle on the plateau of Junin.
In view of all this, Holstein does not hesitate to declare that
Bolivar rules “with more power and absoluteness than does the
autocrat of Russia or the Sultan of Constantinople,” and that,
compared with George Washington, Simon Bolivar was but a Liliputian.
Sr. Riva Aguero, the first president of Peru, goes farther and assures
us that the terrible characterization, given by Apollocorus, of Philip
of Macedon, father of Alexander the Great, is but a true portrait of
the Liberator Bolivar.
These estimates of Bolivar, so different from those of Tejera and
Larrazabel and many of Bolivar’s other biographers—remind
one of what Montesquieu says about the contradictory accounts which
partisan writers have given us regarding certain potentates of
antiquity. As instances he cites Alexander, who is described as the
veriest poltroon by Herodian, and extolled as a paragon of valor by
Lampridius; and Gratian, who by his admirers is lauded to the skies and
by Philostorgus compared to Nero.
“But, how is it possible, the question naturally arises, that
General Bolivar should have liberated his country, and preserved to
himself the supreme power, without superior talent?”
“If by liberating his country,” replies Gen. Holstein,
in answer to his own question, “it be meant that he has given his
country a free government, I answer that he has not done so. If it be
meant that he has driven out the Spaniards, I answer that he has done
little towards this; [308]far less certainly than the meanest of his
subordinate chieftains. To the question, How can he have retained his
power without superior talent? I answer, in the first place, that the
reputation of superior talent goes a great way.... The stupid
management of the Spanish authorities has facilitated all the
operations of the patriots. The grievous faults of Bolivar and some of
his generals have been exceeded by those of his adversaries. It is not
strange, therefore, that Bolivar should have been able to do all he has
done with very limited talents.”24
Such a marked divergence of views respecting the character of
Bolivar and the position he should occupy among the great chieftains of
history admits of an explanation, but such an explanation would of
itself require a volume. It is safe to say, however, that no reliable
biography of the Liberator has yet appeared, and that, when it does
appear, it is most likely that Bolivar will occupy a position much
below that claimed for him by some of his over-enthusiastic eulogists
and above that assigned to him by those who have manifested less
admiration for his policy and achievements.
To write a definitive biography of Bolivar will not be an easy task.
It will require a man of broad sympathies; one entirely free from all
national antipathy and religious bias; one with a judicial mind, who
can sift and weigh evidence without prejudice, and render a verdict
strictly in accordance with the facts in the case. Most, if not all,
who have hitherto written about Bolivar, have exhibited a partisan
spirit and allowed themselves to be swayed by political and other
considerations, which have so greatly detracted from the value of their
work that it cannot be accepted as authentic history.
To do full justice to the subject in all its bearings will require
impartial judgment, ripe and varied scholarship, and above all, a keen
and comprehensive historic sense. The writer will have to discuss the
relation of Spain to [309]her colonies, and consider various social,
political, racial, economical and religious questions that are as
difficult as they are complicated and conflicting. He must have an
intimate and accurate knowledge of the character and aspirations of the
different peoples with whom Bolivar and his lieutenants had to deal. He
must be familiar with the history and traditions of the various South
American presidencies and viceroyalties and captaincies-general, and
take note of the passions and prejudices and jealousies that have been
the cause of so many sanguinary revolutions and have contributed so
much to retard intellectual progress and material advancement. Only
when such an one appears, and completes the colossal task, shall we
have a definitive life of Simon Bolivar, and an authentic record of the
War of Independence.
Before closing this chapter some reference seems necessary to what
cannot escape even the most casual student of South American history,
but what, to the observant traveler, seems to be a matter of special
moment. I refer to Bolivar’s policy of dividing and weakening
Peru, and to his uniting under one flag the three northern countries of
the continent. The separation of Upper Peru—Bolivia—from
Lower Peru seems, in the light of events since the change, to have been
a fatal mistake and detrimental to the best interests of Bolivia as
well as to those of Peru.
I think, however, he exhibited unusual wisdom and foresight in
combining in one republic—Gran Colombia—the provinces of
Quito, New Granada and Venezuela. I know Gen. Mitre has denounced the
idea as an absurdity—como un
absurdo—25 but, if this distinguished
writer had had [310]an opportunity to study actual conditions, as
they present themselves to the traveler to-day, and to consult the
wishes and welfare of the large mass of the people at present dwelling
within the confines of Greater Colombia, I think he would have been
disposed to accept Bolivar’s plan for a great nation, extending
from the Atlantic to the Pacific, as the best for all concerned.
Had the destiny of Colombia, after the union, been entrusted to the
direction of wise and unselfish patriots, as was the infant Republic of
the United States of North America, one may well believe that the
history of this part of South America, during the last three-quarters
of a century, would have been quite different from what it has been,
and that it would have been spared those countless internecine wars
that have deluged the country in blood and rendered civilization, in
its higher sense, impossible.
The geographical features of the country, and the diverse interests
of its different sections, were, pace Mitre, no more opposed to the
formation of a great and stable republic on the Caribbean than they
were in that vast commonwealth to the north of the Gulf of Mexico,
where the Stars and Stripes have so long been the symbol of peace,
prosperity and national greatness. The people in the southern
continent, were not, it is true, so well prepared for a democratic form
of government as were their brethren in the north, but if, instead of
being cursed with selfish and destructive militarism, they could have
enjoyed the blessings of competent and far-seeing statesmanship, it is
safe to affirm that the Great Colombia, as Bolivar conceived it, would,
ere this, have developed into a flourishing and powerful
republic—worthy of taking a place among the great nations of the
world.26 [311]
But, sad to relate, Bolivar’s creation was short-lived. After
a precarious existence of only eleven years, disintegration took place,
and the Liberator, fallen into disfavor and condemned to exile, was
forced to be a witness of the collapse of the structure that had cost
him so much labor, and which he had fondly hoped would be his greatest
and most enduring monument.
Shortly before his death at the hacienda of San Pedro, near Santa
Marta, where he perished alone,
“Maligned and doubted and denied, a broken-hearted man,”
he wrote to General Flores, of Ecuador, a letter in which occur the
following remarkable statements:—
“I have been in power—yo he mandado—for
nearly twenty years, from which I have gathered only a few definite
results:—
“1. America for us is ungovernable.
“2. He who dedicates his services to a revolution plows the
sea.
“3. The only thing that can be done in America is to
emigrate.
“4. This country will inevitably fall into the hands of the
unbridled rabble, and little by little become a prey to petty tyrants
of all colors and races.
“5. Devoured as we shall be by all possible crimes and ruined
by our own ferociousness, Europeans will not deem it worth while to
conquer us.
“6. If it were possible for any part of the world to return
[312]to a state of primitive chaos, that would be the
last stage of Spanish America.”27
Was the Liberator gifted with a seer’s vision when he penned
these prophetic words? It would seem so, for even if he had open before
him the scroll in which has been recorded the chief events of the
history of South America during the past three-quarters of a century,
he could scarcely have spoken with greater truth and precision. Certain
it is, as Mitre well observes, that none of his designs or ideals have
survived him. His political work died with him and all his fond dreams
of a vast Andean Empire vanished like mist before the rising sun.
This is not the place to account for the turmoil and anarchy which
have so long devastated one of the most fertile quarters of the globe.
Considering its immense natural resources and its many advantages of
climate and geographical position, it should be one of the most
prosperous regions of the earth, and its inhabitants among the happiest
and most advanced in culture and the arts of peace. Let it suffice to
reproduce the following paragraph from the work, already cited, of Sr.
Perez Triana:—
“As to the topsy-turviness of things Spanish and
Spanish-American, the story is told that Santiago, the patron saint of
Spain, being admitted into the presence of God, asked and obtained for
the land of Spain and for its people all sorts of blessings; marvelous
fertility for the soil, natural wealth of all kinds in the mountains
and the forests, abundance of fish in the rivers and of birds in the
air; courage, sobriety, and all the manly virtues for men; beauty,
grace and loveliness for the women. All this was granted, but on the
point of leaving, the saint, it is said, asked from God that he would
also grant Spain a good government. The request was denied, as then, it
is said, the Lord remarked, the angels would abandon heaven and flock
to Spain. The story has lost none of its point.” [313]
1 It was
made a city by Charles V in 1540 with the title of “muy noble y muy leal,” very noble and very
loyal. ↑
2
“You do well to weep like a woman for what you failed to defend
like a man.”—Irving’s A Chronicle of the Conquest
of Granada, Chap. LIV. ↑
3 Op.
cit., Appendice B., p. 10. ↑
4 Called
by Colombians la Sabana, or la Sabana de Bogatá. ↑
5
“In the remotest times,” writes Humboldt, following Quesada
and Piedrahita, “before the moon accompanied the earth, according
to the mythology of the Muysca or Mozca Indians, the inhabitants of the
plain of Bogatá lived like barbarians, naked, without
agriculture, without any form of laws or worship. Suddenly there
appeared among them an old man, who came from the plains situate on the
east of the Cordillera of Chingasa; and who appeared to be of a race
unlike that of the natives, having a long and bushy beard. He was known
by three distinct appellations, Bochica, Nemquetheba, and Zuhe. This
old man, like Manco-Capac, instructed men how to clothe themselves,
build huts, till the ground, and form themselves into communities. He
brought with him a woman, to whom also tradition gives three names,
Chia, Yubecayguaya, and Huythaca. This woman, extremely beautiful, and
no less malignant, thwarted every enterprise of her husband for the
happiness of mankind. By her skill in magic, she swelled the river of
Funza, and inundated the valley of Bogatá. The greater part of
the inhabitants perished in this deluge; a few only found refuge on the
summits of the neighbouring mountains. The old man, in anger drove the
beautiful Huythaca far from the Earth, and she became the Moon, which
began from that epoch to enlighten our planet during the night.
Bochica, moved with compassion for those who were dispersed over the
mountains, broke with his powerful arm the rocks that enclosed the
valley, on the side of Canoas and Tequendama. By this outlet he drained
the waters of the lake of Bogotá; he built towns, introduced the
worship of the Sun, named two chiefs, between whom he divided the civil
and ecclesiastical authority, and then withdrew himself, under the name
of Idacanzas, into the holy valley of Iraca, near Tunja, where he lived
in the exercise of the most austere penitence for the space of two
thousand years.”—Vues de Cordillères et
Monuments des Peuples Indigènes de l’Amérique,
par Al. de Humboldt, Paris, 1810. Compare Piedrahita’s Historia General de las Conquistas del Nuevo Reino de Granada,
Cap. III, Bogotá, 1881. Piedrahita, following other authors, was
of the opinion that Bochica was no other than the Apostle Bartholomew,
who, according to a widespread legend, preached the gospel in this part
of the world. ↑
6
“Why do you plant these eucalyptus trees around your
houses?” I asked of a peon one day. “Para
evitar la fiebre, Sumerced,” to prevent fever, your honor.
The “Sumerced,” in this reply, is only one of many
indications of deference on the part of the common people in their
intercourse with strangers, or with those whom they regard as their
superiors. It is an echo of the courtly language employed in the days
of the viceroyalty. ↑
7 The
height of the falls, according to Humboldt’s measurements, is one
hundred and seventy metres. Before his visit they were supposed to be
much higher. Piedrahita calls them one of the wonders of the world and
declares that their height is half a league. Around the top of the
falls are seen oak, elm and cinchona trees; at the bottom are found
palms, bananas and sugar-cane. Colombans always refer to these facts
when they wish to impress the stranger with the extraordinary height of
Tequendama, as compared with that of other great falls. By a single
plunge, they proudly tell us, its waters pass from tierra fria
to tierra caliente. ↑
8 Le Tour du Monde, Vol. XXXV, p. 194. ↑
9 Not
Benalcazar, as is so often written. He took his name from his native
town, Belalcazar, on the confines of Andalusia and
Estremadura. ↑
10
“Ours be his gold and his pleasures,
Let us enjoy that land, that sun.”
 ↑
11 Op.
cit., Parte III, Canto 4. ↑
12
Compendio Historico del Descubrimiento y Colonization de la Nueva
Granada, p. 168, Bogotá, 1901. ↑
13
Piedrahita, op. cit., Lib. VII, Cap. 4, Bogotá, 1881. See also
Noticias Historiales de las Conquistas de Tierra Firme en
las Indias Occidentales, por Fr. Pedro Simon, Tom. IV, p. 195,
Bogotá, 1892. ↑
14
Antologia de Poetas Hispano-Americanos, publicada por la Real
Academia Española, Tom. III, Introduccion, Madrid,
1894. ↑
15 A
peculiar phenomenon, which has been frequently commented on, is that
the early prose writers of Latin America exhibited more true poetic
feeling and enthusiasm in their productions than did those who
expressed themselves in verse. La Araucana, the so-called epic
poem of Ercilla, pronounced an Iliad by Voltaire and considered by
Sismondi a mere newspaper in rhyme, is a case in point. Nowhere, in
this long work of forty-two thousand verses, “has the aspect of
volcanoes covered with eternal snow, of torrid sylvan valleys, and of
arms of the sea extending far into the land, been productive of any
descriptions that may be regarded as graphical.” It exhibits, it
is true, a certain animation in describing the heroic struggle of the
brave Araucanians for their homes and liberty, but, aside from this,
the higher elements of poetry—especially of epic poetry—are
entirely lacking.
The same observation can be made with still greater
truth of the Arauco Domado, of Padre Oña; of the
Argentina, of Barco Centenera; the Cortés
Valeroso, and the Mejicana, of Laso de la Vega; and the
oft-quoted Elegias de Varones Ilustres de Indias, of Juan de
Castellanos. All of these, with the exception of the last-mentioned
work, have long since been buried in almost complete oblivion. The
influence of the Italian school is everywhere manifest in these
productions—an influence which, while it may have contributed to
purity, correctness and elegance of expression, was quite destructive
of the vigor, freshness and originality so characteristic of the great
masters of Spanish verse. Compare Humboldt’s Cosmos, Vol.
II, Part I; and Historias Primitivas de Indias, por
Don Enrique de Vedia, Tom. I, p. 10, Madrid, 1877, in the Biblioteca de Autores Españoles desde la Formacion del
Lenguaje hasta Nuestros Dios.
Those who are interested in the literature of
Colombia will find the subject ably discussed in Historia
de la Literatura en Nueva Granada, by Don José Maria Vergara
y Vergara Bogotá, 1867. ↑
16 The
first printing press seen in the New World was brought to the city of
Mexico by its first bishop, the learned Franciscan, Fray Juan de
Zumarraga, shortly after the conquest by Cortes. ↑
17 The
people of some of the other South American capitals would, I am sure,
take exception to the claims here made in favor of Bogotá. I
myself think them greatly exaggerated. ↑
18 The
Colombian and Venezuela Republics, p. 101, Boston,
1905. ↑
19
Compendio de la Historia de Venezuela desde el
Descubrimiento de America hasta Nuestros Dias, p. 213, Paris,
1875. ↑
20 See
especially introduction and Cap. I, Vol. I, Quinta Edicion, New York,
1901. ↑
21 A
Narrative of the Expedition to the Rivers Orinoco and Apure, pp.
462–464, London, 1819. ↑
22
Memoirs of Simon Bolivar, Vol. II, pp. 3, 236, 257 and
258. ↑
23 After
the battle was over the survivors of this decisive conflict were
saluted by Bolivar as Salvatores de mi
Patria—Saviors of my country. ↑
24 Op.
cit., Vol. II, pp. 249, 250. ↑
25
“Colombia had been an efficient war machine in the hands of
Bolivar by which the independence of South America was secured, but was
an anachronism as a nation. The interests of the different sections
were antagonistic, and the military organization given to the country
only strengthened the germs of disorder. Venezuela and New Granada were
geographically marked out as independent nations. Quito, from
historical antecedents, aspired to autonomy. Had Bolivar abstained from
his dreams of conquest, and devoted his energies to the consolidation
of his own country, he might, perhaps, have organized it into one
nation under a federal form of government, but that was not suited to
his genius. When his own bayonets turned against him, he went so far as
to despair of the republican system altogether and sought the
protection of a foreign king for the last fragment of his shattered
monocracy.”—History of San Martin, p. 467, by
General Don Bartolome Mitre, translated by W. Pilling, London,
1893. ↑
26 After
writing the above paragraphs, I was glad to learn from Mr. W. H. Fox,
the American Minister to Ecuador, that General Alfaro, the present
chief executive of that republic, is, like many distinguished patriots
and statesmen of Colombia and Venezuela, an ardent advocate of the
restoration of Bolivar’s great Republic of Colombia. “I
would,” said he to Mr. Fox, who has given me permission to
publish this statement, “rather be governor of Ecuador, as one of
the states of such a great republic, than be its president, as I am
now.”
All friends of Greater Colombia, and their number
among enlightened and far-seeing statesmen is rapidly increasing, hope
the day is not far distant when Bolivar’s plan can once more be
put into effect, but this time on so enduring a basis that it cannot
again be affected by the machinations of the jealous military rivals
and self-seeking politicians, by whom so many hapless countries in
Latin America have so long been cursed. ↑
27 Quoted
by F. Hassaurek, formerly United States Minister to Ecuador, in his
Four Years Among Spanish Americans, p. 209, New York,
1868. ↑
Our sojourn in Bogotá was much briefer than we
could have wished it to be. Its intellectual atmosphere impressed us
deeply, and the culture and refinement of its people charmed us beyond
expression. During our journey, we had visited many places in which we
would have desired to tarry longer, had it been possible, but so far no
place had so completely captivated us as Colombia’s famous
metropolis—no place from which we were so loath to depart.
“What a pity,” we said, “that Colombia and
Colombians are not better known in our own country! It would be better
for them and better for us.” With special truth can one reiterate
of the inhabitants of this little-known republic what Senator Root has
said of the people of South America in general:—
“Two-thirds of the suspicion, the dislike, the distrust, with
which our country was regarded by the people of South America, was the
result of the arrogant and contemptuous bearing of Americans, of people
of the United States, for those gentle, polite, sensitive, imaginative,
delightful people.”
The Senator, as President Roosevelt’s representative, did
much, during his visit to our sister continent, to remove
misunderstandings and establish more cordial relations between the
United States and Latin America. And the Bureau of American Republics
is contributing much towards completing and extending his work. It is,
therefore, to be hoped, that soon “the suspicion, the dislike,
the distrust” will be eliminated forever and succeeded by an era
of mutual respect and indissoluble friendship. [314]
Our luggage—small in amount, be it said—was conveyed
from our hotel to the depot, a few blocks distant, by a good-natured
Chibcha Indian. He asked for his service the sum of forty dollars,
which, to his great delight, was paid promptly and without question.
“Muchisimas gracias, mi amo. Que Vd vaya
bien!” Many thanks, my master. Farewell! were his parting
words, as he passed out of the station with his hat in his hand and a
smile lighting up his face.
“Forty dollars for carrying a little luggage a few squares!
Why, that,” one would say, “was down-right robbery.”
Not at all, when you are accustomed to paying such prices, and we had
become quite accustomed to them, ever since we had entered Colombian
territory. As a matter of fact, we found the peon’s bill very
moderate.
In the beginning, however, it must be confessed that we were
surprised at some of the bills presented us for payment. The first one
was for the washing of some linen in a town on the Meta. The work was
done by an Indian woman, for which a charge was made of two hundred and
forty-five dollars. This bill, large as it was, did not frighten us as
much as one that Mark Twain tells of in his Innocents Abroad,
when during his visit to the Azores, one of his traveling companions
was charged some thousands of milreis for a modest repast. We should
have paid it without comment, but found that the articles in question
had been washed only and not ironed. When we remarked upon this
apparent forgetfulness or neglect, the tawny laundress informed us that
it was not the custom there for the same person to do both washing and
ironing, and referred us to a neighbor of hers as one quite competent
to complete the work she had begun. Unfortunately, as it had been
raining continuously for several days, and our laundress had no way of
drying the things she had washed, except in the sun—which had
obstinately refused to appear—and as we were obliged to take our
departure [315]without delay, the wearing apparel aforesaid was
neither ironed nor dried.
But the washer-woman’s bill, which seems exorbitant, requires
an explanation. It was all a mere matter of the rate of exchange,
which, in Colombia, during the time of our visit, was ten thousand.
That means that the peso—dollar—had a value of just
one centavo—one cent. Some years ago the rate of exchange
was much higher. Now, however, there is a well-founded hope, that the
financial condition of the country will soon be on a more satisfactory
basis, and that before many years elapse, it can be put on a gold
basis. The present legal tender of the country is paper currency and
gold coin. Outside of the large cities one never sees anything but
paper money. I have known the peons in several cases to refuse coin
because they thought it was counterfeit—so long is it since gold
coin has been in circulation.
The present financial condition of the republic is a striking
commentary on the havoc wrought by the numerous revolutions that have
devastated the country and ruined its credit. One of the most difficult
of the many difficult tasks that confront the administration is that of
restoring the nation’s credit, and of getting the rate of
exchange back to par. It is, however, making a noble effort, and all
well-wishers of Colombia trust its endeavors will be crowned with
success.
As one may imagine, it is necessary for the traveler to carry with
him quite a bulky package of bills in order to live in even the most
modest fashion. A mule or a cart was not, however, required to
transport our funds, as Hazard, in his work on Haiti, says was
indispensable in that ill-fated land, where a hundred dollars in gold
was exchanged for several sacks of bills—huge bags—not
unlike bundles of rags or waste paper.
To us it was always interesting to hear the peons talk of their
fortune of hundreds or thousands of dollars. It seemed to give the poor
fellows special satisfaction to deal [316]in large figures and
to speak of large sums, as if they were all rising millionaires. The
monetary crisis had this redeeming feature, if no other, that it
afforded the beggar in the street the pleasure of seeing dollars in his
alms where, before the revolution, he would have found only so many
cents. The sturdy market women we saw on the way from Caqueza to
Bogotá talked in a most happy way of their prospects of
realizing forty dollars a piece for their chickens and fifteen dollars
a dozen for their eggs, while their husbands were rejoicing in the
thought that they would receive a thousand dollars for a heifer and two
thousand or more for a milch-cow. They never used the words
“cents”; it was always
“pesos”—dollars. Happy people, who find such
delight in names and appearances!
There are but few railroads in Colombia, and their total mileage at
the time of our visit was less than five hundred miles. Many roads are
projected and have been for decades past, but the numerous revolutions
have prevented their construction. The one from Bogotá to
Facatativá, our first objective point on the way to the
Magdalena, is only twenty-five miles in length. There is, however, a
well-grounded hope that this can at an early day be connected with the
line that is building from Girardot.1 When this
shall have been accomplished it will be possible to reach Bogotá
without the long overland ride on horse- or mule-back that has been
necessary since the time of Quesada.
But far from regretting the lack of a through train to the
Magdalena, we were rather glad that we were obliged to have recourse to
a less expeditious mode of locomotion. It required more time, it is
true, to make the trip, and was more fatiguing, but it gave us an
opportunity of seeing the country to greater advantage and of getting
better acquainted with its people. Indeed, the journey down the
Cordillera from Bogotá to Honda was but the proper complement of
that from the llanos up to the [317]Sabana that lies at the foot
of the nation’s capital. It gave us an opportunity of comparing
conditions on the eastern slope of the Oriental Andes with those
prevailing on the western, and we have always considered ourselves
fortunate in having been able to explore from the saddle the
interesting country that lies between the Meta and the Magdalena. As I
now think, it was, in many respects, the most delightful and
instructive part of our wanderings in South America.
The track and rolling-stock of the Sabana railway are, as might be
expected, of the most primitive kind. The roadbed has received little
attention, and the cars and engine are scarcely fit for service. But
all this can be condoned when one is familiar with the untoward
conditions that, for so many years, have militated against improvements
of all kinds. The transportation of the rails, cars and locomotives
from Cambao, on the Magdalena, to the plateau, when the cart road
between the two points was little better than a bridle-path, was in
itself a Herculean task, and as we journeyed to Honda, it never ceased
to excite our wonder. Great improvements, however, are promised as soon
as connection shall be made with the branch, now approaching
completion, from Girardot. Then the transportation of heavy freight
will be a trifling task in comparison with what it has been
hitherto.
The Sabana of Bogotá resembles somewhat the plain of Caracas
except that it is far more extensive than the Venezuelan plateau. Both
have been regarded as the beds of lakes that have long since
disappeared. Whatever may be said about the existence of a lake in the
vale of Caracas, it seems now quite certain that there never was any
great body of water, such as has so long been imagined, occupying the
region now known as the Sabana de Bogotá.2 Recent
investigations appear to have decided this much-debated question
against Humboldt and those who accepted his views regarding this
matter. [318]
We were much interested in the haciendas through which the train
passed, as well as in the homes of their owners and in the picturesque
villages along the road. There were broad acres devoted to the
cultivation of wheat, barley, maize and potatoes, and extensive
pastures, over which roamed large flocks of sheep and herds of cattle.
These cattle, so we fancied, were the lineal descendants of those
brought to Española by Columbus at the time of his second
voyage. And the swine we saw—there could be little doubt about
it—could claim, as their ancestors, those which Belalcazar had
brought with him from Quito, as the hens, that cackled and clucked as
we sped by, were the offspring of those carefully guarded by Federmann
during his famous expedition from Coro to Santa Fe de
Bogotá.3
Aside from the Humboldt oak, with its majestic crown of ever-green
foliage, and the ubiquitous Eucalyptus, there are no trees of any
magnitude in the Sabana. Its flora, however, is particularly rich in
shrubs and plants. Among them were the beautiful passion flower,
Passiflora Antioquensis, blossoming the year round, and a
peculiar species of blackberry—Rubus Bogotensis—ever
clothed with a vari-colored mantle of snow-white bloom and ripening
fruit, realizing Shelley’s idea of the millennium, where
“Fruits are ever ripe, and flowers ever
fair.”
[319]
The meadows are carpeted with various species of clover and
succulent grasses, and, along the hedges and walls, one finds an
endless variety of fuchsias, verbenas, mallows, asters, buttercups,
lupines, lilies, lobelias, irises, morning-glories and passion flowers.
The last two plants and certain varieties of roses are great favorites
in the garden and around the house, as are also violets, pinks,
jasmines and heliotropes. We observed several habitations, some of them
the humble cots of poor Chibchas, that were almost concealed in
magnificent bowers of climbing clematis, passion flowers and
morning-glories.
On the eastern slope of Suma Paz, we frequently had occasion to
admire the wealth and brilliancy of bloom around some of the homes
which we passed, or when we enjoyed the hospitality of their courteous
inmates, but nowhere did we see more beautiful floral exhibits than
greeted us on the Sabana de Bogotá.
Much, however, as we were interested in the fauna and flora of this
region, and the people who now inhabit it, we found our minds
constantly reverting to pre-Colombian times, and picturing to ourselves
the condition of this plain and its inhabitants at the period of the
arrival of the conquistadores.
When Quesada and his intrepid followers reached this beautiful
plateau, they found it inhabited by a tribe of Indians to whom they
gave the name Muiscas, because they frequently heard them pronounce
this word, or Moscas, a Spanish word, similar in sound, signifying
flies, because they said these Indians were as numerous as
flies.4
They occupied the tablelands in the central part of New Granada. The
territory under the jurisdiction of their zipas—chiefs—was
elliptical in form and equaled in area [320]the kingdom of the
Netherlands. They numbered about one million inhabitants, and,
according to the early chroniclers, they counted no fewer than a
hundred and thirty thousand warriors. The number of fighting men was
doubtless far below this figure. It seems certain, however, that at the
date of the arrival of the Spaniards they were in the apogee of their
power, and were making progress towards a condition of culture
approaching that of the Aztecs and Incas.
The dominions of the last zipas of Bacatá extended from
Simijaca to Pasca and from Zipacon to the llanos. Although united by
ties of language and beliefs, customs and laws, similar in character
and revealing a common origin, they formed an aggregation of small
states, generally independent, rather than a compact and well-organized
commonwealth.
The Chibchas, or Muiscas, were preëminently an agricultural
people. They had no domestic animals, except the dog—not even the
llama. Their chief articles of food were maize, potatoes5
and quinoa, which the natives of [321]Colombia have long since
discarded for rice. Besides these staples they had many other
vegetables peculiar to the country and a great variety of luscious and
wholesome fruits. They also had game in abundance.
They cultivated cotton, from which they made their clothing, the
material of which often exhibited various colored designs. In this
respect they were far in advance of the surrounding tribes, who had no
more to cover them than have the wildest children of the tropical
forest to-day.
Their houses were of wood, with thatched roofs not unlike many of
those we saw along our route from the llanos to the Magdalena valley.
When the Spaniards arrived they had just begun to use stone in the
erection of a few of their buildings, presumably temples, which
apparently were never completed.
As might be surmised, their commerce was limited. They bartered to
some extent with the neighboring tribes, especially those west of the
Magdalena. From these they obtained gold in exchange for salt, emeralds
and textile fabrics. With the Chimus of Peru, they were the first to
use gold as a medium of exchange. Their currency consisted not of
stamped coins, but of disks of the precious metal without any kind of
marking. They had a limited intercourse with the people of Quito and
had some slight knowledge of the great Inca kingdom farther south.
Regarding the culture of the Chibchas, we can say what the Marquis
de Nadaillac says of the people in general—“We know very
little.”6 But we know enough to be warranted in
affirming that many erroneous notions have long prevailed concerning
them, and that the claims that have been made for them as a civilized
people have been greatly exaggerated.
According to Duquesne—to whose fanciful theories the
[322]great Humboldt unfortunately gave his
support—and to the school that for a century made
Duquesne’s views their own, the Chibchas were acquainted with the
use of the quipus, and had a system of numbers and hieroglyphics and a
complicated calendar. Their priests were represented as the
depositaries of astrological and chronological science, and as experts
in astronomical and meteorological observations. The people were lauded
for their advanced knowledge of architecture and praised for their
courts of justice. In the temple of Sogamuxi, they would have us
believe, were preserved the national annals and the chronicles of their
civilization. Their general material progress and intellectual status
was commented on as something quite comparable with the best that
obtained in Mexico or Cuzco.
We have but two sources of information respecting the much-debated
question of Chibcha culture. These are a comparative study of the early
chronicles—no one or two of them will suffice—and an
examination of the few stone monuments the Chibchas have left us,
together with their pictographs, ceramic ware and objects of gold and
copper found in their places of sepulture. The chronicles that we must
rely on are those left us by Quesada, Castellanos, Padre Simon and
Piedrahita, all of which have already been quoted, together with those
left us by Padre Bernardo Lugo, Juan Rodriguez Fresle, a son of one of
the conquistadores, and Fray Alonso de Zamora, of Bogotá.
As a result of a critical study of these chronicles and monuments,
the distinguished Colombian writer, Don Vicente Restrepo, has
demonstrated that most of the claims that have been made for Chibcha
culture are utterly devoid of foundation in fact. His conclusions,
which can be given in a few words, are:—
“The Chibchas had no stone buildings and their knowledge of
architecture was therefore limited to the erection of the simplest
structures of wood. [323]
“They had no quipus, like that of the Incas, no alphabet, and
no writing of any kind, either figurative, symbolic or ideographic.
Neither had they any chronology or archives.
“The petroglyphs and pictographs found in limited7
numbers in various parts of the country, far from recording the
migrations and hunts of the aborigines and the cataclysms which they
are supposed to have witnessed, are nothing more than rude geometrical
designs and fantastic figures which are repeated in the most confused
manner, according to the infantile caprice of the one who carved or
painted them.”
Concluding his discussion of these meaningless figures, which
certain writers have so long insisted were true hieroglyphics, awaiting
some Champollion or Rawlinson to decipher, Sr. Restrepo does not
hesitate to assert that the rude “attempts at drawing these
ill-formed figures of animals, and these pothooks, similar to those
traced by an inexperienced child, can reveal nothing to historic
science. They never exhibit that order and sequence which are the
certain index of genuine writing. They never reproduce even the
simplest scenes of Indian life, such for example as a religious
ceremony, the chase, or warriors fighting.
“Mute by reason of their origin, and condemned to eternal
silence by the unconscious hand that traced them, the magic wand of
science will never be able to make them speak.”8
If we accept the classification and definitions of the various
grades of culture, as given by Morgan in his great [324]work
on Ancient Society,9 as many profound thinkers do, we
shall be forced to conclude not only that the Chibchas were not
civilized, but that they had not even reached the upper status of
barbarism.
Civilization implies the existence of a phonetic alphabet or, at
least, of hieroglyphics akin to those of the Egyptians, and the use of
these in the production of written records. The Chibchas, as we have
seen, had neither an alphabet nor written records of any kind.
Neither had they any knowledge of the process of smelting iron ore.
As the use of iron is the chief characteristic of the third, or upper,
period of barbarism, the Chibchas, according to Morgan, should be
considered as representatives of the middle status of barbarism, like
the Zuñis and the Mayas, or like the lake-dwellers of ancient
Switzerland, or the early Britons before they learned the use of iron
from their more advanced neighbors in Gaul.10
It took us two hours to make the run from Bogotá to
Facatativá, the western terminus of the Sabana railway. Here we
took luncheon. For a place that has so long been the centre of traffic
between the capital and the Magdalena, the town has no reason to boast
of its restaurants or hotels. They are about as poor in every way as
could well be imagined. A town in Italy or Switzerland, frequented by
so many travelers as Facatativá, would have not one but several
hostelries where its patrons would have every convenience and comfort.
Let us hope that Colombia will soon witness an improvement in this
respect, not only in this place but all along the chief lines of
travel. It is much needed, and along no route more than that connecting
Bogotá with Honda.
At the time of the conquest, Facatativá was a Muisca
stronghold, and what are said to be the ruins of an old Indian fortress
are still shown to the curious visitor. One may also see some rocks on
which are carved certain figures [325]long supposed to be Chibcha
hieroglyphics. We have already learned what value is to be ascribed to
these and similar inscriptions in other parts of the country.
After luncheon we prepared to start for Chimbe, where we intended to
pass the night. We had telegraphed the day before to our arriero
to have in readiness the necessary saddle and sumpter mules. They were
waiting for us on our arrival and we were much gratified to find that
both animals and peons were all that could be desired. Those who have
traveled in the Andes know how important it is to have good mules and
servants, and how much it adds to the comfort and pleasure of
one’s journey.
From the time we had left our launch on the Meta, we had been
singularly fortunate in always having good animals and honest, reliable
men to take care of them and attend to our wants on the way. To our
devoted and watchful muleteers and their assistants we owed much of the
enjoyment that was ours during our wanderings over mountain and plain,
and we shall always hold their obliging disposition and prompt service
in grateful remembrance.
It affords me special pleasure to render them this tribute, as they
are often, I have reason to believe, much misunderstood, especially by
people who are not familiar with their language, and frequently held
responsible for delays and contretemps of which they are in no wise
responsible. Judging by our own experience, the arieros and peons of
South America are, as a class, far better than they are usually
represented and are deserving of more recognition and better treatment
than is usually accorded them by those who require their humble but
often too poorly recompensed services.
The saddle generally used in the mountains closely resembles the
McClellan saddle and is called a galápago. For obvious
reasons an English hunting saddle—silla—could not be
used where the roads are constantly leading up and down steep
mountains—bergauf, bergab, as a
German [326]traveler phrases it—and where even on a
cavalry saddle it is at times extremely difficult for one to retain
one’s position.11
The saddle is usually covered by a pellon or shabrack, made
either of sheepskin, or horsehair dyed black and neatly braided at the
ends. Attached to the saddle are several bags or
pockets—bolsas. These are of the greatest convenience for
carrying many things necessary on long journeys. In them the natives
stow away cheese, cakes of maize, papelon, and the
never-forgotten supply of aguardiente, without which a journey
of any length is considered impossible.
Cross section of the Oriental Andes from the Meta
to the Magdelena, from Karsten.
The stirrups are curiosities. They are usually of brass or bronze in
the shape of a shoe, but frequently they are in the form of the basket
hilt of a claymore. The stirrups of one of the saddles I used were
curiously embossed, and as large as a good-sized bell. But whatever
their design, [327]they are admirably adapted for service in the
mountains where the paths are so narrow that one is frequently exposed,
without such protection, to having one’s feet crushed when his
mule approaches too near the rocky wall that flanks one side of the
road. The danger is especially great when one meets a herd of cattle or
a caravan of pack-mules. Then the rider suddenly finds his mule
crushing him against the steep rocks on one side of the path, to avoid
being thrown over a precipice which is yawning beneath him on the other
side along which the approaching animals pick their way with a skill
that is marvelous. We often had reason to be thankful that our feet
were protected by these fantastic and cumbersome
estribos—stirrups—as otherwise we should have
suffered serious bodily injury. Like the leather hoods of wooden
stirrups, such estribos also keep the feet dry.
The riding equipment, however, of a Colombian horseman is not
complete without huge brass or bronze
rowel-spurs—espuelas—and a pair of
zamoros—bag-trousers—often made of leather or
goatskin. They are not unlike the chaparejos12 of a New
Mexican cowboy, and serve as a protection against rain and mud, and the
thorns of the shrubs and brush along the wayside.
From Facatativá to El Alto del Roble, some miles to the west,
the road slightly rises. At the latter point, nearly five hundred feet
above Bogotá, one has a glorious view of the Sabana, of the
chain of Suma Paz, and of the Central Cordillera away beyond the
Magdalena.
From El Roble—the oak—so named from the number of
ever-green oaks seen there, the descent towards Chimbe is marked by
quite a steep grade. A good carretera, or carriage road, extends
from Factativá to Agua Larga, and this much-needed highway is to
be prolonged as far as the Magdalena. The present plan is to construct
the road in such wise that traction cars can be used on it for the
transportation of both freight and passengers, and at the [328]time
of our passage the road, under the direction of English engineers, was
being pushed forward towards completion with a display of energy that
augured well for ultimate success.
Only a few minutes after we began our descent on the western
declivity of El Roble we observed a change in the temperature. We were
passing from the tierra fría to the tierra
templada, and a thermometer was scarcely necessary to indicate our
rate of progress towards lower altitudes. Aside from the marked change
in the atmosphere, there was a corresponding one in the flora.
Near the summit of El Roble we were gratified in finding large
patches of strawberries. They were sweet reminders of home, as they
were of the same species as our own fragrant Fragaria. These
slender mountain runners did not, however, bear the large fruits
afforded by our Illinois or Florida plants, but rather the small
scarlet, but richly flavored, berries one meets in an uncultivated
state in Italy and Russia.
Further on our way we came across another reminder of our own
country. This time it appeared in the form of long, dark-gray tufts and
festoons of that curious epiphyte—Tillandsia
usneoides—popularly known in the Gulf States as Spanish moss
and in Jamaica as old man’s beard. The natives in Colombia call
it barba de palo—tree-beard—a much more picturesque
epithet than any of those mentioned, and another one of countless
instances of the wonderful faculty the Indian has of giving expressive
names to the objects that specially strike his fancy.
As we reached a still lower level, our attention was arrested by the
beauty and luxuriance of the palms and tree ferns that graced our path.
The fern trees were as remarkable for their size as for the delicacy of
their plume-like fronds. The trunks of some of them were twelve to
fifteen feet high and the leaves of their wondrous crowns—like
veritable leaves of emerald gauze—were at times as long as the
trunk was high. Gazing at these bizarre [329]forms of vegetable
life, with their dark, rough, leaf-scarred trunks, so unlike those of
surrounding trees, we could easily imagine ourselves in a forest of
those giant paleozoic Sigillariæ and Lepidodendrons that
contributed so largely towards the formation of the lower coal
measures.
We never made any attempt to enumerate the divers species of palms
that were ever in view from the paramo to the ocean. But wherever we
saw them, whether on the elevated Andean plateau or in the humid
valleys of the Orinoco and the Magdalena, they were for us, as they
were for Linnæus, “the princes of the vegetable
world.” Decked with a mantle of eternal youth, with smooth,
straight trunks like the marble shafts of Athens or Palmyra, they were
not only the glory of forest and savanna, but they were also for us, as
for Martius, a symbol of immortality.
At Agua Larga our road bifurcated, the new and better branch veering
off to the right at a slight angle, and the old one continuing with a
similar turn to the left. Although a bright young señorita, who
happened to be near the parting of the ways, declared that the old road
was the one that led to Chimbe, our objective point, we chose the new
one, and for the first time since we had left the Meta, we went astray.
We did not discover our error until we had gone several miles, when an
old man, who was repairing his humble cot by the wayside, corroborated
the señorita’s information.
There was then nothing left for us but to retrace our steps. The
mistake was quite a blow to the topographical instinct of one of our
party, who had, during our long trip, particularly prided himself on
the unerring indications of his organ of locality, which rendered, he
said, the assistance of a guide superfluous. At the same time, it was
quite trying to the patience of all of us, as we were tired, hungry,
and wished to arrive at Chimbe before sundown. It was now quite evident
that we could not possibly reach [330]our destination before
nightfall. We then realized to our sorrow the truth of Balboa’s
words, when writing to the King of Spain—”Llega el
hombre hasta donde puede y no hasta donde quiere”—One
goes as far as one can and not as far as one wishes to go. And,
recalling what the señorita had told us, we had likewise a
forcible reminder of the verity of Sancho Panza’s saying:
“Though a woman’s counsel isn’t worth much, he that
despises it is no wiser than he should be.”
After getting back to the bifurcation of the road, we found that the
older branch, which we should have taken, was little better than a
rough, rocky stairway, the steps of which had been rendered extremely
slippery by a heavy rainfall a few hours before. C., our dashing and
debonair cavalier, was still suffering from the effects of this
downpour, for having lost his waterproof sombrero, specially
designed for travel in the tropics, he had nothing left but a light
straw hat, which afforded the head no more protection than a sieve.
Truth to tell, he was suspected of intentionally discarding his
waterproof headgear, as, in his estimation, it did not comport with the
dignity of a caballero who would trace his lineage back to one of the
noblest grandees of Spain, and who, during his journey from Trinidad,
had been the recipient of special attention from young and old as well.
He seemed to be the special favorite of well-to-do matrons,
particularly in the towns and cities in which our sojourn was somewhat
protracted. Was it that they would fain have seen in the handsome young
traveler a prospective son-in-law? Not being a mind reader, I must
leave the question unanswered. As a veracious narrator of occurrences
by the way I can only state facts and let the reader draw his own
conclusions.
But what a road it was, that now lay between us and Chimbe! To us,
in the declining rays of the setting sun, it appeared like a
cobblestone track after it had passed through a dozen earthquakes and
had then been set at an [331]angle of forty-five degrees with
the horizon.13 Even our mules, which were usually prepared
for any kind of a path where they could find a foothold, frequently
balked at the more difficult sections of this much-neglected highway.
Comparing the part we were now traversing with the more improved road
we had left at Agua Larga, we could not but recall the words of an
Irish engineer, regarding certain highland roads, as recorded in
Scott’s A Legend of Montrose:—
“Had you but seen those roads before they were
made,
You would have held up your hands and blessed General
Wade.”
And yet this was the camino real, the
royal highway from the Magdalena to the national capital. President
Reyes was doubtless right when he publicly stated, some years ago, that
it was now in a worse condition than it was before the War of
Independence.
But it was also, and this afforded us some compensation for our
discomfort, the Muisca trail—the same that the subjects of the
Zipa of Bacatá and those of the Caciques of Hunsa and Sugamuxi
made use of during their bartering expeditions to the tribes beyond the
Magdalena. Along this trail they, for generations, carried their stores
of salt, textile fabrics and emeralds, and brought back, in exchange
for them, from the placers of what is now known as Antioquia, those
treasures of gold that so excited the cupidity of the conquistadores,
and which, by many of them, were considered as an adequate reward for
all the hardships they had endured to secure their possession.
Finally, after a long, tiresome breakneck ride over that
“royal” but infinitely rugged road—
“Arduus, obliquus, caligine densus
opaca,—”14
[332]
We arrived at Chimbe where, fortunately, we found an appetizing
repast, and what we were then willing to consider clean and comfortable
beds, awaiting us.
Early the next morning, after a refreshing sleep, we were again in
the saddle and on our way to Guaduas, where we purposed spending the
night. After a brisk ride of a few hours through a picturesque country,
we reached the town of Villeta, situated in a charming and fertile
valley. Here we had a hasty breakfast and were then on our way up the
prolonged and precipitous slopes of Cune and Petaquero.
The Muisca trail, like the path we followed from the llanos to the
Sabana de Bogotá, was to us an interesting example of the manner
in which the Indians traced out their roads. Having neither blasting
powder nor dynamite, they were perforce obliged to go around the rocks
that were in their way. But in spite of this, owing to their thorough
familiarity with the country, they always succeeded in finding the
shortest routes from one point to another. They made it a rule,
however, never to get far away from a water supply, and, for this
reason, their roads nearly always kept close to the water courses of
the regions through which they passed. The conquistadores, who had to
be always on the alert against the Indians, and who took every
precaution against surprise and ambuscade, avoided swamps and lowlands,
and kept rather to the commanding ridges of the country on their line
of march. As a consequence, the best roads in Colombia to-day are those
traced out by the old Muisca traders and by Quesada in the north and
Robledo, Almaguer and Belalcazar in the west and south.
Road Between Bogotá and
Honda.
On our way to Guaduas from Chimbe, we observed a number of small
plantations of sugar cane, and near by there was usually a
trapiche, a primitive contrivance for extracting the juice from
the cane. It consisted of a thatched shed under which was a cumbersome,
creaking machine consisting essentially of three vertical cylinders
[333]of wood which were kept in motion by a span of
mules or a yoke of oxen driven by a boy. The cane was fed into the
machine by a couple of women, and the juice was received into a wooden
trough. From this it was transferred into a boiler, if
panela—crude sugar—was desired. More frequently,
however, it was conveyed to a still, in order to be converted into
aguardiente, a crude distillate, rich in alcohol, of which the
natives, the country over, consume large quantities.
But fond as the inhabitants are of aguardiente, and guarapo,
the fermented juice of the sugar cane, or a mixture of sugar and water
which has undergone fermentation, the most popular drink, especially
among the poorer classes, is chicha. This is to the greater part
of South America what pulque is to Mexico and beer to Germany—the
national beverage. It has been so from time immemorial. Chicha was as
much esteemed by the Muiscas, before the arrival of the Spaniards, as
it is to-day; for then, as now, no festivity or celebration was
considered complete without a liberal supply of this enlivening
potation.
Padre Rivero, referring to the love of drink, especially of chicha,
among the Indians, says, “Drink is their life, their glory, and
the acme of their happiness.” The earlier historians have much to
say of the frightful orgies, as the result of over-indulgence in
chicha, that obtained among all classes on the occasions of national
festivals, or the celebration of a victory over an enemy. It is said to
be used to excess to-day, as much as in former times, but of this I
cannot speak from personal observation. All the way from Villavicencio
to Honda, we saw countless estancos and
estanquitos—licensed bars—of the type of our lowest
dram shops, where chicha is the principal drink sold; but, although we
saw many people, men and women, congregated about these places, we
never saw a single case of drunkenness or any serious disturbance of
any kind. This was not because no one had been drinking while we were
present. All had been imbibing more or less freely, [334]but
they seemed so accustomed to the use of their favorite beverages that
they were no more affected by them than are the people of France and
Italy by the drinking of the wines of their respective
countries.15
From what, the reader will ask, and how, is chicha prepared? It is
made from Indian corn and by an extremely simple process. It is,
indeed, the same method as was employed before the conquest.
First of all, the grains of maize are moistened by water and allowed
to sprout, just as barley is treated in the manufacture of beer. After
this the product is dried and roasted in a large earthen jar. Then by
means of a piedra de molar—a kind of crude
mortar—like the metate, which the Mexican uses for
reducing maize to meal, the grains are ground, and then put into hot
water and allowed to ferment. As a result of germination and the action
of hot water, the starch of the maize is converted into sugar. This, by
fermentation, is next changed into alcohol, which gives to chicha its
intoxicating property. This is less noxious than that which is produced
by boiling the maize [335]and adding to the chicha thus obtained a
certain amount of panela, or molasses.16
When properly prepared, it is an agreeable and wholesome drink, not
unlike cider or light beer. I have frequently seen it used at meals by
the best families—people who would never think of serving at
their table a harmful or intoxicating beverage. Bürger, I know,
condemns it, because he asserts it is rich in fusel oil, and because,
he maintains, it has a brutalizing effect on those who use it as a
beverage. Not having seen a reliable chemical analysis of chicha, I am
not prepared to accept his view of the subject. [336]The
same writer, it may be remarked, decries cassava bread, because, he
will have it, it is composed for the most part of cellulose.
On our way from Villeta to Guaduas, we were obliged to pass two
lofty mountain crests, El Alto del Trigo and El Alto del Raizal. It was
then again for the hundredth time that we admired the sagacity of the
mule, and the importance of having one that is familiar with service in
the mountains. If the camel deserves the epithet—“ship of
the desert,” the mule is entitled to being considered the
aeroplane of the mountains. For the way he scales the highest peaks,
almost rivaling the condor in the altitudes he is capable of attaining,
and the manner in which he, with perfect security, glides along the
narrow, dizzy paths of the precipitous mountain slopes, is a matter of
ever-increasing wonder. We never, I confess, became quite reconciled to
the habit all mules have of keeping on the side of the path next to the
precipice—except when they meet animals coming from the opposite
direction, when they instinctively crowd closely to the over-hanging
mountain—but we soon learned that the mule had as much care for
his safety as we had for our own, and then the danger, we at first so
much dreaded, became more apparent than real. It is curious, but a
fact, that a mule left to himself will almost always follow in the
footsteps made by his predecessor, and no persuasion can induce him to
deviate from the beaten path. So regular and so constant is his pace
that one could almost determine in advance the number of steps he will
make from one point to another.
He rarely stumbles and still more rarely does he fall. And no matter
how deep may be the chasm along whose brink he carefully feels his way,
he never suffers from vertigo nor makes a false step. Certain travelers
tell us blood-curdling stories about their mules losing their balance
and plunging headlong into dark, deep ravines, but during all my
travels among the Andes, I never heard of such a thing and, from what I
know of the supreme carefulness [337]of the mule when in dangerous
places, such an accident seems most unlikely. If he is overloaded, he
files a protest by lying down and refusing to rise until relieved of a
part of his burden. Occasionally, too, when he reaches a suitable level
spot, he may take it into his head to have a roll, and he incontinently
proceeds to gratify this inclination before his rider is aware of his
intention.
I recall particularly how disconcerted and disgusted C. was on one
occasion, when his mule, on arriving at a specially dusty place in the
road, lay down without giving the slightest notice of his purpose and
proceeded to take a roll, before his rider was able to extricate
himself from his uncomfortable position. For a proud caballero who,
when he happened to be the cynosure of a group of admiring
señoritas and faded dames of quality, would fain pose as a scion
of Castilian nobility, this was an indignity that merited condign
punishment. The consequence was that whenever, thereafter, C. noticed a
suspicious movement in his mount, he forthwith proceeded to ply him
with a tough, pliable rod from a coffee bush, which had the effect of
distracting, at least temporarily, the mule’s attention to
matters of greater moment.
Among the many objects that were to us a source of constant wonder
and delight in the tropics were the butterflies. We met them in
countless species in the most unexpected places, especially during our
journeyings in the lower altitudes. Here we found them of the most
brilliant hues and of every color of the spectrum. In some districts,
as for instance between the Nevada de Santa Marta and the sea, there
are at times clouds of them, and their number is then comparable only
with the millions of medusæ that people certain parts of the
ocean. At times owing to their prodigious numbers and their gorgeous
colors, one could, without a great stretch of the imagination, fancy
one’s self gazing at fluttering bits of a shattered rainbow. The
largest and most beautiful is the Morpho [338]Cypris, having an expanse of wing of fully
six inches, a bright cobalt-blue above, and ocellated underneath.
According to Hettner,17 the people around Muso, where
the celebrated emerald mines are located, will have it that there is a
mysterious relationship between the mineral emeralds buried in the
earth and “animal emeralds” that flit through the air. How
like the fancy of the aborigines of Trinidad—that the glittering
colibris formerly occurring in such numbers in that island were the
souls of departed Indians!
Quite rivaling the butterflies in splendor and adornment are the
beauteous humming birds that are met with from ocean level to mountain
summit. Poets and naturalists have essayed in vain to portray their
marvelous richness of coloring and their magic evolutions as they dart
from flower to flower, or balance themselves above some bright fragrant
corolla while drawing from it its precious nectar. As well might the
painter try to transfer to canvas the glories of the setting sun as to
copy the iridescent hues of such glowing mites of the feathered tribe
as the Ruby Throat or the Fiery Topaz. Truly, they as well as the noted
paradiseines of New Guinea should come under the expressive designation
of birds of Paradise.18
After a hard day’s ride we reached Guaduas just as the sun had
dropped behind the mountain to the west. Guaduas in Spanish signifies
bamboos, and the town was given [339]this name on account of the
large number of these giant, tree-like grasses that formerly grew in
and about the place. Even now numerous clumps of bamboo may be seen
here, especially along the many water courses which intersect the
delightful valley in which the town is located.
It is really remarkable for how many purposes the bamboo is used in
the equatorial regions. It is employed in building houses, bridges,
rafts, fences, for making planks, beams, rafters, bedsteads, benches,
tables, buckets and small vessels for holding molasses, aguardiente and
other fluids, and for various other domestic utensils too numerous to
mention. Indeed, to the poorer classes of the Colombian Andes, it is
almost as useful as is the banana plant to the native of Uganda, who
contrives to get from it everything he uses except meat and iron.
In the plaza of the town there is a monument erected to the
patriotic heroine, Policarpa Salavarrieta, who was shot in
Bogotá during the War of Independence, by order of the viceroy,
for the part she took in assisting those who were fighting against the
mother country. Throughout Colombia her memory is held in benediction,
and the story of her tragic death has been a favorite theme for poet
and historian as well.
Our first view of Guaduas, in its charming setting of perennial
verdure, illumined by the crimson glow of the setting sun, was a
picture of surpassing charm. It bodied forth all the tranquillity,
verdancy and loveliness which Humboldt found in Ibague than which
“Nil quietius, nil muscosius, nil
amœnius.”
The spell was broken, however, when we entered the
town. We then found to our regret that it was another of so many
instances where
“Distance lends enchantment to the
view.”
So favorably situated and with so agreeable a climate,
it could easily be made one of the most delightful places of
[340]residence in the republic. Let us hope that this
is what it shall be in the approaching dawn of a new era.
Before leaving Bogotá, we had been told by a noted English
traveler to be on the lookout for a remarkable view towards the west,
from the summit of El Alto del Sargento. “Be sure not to miss
it,” he said, “for from that point you will behold one of
the most magnificent panoramas in the world.” We were at first
inclined to regard this statement as the usual exaggeration of the
tourist, but were, nevertheless, eager to contemplate a prospect so
famed for beauty and sublimity.19
In order to reach the crest of the mountain, before the clouds
gathered about El Sargento, which usually occurs about midday, we made
an early start from our posada, where we had found commodious and
fairly comfortable quarters, and were soon on our way up the last of
the Serranias—mountain ridges—that separated us from
the Magdalena valley.
It was about eleven o’clock when we arrived at the summit of
El Sargento. We had just rounded a tree-covered eminence, that
concealed the view towards the west, when all of a sudden, there burst
upon our vision, what was, to me at least, the most superb spectacle I
had ever contemplated. C. and I instinctively stood still in silent
rapture. As the picture appeared to us, it surpassed by far all that
had been said in its praise. Not even half the truth had been told. Our
emotion was too great for words, and, as we paused in mute admiration,
one of us at least recalled a similar experience enjoyed by three other
travelers in the Guadarrama mountains of Spain. It is thus recorded in
Longfellow’s The Spanish Student:20
[341]
“Victorian. This is the highest point.
Here let us rest.
See, Preciosa, see how all about us,
Kneeling, like hooded friars, the misty mountains
Receive the benediction of the sun.
O glorious sight!
Preciosa. Most beautiful indeed!
Hypolito. Most wonderful!”
In the foreground beneath our feet, was the wooded
slope of El Sargento. In the distance, near the mountain’s base,
were the picturesque towns of San Juan and Ambalema. Further on, like
an immense opalescent band, was the meandering Magdalena. Beyond it
were the broad plains of Mariquita, which extended as far as the
foothills of the Central Cordillera. Over and above these, veiled in an
azure haze, and piercing the clouds, were the snow-crowned mass of Ruiz
and the Mesa de Herveo, and slightly to the left, but towering above
all the neighboring peaks, was Tolima, the giant of the Colombian
Andes.21
But it was not merely the physical features just mentioned, that
produced the admirable picture that held us spellbound. It was the
marvelous combination of light and shade, the position of the sun in
the heavens, and the strange optical illusions caused by the bright and
fleecy clouds that constantly swept over the landscape. These factors
gave rise to an ever-changing perspective, and at times, exaggerated
distances and magnitudes in the most extraordinary manner. Each change
developed a new picture and each one was, if possible, more beautiful
than that which it replaced. It seemed as if the genius of the Andes
wished to give us, as we were leaving his domain, a series of
dissolving views on a stupendous scale. View succeeded view with
kaleidoscopic rapidity, all distinguished by color-schemes of supreme
delicacy and splendor. [342]At one time we caught a glimpse of
a cloud-grouping that recalled Raphael’s Disputa. Perhaps
in his Umbrian home Nature had gladdened the great artist’s soul
with a similar view. Perhaps he had caught it from some lofty peak of
the Apennines while gazing at the apparition of the morning sun from
beneath the blue waters of the Adriatic.
