# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2016
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Wilbur G. Zeigler, The Heart of the Alleghanies
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/50952/50952-h/50952-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Some typographical errors have been corrected;
a list follows the text.
List of Illustrations
(In certain versions of this etext [in certain browsers]
clicking directly on the image, will bring up a larger version.)
Tables.
(etext transcriber's note)

VALLEY OF THE NOON-DAY SUN.
(See page 98.)
{1}
COMPRISING

ITS TOPOGRAPHY, HISTORY, RESOURCES, PEOPLE,
NARRATIVES, INCIDENTS, AND PICTURES OF TRAVEL,
ADVENTURES IN HUNTING AND FISHING.

AND

LEGENDS OF ITS WILDERNESSES.
BY
WILBUR G. ZEIGLER AND BEN S. GROSSCUP
————————
WITH MAP AND ILLUSTRATIONS
————————
RALEIGH, N. C.
ALFRED WILLIAMS & CO.

CLEVELAND, O.
WILLIAM W. WILLIAMS
{2}
Copyright, 1883
By Wilbur G. Zeigler and Ben S. Grosscup
{3}
{6}
{7}
HE great mountain system that begins in that part of
Canada south of the St. Lawrence, and under the name of the Alleghanies,
or Appalachians, extends southward for 1,300 miles, dying out in the
Georgia and Alabama foot-hills, attains its culmination in North
Carolina. The title of Appalachians, as applied by De Soto to the whole
system, is preferred by many geographers. Alleghany is the old Indian
word, signifying “endless.” It is ancient in its origin, and in spite of
its being anglicized still retains its soft, liquid sound. It was not
until a comparatively late year that Western North Carolina was
discovered to be the culminating region. Until 1835 the mountains of New
Hampshire were considered the loftiest of the Alleghanies, and Mount
Washington was placed on the maps and mentioned in text books as the
highest point of rock in the eastern United States. It now holds its
true position below several summits of the Black, Smoky, and Balsam
ranges.{8} From the barometrical measurements of trustworthy explorers, no
less than 57 peaks in Western North Carolina are found to be over 6,000
feet in altitude. The more accurate observations being taken by means of
levels, by the coast survey, may slightly reduce this number.
It was John C. Calhoun who, in 1825, first called particular attention
to the southern section of the system. His attention had been turned to
it by observing the numerous wide rivers, and tributaries of noble
streams, which, like throbbing arteries, came forth from all sides of
the North Carolina mountains, as from the chambers of a mighty heart. He
saw the New river flowing towards the Ohio; the Watauga, the Nolechucky,
the French Broad, the Big Pigeon, the Little Tennessee, the Hiawassee,
and their thousand tributaries, pouring from the central valleys through
the deep gaps of the Smokies into the western plains, and uniting with
the branches from the Cumberland mountains to form the stately
Tennessee; the Yadkin, the Catawba, the Broad, the Chatooga, and the
headwaters of the greatest streams south of Virginia that empty into the
Atlantic. From these observations he reasoned rightly that between the
parallels of 35 degrees and 36 degrees and 30 minutes, north latitude,
lay the highest plateau and mountains of the Atlantic coast.
The region, as measured in a bee line through the center of the plateau
from Virginia to Georgia, is 200 miles in length. Its breadth, from the
summits of the parallel rampart ranges of the Blue Ridge and Smokies,
varies from 15 to 65 miles, and includes within this measurement a
plateau expanse of 6,000 square miles, with an altitude of from 2,000 to
4,000 feet. Inclusive of the eastern slope, the off-shooting spurs of
the Blue Ridge and the South mountains, the average breadth is 70 miles.
A portion of the piedmont section, properly a part of the mountain
district, would be taken in the latter measurement.{9} The counties are 25
in number, reaching from Ashe, Alleghany, and Surrey in the north to
Macon, Clay, and Cherokee in the south.
After the bifurcation of the Blue Ridge and Smoky mountains in Virginia,
embracing with a wide sweep several counties of that state and Ashe,
Alleghany, and Watauga of North Carolina, they almost meet again in the
northeastern limit of Mitchell county. Here, in collosal conjunction,
through their central sentinel heads, the two ranges seem holding
conference before making their final separation. The Grandfather, the
highest peak of the Blue Ridge and the oldest mountain of the world,
stands on one side; the majestic Roan of the Smokies, on the other,
connected by the short transverse upheaval known as Yellow mountain.
This spot is poetically spoken of as the grand portal to the inner
temple of the Alleghanies; the Grandfather and the Roan being the two
pillars between which hangs, forever locked, the massive gate of Yellow
mountain. The high table-land of Watauga forms the green-carpeted step
to it. Trending southwest, between the two separating ranges,—the Blue
Ridge bending like a bow, and the Smokies resembling the
bow-string,—lies wrapped in its robe of misty purple, the central
valley, comprising 13 counties.
The western rampart range, bearing the boundary line between North
Carolina and Tennessee, lifts its crest much higher than the Blue Ridge;
is more massive in its proportions; less straggling in its contour; but
with lower gaps or gorges, narrow and rugged, through which flow all the
rivers of the plateau. Generically known as the Smoky mountains, it is
by the river gorges divided into separate sections, each of which has
its peculiar name. The most northerly of these sections is termed the
Stone mountains; then follow the Iron, Bald, Great Smoky, Unaka, and the
Frog mountains of Georgia. Twenty-three peaks of the Smoky mountains are
over 6,000 feet in altitude,{10} the loftiest being Clingman’s Dome, 6,660
feet. The deepest gap is that of the Little Tennessee, 1,114 feet.
The eastern rampart range—the Blue Ridge—trends southward with the
convolutions of a snake; its undulations rising seldom above a mile in
altitude and sinking sometimes so low that, in passing through its wide
gaps, one is not aware that he is crossing a mountain range, the fact
being concealed by the parallel spurs rising, in many instances, to a
higher altitude than their parent chain. In spite of its depressions,
and, when compared with the Smoky mountains, the low average elevation
of its crest, it is the water-shed of the system. Not a stream severs
it. On the east every stream sweeps toward the Atlantic. On the west the
waters of its slopes are joined at its base line by those flowing down
the east or south side of the Smoky mountains; and, mingling with the
latter, pour through the deep passes of the loftier range into the
valley of the western confluent of the Tennessee.
From the Blue Ridge is thrown off many short ranges, trending east and
south across the submontane plateau. In character of outline they are
similar to the parent chain. This plateau, known as the Piedmont, walled
on the west by the Blue Ridge, diversified by mountains and hills, and
seamed by the Yadkin, Catawba, and Broad rivers and their affluents,
incloses in its limits many beautiful and fertile valleys. The outer
slope of the Blue Ridge, overlooking Piedmont, is abrupt in its descent
and presents wild and picturesque features; cascades marking the
channels of the streams. Further south, where the range bends around the
South Carolina and Georgia lines, bold escarpments of rock and ragged
pine-set declivities, seamed by cataracts, and beaten on by a hot and
sultry sun, break sheer off into the southern plains. The inner slope of
the Blue Ridge throughout its entire length from Virginia to Georgia, as
contrasted with the outer slope, is more gentle in its descent; is{11}
heavily wooded and diversified with clearings. The Smoky mountains
present similar characteristics—richly wooded descents toward the
central valley; rocky and sterile fronts toward Tennessee.
The reader must not imagine that the central valley or plateau, of which
we have been speaking, is a level or bowl-shaped expanse between the
ranges described. On the contrary, its surface is so broken by
transverse mountain ranges and their foot-hills that, by means of vision
alone, the observer from no one point can obtain a correct idea of the
structural character of the region. From the loftiest peaks, he can see
the encircling ranges and the level lands beyond their outer slopes; but
below him is rolled an inner sea of mountains, which, when looked upon
in some directions, seems of limitless expanse. The transverse chains,
comprising the Yellow mountain, the Black, Newfound, Balsam, Cowee,
Nantihala, and Valley River mountains, hold a majority of the highest
summits of the Alleghanies.
The Black mountain chain, the highest of these ranges, is only 20 miles
long, and has 18 peaks in altitude over 6,000 feet; the highest of
which, Mitchell’s Peak, 6,711 feet above sea-level, is the sovereign
mountain of the Alleghanies. The Balsam range, the longest of the
transverse chains, is 45 miles in length and crested by 15 wooded
pinnacles over 6,000 feet high. The parallel cross-chains have, nestling
between their slopes, central valleys, varying in length and width, and
opening back into little vales between the foot-hills and branching
spurs. Through the lowest dip of each great valley, sweeps toward the
Smokies a wide, crystal river fed by its tributaries from the mountain
heights.
The great valleys, or the distinct regions drained each by one of the
rivers which cut asunder the Smokies, are six in number. The extreme
northern part of the state is drained by the New{12} river and the Watauga.
Between the Yellow mountain and the Blacks lies that deeply embosomed
valley region watered by the head-springs of the Nolechucky. Next comes
the widest and longest plain of the mountain section—the valley of the
French Broad. The Big Pigeon winds through the high plateau between the
Newfound and Balsam mountains. The region of the Little Tennessee
comprises not only the wide lands along its own banks, but those along
its great forks—the Tuckasege, Nantihala, and Ocona Lufta. West of the
Valley River mountains the country is drained by the Hiawassee.
Geologically speaking, the mountains of North Carolina are the oldest in
the world. During the period of general upheavals and subsidences of the
crust of the earth, these mountains were the only lands remaining
throughout firm above the surface of the ocean. Rocks of the Archæan or
earliest age are exposed, and with their edges turned at a high angle
lie upon the beds of later periods of formation. North of the southern
boundary of Virginia, the structural character of the mountains is
different.
The entire region is mantled with forests to the summit of every peak;
the valleys and many of the adjacent coves are cleared and inhabited by
a happy, healthy, and hospitable people. It is rich in picturesque
scenery—romantic rivers, luxuriant forests, majestic mountain heights,
valleys of exquisite beauty, quaint villages, cliffs, and waterfalls. It
is rich in a life-giving climate, brilliant skies, fertile lands,
pastured steeps, and timber and mineral wealth.
It is of this country—the Heart of the Alleghanies—that in the
following pages we have treated in as full, concise, and entertaining a
manner as we could conceive and carry into execution.{13}

UNAKA KANOOS.
{14}
{15}
E are excluded from a knowledge of ancient American
history by an impenetrable veil of mystery and silence. The past has
left us only relics—relics of things and relics of races—which are
interpreted by an unreined imagination. Before Europeans set foot on the
western shore of the Atlantic, before the Indians occupied the forest
continent, there dwelt on all the sunniest plains and fertile valleys a
race well advanced in mechanical and æsthetic art, skilled in war and
consecrated in religion. It came and flourished and perished, leaving
only monuments of its existence in the form of works of earth, and works
of stone—mounds, forts, and pottery. The old mounds scattered
everywhere are the sepulchres of illustrious dead, and because of their
number, the race has been designated the “Mound Builders.” They
inhabited, among other places, the{16} southern Alleghanies, the largest
number of mounds being found in the upper valley of the Little
Tennessee. Most of the rich mica dikes bear evidence of having been
worked centuries ago. The marks of stone picks may still be seen upon
the soft feldspar with which the mica is associated, and tunnels and
shafts show some knowledge of mining. The fact that a great many ancient
mounds all over the country contain skeletons, encased in mica plates,
associates these diggings with the builders of the mounds.
The earliest traditional knowledge we have of the habitation of the
southern highlands has been handed down by the Cherokees. They say that
before they conquered the country and settled in the valleys, the
inhabitants were “moon-eyed,” that is, were unable to see during certain
phases of the moon. During a period of blindness, the Creeks swept
through the mountain passes, up the valleys, and annihilated the race.
The Cherokees in turn conquered the Creeks, with great slaughter, which
must have occurred at a very ancient date, for the country of their
conquest and adoption is the seat of their religious legends and
traditional romances.
No definite boundaries can be assigned to the land of any Indian tribe,
much less a nation of proud and warlike mountaineers who were happy only
when carrying bloodied tomahawks into an enemy’s country. The tribe was
distinguished by two great geographical divisions, the Ottari,
signifying “among the mountains,” and the Erati, signifying “lowland.”
Provincial historians have designated them as “In the Valley” and
“Overhill” towns, the great highland belt between the Blue Ridge and
Smoky mountains being designated as a valley. The ancient realm of the
tribe may, in a general way, be described as the headwater valleys of
the Yadkin and Catawba on the east; of the Keowee, Tugaloo, Flint, Etowa
and Coosa on the south, and the several tributaries of the Tennessee{17} on
the west. There were 60 towns, and 6,000 fighting men could at any time
be called by the grand chief to the war path. It was the military
prowess of these warriors that gave to the nation the most picturesque
and most secure home of all the American tribes. A keen and delicate
appreciation of the beautiful in nature, as associated with the grandeur
of their surroundings, inspired them to unparalleled heroism in its
defense against intrusion. They successfully withstood neighboring
tribes, but their contest with the whites was a contest with destiny, in
which they yielded only after a long and bloody struggle. The ancient
nation of the mountains, expelled from its home, crippled and enervated,
but improved in some respects, has found a home in the less picturesque
and distant west; but has left a dissevered and withered limb which,
like a fossil, merely reminds us of a bygone period of history.
If any one doubts that the Cherokees possessed an appreciative love of
country and a genuine sympathy with nature, let him turn to his map, and
pronounce those Indian names which have not been cruelly, almost
criminally, displaced by English common-places. Let him remember too
that there is a meaning in their euphony, and a suggestiveness in their
melody. It is a grievous fault, the more grievous because it is
irreparable, that so many of the bold streams which thunder down forest
slopes and through echoing cañons, have lost those designations whose
syllables glide from the tongue in harmony with the music of the crystal
currents. Of many natural features the names are preserved, but their
meanings have been lost.
East of the Blue Ridge, in North Carolina, very few geographical names
of Indian origin have survived. In the valley of the French Broad there
is also a barrenness of prehistoric nomenclature. From this circumstance
it is argued, and the argument is well sustained, that there was no
permanent habitation of Indians in these two localities. The villages
were{18} located in valley, and were known by the name of the streams. In
some instances, traditions became associated with the name, and in them
we have a key to an unwritten scroll. A village, furthermore, gave to a
region an importance which made its name widely known, not only in the
tribe but among traders and other white adventurers, and thus made it a
fixture. There is the additional negative evidence of no permanent
habitation, in the fact that mention is no where made, in the annals of
military expeditions against the Indians, of villages east of the Balsam
mountains. Hunters and warriors penetrated the forests for game, and
carried the tomahawk to every frontier, frequently making the Upper
Catawba and French Broad valleys their camping ground. While we know
nothing about the facts, the presumption is reasonable that at least all
the larger rivers and their tributaries were given names by the Indians,
which perished with the change of race and ownership.
Catawba is not of Cherokee origin. The river takes its name from the
tribe which inhabited its valley until a recent date; South Carolina. It
was a species of vandalism to substitute French Broad for Agiqua and
Tocheeostee, the former being the name applied by the Erati, or “over
the mountain” Cherokees, to the lower valley, and the latter by the
Ottari, or “valley” towns, to the upper or North Carolina section below
Asheville. “Racing river” is a literal translation of the term
Tocheeostee. Above Asheville, where the stream is placid and winds
snake-like through the wide alluvions, it took the name Zillicoah.
Swanannoa is one of the most resonant of Indian names, though in being
accommodated to English orthography it has lost much of its music. It
would be impossible to indicate the original pronunciation. I can,
perhaps, tell you nearer how to utter it. Begin with a suppressed sound
of the letter “s,” then with tongue and palate lowered, utter the vowel
sound of “a” in swan{19} four times in quick succession, giving to the
first as much time as to the second two, and raise the voice one note on
the last. The word is said to have been derived from the sound made by a
raven’s wing as it sweeps through the air. Before white settlers came
into the country that species of bird was very plentiful along all the
streams, and at their points of confluence were its favorite roosting
places, whence, aided by the scent of the water, it sallied up stream in
search of food. Hundreds collected at the mouth of the Swanannoa, and
the name was the oft repeated imitation, by the voice, of the music of
their wings, as they whizzed past the morning camp-fire of the hunter or
warrior bands, on the bank of the stream. The hungry, homely, and hated
raven is indeed an humble origin for a name so beautiful, applied to an
object so much applauded for its beauty.
If the upper tributaries of the French Broad ever had names worthy of
their character which have been displaced by such colloquialisms as
Cathey’s creek, Davidson’s river, Mills’ river, and Little river, they
perished with the race more in sympathy with nature than the inhabitants
of the last century. By some chance that gentle stream which snakes
through the flat valley of Henderson county, has preserved an Indian
designation, though it is probably a borrowed one. Ocklawaha is the name
which we find in old legal documents, and its tributary, which gives the
county’s capital a peninsular situation, is designated the Little
Ocklawaha—a barbarous mixture of Indian and English. The word is of
Seminole origin, and means “slowly moving water.” It was applied to a
river in Florida by the natives, and to this Carolina stream by the “low
country” people who found summer homes beyond the Blue Ridge, because of
the applicability of the name and its resemblance in some other respects
to the original Ochlawaha. Reverence of antiquity and the geographical
genius of the red race, can not be claimed as an argument in favor of
the re-substitution of the{20} Indian designation for the present
universally used colloquialism, “Mud creek,” as homely as it is false in
the idea it suggests. Ochlawaha is not only more pleasing to the ear,
but gives a much more faithful description of the landscape feature
designated, and hence has sufficient claims to the public recognition
which we take the lead in giving it.
Going southward, and crossing the Blue Ridge and Green river, which
derives its name from the tint of its water, we come to the Saluda
range, the fountain of a river of the same name. The word is of Catawba
origin, as is also Estatoa. Toxaway, or more properly spelled Tochawha,
is Cherokee, but we have no satisfactory interpretation of its meaning.
The Balsams are rich in legendary superstitions. The gloom of their dark
solitudes fills even the hurried tourist with an unaccountable fear, and
makes it impossible for him to suppress the recollection of tales of
ghosts and goblins upon which his childish imagination was fed. The
mountains assume mysterious shapes, projecting rocks seem to stand
beckoning; and the echo of cascades falls upon the ear like ominous
warnings. No wonder then, that it was a region peopled by pagan
superstition, with other spirits than human. It is the instinct of the
human mind, no matter what may be its degree of cultivation, to seek an
explanation of things. When natural causes can not be discovered for the
phenomena of nature, the supernatural is drawn upon. The Cherokees knew
no natural reason why the tops of high mountains should be treeless, but
having faith in a personal devil they jumped at the conclusion that the
“bald” spots must be the prints of his horrid feet as he walked with
giant strides from peak to peak.
Near the Great Divide, between the waters of Pigeon river and French
Broad, is situated the Devil’s Court-house, which rises to an altitude
of 6,049 feet. Near it is Court-house mountain. At both places his
Satanic majesty was believed to sit in{21} judgment, and doom to punishment
all who had been wayward in courage, or had departed from a strict code
of virtue, though bravery in war atoned for a multitude of sins.
The devil had besides these a supreme court-house, where finally all
mankind would be summoned for trial. This was one of the great
precipices of the Whiteside mountain, situated in Jackson county, at the
southern terminus of the Cowee range. There is no wonder that the simple
minded pagans supposed that nature had dedicated this structure to
supernatural use, for it excels in grandeur the most stupendous works of
human hands. It consists of a perpendicular wall of granite, so curved
as to form an arc more than a mile long, and rises 1,800 feet from the
moss-blanketed rocks which form the pavement of an enclosed court. About
half way up there is a shelf-like projection, not more than two feet
wide, which leads from one side to a cave. This was supposed to be the
inner room of the great temple, whence the judge of human conduct would
come to pronounce sentence at the end of the world. That this important
business should be entrusted to Satan is a mythological incongruity. A
certain sorcerer, or medicine-man, taking advantage of the popular
superstition about the place, made the cave his home, going in and out
by the narrow shelf. He announced that he was in league with the spirits
of the next world, and consequently could go in and out with perfect
safety, which fact caused him to be recognized as a great man. There
have been found, in the vicinity of Whiteside, Indian ladders—that is,
trees with the limbs trimmed so as to form steps. What they could have
been used for we are unable to conjecture; certainly not to scale the
mountain sides, for such a thing would be impossible.
Old Field mountain, in the Balsam range, derives its name from the
tradition that it was Satan’s bed-chamber. The Cherokees of a recent
generation affirm that his royal majesty was{22} often seen by their
forefathers, and even some of the first white settlers had knowledge of
his presence. On the top of the mountain there is a prairie-like tract,
almost level, reached by steep slopes covered with thickets of balsam
and rhododendron, which seem to garrison the reputed sacred domain. It
was understood among the Indians to be forbidden territory, but a party
one day permitted their curiosity to tempt them. They forced a way
through the entangled thickets, and with merriment entered the open
ground. Aroused from sleep and enraged by their audacious intrusion, the
devil, taking the form of an immense snake, assaulted the party and
swallowed 50 of them before the thicket could be regained.
Among the first whites who settled among the Indians and traded with
them, was a party of hunters who used this superstition to escape
punishment for their reprehensible conduct. They reported that they were
in league with the great spirit of evil, and to prove that they were,
frequented this “old field.” They described his bed, under a large
overhanging rock, as a model of neatness. They had frequently thrown
into it stones and brushwood during the day, while the master was out,
but the place was invariably as clean the next morning “as if it had
been brushed with a bunch of feathers.”
But there is another legend of the Balsams more significant than any of
these. It is the Paradise Gained of Cherokee mythology, and bears some
distant resemblance to the Christian doctrine of mediation. The Indians
believed that they were originally mortal in spirit as well as body, but
above the blue vault of heaven there was, inhabited by a celestial race,
a forest into which the highest mountains lifted their dark summits. It
is a fact worth noticing that, while the priests of the orient described
heaven as a great city with streets of gold and gates of pearl and fine
gems, the tribes of the western continent{23} aspired to nothing beyond the
perpetual enjoyment of wild nature.
The mediator, by whom eternal life was secured for the Indian
mountaineers, was a maiden of their own tribe. Allured by the haunting
sound and diamond sparkle of a mountain stream, she wandered far up into
a solitary glen, where the azalea, the kalmia, and the rhododendron
brilliantly embellished the deep, shaded slopes, and filled the air with
their delicate perfume. The crystal stream wound its crooked way between
moss covered rocks over which tall ferns bowed their graceful stems.
Enchanted by the scene she seated herself upon the soft moss and
overcome by fatigue was soon asleep. The dream picture of a fairyland
was presently broken by the soft touch of a strange hand. The spirit of
her dream occupied a place at her side, and wooing, won her for his
bride.
Her supposed abduction caused great excitement among her people, who
made diligent search for her recovery in their own villages. Being
unsuccessful, they made war upon the neighboring tribes in the hope of
finding the place of her concealment. Grieved because of so much
bloodshed and sorrow, she besought the great chief of the eternal
hunting grounds to make retribution. She was accordingly appointed to
call a council of her people at the forks of the Wayeh (Pigeon) river.
She appeared unto the chiefs in a dream, and charged them to meet the
spirits of the hunting ground with fear and reverence.
At the hour appointed the head men of the Cherokees assembled. The high
Balsam peaks were shaken by thunder and aglare with lightning. The
cloud, as black as midnight, settled over the valley; then lifted,
leaving upon a large rock a cluster of strange men, armed and painted as
for war. An enraged brother of the abducted maiden swung his tomahawk,
and raised the war whoop; but a swift thunderbolt dispatched him before{24}
the echo had died in the hills. The chiefs, terror-stricken, fled to
their towns.
The bride, grieved by the death of her brother and the failure of the
council, prepared to abandon her new home and return to her kindred in
the valleys. To reconcile her the promise was granted that all brave
warriors and their faithful women should have an eternal home in the
happy hunting ground above, after death. The great chief of the forest
beyond the clouds became the guardian spirit of the Cherokees. All
deaths, either from wounds in battle or disease, were attributed to his
desire to make additions to the celestial hunting ground, or on the
other hand, to his wrath which might cause their unfortunate spirits to
be turned over to the disposition of the evil genius of the mountain
tops. Plagues and epidemics were sometimes supposed to be the work of
sorcerers, witches and monsters, human and superhuman. Once during an
epidemic of smallpox, so says a traditional tale, a devil in human form
was tracked to the headwaters of Tusquittee, where he was apprehended in
a cave. They saluted him with a volley of poisoned arrows, which he
tossed back with derisive laughter. After several repetitions with the
same result, a bird spoke to the disheartened warriors, telling them
that their enemy was invulnerable, except one finger which, if hit,
would cause his instant death. As in the case of Achilles, of Troy, the
vulnerable spot received a fatal shot, and the plague ceased its
ravages. The bird was of the variety of little yellow songsters—a
variety protected as sacred down to within the memory of the man from
whom the writer received this legend.
We return now to the discussion of Indian names, with which the
narration of incidents, connected with the geographical nomenclature of
the Balsam mountains has slightly interfered. The Indian names of the
French Broad have already been given. The present name has an historical
signification to commend its{25} continued use, if nothing more. Prior to
the treaty made between England and France in 1763, the latter nation
claimed all the country drained by the Mississippi, the ground of this
claim being actual settlement near the mouth of that river and at
several places along its course. International customs gave the claim
validity, though the English never admitted it. Adair, an early
historian, says: “Louisiana stretched to the head-springs of the
Alleghany and Monongahela, of the Kenawha and Tennessee. Half a mile
from the southern branch of the Savannah is Herbert’s spring, which
flows into the Mississippi. Strangers who drank of it, would say they
had tasted of French waters.” In like manner, traders and hunters from
the Atlantic settlements, in passing from the headwaters of Broad river
over the Blue Ridge, and coming to the streams with which they
inosculate, would hear, as Adair did, of the French claim, and call it
most naturally “French Broad.”
Watauga and Nollichucky are Cherokee designations, but the latter should
be spelled Nouachuneh. We are unable to learn the original name of New
river. Estatoa, flowing from the Black mountains, has been shortened to
“Toe.” The Pigeon was originally Wayeh, which has been simply
translated.
The reader should be reminded before going further into this subject
that absolute accuracy in the importation of the Cherokee into our
language cannot be attained. In the first place no combination of
English letters can be made to represent the original sounds, nor can
they be uttered by the English mouth. Then again, the same syllables
with different inflections have different meanings. The English spelling
is merely an attempt at imitation, and the meanings, given by those who
profess to know, are sometimes only guesses. In spelling, uniformity is
chiefly to be sought. One rule, however, should be followed implicitly:
never use a letter whose sound requires closing the lips. A Cherokee
said everything with his mouth{26} open. “Tsaraghee” would come nearest a
correct pronunciation of the name of the tribe, yet in its application
to a mountain in Georgia it is “Currahee.”
The country occupied by the Cherokees down to within the memory of men
still living, embraced the valleys west of the Balsam mountains. The
first white settlers adopted the geographical nomenclature of the
natives, which is still retained. Junaluska, the name of the picturesque
mountain group overlooking the Richland and Scott’s creek valleys, was
applied by white settlers in honor of the intrepid war chief who
commanded the Indian forces in Alabama, belonging to Jackson’s army in
the war of 1812. He was an exemplary man, honored by his people and
respected by the whites. The State, in recognition of his military
services, granted him a boundary of land in the Cheowah valley, known as
the Junaluska farm, on which he was buried in 1847.
Tennessee, the name of the largest river in upper Carolina, is of Indian
origin, but was written by the first explorers, “Tennasee.” Kalamutchee
was the name of the main stream formed by the Clinch and Holston. The
French named the whole river Cosquinambeaux which happily perished with
the old maps.
The principal tributary of the Little Tennessee above the Smoky
mountains is spelled differently on almost every map. The best
authority, however, derived from the Indians themselves, through
intelligent citizens, makes it a word of three syllables, spelled
Tuckasege. Most old maps give it an additional syllable by doubling the
final “e.” The English signification of the word is “terrapin.” There
was a town of the same name above the site of Webster, and near it a
pond which abounded in the water species of that reptile. The shells
were much sought and highly prized by the Indians for ornaments. The
couplet of mountains which divide the Tuckasege from Cashier’s{27} valley,
are locally known by the English signification “Terrapin,” but the
original, “Tuckasege,” should be restored.
Ocona Lufta, the name of the pearly stream which flows through the
Indian settlement, is derived from its having been a nesting place for
ducks and other water fowls. One of its affluents, the Colehmayeh, is
derived from Coleh, “raven,” and Mayeh, “water.” The English “Raven’s
fork” is in common use among the whites. Soco, the name of another
tributary of the Lufta, means “one.”
Charlestown, in Swain county, occupies the ancient site of the Indian
village of Younaahqua or Big Bear. Wesuh, meaning “cat,” has taken the
colloquialism Conley’s creek for its name. The post hamlet of Qualla
town, in the present Cherokee settlement, is an English name modified to
suit the Indian tongue. A white woman named Polly, familiarly “Aunt
Polly,” opened a small store. Her Indian customers, unable to give the
sound of “p,” their speech being open-mouthed, substituted the “q”
sound, which came into general use and finally changed the word. Qualla
is a very common name for Indian women.
The euphonious name Nantahala seems to be little understood. The most
commonly given interpretation is “maiden’s bosom,” though that meaning
can only be derived by a stretch of metaphor. If the word, as supposed
by some interpreters, is compounded of Nantaseh and Eylee, it means
“between ridges,” whence by far-fetched simile “maiden’s bosom.” But it
is more probably compounded of Nantaseh and Eyalee, which literally
means “The sun between,” or “half way,” hence “noonday sun.”
The Hiawassee was known among the earliest explorers as the Euphrasee,
which was perhaps the name applied by a more southern tribe. The largest
affluent of the Hiawassee is the Valley river, known by the Cherokees as
Ahmachunahut, meaning “long stream.”{28}
Cullasaja is the old name of that tributary of the Little Tennessee
which heads in the Macon highlands, and is noted for the beauty of its
cascades. The English signification of the word is “sweet water.” Sugar
fork is the local designation, though the maps preserve the old and rich
sounding original.
Satoola, the name of a high peak overlooking the upper Macon plateau,
has been mercilessly pruned to “Stooley.” Horse Cove is the homely
appellation of a parquet-shaped valley within the curved precipice which
leads from Satoola to Whitesides. Sequilla, the old Indian name, has a
much better sound. Cowee, the designation of the great transverse chain
which divides the Tuckasege from the Tennessee is a corruption of Keowe,
the form which still attaches to the river. It means “near”, or “at
hand.”
The writers regret that they are unable to give the meaning of all the
words of Indian origin which appear upon the map. They regret still more
that they are unable to restore to all places of general interest the
rich accents of the Cherokee tongue. It is a subject which will require
long and patient study. Public interest must also be aroused, so that
designations long since laid aside, when made known, will be locally
applied.
We will now trace the rapid decline of the most warlike of all the
Indian tribes, and conclude with an account of the remnant band known as
the Eastern Cherokees. One of the first white invasions of the
picturesque dominion of the ancient tribe was made by slave traders,
late in the seventeenth century, in the interest of West India planters.
Hundreds of strong warriors were bound and carried from Arcadia and
freedom to malarious swamps and bondage, where they soon sank under the
burden of oppressive labor. Cherokees made better slaves than any other
Indians, on account of their superior strength and intelligence, and
consequently were the most sought. Neighboring{29} tribes were incited to
make war upon them by the offer of prizes for captives. After long
suffering and much bloodshed, the governor of Carolina, in response to
the solicitations of the head men of the tribe, interposed the authority
of his government. The Cherokee nation in return acknowledged Great
Britain as its protector, and permitted the erection of British forts
within its territory. Emissaries of France attempted to win the
allegiance of these Indians with presents of gaudy blankets, and arms
for the chase. While their affections vacillated between the two
nations, the tribe proved loyal in the end to its first vow. In the
French war in the year 1757, the Cherokees bore arms against France,
with which nation most of the red race were in alliance. On their return
from the forks of the Ohio, after the fall of Fort Duquesne, being
poorly fed, they raided the settlements and carried away a large number
of negro slaves. These taught their masters the elements of farming.
The Cherokees remained loyal to the king during the Revolution, and,
associated with tory guerrillas, engaged in many acts of bloody
violence. The transmontane settlement, on the Holston in East Tennessee,
was the chief object of the tribe’s malignant jealousy. For six years,
the little band of settlers held their lives in their hands, struggling
incessantly with blood-thirsty foes and slowly devouring poverty.
The Indians themselves suffered incursions from both sides of the
mountains. Their villages on the Tuckasege, Little Tennessee and the
Hiawassee were frequently destroyed, the country pillaged, corn burned
and ponies led away. Ramsey thus describes an expedition of Tennesseeans
under command of Colonel John Sevier, the lion of the western border:
“The command, consisting of 120 men, went up Cane creek (from the
Holston), crossed Ivy and Swanannoa,” thence through Balsam gap to the
Tuckasege. “He entered and took by surprise the town of Tuckasege. Fifty
warriors were slain,{30} and fifty women and children taken prisoners. In
that vicinity the troops under Sevier burnt 15 or 20 towns and all the
graneries of corn they could find. It was a hard and disagreeable
necessity that led to the adoption of these apparently cruel measures.”
The lower and valley towns afterwards suffered a similar fate.
An incident illustrative of the times is associated with the naming of
Fine’s creek in Haywood county. The Indians were in the habit of making
sallies down the Pigeon into the Tennessee settlements, then returning
to their mountain fastnesses. On one of these expeditions they were
routed and followed by Peter Fine and a company of plucky militia. The
Indians were overtaken in camp beyond the mountains, one killed and the
property recovered. The whites were in turn followed by the Indians,
and, while sustaining a night attack, Vinet Fine, the major’s brother,
was killed. A hole was cut in the ice, and, to conceal the body from the
savages, it was dropped into the creek. It is appropriate, therefore,
that the stream should be called Fine’s creek.
Soon after the Revolution the Cherokees made a session of all their
lands between the Tennessee and Cumberland rivers. More than 12,000
Indians were present at the council. Monnette’s History gives the
prophetic speech of an old chief—Oconnastotee. He began by describing
the flourishing condition of his nation in the past, and the
encroachments of the whites upon the retiring and expiring tribes of
Indians, who left their homes and the seats of their ancestors to
gratify the insatiable thirst of the white people for more land. Whole
nations had melted away, and had left their names only as recorded by
their enemies and destroyers. It was once hoped that they would not be
willing to travel beyond the mountains so far from the ocean on which
their commerce was carried on. That fallacious hope had vanished, for
the whites had already{31} settled on the Cherokee lands, and now wished to
have their usurpations sanctioned by treaty. When that shall have been
done new sessions will be applied for, and finally the country which the
Cherokees and their forefathers occupied will be applied for. The small
remnant which may then exist of this once great and powerful nation will
be compelled to seek a new home in some far distant wilderness.
But a few years elapsed before the beginning of the fulfillment of this
prophesy. Emigration after the Revolution became a mania. The Watauga
passes were filled with teams en route for the Holston valley, and
roads were constructed up the Blue Ridge to the garden valley of the
upper French Broad.
The Indians were soon forced to retire beyond the Balsams, into the
valley of the Little Tennessee and its upper branches. Tennessee
acquired, by purchase and otherwise, most of the Cherokee territory in
that state, while Georgia adopted a harsh and oppressive policy,
calculated to produce discontent. As early as 1790, a band of low
country Cherokees emigrated beyond the Mississippi, from which time, as
the hunting grounds became more and more contracted, discouragement and
a desire to go west, became general among the clans below the Smoky
mountains and Blue Ridge. Several treaties ceding portions of their
domain were made, and finally a faction representing themselves as
agents of the tribe, in 1835 surrendered “all rights, title, and
possession to all the lands owned and occupied by the Cherokee Indians,”
in exchange for lands west of the Mississippi. The North Carolina
Indians and a portion of those in Georgia and Tennessee protested
vigorously against the terms of the treaty. Under the leadership of the
proud warrior Junaluska, they were among the most valiant of General
Jackson’s soldiers in the second war with Great Britain. They now vainly
appealed to the same General Jackson as President{32} of the United States,
for the privilege of remaining in the land of their fathers.
By a treaty made in 1819 the Cherokees had ceded all their lands,
“saving and reserving one section for each family who chose to remain.”
The clans that desired to emigrate were given lands and transportation.
The treaty of 1835 provided for an exchange of all the eastern
reservations for lands in the west, without discretion; but through the
influence of Colonel W. H. Thomas, the treaty was so modified that
certain towns were to have money compensation for their reservations
under the treaty of 1819, with which to purchase new homes in their
native land. These were to be held in fee simple by as many as chose to
remain.
A large percentage of the tribe denied the validity of the treaty
altogether, and only yielded when the force of General Scott’s army was
brought to bear, in 1837. It is in those who accepted the advice and
offices of Colonel Thomas, and remained in North Carolina, we are
chiefly interested. Their kin who voluntarily emigrated or were driven
west of the Mississippi have progressed steadily in the useful arts,
have schools, churches, farms and cattle.
The Eastern Band, as those who remained and purchased farms, and their
descendants are known, has been steadily decreasing in numbers, there
being at present but slightly above 1100 souls.
Colonel Thomas, who was, until recent years, the chief of the band, was
born in the Pigeon river valley, and, at a very early age, left an
orphan. Felix Walker, the Congressional representative from the Western
North Carolina district, had two stores, one at Waynesville and one in
the Indian country, on Soco, in which latter store young Thomas was
placed as clerk. Most of the customers being Indians, he soon learned to
speak and write Cherokee. These linguistic attainments made him{33}
invaluable to the tribe for the transaction of public and private
business. Younaguska (Drowning Bear), the reigning chief, adopted the
lad into his family and tribe, and gave him entire clerical charge of
public affairs.
The chief, Younaguska, was an extraordinary Indian. He was acute,
vigorous, and determined; qualities which made him both respected and
feared by his people. He knew how to control their weaknesses and use
their superstitions.
The Cherokees, like all Indians who come in contact with the whites,
became intemperate. Younaguska, though himself addicted to the use of
whisky to excess, determined upon a reformation of his people. He sank
into a trance, so heavy that the whole town supposed him to be dead,
though some signs of life remained. Anxiously they watched and waited
for fifteen days, when it was determined to perform the funeral rites
according to their ancient usages. The tribe assembled. The plaintive
notes of the funeral song began to mingle with the roll of the Lufty.
They marched and counter-marched, 1,200 of them, around the prostrate
body of their chief. Then came a sudden pause and fright, for the dead
had returned to life! An old familiar voice was summoning their
attention. He spoke with deep feeling, telling his people that he had
been in a trance; that he had communed with the great spirit; that his
long service for his people was not yet ended; he was to remain with
them as many years as he had been days in the “happy hunting ground.”
Having thus given to his speech the authority of inspiration, he
proceeded to tell them that he had served them upwards of 40 years
without any pecuniary consideration whatever. His sole aim had been to
promote their good. Their happiness in the future was his chief concern.
He was convinced that intemperance was the cause of the extermination of
the Indian tribes who lived in contact with the whites. As an example{34}
he referred to the previous and present condition of the Catawbas, with
whom they were acquainted. He deplored the scenes of dissipation so
common among his own people, and closed by directing Mr. Thomas, from
whom this account has been derived, to write the following pledge: “The
undersigned Cherokees, belonging to the town of Qualla, agree to abandon
the use of spirituous liquors.” The old chief signed first and was
followed by the whole town. This pledge was enforced with the rigor of a
written law, its violation in every instance being punished at the
public whipping post. Younaguska expressed pleasure in the knowledge
that his people confided in him. He advised them to remain where they
were, in North Carolina, a State more friendly and better disposed
toward the red man than any other. Should they remove west they would
there too soon be surrounded by the whites and perhaps included in a
State disposed to oppress them.
Younaguska’s influence over them was well nigh omnipotent, and was
exerted uniformly with a view to their improvement. Colonel Thomas,
whose acquaintance with public men was extensive, has declared that this
old Indian was the intellectual peer of John C. Calhoun. There is
certainly a place in history for the individual, whatever be his race,
who can elevate a band of warriors and hunters into a community of
agriculturists, capable of raising their own food and manufacturing
their own clothing.
Before Younaguska died he assembled his people and publicly willed the
chieftainship to his clerk, friend and adopted son, W. H. Thomas, whom
he commended as worthy of respect and whom he adjured them to obey as
they had obeyed him. He was going to the home provided for him by the
great spirit; he would always keep watch over his people and would be
grieved to see any of them disobey the new chief he had chosen to rule
over them. It was therefore under the most auspicious{35} circumstances
that Colonel Thomas became chief of the Eastern Band of the Cherokees.
He had been with them long enough to know their character. He made
himself absolute in everything, and required the strictest obedience. He
kept constantly in their minds the injunction of Younaguska, and warned
them at every critical juncture of the danger of incurring the
displeasure of the spirit of their old chief. Councils were held
according to the ancient usages of the tribe, but they did little more
than confirm the transactions of the chief.
Colonel Thomas, as provided by the treaty of 1835, used the funds of the
Indians in the purchase of homes. He provided for their education and
encouraged religious exercises among them. When the war broke out he led
four companies into the Confederate army. They showed capacity for
discipline and were not wanting in courage; but like a great many of
these highlanders, they had no interest in the cause, and employed the
first opportunity to desert, some of them joining the Federal army and
many finding their mountain homes. During the war the tribe’s internal
affairs were in chaos, its councils were without a head, and its members
lapsed into dissipation and laziness. The ban of an adverse fatality
seemed to rest over these unfortunate pilgrims on their way from
barbarism to civilization.
Their chief was stricken with nervous disease when his services were
most needed, and years of confusion and imposition followed. There were
rival pretenders to the chieftainship, who divided the band into
factions and threatened at one time a contest at arms. The animus of
this whole affair was the avarice of several white adventurers who were
seeking to control the business of the tribe in order to get into their
own hands the claims due the Indians from the United States. Even under
such circumstances these people demonstrated their capacity for self
government. One of the contestants, whose English name was John Ross,
was forced to abandon his pretensions,{36} and Lloyd Welsh, his competitor,
soon after died. A written constitution had in the meantime been
adopted, which is still in force. Nimrod Jarrett Smith, an intelligent
and educated member of the tribe, was elected by popular vote to the
chieftainship for the term of four years, and has since been re-elected.
The Eastern Band of Cherokees have title in fee simple to 50,000 acres
of land on the Ocona Lufta and Soco creek, known as the Qualla boundary.
A few small tracts belonging to individual Indians are included. Besides
this boundary, there are belonging to the band and individuals 1,521
acres in detached tracts lying in the counties of Cherokee, Graham,
Jackson, and Swain. According to the census of 1880, there were living
in the Qualla reserve, 825; in Cherokee county, 83; in Graham county,
189, and in Macon county, 12, making a total of 1,109. This number is
ten per cent. less than in 1870. The Graham county Indians live along
the head branches of the Cheowah, those in Cherokee county on Valley
river.
The Indians have no towns, nor does their manner of life differ in many
particulars from that of the white people among whom they reside. A
stranger, unless he sees the inmates, does not distinguish an Indian
cabin from a white man’s, nor, with few exceptions, an Indian’s little
cove farm from one of its class cultivated by a white man.
The valley of Soco is the locality of densest Indian population. The
fields, originally of average fertility, are worn out by bad farming.
There is an abundance of fruit—apples, peaches and plums. The
predominant crop is corn, which is reduced to meal by the simple little
mills common to the mountain country. Small herds of ponies are
frequently seen by the wayside. These, and a few cattle, are the main
sources of revenue upon which the people rely for what money they need.
Taxes and expenses incident to their government, including schools{37} is
the extent of cash demands made upon them. They manufacture their own
clothing. The primitive dress of the warriors and hunters consisted of
deer skin leggins and moccasins, a highly colored shirt, and a kind of
turban ornamented with feathers. The moccasins alone survive, the dress
of an Indian in all other respects being like that of his white
neighbor. The Cherokee women of the present generation are unattractive.
Some of the young children who attend school are clean and neat in
person and dress, which is more than can be said of many of the mothers.
The women are seldom seen upon the road without burdens, though the men
rarely carry anything. The lower valley of the Soco is barren of scenic
interest, yet these metamorphosed representatives of a primitive
population cannot fail to occupy the attention of the tourist. You may
be interested in some of the details of our trip from the mouth of the
Ocona Lufta to Soco gap.

A SOCO LASS
The loquacious innkeeper at Charleston started us off with a comfortable
breakfast and the information that the distance to Yellow Hill, the
residence of Chief Smith and Cherokee seat of government, was about
eleven miles, and from there to Waynesville, through Soco gap, was
twenty-five. Two hours’ ride through the sandy, but well cultivated
valley of the Tuckasege brought us to the Ocona Lufta. From this point
the road follows the general course of the stream, but, avoiding its
curves, is at places so far away that the roar of the rapids sounds
like{38} the distant approach of a storm. At places the road is almost
crowded into the river by the stern approach of precipices, and then
again they separate while crossing broad, green, undulating bottoms.
Overtaking an old squaw and a girl probably ten years old, we inquired
the distance to Yellow Hill. The old woman shook her head and gave us an
expressionless look, indicating that she did not understand. The girl in
good English gave us intelligible directions. We learned subsequently
that nearly all the Cherokee children can speak and write English. Many
of the old folks can understand our language, but will not admit it. I
began asking some questions of a stoop-shouldered, heavy-set fellow
about the country. He stood dumb, but when I told him I wanted to buy a
few peaches his eye brightened, and the words “How many?” were
distinctly uttered.
We arrived at Yellow Hill about 11 o’clock. Chief Smith resides in a
comfortable house of four rooms, situated on top of an elevation in the
midst of a plain of considerable extent. In an open yard near the house
is a frame building used for a school-house, meeting-house, and
council-house. We found Chief Smith in his residence, writing at a table
covered with books, pamphlets, letters, and manuscripts. The room is
neatly papered and comfortably furnished. The chief received us with
cordiality. He was dressed in white starched shirt, with collar and
cuffs, Prince Albert coat, well-fitting black pantaloons, and calf-skin
boots shining like ebony. He is more than six feet tall, straight as a
plumb line, and rather slender. His features are rough and prominent.
His forehead is full but not high, and his thick, black hair, combed to
perfect smoothness, hung down behind large protruding ears, almost to
the coat collar. He has a deep, full-toned voice, and earnest,
impressive manner. His wife is a white woman, and his daughters, bright,
intelligent girls, have been well-educated.{39} One of them was operating a
sewing-machine, another writing for her father.
Under the present constitution the chief’s term of office is four years.
His salary is $500 a year, and $4 a day additional when on business in
Washington. No one but a Cherokee of more than 35 years of age is
eligible to the chieftainship. There is an assistant chief who receives
$250 yearly. He is one of the council, and in the absence of the chief
performs his duties. There are in addition three executive advisers. The
council consists of two delegates to every 100 persons. It is presided
over by the chief, who has the veto power, but who is not at liberty to
act in any matter of public policy without the authority of the council.
Every male Indian over sixteen years old, and every white man who has an
Indian wife, is allowed to vote. No one is eligible to office who has
ever aided and abetted, or in any way joined the whites in defrauding
the tribe; neither can any one hold office who denies the being of a
God, or of a future state of rewards and punishments. There is general
satisfaction with the present government, and Mr. Smith declares there
is entire loyalty in all the settlements.
A public school is maintained, and even the old and middle-aged are
better educated than the whites in many communities. The young are
taught in both Cherokee and English. It is unfortunate that no public
fund is provided for the advanced education of the more intelligent of
them, that they might become teachers. Others should be placed in shops
where they would become artisans. Finely engraved pipes, ornaments, and
well made baskets show their capacity in this direction. Their industry
at present is not commendable.
The christianization of the Cherokees was begun in 1801, by Moravian
missionaries. It was easy to adapt their old faith to the new creed, and
many were converted. Other churches have since taken up the work,
Baptists deserving the most{40} credit, and next to them the Methodists.
They are naturally devout, and most of them are in regular communion
with the church, thereby imposing marriage laws and other social
regulations. Christianity has strengthened and solemnized the marriage
tie, which in the prouder but more barbarous condition of the tribe was
a very weak relation. Boys used to choose their wives at sixteen to
eighteen years of age, live with them a few years and then abandon them
and their families. It not unfrequently happened that after rioting with
strange women for a period, they came back to their first choice, unless
their places had been taken by others. Prostitution was common, though
considered the most disgraceful of crimes, and punished by shearing the
head. This punishment has been discontinued. Although there has been a
healthy change in social morals there is room for improvement.
Rigid seriousness is a marked element of Indian character, and is
written in unmistakable lines upon their faces. The Cherokee language is
not capable of expressing a witticism, and anything like a joke is
foreign to their nature. They have a great many so-called dances, but
none of them, like the dance of the negro, is the effervescence of
irrepressible joy. The Indian dances as a preparation for some coming
event; he never celebrates. It seems to be a legacy of his heathen ideas
of making sacrifice to the great spirit, apparently involving much
painful labor. In the primitive days the whole tribe danced before
making war, and the warriors danced before going into battle. It is
still their custom to go through these melancholy perambulations before
every contest of strength, such as a game of ball or a wrestling match.
The funeral dance and the wedding dance are performed with the same
stern immobility of features.
From Yellow Hill our party started to Qualla post-office, a collection
of a half-dozen unattractive houses, inhabited by{41} whites, but at one
time the council house of the band. The Ocona Lufta crossed our path at
the beginning. The purity of the stream seemed to forbid the intrusion
of a dirty hoof, but there was no time to indulge sentiment. The ford is
shallow, and angles down stream. My horse mistook a canoe landing,
almost opposite, for his place of destination, his rider’s attention
being absorbed in the blocks of many colored granite and transparent
crystals of quartz, which form the bottom pavement. Three-fourths way
across, the water was smooth and touched the horse’s neck. Another
length, a plunge, and the horse was swimming; still the lustrous bottom
shone with undiminished distinctness.
On our way through Quallatown to Soco creek, we passed numerous
wayfarers carrying corn, fruit, baskets, and babies. One woman had a
bushel of corn tied in a sack around her waist, a basket of apples on
her head, and a baby in her arms. A slouchy man was walking at her side
empty-handed and scolding, probably because she was unable to carry him.
Under a peach tree before a cabin stood a witch-like squaw and half a
dozen unattractive children. “Is this the Soco road?” was asked.
“Satula” issued from her grim old mouth, and her finger pointed at the
peaches.
“No, Soco; is this Soco?” nervously urged our companion, pointing up the
stream.
“Uh,” she grunted out, and handed him one peach, from which we inferred
that “soco” means “one.” A white woman in the vicinity confirmed our
guess, and told us that “satula” is equivalent to the phrase “do you
want it?”
Pause, and look at an “Indian maiden” by the road side. We did. Who,
that has read Longfellow, and Cooper, and Irving, could pass without
looking? She certainly could not have been the inspiration of
Longfellow’s Hiawatha. She stands, in my recollection, with fishing rod
in hand—about five{42} feet tall, and 140 pounds in weight. Black, coarse,
knotted hair hangs down her back to the waist. Under her low forehead is
a pair of large, black eyes, which, unfortunately, are devoid of
expression. Her cheek bones are wider than her forehead and almost touch
the level of her eyes. A flat nose, straight mouth, and small ears,
complete the physiognomy which showed no sign of thinking. Her neck is
short and thick, and her shoulders broader than her broad hips. Her
waist is almost manly. A gown of homespun, patched and dirty, half
conceals her knees. With a glance at a large, but clumsy, pair of
ankles, and flat feet, we pass on out of the Indian settlement along the
rapids of Soco. We had not been approached by a beggar, or asked to buy
a penny worth of anything during the whole day.
The scenery along the torrents of Soco creek, down the western slope of
the Balsams, rivals in variety and picturesque effect that of any place
in the Appalachians. There are no grand chasms, nor grand cascades.
There is nothing, indeed, which calls for superlative adjectives,
unless, possibly, we except the immensity of the trees, the unbroken
carpeting of moss, and the perfect grace of tall ferns. There is, in the
curves of the torrent, as it bounds over precipices and down rapids,
compelling us to cross its noisy channel at least twenty times; in the
conformation of the glens through which we rode; in the massiveness and
towering height of the great chain, up whose side we were climbing; in
the white fragments of rock, which reflect the sun light from the
stream’s channel and the highway; in the rounded cliffs, so modest that
they keep themselves perpetually robed in a seamless vesture of moss; in
the ferns, the shrubs, the trees, in the absolute solitude and
loneliness of the place,—there is something so complex in its effect
upon the interested student of nature that he is unwearied by the two
hours and a half required to make the ascent.{43}

MOUNT PISGAH.
West Asheville in the Foreground.
{44}
{45}
HE black bear, native to North America, still exists in
large numbers on the wildest ranges of the southern mountains. The work
of extermination pursued by hunter and trapper proceed more slowly
against him than against his fellow inhabitant of the wilderness—the
deer, in which every faint halloo of mountaineer, or distant bay of the
hounds, strikes terror; and whose superior fleetness of limb only serves
to carry him to the open river—his slaughter ground.
Bruin’s usual haunts are in those melancholy forests which hood the
heads of the Black, Smoky, and Balsam ranges, and deck a few summits of
the Blue Ridge, resorted to either from liking, or to avoid his enemies;
and it is only when pushed by hunger or when his tooth has become
depraved by a bait of hog, taken during one of these starving periods,
that he appears on the lower slopes or in the cultivated valleys.
However,{46} there are some localities, much lower than those mantled by
the fir forests, where the black bear still roams. In some sections of
the lower French Broad he is occasionally seen. The region of the Great
Hog-back, Whiteside, Satoola, and Short-off, afford some sport in this
line for the hunter; while among the Nantihalas frequent successful
hunts are undertaken.
For bear-driving in the Black mountains, the best place for a stranger
who really wishes to kill a bear, and who feels himself equal to so
arduous a tramp, is “Big Tom” Wilson’s, on Cane river. To reach it, you
take the stage from Asheville to Burnsville, and then ride or walk from
the village 15 miles to the home of the old hunter. He is familiar with
every part of the mountains. He it was that discovered the body of
Professor Mitchell. Another good starting point would be from some cabin
on the Toe river side, reaching it by leaving the main traveled road at
a point, shown you by the native, between Burnsville and Bakersville. A
start might be made on the Swannanoa side; but the guides close at the
base of the mountains have become perverted by too much travel from
abroad, and will show more anxiety about securing pay for their
accommodations and services than interest in driving up a bear. Judging,
however, from the number of traps set in the latter locality, one would
form the idea that bears pay frequent visits to the cornfields.
For a drive in the Smoky mountains, read the sketch on deer hunting. The
region of the Cataluche, 22 miles north of Waynesville, is an excellent
place to visit. The log-cabin of Tyre McCall on the head-waters of the
French Broad, and near Brevard, would afford fair headquarters for him
who wished to rough it. Deer and bear roam on the Tennessee Bald within
five miles of the cabin. Tyre is a horny-handed but hospitable host, and
would hunt with you in earnest.
In the Nantihalas, Alexander Mundy’s is the point from{47} which to start
on a bear hunt. Further into the wilderness, on the far boundary of
Graham county, rise the Santeelah and Tellico mountains. At Robbinsville
information can be obtained regarding the best hunter with whom to
remain for a week’s sport.
With this slight introduction, the writer proposes to convey to the
reader some idea of what bear hunting in the heart of the Alleghanies is
like; what one must expect to encounter, and what sort of friends he is
likely to make on such expeditions. Besides the usual equipments carried
by every hunter, it would be well to take a rubber blanket and have the
guide carry an ax.
It was one night about the 1st of December that we were in camp; eight
of us, huddled together under a low bark roof, and within three frail
sides of like material. Around the camp lay seventeen dogs. The ground
beneath us was cold and bare, except for a thin layer of ferns lately
bundled in by some of the party. Before the front of the shelter, lay a
great fire of heavy logs, heaped close enough for a long-legged sleeper
to stick his feet in, while his head rested on the bolster log. The hot
flames, fanned by a strong wind, leaped high and struggled up into the
darkness. On long sticks, several of the group were toasting chunks of
fat pork; others were attending to black tin pails of water boiling for
coffee, while the remaining few were eating lunches already prepared.
The wood crackled, and occasionally the unseasoned chestnut timber
snapped, sending out showers of sparks. Around and within the circle of
fire-light, stood the trees with stripped, gaunt limbs swaying in the
wind. Above, clouds rolled darkly, concealing the face of the sky.
The temporary camp of a party of mountaineers on the hunt for Bruin, as
viewed by night, presents a scene of unique interest. It is a shelter
only for the time being; no one expects to return to it, for by the
following night the hounds may be 20{48} miles away, and the drivers and
standers toasting bear steaks in their cabins, or encamping on some
distant height preparatory to resuming on the morrow the chase of a
bruin who had through one day eluded their pursuit. The mountain
straggler often sees by the trail which he follows, the ashes and
scattered black brands of an extinguished fire, and the poles and birch
bark of an abandoned camp. At this view he imagines he has some idea of
a hunter’s camp; but it is like the conception of the taste of an oyster
from a sight of the empty shell.
Situated as above described, we were improving an opportunity afforded
for devouring the whole oyster. Our encampment was on Old Bald; not the
famous shaking mountain, but of the Balsams, eight miles south of
Waynesville. A few days previous, a denizen of Caney Fork, while
crossing the mountain by the new dug road, came face to face with a
black bear, gray about the nose and ears, and of enormous size, as he
said. Did you ever hear a tale where the bear was not of size too large
to swallow? The denizen of the valley had no fire-arms with him, so
both, equally frightened, stood staring at each other, until the denizen
of the mountain shuffled into the beech woods. This report considerably
interested the Richland settlers. They laid their plans for an early
hunt, and had them prematurely hatched by information brought in by the
highest log-chopper on the creek, that his yard had been entered the
last past night by some “varmint,” and a fine hundred-pound hog
(otherwise known as a mountain shad) killed and eaten within the
pig-pen. The log-chopper had followed the trail for some distance, but
without avail.
That same afternoon our party climbed the mountain by an old
bridle-path, arriving just before sunset at a place admirably suited for
a camp. Two steep ridges, descending from the main mountain top, hold
between them the channel of a sparkling brook. Its water is crystal in
clearness and icy cold. The{49} wood, principally beech, is green with
casings of moss, and the cold rocks in the brook’s bed and on the slopes
above it are covered with a like growth. Where the trail enters the
water the ground is level on one bank, and here we decided to kindle our
fire, and, as the air was quite chilly, bearing indications of a storm,
to erect a light shelter.
Dry leaves and twigs make excellent tinder for a flint’s spark to settle
and blaze in, and enough seasoned logs, bark, and limbs always lie
scattered through this forest to afford campfires. Our’s was soon
flaming. The loosened bark of a fallen beech furnished us the material
for the roof and sides of a shelter, which we built up on four forked
limbs driven into the ground and covered with long poles. It was secured
against wind assaults by braces.
Near where we encamped, and below on the Beech Flats, stand trees as
stately and magnificent as any ever touched by woodman’s ax. We noticed
several cherries measuring four and a half feet through, and towering,
straight as masts, 70 feet before shooting out a limb; poplars as erect
and tall to their lower branches and of still greater diameter;
chestnuts from 15 to 33 feet in circumference, and thousands of sound,
lofty linns, ashes, buckeyes, oaks, and sugar maples. A few hemlocks
considerably exceed 100 feet in height. A tree called the wahoo, grows
here as well as on many of the ranges. It bears a white lily-shaped
flower in the summer. Numerous cucumber trees are scattered on the
slopes. These with the beech, water birch, black birch or mountain
mahogany, black gum, red maple, and hickory, form the forests from the
mountain bases to the line of the balsams. On the Beech Flats there is
no underbrush, except where the rhododendron hedges the purling streams.
In places the plain path, the stately trees, and the level or sloping
ground, covered only with the mouldering{50} leaves of autumn, form parks
more magnificent than those kept in trim by other hands than nature’s.
The best hounds, known as the “leaders,” were fastened to poles stuck in
the ground at the corners of our lodge. This was done to prevent them
starting off during the night on the trail of a wolf, raccoon, or
wildcat, thereby exhausting themselves for the contemplated bear hunt.
The rest of the pack were either standing around, looking absently into
the fire, or had already stretched themselves out in close proximity to
it.
“The way them curs crawl up to the blaze,” said Wid Medford, “is a shore
sign thet hits goin’ ter be cold nuff ter snow afore mornin’.”
No one disputed his assertion, and so, relative to this subject, he spun
a story of how one of his hounds, one night many years since, had crept
so close to the camp fire that all of his hair on one side was burnt
off, and Wid awoke to detect the peculiar scent and to feel the first
flakes of a snow storm that fell three feet deep before daylight. As
though this story needed something to brace it up, Wid continued:
“Whatever I talk of as facts, you kin count on as true as Scriptur.”
Israel Medford, nicknamed Wid, the master-hunter of the Balsam range, is
a singular character, and a good representative of an old class of
mountaineers, who, reared in the wilderness, still spend most of their
time in hunting and fishing. He possesses a standard type of common
sense; an abundance of native wit, unstrengthened by even the slightest
“book-larnin’;” is a close observer, a perfect mimic, and a shrewd judge
of character. His reputation as a talker is wide-spread; and, talking to
the point, he commands the closest attention. His conversation abounds
in similes; and, drawn as they are from his own observation, they are
always striking. He is now sixty-five years old, and has been all his
life a resident of Haywood county.{51}
That night as he sat cross-legged close to the fire, turning in the
flames a stick with a slice of fat pork on it, with his broad-brimmed
hat thrown on the ground, fully exposing his thick, straight, gray
locks, and clear, ruddy, hatchet-shaped face, bare but for a red
mustache, lighted up with youthful animation, he kept shaking the index
finger of his right hand, while in his talk he jumped from one subject
to another with as much alacrity as his bow legs might carry him over
the mountains.
“What I don’t know about these mountings,” said he, directing his keen
blue eyes upon one member of the group, “haint of enny profit to man or
devil. Why, I’ve fit bars from the Dark Ridge kentry to the headwaters
of the French Broad. I’ve brogued it through every briar patch an’
laurel thicket, an’ haint I bin with Guyot, Sandoz, Grand Pierre, and
Clingman over every peak from hyar to the South Caroliny an’ Georgy
lines? Say?”
“What do you mean by ‘brogued it’?” was asked.
“Crawled, thets what hit means; just as you’d hev to do ef you perused
every pint o’ the mountings; ef you went through Hell’s Half Acre; ef
you slid down the Shinies, or clim the Chimbleys.”
“Hit’s rough thar,” remarked a broad-shouldered, heavy-mustached young
fellow, named Allen.
“Rough?” resumed Wid, “wal, I reckon hit is.”
“But a man can git in rough places right on this slope, can’t he?” some
one inquired.
“In course,” remarked another hunter, “Wid, you cum powerful nigh
peeterin’ out nigh hyar, wunct, didn’t you?”
“Yes,” said Wid, now devoting his attention partly to a boiling pot of
coffee, “Thet day war a tough un. Hit war a hot summer day. We,—thet
is, Bill Massey who’s awmost blind now, Bill Allen who gin up huntin’
long ye’rs ago, my brother El, me, an’ sev’ral others,—we started a bar
on the{52} Jackson county line nigh Scotts creek in the mornin’. We driv
till arter-noon, an’ in the chase I got below hyar. I heered the dogs up
on Ole Bald, an’ abearin’ down the ridge-top I was on. Powerful soon I
seed the bar comin’ on a dog-trot under the trees. He war a master
brute!”
“How big, Wid?”
“Four-hunderd an’ fifty pound, net. Thinks me to myself, ‘Gun fust,
knife next’; fer, you see, I war clean played out with the heat and long
run, an’ I war in favor o’ bringin’ the thing to a close; so I brought
my ole flint-lock to my shoul’er. This is the very gun I hed then,” and
he tapped the battered stock of a six-foot, black-barreled, flint-lock
rifle.
“I wouldn’t hev your cap arrangements. This kind never misses fire; an’
rain never teches hit, fer this ’ere kiver, ter put over the pan, keeps
hit as dry as a tarripin hull.”
“Go on with the story,” exclaimed an interested auditor.
“Jist tend ter brilin’ your bacon, Jonas, an’ let me travel ter suit my
own legs. I fetched my gun to my shoul’er an’ fired. The brute never
stopped, but I knowed I’d hit him, for I hed a dead sight on his head;
an’, like blockade whisky, a ball outer thet black bore allus goes to
the spot. He’s a thick-skulled varmint, I thought. I dropped my gun, an’
pulled my knife. On he cum. He didn’t pay no more tenshun to me then ef
I’d bin a rock. I drew back a step, an’ as he brashed by me, I bent over
him, grabbin’ the ha’r o’ his neck with one hand, an’ staubed him deep
in the side with the knife in the other. Thet’s all I knowed for hours.”
“Did you faint?” some one asked.
“Faint?” sneered Wid, sticking out his square chin and showing his
teeth. “You ass! You don’t reckon I faint, do you? Women faint. I fell
dead! You see all the blood in me jumped over my heart into my head, an’
ov course hit finished me fer a time.”{53}
“A dead faint,” was suggested.
“I don’t like thet word, stranger. But, the boys an’ dogs cum on me a
second arter. Bill Allen cut my veins an’ in a short time I cum round,
but I war sick fer a week.”
“How about the bear?”
“Hit lay dead by the branch below, staubed clean through the heart.”
Before the story ended, a noise like thunder came rolling to us through
the forests. Owing to the strange time of the year for a thunder storm,
we were slow in realizing that one was brooding, but repeated peals and
long rumbling echoes, preceded by vivid flashes of light in the northern
sky, soon convinced us of this fact. The wind changed, grew stronger,
and soughed dismally through the trees. Rain began pattering on the bark
roof: it came in slight showers, ceasing with each gust and flaw, then
descending in torrents. The fire grew fiercer under these attempts to
smother it, and with the shifting of the wind, much to our discomfiture,
smoke and sparks were driven under the roof. Occasionally, a strong
blast would make us draw up our feet as the flames, leveled to the
ground, whirled in on us.
The situation became unendurable, and in a lull of the storm we crawled
out in the open air; tore down our camp, and changed it around with its
back wall towards the wind. This occupied but a few minutes, and we were
soon ensconced again. It was a wretched night. We lay tight together,
like spoons, the six middle men being well protected from cold, but not
from leaks in the roof. The two end men fared less comfortably with one
side exposed. No one slept unless it was the gray-headed Medford,
hardened by 1001 nights of like experience. The rain ceased before
morning, but the temperature was considerably below the freezing point,
and icicles had formed on the end of the roof fartherest from the fire.
All{54} night we had shifted and changed our positions, and the gray light
of dawn found us in the ashes, seemingly close enough to the fire to
blister our faces, suffering in martyr-like submission with smoke in our
eyes and backs cold.
I never saw a man with a good appetite for breakfast after a night of
wakefulness beside a camp fire. After a long tramp, you can eat the
roughest food with relish, but there is nothing tempting about hot
coffee without sugar and cream, dry cornbread and fat meat, in the
ashes, on a cold, raw morning before the stars have paled in the sky.
However, on the unpleasant prospect of seven hours elapsing before
another snack, on this occasion we did stuff down some solid food, and
drank copiously of the coffee.
At this time an artist, seated at some distance up the brook, would have
seen a spectacle of striking interest for the subject of a painting. In
the center of his canvas he would have placed a huge fire with blaze,
ten feet high; behind it, half hidden by smoke and flame, the outlines
of a rude shelter; around it, their rugged features brightly lighted up,
a group of shivering mountaineers, some wrapped to their hat rims in
blankets, others with closely buttoned coats, and all squatting on the
ground or standing leaning on their rifles; the dogs in all imaginable
postures, either crouched close to the fire, or, outside the human
circle, struggling for the possession of a dry crust; the great, mossed
trunks of trees springing from the ferny rocks and slopes on which moved
fantastic shadows. He could have shown the stillness of the air by the
straightness of the column of ascending smoke, and the winter chill by
the gaunt branches encased in ice. But the sounds of camp life—striking
characteristics of the scene—would have eluded him. No brush could have
conveyed to the canvas the snarling of the dogs, the laugh of a
strong-lunged hunter, or Wid’s startling imitation of the{55} hoot of the
owl, awakening the echoes of the gorges and responses from the
night-bird just repairing to his roost.
We ascended Old Bald by a trail termed the “winds.” It was icy
underfoot, and some of the party had severe falls before we issued, from
the dwarf beeches, upon the bare backbone of the range. Although no
breeze was stirring that morning on the north side of the mountain, a
bitter, winter blast was sweeping the summit. It cut through our
clothing like wizard, sharp-edged knives that left no traces except the
tingling skin. This blast had chased off every cloud, leaving clear,
indigo-blue depths for the sun, just lifting over Cold Spring mountain,
to ride through. As we reached the bare, culminating point of the narrow
ridge between Old Bald and Lone Balsam, the sun had cleared himself from
the mountain tops; and, red and round, doubly increased in size, he was
shedding his splendor on a scene unsurpassed in beauty and wild
sublimity. The night rain, turning to sleet on the summits of the
mountains, had encased the black balsam forests, covering the Spruce
Ridge and Great Divide, in armors of ice. They glistened like hills and
pinnacles of silver in the sunlight. Below the edges of these iced
forests, stood the deciduous trees of the mountains, brown and bare. No
traces of the storm clung to them. The hemlocks along the head-prongs of
the Richland were green and dark under the shadows of the steep
declivities. No clouds were clinging to the streams through the valleys,
and visible in all the glory of the frosty morn, lay the vale of the
Richland, with its stream winding through it like an endless silver
ribbon. The white houses of Waynesville were shining in the sunlight
pouring through the gap towards the Pigeon. No smoke was circling above
their roofs. The quiet of night apparently still pervaded the street.
High, and far behind it, rose the mystic, purple heights of the
Newfound.
On the side towards the south the scene was different.{56} Mountains are
here rolled so closely together that the valleys between them are hidden
from sight. There are no pleasant vales, dotted with clearings or
animated by a single column of cabin smoke. No evergreens are to be seen
beyond the slope of the Balsams. That December morning the vast ranges
looked black and bare under the cutting wind, and far off, 30 miles on a
bee-line through space, rose Whiteside and its neighboring peaks,
veritably white from snow mantling their summits.
Medford had been right in his prediction; snow had fallen, but not in
our immediate vicinity. Before noon, as we had good reasons to believe,
the wintry character of the scene would be changed under the influence
of the sun in an unclouded sky. As we descended into the low gap between
Lone Balsam and the next pinnacle of the Balsams, Ickes, who had started
in advance, came out in sight, on the ridge top, at a point some
distance below us. Just at the moment he appeared, a turkey rose, like a
buzzard, out of the winter grass near him, and was about to make good
its flight for the iced forests beyond, when his gun came to his
shoulder, a flash and a report succeeded, and the great bird whirled and
fell straight downward into the firs. The mountaineers yelled with
delight. Shot-guns being little used in this section, shooting on the
wing is an almost unheard of art. Not one of those bear hunters had ever
seen a shot of like nature, and the unostentatious young sportsman was
raised to a high notch in their estimation. When we reached him, he had
already descended into the grove and returned with his game. It was
somewhat bruised, and feathers considerably ruffled from falling through
tree-tops upon a rocky ground.
A mountain turkey is no small game. This one was a magnificent specimen;
a royal turkey-gobbler, that by stretching his brilliant neck would have
stood four feet high. Stripped of his{57} green and blue bronzed plumage,
and prepared for the oven, he weighed 24 pounds. In the neighborhood of
Waynesville I have bought the same birds about Christmas time for 50
cents a piece, and the hunter, who, with heavy rifle, had ranged the
cold mountain top before day-break, and then brought his game eight
miles down the winding trail, felt satisfied with this sum (all he had
asked) as compensation for his labor and skill as a sportsman. Perhaps
he weighed the fun of killing the bird on his side of the scales.
We now reached the edge of the great forests of the balsam
firs,—forests which mantle nearly every peak above 6,000 feet in
altitude in North Carolina. The balsam is one of the most beautiful of
evergreens. When transplanted, as it is occasionally, to the valleys of
this region, it forms an ornamental tree of marked appearance, with its
dark green, almost black, foliage, its straight, tapering trunk and
symmetrical body. In the rich dark soil in some of the lofty mountain
gaps it attains to a height of 150 feet, and in certain localities
growing so thickly together as to render it almost impossible for the
hunters to follow the bear through its forests. It is of two sorts,
differing in many particulars, and termed the black and white or male
and female balsams. Every grove is composed of both black and white
balsams, and no single tree is widely separated from its opposite sex.
The black balsam has a rougher bark, more ragged limbs, and darker
foliage than the white. The latter is more ornamental, with its
straight-shooting branches and smooth trunk; it bears blisters
containing an aromatic resinous substance of peculiar medicinal
properties. A high price is paid for this balsam of firs, but it seems
that the price is not in proportion to the amount of time and labor
necessary to be expended in puncturing the blisters for their contents,
for very little of it is procured by the mountaineers. It covers every
high pinnacle of the Balsam mountains. On some slopes,{58} however,
extending only a few hundred yards down from the top before blending,
and disappearing into the deciduous forests; but on other slopes, like
those descending to the west prongs of the Pigeon, it reaches downward
for miles from the summit of the mountains, forming the wildest of
wooded landscapes.
Although the observer, from the outer edge of this sombre wood-line,
fails to see any foliage but that of the balsam, when he enters the
shadows he discovers a number of trees and shrubs, peculiar to the firs
forests of the extreme mountain heights. Of the trees indigenous to the
valleys, the wild cherry and hawthorn appear to be the only species
growing here. The most ornamental of the trees of the firs forests is
the Peruvian, with its smooth, slender trunk, and great branches of
brilliant red berries, which appear in the early fall and hang until the
severest frosts. Its bark and berries taste like the kernel of a
peach-pit, and are frequently mixed by the mountaineers in their whisky,
as a bitters having the flavor of peach brandy. Here also spring the
service tree, with its red, eatable berry, ripe in August; the balsam
haw, with its pleasant tasting black fruit; the Shawnee haw; the Peru
tree; the small Indian arrow wood; and thick in some of the most darkly
shaded localities, hedges of the balsam whortle-berry, a peculiar
species of that bush, bearing in October a jet black berry, juicy and
palatable, but lacking the sweetness of the common whortle-berry, which
is also found on heights above 6,000 feet in altitude.
Scattered near these hedges, are great thickets of blackberry bushes. It
is a fortunate thing for the hunters obliged to break through them
(sometimes for hundreds of yards), that they are singularly free from
briers. While the berries are ripe in July in the valleys, these are
green, and it is not until September and October that they become
mature. The bears grow fat in such gardens. Peruvian berries are a great
delicacy for{59} them. That day, on the Spruce Ridge, Wid Medford called my
attention to a small tree of this kind, no more than four inches through
at the base, with branches broken on its top about 15 feet from the
ground. Deep scratches of an animal’s claws were visible in the bark. It
had been climbed by a bear a month since; and a good-sized bear at that,
judging from the distance he had reached from where his claws had left
their imprint to the highest broken branch. The wonder was how so heavy
an animal had climbed a tree so slender.
In this connection, I had with the old hunter an interesting talk
containing considerable information concerning the habits of the black
bear. Whatever Wid Medford says on natural history can be accepted as
truth gained by him through long years of experience, close observation,
retained by a good memory, and imparted, as such matters would be,
without any incentive for exaggeration. His quaint vernacular being the
most fitting medium for the conveyance of the sense of his remarks, it
is not necessary to clothe it in the king’s English.
“Wid,” I asked, “do bears sleep all winter?”
“Thet calls fer more o’ an answer than a shake or nod o’ the head. Bears
go inter winter quarters ’tween Christmas an’ New Ye’r. The ole he bats
fast his eyes an’ never shuffles out till about the fust o’ May. The
bearing she has cubs in Feb’ry, an’ then she comes out fer water an’
goes back till April fust, when she mosies out fer good.”
“What are their winter quarters?”
“Caves, holler trees, or bray-sheaps cut by them and piled high ’ginst a
log. When they git it high nuff, they dig a tunnel from the furder side
o’ the log, an’ then crawl through an’ under the brashe.”
“Do they quarter together?”
“No, sar’ee; every one alone.”
“What is their condition when they come out?”{60}
“Fat as seals.”
“That would be the best time to kill them, wouldn’t it?”
“Yes, but you’d hev to be quick about it.”
“Why?”
“In jist a few days they grow ez lean ez a two-acre farmyer’s hoss,
arter corn hez been a dollar an’ a half a bushel fer three month, an’
roughness can’t be got fer love or money. Jist figger to yerself the
weight of an animal under sich sarcumstances. The fust thing they eat is
grasses, weeds, an’ green stuff fer a physic, an’ hit has a powerful
effec’ on runnin’ ’em down to skin an’ bone. They’re mighty
tender-footed tho’ when the daylight fust hits ’em sq’ar in the eyes,
an’ hit don’t take long fer the dogs ter git ’em ter stan’ an’ fight.”
“How are their hides in April and May?”
“Fine; the ha’r is thick, long, an’ black; but they soon begin ter shed,
an’ hit’s not till cold weather agin thet they make fit skins fer
tannin’.”
“What do they sell at?”
“Three dollars is a fa’r price fer a prime hide.”
It is a fact worth mentioning, that these same hides are sold at $10,
and even as high as $15 in the cities.
“Now,” I inquired with considerable interest, “will a black bear attack
a man?”
“Hit ’pends on sarcumstances. He wouldn’t tech the illest human, ’les he
war cornered an’ hed to fight his way out, or he war wounded, or hit war
an ole she with cubs. In sich cases, look out, I say! I memorize one
time thet I war in a tight box. Hit war down on Pigeon, whar the laurel
is too thick fer a covey o’ patridges ter riz from. Thar war one
straight trail an’ I war in it. My gun war empty. I heered the dogs
a-comin’ an’ knowed without axin’ thet the bar war afore ’em. I never
hed no objections ter meetin’ a varmint in a squar, stan’-up fight,—his
nails agin my knife, ye know; so{61} without wunct thinkin’ on gittin’
outer the way, I retched fer my sticker. The tarnal thing war gone, an’
thar war me without a weepin’ big enuff to skin a boomer. I run along
lookin’ at the laurel on both sides, but thar warn’t a place in it fer a
man ter git even one leg in. Ticklish? You’re sound thar! I didn’t know
what the devil ter do, an’ I got all in a sweat, an’ drawin’ nigher,
nigher, up the windin’ trail I heerd the varmint comin’. Wal, I drapped
on my elbows an’ knees squar across the narrer path, so narrer thet I
hed ter hump myself up. I kinder squinted out one side, to see the
percession, ye know. Hit cum: a big monster brute, with a loose tongue
hangin’ out, an’ red eyes. He war trottin’ like a stage-hoss. He never
stopped, even to sniff me, but puttin’ his paws on my back, as tho’ I
war a log, he jist leaped over me an’ war out o’ sight in a jerk. The
dogs war clus on his heels, a snappin’ away, an’ every one o’ ’em jumped
over me as kerless like as him, an’ raced along without ever stoppin’
ter lick ther master’s han’.”
“Do you like hunting?” I asked, as he finished.
“Good law!”
That was his sole answer, but with the astounded look on his face, it
expressed everything.
“Wid, your life has been one long, rough experience. If you had it to
live over again, knowing as much as you do now, how would you live?”
As though the question was one he had thought over again and again,
without hesitating a moment, he laid his hand on my shoulder and said:
“I’d git me a neat woman, an’ go to the wildest kentry in creation, an’
hunt from the day I was big nuff to tote a rifle-gun, ontil ole age an’
roomaticks fastened on me.”
Just after shooting the wild turkey we prepared to separate. The hounds
were all leashed with ropes and fresh bark straps. Four of the hunters
held them in check. This was done to{62} prevent them starting on the track
of a wild cat or wolf. The Judyculla drive was the first one to be
undertaken. It is a wild, tumbled forest of balsams, matted laurels and
briers, on the south slope of the Spruce Ridge. When a bear is started
in the valleys, or on the slopes above it, he always climbs the
mountain, crossing through one of its lowest gaps, and then plunges down
the rugged heights into the wilderness lying on the opposite side.
The stands for the Judyculla drive are on the backbone between the
Spruce Ridge and the Great Divide. Through some one of them Bruin always
passes on his way to the waters of Richland creek. The drivers with
fourteen dogs now descended the ridge, and four of us, designated as
standers, with three dogs, entered the forest of balsams. The three dogs
were to be held in check by one of the standers, and only to be loosened
to take up the fresh trail when Bruin should cross, as he might, through
one of the mountain gaps. At fifteen steps one seems to be in the heart
of the woods. The light, so strongly shed on the open meadows beyond the
outskirts, is lost; the thickly set trees intercept it and one’s sight
from detecting that an open expanse lies so near.
The transition from the broad daylight of the meadows to the darkness of
the fir forests is not always as sudden. The approach from the Cold
Spring mountain side is entirely different. For the first few square
rods the trees—straight, beautiful evergreens—are set widely apart. A
green, closely-cut sward, soft for the foot, covers the rounded mountain
side. The few rocks lying here are so green and thick-grown with moss
and lichens that they appear like artificial mounds. Over all broods a
slumberous silence, unbroken but for the march of the forces of the
storm, the tinkling bells of lost cattle, the voice of an occasional
hunter, the singing of the mountain boomer, or the howl of wolves. It
seems like a vast cemetery.{63}
Although in December, a luxuriant greenness mantled everything, except
where beds of ferns had found root and then faded with the approach of
autumn, or the yellow leaves of the few scattered hard wood trees lay
under foot. The rich, black soil was well grown with that species of
grass that dies during the summer and springs up heavy and green in the
fall. Mosses, with stems and leaves like diminutive ferns, covered every
ledge of rock and crag, and formed for the trail a carpet soft and
springy. This trail is as crooked as a rail fence, and as hard to follow
as it would be to follow closely the convolutions of a rail fence, where
every corner had been used as a receptacle for gathered rocks, and left
for nature to plant with the hazel and blackberry. It was hard enough to
crawl up and down the moss-mantled rocks and cliffs, and over or under
an occasional giant balsam that, yellow with age, had fallen from its
own feebleness; but, along the narrow backbone approaching the Great
Divide, a recent hurricane had spread such devastation in its path as to
render walking many times more difficult.
For two miles, along this sharp ridge, nearly every other tree had been
whirled by the storm from its footing. They not only covered the path
with their trunks bristling with straight branches; but, instead of
being cut off short, the wind had torn them up by the roots, lifting
thereby all the soil from the black rocks, and leaving great holes for
us to descend into, cross and then ascend it was a continual crawl and
climb for this distance.
There were only three stands, and Wid and I, with the three dogs,
occupied one of these. It was a rather low dip in the ridge. We seated
ourselves on a pile of rocks, upholstered with mosses, making an easy
and luxurious couch. A gentle hollow sloped down toward where lay the
tangles of the Judyculla drive. A dense, black forest surrounded us.
Where the hollow reached the center line of the ridge it sunk down on
the{64} other side rather abruptly toward the Richland. This was the
wildest front of the mountain. At one point near the stand an observer
can look down into what is called the Gulfs. The name is appropriate. It
is an abyss as black as night. Its depth is fully 2,000, possibly 2,500
feet. No stream can be seen. It is one great, impenetrable wilderness.
The bear-hunters are the only men familiar with these headwaters of the
Richland. At the foot of the steep, funereal wall lies one spot known as
Hell’s Half-acre. Did you ever notice, in places along the bank of a
wide woodland river, after a spring flood, the great piles of huge
drift-logs, sometimes covering an entire field, and heaped as high as a
house? Hell’s Half-acre is like one of these fields. It is wind and
time, however, which bring the trees, loosened from their hold on the
dizzy heights and craggy slopes, thundering down into this pit.
The “Chimbleys and Shinies,” as called by the mountaineers, form another
feature of the region of the Gulfs. The former are walls of rock, either
bare or overgrown with wild vines and ivy. They take their name from
their resemblance to chimneys as the fogs curl up their faces and away
from their tops. The Shinies are sloping ledges of rock, bare like the
Chimneys, or covered with great thick plats of shrubs, like the
poisonous hemlock, the rhododendron, and kalmia. Water usually trickles
over their faces. In winter it freezes, making surfaces that, seen from
a distance, dazzle the eye.
The trees began to drip as we sat there, and the air grew warm. With
this warmth a little life was awakened in the sober and melancholy
forest. A few snow-birds twittered in the balsams; the malicious
blue-jay screamed overhead, and robins, now and then, flew through the
open space. The most curious noise of these forests is that of the
boomer, a small red squirrel, native to the Alleghanies. He haunts the
hemlock-spruce, and the firs, and unlike the gray squirrel, the presence
of man{65} seems to make him all the more noisy. Perched, at what he
evidently deems a safe distance, amid the lugubrious evergreen foliage
of stately balsams, he sings away like the shuttle of a sewing-machine.
The unfamiliar traveler would insist that it was a bird thus rendering
vocal the forest.
Wid had been silent for several minutes. Suddenly he laid his hand
softly on my knee, and without saying a word pointed to the dogs. They
lay at our feet, with ropes round their necks held by the old hunter.
Three noses were slightly elevated in the air, and the folds of six long
ears turned back. A moment they were this way, then, as a slight breeze
came to us from the south, they jumped to their feet, as though
electrified, and began whining.
“Thar’s suthin’ in the wind,” whispered Wid. “I reckon hits the music o’
the pack. Sh——! Listen!”
A minute passed, in which Wid kicked the dogs a dozen times to quiet
them, and then we heard a faint bell-like tinkle. The likening of the
baying of a pack of hounds to the tinkling of bells is as true in fact
as it is beautiful in simile. There is every intonation of bells of all
descriptions, changing with distance and location. It was a mellow,
golden chiming at the beginning; then it grew stronger, stronger, until
it swung through the air like the deep resonant tones of church bells.
Did you ever hear it sweeping up a mountain side? It would light with
animation the eyes of a man who had never pulled a trigger; but how
about the hunter who hears it? He feels all the inspiration of the
music, but mingled with it are thoughts of a practical nature, and a
sportsman’s kindling ardor to see the “varmint” that rings the bells.
It steadily grew louder, coming with every echo right up the wooded
slope.
“They’re on the trail now, shore,” remarked Wid, “an hit-’ll keep the
bar hoppin’ ter climb this ’ere mounting without{66} whoppin’ some o’ ’em
off. I reckon I’d better unlimber my gun.”
Suiting the action to the word, the old hunter laid his flintlock rifle
across his knees, and with deliberation fixed the priming anew in the
pan. As he did so, he kept talking; “Hark sharp, an’ you kin hear my
slut’s voice like a cow-bell. She’s the hound fer ye tho’. Her legs are
short, her tail stubby an’ her hide yaller, but thar’s no pearter hound
in the kentry.”
“Are they likely to wind and overtake the bear coming up the mountain?”
I asked.
“Yes, sar; a dog travels the faster comin’ up hill, but when wunst the
varmint turns ter go down hill, the pack mought ez well try ter ketch a
locomotion an’ keers. I’ve heered tell thet them things go sixty mile an
hour. Wal, a bar is trumps goin’ down hill. They don’t stop fer nuthin’.
They go down pricipises head-fust, rollin’ an’ jumpin’. Now a dog hez to
pick his way in sich places.”
We waited; the baying was bearing towards the east below us. Then it
seemed ascending. An expression of astonishment spread over Wid’s face.
“Hits cur’ous!” he exclaimed.
“What?”
“Why them dogs is racin’ like deer. Thet proves thet the bar is fur
ahead, an’ they’re close to the top o’ the ridge at Eli’s stan’. The bar
must hev crossed thar. But Good Jim! why aint he shot? Come, lets git
out o’ this.”
The three dogs tugged on ahead of us. We traveled through a windfall for
a quarter of a mile, and then came into the stand to find it vacant, and
the hounds baying on the slopes, towards the Richland. They had crossed
the gap, hounds and hunters, too; for a moment after we heard the
musical notes from a horn wound by some one in the lower wilderness. It
was wound to tell the standers to pass around the heights to the lofty
gaps between the Richland and the waters of the Pigeon.{67}
As was afterwards related, the bear had passed through Eli’s stand, but
Eli was not there on account of his mistaking and occupying for a
drive-way a gully that ended in a precipice on either side of the ridge.
He, with the other stander, soon joined us and we pushed along the
trail, towards the summit of the Great Divide.
This mountain stands 6,425 feet above the sea, and is the loftiest of
the Balsams. Among the Cherokees it is known as Younaguska, named in
honor of an illustrious chief. Except when the king of winter, puffing
his hollow cheeks, wraps the sharp summits in the pure white mantle of
the snow, or locks them in frosted armor, the Great Divide with its
black, unbroken forests of fir, ever rises an ebon mountain. Its fronts
are gashed, on the east, south and north sides, by the headwaters of the
Pigeon, Caney Fork and Richland. For the reason of the two
last-mentioned streams springing here, the mountain is termed by some
geographers the Caney Fork or the Richland Balsam mountain.
Three distinct spurs of mountains, forming portions of the great Balsam
chain, lead away from it as from a hub. One, trending in a due west
course, splits into various connected but distinct ranges; and, after
leaping a low gap, culminates in a lofty cluster of balsam-crowned
peaks, known as the Junaluska or Plott group, seven of which are over
6,000 feet in altitude. The spur towards the north terminates in
Lickstone and its foot-hills; while the one bearing east, a long,
massive black wall, holding six pinnacles in altitude above 6,000 feet,
breaks into ranges terminating in the Cold mountain, Pisgah, and far to
the south, the Great Hogback.
From this description the reader may have some conception, however
faint, of the majesty of the Balsam range, the longest of the transverse
chains between the Blue Ridge and the Smokies, and forming with its high
valleys, numerous mountains{68} and those lofty summits of the Great Smoky
chain towards which it trends, the culminating region of the
Alleghanies.
On the south brow of the Great Divide, only a few feet lower than the
extreme summit, lies an open square expanse of about 20 acres embosomed
in the black balsams. It has every feature peculiar to a clearing left
for nature to train into its primitive wildness, but in all its
abandonment the balsams have singularly failed to encroach upon it; and,
as though restrained by sacred lines which they dare not pass, stand
dense and sombre around its margin. Its gentle slope is covered thick
with whortleberry bushes, in this instance, contrary to the nature of
that shrub, springing from a rich, black soil. Only one small clump of
trees, near the upper edge, mars the level surface of the shrubs. It is
called the Judyculla old field, and the tradition held by the Indians is
that it is one of the footprints of Satan, as he stepped, during a
pre-historic walk, from mountain to mountain.
We were informed by mountaineers that flint arrow heads and broken
pieces of pottery have been found in this old field, showing almost
conclusively that some of the Cherokees themselves, or the nation that
built the many mounds, laid the buried stone walls and worked the
ancient mica mines, occupied it as an abiding place for years.
There are other bare spots on these mountains known as scalds, and like
this old field, situated in the heart of fir forests. They are grown
with matted ivy, poisonous hemlock and briers, but traces of the fire,
that at recent date swept them of their timber, are to be seen. In a few
years the wilderness will have reclaimed them; but the Judyculla old
field will remain, as now, a mysterious vistage, which the mutilations
of time cannot efface.
Through a dark aisle, leading from the summit of the Great Divide, we
descended to the Brier Patch gap, and here one of{69} our number was
stationed, while the rest of us toiled up a nameless black spur, crossed
it and dropped slowly down to Grassy gap. It was past noon, and while we
listened to the low baying of the hounds in the depths, we munched at a
snack of corn bread and boiled corned beef. In the meantime, Wid was
examining the trail from one slope to the other. He would peer closely
into every clump of briers, pulling them apart with his hands, and bend
so low over the grasses along the path, that the black strip in his
light colored trousers, hidden by his brown coat tails when he walked
erect, would be exposed to view.
At length he paused and called us to him. The branch of a whortleberry
bush, to which he pointed, was freshly broken off, and in the black soft
soil, close to the trail, was the visible imprint of a bears’ paw. Bruin
evidently had a long start on the pack, and having climbed up from the
gulf, had passed through Grassy gap, and descended to the Pigeon. We now
all fired our guns in order to bring the hunters and hounds as soon as
possible to us.
It was 4 o’clock, and the shadows were growing bluer, when up through
the laurel tangles, out from under the service-trees, hawthornes, and
balsams, came the pack,—one dog after another, the first five or six,
in quick succession, and the others straggling after. Wid seemed to
deliberate a moment about stopping them or not; but, as they raced by,
he cut the thongs of the three dogs which we had kept all day,
remarking: “Let ’em rip. Hits too late fer us to foller, tho’. We’ll hey
ter lay by at the Double spring till mornin’. I’d kep’ ’em in check,
too, but hit may snow to-night and thet wud spile the scent an’ hide the
track. They’ll cum up with ’im by dark, an’ then badger ’im till
daylight an’ we’uns git thar.”
“Won’t they leave the trail at dark?” was asked.
“Never! Why, I’ve knowed my ole hounds ter stick to hit{70} fer three days
without nary bite o’ meat, ’cept what they peeled, now an’ then, from
the varmint’s flanks.”
All the hunters soon came straggling in; and as a soft, but cold evening
breeze fanned the mountain glorified with the light of fading day, and
the vales of the Pigeon grew blue-black under the heavy shadows of the
Balsam range, we filed into the cove where bubbles the Double spring,
and made preparations for supper and shelter similar to the previous
night.
As it grew darker the breeze entirely died away, leaving that dead,
awful hush that oftentimes precedes a heavy snow storm. The branches of
the mountain mahogany hung motionless over the camp. Around, the
stripped limbs of ancient beeches, and the white, dead branches of
blasted hemlocks, unswayed and noiseless, caught the bright light of the
fire. The mournful howl of the wolves from points beyond intervening
dismal defiles, now and then came through the impenetrable darkness to
our ears.
Snow began steadily falling,—that soft, flaky sort of snow, which seems
to descend without a struggle, continues for hours, and then without
warning suddenly ceases. All night it fell, sifting through our
ill-constructed shelter, burying us in its white folds and extinguishing
the fire. Notwithstanding the presence of this unwelcome visitant, we
slept soundly. Sleep generally finds an easy conquest over healthy
bodies, fatigued with a late past night of wakefulness, and an all day’s
travel through rugged mountains.
I awoke to find my legs asleep from the weight of a fellow-sleeper’s
legs crossed over them. As I sat up, leaning my elbows on the bodies of
two mountaineers packed tight against me, I saw the old hunter, on his
hands and knees in the snow, bending over a bed of coals surrounded by
snow-covered fire-logs. Some live coals, awakened by the hunter’s
breath, were glowing strong enough for me to thus descry his dark form,
and{71} the clear features and puffed cheeks of his face. He had a struggle
before the flames sprung up and began drying the wet timbers. It was
still dark around us, but a pale, rosy light was beginning to suffuse
the sky, from which the storm-clouds had been driven.
While part of the company prepared breakfast, the rest of us picked our
way through the shoe-mouth-deep snow to the summit of Cold Spring
mountain. It was the prospect of a sunrise on mountains of snow that
called us forth. The sky was radiant with light when we reached the
desired point; but the sun was still hidden behind the symmetrical
summit of Cold mountain, the terminal peak of the snowy and shadowed
range looming across the dark, narrow valley of the upper Pigeon. Light
was pouring, through an eastern gap, upon the wide vale of the river far
to the north. In its bottom lay a silver fog. Snow-mantled mountains
embosomed it. It resembled the interior of a great porcelain bowl, with
a rim of gold appearing round it as day-light grew stronger. Fifty miles
away, with front translucent and steel-blue, stood the Black mountains.
Apparently no snow had fallen on them. Their elevated, rambling crest,
like the edge of a broken-toothed, cross-cut saw, was visible.
After breakfast we started on the backbone of the Balsam range for the
Rich mountain, distant about eight miles. It was a picturesque body of
men, that in single file waded in the snow under the burdened balsams,
and crawled over the white-topped logs. The head youth from Caney Fork
had his hat pulled down so far over his ears, to protect them from the
cold, that half of his head, flaunting yellow locks, was exposed above
the tattered felt, and only the lower portion of his pale, weak face
appeared below the rim. His blue, homespun coat hardly reached the top
of his pantaloons; and his great, horny hands, and arms half way to the
elbows protruded from torn sleeves.{72} There was no necessity for him to
roll up his pantaloons; for so short were they that his stork-like legs
were not covered by fifteen inches from the heels. Next behind him came
Wid, with his face as red as ever, and his long hair the color of the
snow. Then followed Allen, a thick-set, sturdy youth from the Richland.
He gloried in his health and vigor, and to show it, wore nothing over
his back but a thin muslin shirt. He whistled as he walked, and laughed
and halloed till the forests responded, whenever a balsam branch
dislodged its snow upon his head and shoulders. Noah Harrison, another
valley farmer, who likes hunting better than farming, came next. He was
a matter-of-fact fellow, and showed his disrelish to the snow by
picking, with his keen eyes, his steps in the foot-prints of those
ahead. Jonas Medford, a stout, mustached son of the old hunter, followed
behind the three young fellows who wore store clothes and carried
breech-loading shot-guns, instead of the rifles borne by the natives.
When half-way round the ridge, we caught faint echoes from the hounds
below. The sound was as stirring in tone as the reveille of the camp. A
minute after, our party was broken into sections, every one being left
to pick his way as best he could to the scene of the fight between the
dogs and bear. Naturally, the three young fellows in store clothes
stayed together. A balsam slope is the roughest ever trodden by the foot
of man. The rhododendrons and kalmias are perfect net-works. In them a
man is in as much danger of becoming irrecoverably entangled unto death
as a fly in a spider’s web; but, in the excitement caused by that faint
chiming of the hounds, no one seemed to think of the danger of being
lost in the labyrinths.
Luckily, before we three had proceeded 100 yards down a steep declivity,
we struck the channel of a tiny brook. Hedges of rhododendron grow
rankly along it, on both sides, and almost meet over the clear, rushing
water. It would be impossible for{73} a man to penetrate these hedges for
any great distance, unless time was of no object whatever. The path of
the torrent affords the path for the hunter. We had on rubber boots, and
so waded in, following it down a devious course. It was an arduous walk.
At times slippery rocks sent us floundering; boulders intercepted us,
and the surface of deep pools rose higher than our boot-tops. For two
miles we pushed on, our ardor being kept aflame by the increasing noise
of the pack, and a few minutes later, we reached the scene of the
struggle.
The fight between two dogs on a village street affords great interest to
the mixed crowd that gathers around it; cocks pitted against each other
collect the rabble, and the bull fight of Spain furnishes a national
amusement; but of all fights that between a pack of ravenous dogs and a
frenzied bear is the most exciting. But few persons are ever accorded a
sight of this nature. It can never be forgotten by them. This is what we
saw on issuing from the laurel: A white wintry expanse, free from
undergrowth, on which the trees were set a little further apart than
usual; back of us the stream; while across the open expanse, at the
distance of twenty yards, a leaning cliff with the wild vines on its
front sprinkled with snow, and its top hidden from view by the giant
hemlocks before it. Close at the base of one of these hemlocks, reared
on his haunches, sat a shaggy black bear. He was licking his chops; and,
holding his fore paws up in approved pugilistic style, was coolly eyeing
ten hounds, which, forming a semi-circle, distant about ten feet before
him, were baying and barking with uplifted heads and savage teeth
exposed. One poor hound, with skull cracked by Bruin’s paw, lay within
the circle. At the foot of a hemlock near us sat two bleeding curs, and
one with a broken leg began dragging himself toward us.
By exposing ourselves we lost our chances for a shot; for, as soon as we
came in view, the hounds, encouraged by the sight{74}

THE FINAL STRUGGLE.
of men, sprang at their antagonist with redoubled fury and increased
yelping. It would have been impossible for us to have made a shot with
our shotguns without having killed or disabled several of the hounds; so
with triggers cocked we{75} bided our time and with interest watched the
combat. Judging by his methods of defense, Bruin was an adept in that
line. He had had time for experience, for he was a great, shaggy fellow
with gray tufts of hair on his head. He showed his teeth and growled as
the dogs kept jumping at him. A twelve hour fight, in which several of
the pack had been rendered incapable of attack, had given caution to the
remainder, and they were extremely wary about taking their nips at him.
During the melee that for the next minute ensued, one savage hound was
caught in the clutches of the bear and hugged and bitten to death;
while, taking advantage of the momentary exposure of his sides, the
others of the pack fell upon old Bruin until he was completely hidden
under the struggling mass. He had just shaken them off again and
recovered his balance, when a rifle shot sounded, and a puff of white
smoke arose from under a spruce at the edge of the laurel thicket. The
noise of the fight had prevented us hearing the approach of Wid, the old
hunter. I looked from him at the group. Bruin had fallen forward on his
face. Every dog was on his body, now writhing in its death throes.
“Too bad ye didn’t git a chance to kiver him,” said the old man, “but
hit wouldn’t done to kill the dogs no way.”
If I had had any idea of the game being thus easily taken from me, I
would have availed myself of the minute before Wid’s appearance by
killing the bear, and several dogs with him if necessary to that end. My
companions were of the same mind. One by one the hunters straggled in.
The animal was skinned where he lay; and then, packed with hide, meat,
blankets and our guns, we descended the middle prong of the Pigeon to
the road through the picturesque valley.
It was fortunate for us that the bear stopped to rest on the middle
prong. Had he continued on a sharp trot he would have escaped us; for,
when closely hounded, Bruin travels{76} directly toward Sam’s Knob, a peak
lying between the Rich and Cold mountains. It is the most inaccessible
mountain of the range, and few persons have ever scaled its summit. The
wildest woods and laurel, interlocked with thorns and briers, spring
from its precipitous sides; while the voices of cascades and cataracts
arise from its shadowy ravines. It is the safe retreat of Bruin. But
what cannot be accomplished on this mountain by rifle and hound is
attempted by traps. The true hunter is not prone to pursuing any other
than open warfare against the black bear. While the sale of their hides
and meat nets him a respectable sum each year, his chief incentive for
slaying them is his passionate love for the chase.
Two kinds of traps are used. The common steel trap is familiar to nearly
every one. Its great springs seem strong enough to splinter a man’s leg.
They are carefully set on bear trails in the densest labyrinths, and
covered with leaves and grasses to conceal them from the luckless
“varmint” that walks that way. No bait is required. On some of the peaks
there is far more danger to be apprehended by the mountain straggler
from these steel traps than from rattlesnakes. One must be careful how
he ventures into close paths through the lofty mountain thickets.
However, the neighboring mountaineers are aware where these traps are
set.
The wooden trap is used in some localities. It consists of a wide half
log, about twelve feet in length, with level face up. With this log for
a bottom, a long box is formed by using for the sides two similar half
logs, fastened with flat sides facing each other along the edges of the
bottom log. Into one end of this box is pinned a heavy timber inclined
at an angle over the bed of the box, and supported by sticks constructed
like a figure four, baited with bread and honey, or meat. Rocks are
fastened to its elevated end to increase its weight. The bear, attracted
by the sweet smell of the honey, ventures in, pulls{77} the figure four to
pieces, and is crushed down by the fallen cover. If not killed he is
effectually pinned until the merciless trapper unintentionally shows
some mercy by ending his struggles.
As the white-haired Wid said: “Traps is good fer ’em ez hunts rabbits,
an’ rabbit huntin’ is good fer boys; but fer me gim me my ole flint-lock
shootin’-iron, an’ let a keen pack o’ lean hounds be hoppin’ on ahead;
an’ of all sports, the master sport is follerin’ their music over the
mountings, an’ windin’ up, with bullet or sticker, a varminous ole
bar!”
{78}
{79}
It is one of those numerous chef-d’œuvre of creation which God
has scattered over the earth, but which He conceals so frequently
on the summit of naked rocks, in the depth of inaccessible ravines,
on the unapproachable shores of the ocean, like jewels which He
unveils rarely, and that only to simple beings, to children, to
shepherds, or fishermen, or the devout worshippers of
nature.—Lamartine.
N Macon county, North Carolina, is a section of country
so seldom visited by strangers, that few persons living beyond its
limits are aware of its existence, except as they find it located on the
map. In pomp of forest, purity of water, beauty of sky, wildness of
mountains, combining in a wonderful wealth of sublime scenery, the
valley of the Nantihala river is not surpassed by any region of the
Alleghanies. While a great portion of Macon and of other counties have
had attention occasionally called to them by magazine articles, and by a
few novels with plots laid in the familiar picturesque sections, the
Nantihala and the mountains mirrored on its surface, have to this day
remained an unrolled scroll. This is not strange, from the fact of the
wild and rugged nature of the mountains, its few inhabitants, its
remoteness from railroads, and the roughness of the highways and trails
by which it is traversed. Even{80} the ambitious tourist who enters Western
North Carolina with the purpose of seeing all the points of picturesque
interest, finds his summer vacation at a close before he has completed a
tour of those scenic sections lying within a radius of fifty miles from
Asheville.
The musical name of Nantihala, as applied to the river, is a slight
change from the Cherokee pronunciation of it—Nanteyaleh. Judging from
the fact of different interpreters giving different meanings for the
name, its signification is involved in obscurity. By some it is said to
mean Noon-day Sun, from the fact of the mountains hugging it so closely
that the sunlight strikes it only during the middle of the day. The
other meaning is Maiden’s Bosom.
The river is wholly in Macon county. Rising near the Georgia boundary,
amid the wilds of the Standing Indian and Chunky Gal mountains—peaks of
its bordering eastern and western ranges—it flows in a northerly and
then north-easterly direction, and after a swift course of fifty miles,
empties its waters into the Little Tennessee. The ragged, straggling
range, sloping abruptly up from its eastern bank, takes the name of the
river. This range breaks from the Blue Ridge, in Georgia, and trends
north, with the Little Tennessee receiving its waters on one side, and
the Nantihala, those on the other. The Valley River mountains, forming
the Macon county western boundary, run parallel with the Nantihala
range. It is in the narrow cradle between these two chains that the
river is forever rocked.
Through most of the distance from its sources to where it crosses the
State road, the river flows at the feet of piny crags, under vast
forests, and down apparently inaccessible slopes. Its upper waters teem
with trout, and its lower, with the gamiest fish of the pure streams of
level lands. The red deer brouses along its banks, and amid the laurel
and brier thickets which shade its fountain-heads, the black bear
challenges the pursuit{81} of hounds and hunters. Near the State road are
gems of woodland scenery, where all the natural character of the
stream—its wildness—is absent; and under the soft sunlight and cool
shadows of quiet woods, beside a swift, noiseless stretch of water, on
which every leaf of the red-maple and birch is mirrored, and along which
the gnarled roots of the whitened sycamore offer inviting seats, the
stroller is vividly reminded of some lowland river, familiar, perhaps,
to his boyhood. At these places, the basin is just such a one as you
would like to plunge headlong into. The grass is green and lush along
the banks, and the interlacing hedges, and brilliant vines drooping from
the over-arching trees, would render concealment perfect. If you are not
afraid of ice-cold water, a swim here would be most enjoyable, but even
at noon in July or August, the temperature of the stream is near the
freezing point.
From the leaning beech, one can look down into the trout’s glassy pool,
and see him lying motionless in the depths, or catch a glimpse of his
dark shape as he shoots over the waving ferny-mossed rocks, and
disappears under the cover of the bank. The king-fisher is not an
unfamiliar object. His sharp scream as he flies low over the waters will
attract the attention of the observer. Ungainly herons may be startled
from their dreaming along the stream; and flocks of plover, seemingly
out of their latitude, at times go wheeling and whistling high above the
woods.
Monday’s has a place on the map. Why? It is a cheerful, home-like
country tavern. Extensive cleared lands stretch back to the green forest
lines. A board fence fronts the neatly-kept lawn, on whose elevated
center rises a two-story weather-beaten frame house. The steep, mossy
roof is guarded at either end by a grim, stone chimney. Large windows
look out upon a crooked road, and a long porch with trellised railing is
just the place to tip back in a hard-bottomed chair, elevate your{82} feet,
and enjoy a quiet evening smoke. The river is out of sight below the
hill, but at times the music of its rapids can be distinctly heard. The
ranges of the Nantihala and Valley River rise on either side the valley.
The only wagon-ways to this point are across these ranges, from Franklin
on the east and Murphy on the west.

THE WARRIOR BALD.
Franklin, the county seat of Macon, is situated in the heart of one of
the most fertile sections of the mountains—the valley of the Little
Tennessee. Its site is on a great hill on the west bank of the river. As
the traveler, approaching from the east, winds through the lands lying
along the banks of the slow-flowing stream, he will be attracted by the
broad, level farms, and, if in summer or early fall, by the wealth of
the harvest. One of the most charming views of the village and the
magnificent valley is on the road coming from Highlands. You will halt
your horse. Let it be on a summer evening, just as the shadows have
crept across the landscape. The green and yellow fields will lie in the
foreground pervaded with a dreamy quiet. Below, you see the covered
bridge, and the red road, at first hidden behind the corn, at some
distance beyond, climbing the hill and disappearing amid dwellings,
buildings, and churches whose spires rise above the cluster. Far in the
background looms the dark, bulky form of the Warrior Bald, of the
Nantihalas, and further to the south, the long, level-topped
continuation of{83} the range. If old Sol is far down, the bright green
glow that marks the last moment of the day will crown the summit of his
sentinel peak. A moment later the stars are seen, and as you ride on and
ascend the hill, the faint mists of the river will be visible, gathering
as if to veil the scene.
You are on the village streets. A few shop lights gleam across the way,
but there is no bustle before any of them, and you will imagine that the
villagers, careful of their health, retire at sundown. Some of them
certainly do, but it is no unusual thing to hear laughter on the hotel
porch even as late as midnight, and no deaths or arrests chronicled the
next morning. The hotel keeper, Cunningham, is a queer character. He is
a good-natured landlord, an excellent story-teller, and a shrewd horse
trader. The first two accomplishments are appreciated by travelers. The
curiosity about the hotel porch is the chairs. They are too high for a
short man to get into without climbing, and so large that he will feel
lost in them. At sight of these great chairs ranged about the hotel
door, the traveler will imagine that he has dropped into a colony of
giants.
Franklin is a growing town. This is due to the fact of its being in the
center of a farming and mining country. It is a market for grain, and in
past years for the mica taken from several paying mines in the vicinity.
It is 71 miles distant in a southwest course from Asheville, and about
30 miles from Clayton, the seat of Rabun county, Georgia. A fine brick
court-house has lately been built in the village center.
From Franklin the State road toward the Nantihalas leads across hills
and through valleys to the Savannah, whose meanderings it follows under
heavy foliaged forests. The road from the eastern base of this range
across the summit to the opposite base, winds through a lonely
wilderness. It is the grandest highway of the mountains. At the
commencement of the{84} ascent stands a primitive toll-gate, one of the
many obnoxious guardians to state roads. A quarter will be demanded
before passage is permitted. The house of the toll-gate keeper is on one
side. There is moss on its roof and green vines on its front. The
skeleton of a venerable saw-mill, whose straight, perpendicular saw is
allowed to rust through a great part of the time, stands on the opposite
side below a beaver-like dam. The sound of crashing waters continually
breaks the silence of the great woods.
The distance over the mountain is 12 miles, and but one house, a log
cabin, empty and forlorn, almost hidden in a dark cove, is to be seen.
The woods are as dense as those of the lowlands, and so well trimmed by
nature, so fresh and green are they, so invigorating the air that
circles through them, that one, if he ever felt like retiring to some
vast wilderness, might well wish his lodge to be located here. All the
mountains of the Nantihala range are exceedingly steep. To ascend this
one, the road winds back and forth in zigzag trails, so that in reaching
one point near the summit, you can clearly see three parallel roads
below you. The view from the top of the pass is one never to be
forgotten. Higher spurs of the Nantihalas shoot up in rugged
magnificence across the gorge that falls away from the brow of the peak
on which the highway winds. In spite of the rocky and perpendicular
character of the slopes of these neighboring peaks, black wild forests
cover them from bases to summits. Dazzling white spots on the front of
the nearest mountain show where some enterprising miner had worked for
mica. In one direction there is a valley view. It is toward the east.
Its great depth renders one dizzy at the prospect. White specks on
yellow clearings in the green basin mark the few farm houses. A streak
of silver winds through it, vanishing before the eye strikes the bases
of the Cowee mountains, which wall the background.{85}
All along the lofty pass, the road is crossed by little sparkling
streams pouring over the mossed rocks, under the birches and pines. By
one of these roadside rivulets is an enchanting spot for a noonday
lunch.
The western slope is less precipitous than the eastern, and after a
descent through an unbroken forest, the traveler arrives at Monday’s.
The most direct course to Charlestown, Swain county, is down the river;
but for the next ten or twelve miles the mountains so crowd the stream
that no road is laid. A bridle-path winds through the forbidding
fastnesses, occasionally in sight of the stream. From Brier Town, a
scattered settlement, the falls of the river can be reached by a walk of
four miles. These falls, on account of their inaccessibility, are seldom
visited, except by the cattle herder and hunter. They pour over the lip
of a ragged cliff in a wild gorge, hidden by lofty and precipitous
mountains.
The State road crosses the river on a bridge just below the fork of the
road to Hayesville, the county seat of Clay. A mill and several houses
are clustered near the bridge; but a moment after passing them you
ascend the Valley River mountains. It is a well graded road, through
chestnut and oak woods, for five miles to the lowest dip in the
mountains. There is no view to be had, except of one wild valley that
presents no striking features, but in the utter loneliness brooding over
it. Down the slope you go through one of the densest and most luxuriant
forests of the mountain region. It is a tremendous labyrinth of monarch
hemlocks and balsams, so heavily burdened with{86} foliage that their
greenness approaches blackness, and renders the air so cold that the
traveler riding through them, even in the middle of the morning, shivers
in his saddle. The laurel grows to twice its customary height, affording
safe coverts for the bear and wolf. The ground is black. A stream flows
along by and in the road, the only noisy occupant of the solitude
visible and audible at all times.
Wild scenes appear as the base of the mountain is neared. As you advance
under the shadows, around the foot of a steep ridge, bounded by a stream
making mad music over the boulders, suddenly before you will tower a
vine-mantled wall with top ragged with pines, cleaving the blue sky.
Then, after lingering along the foot of this wall, as though loath to
leave the cool greenness of its mossed rocks and woods, the road issues
into a small circle of cleared land, where the ranges, drawing apart for
a short distance, have allowed man to secure a foothold. In most of
these confined dells it is, however, a feeble foothold; due,
principally, to the indolence of the occupant. These homes are pictures
of desolation;—a miserable log cabin with outside chimney crumbled to
one-half its original height, and the end of the house blackened and
charred from the flames and smoke poured upward along it; the roof
heaped with stones to keep it in place; the door off its wooden hinges;
the barn an unroofed ruin, and the clearing cultivated to the extent of
one small patch of weed-strangled corn. The family who live in such a
place will be alive, however, and outside as you go by. The man on the
bench before the door will shout “howdy,” and continue smoking his pipe
with as much complacency as if he had a hundred acres of golden wheat
within his sight, a well filled granery, and cows weighing 1,200 instead
of 500 pounds. From four to ten children, all about the same size,
clustered along the fence, will excite wonder as to how they have lived
so long.{87}
Lazy men can be found in all countries; but no lazier specimen of
humanity ever lived than one existing at present near the Tuckasege in
Jackson county. We heard of him one night at a dilapidated farm-house of
an ex-sheriff of that county. It can better be told in the exact words
of the conversation through which we learned of the specimen’s
existence; but, in order for you to fully appreciate it, it will be
necessary to give an idea of the appearance of the house and its
surroundings. The farm of level land was first owned by an enterprising
farmer. The house, a large, log one, was built by him 40 years ago. It
now consists of a main building of two stories, with a wing in the rear.
It first struck us that the house had never been completed; for on
riding toward it we found ourselves under a long roof extending from the
main building. The loft and roof overhead were intact, and were
supported by posts at the two corners out from the house. It was
apparently a wing that had never been sided or floored.
After supper as we sat by the moonlight-flooded window, on inquiring of
our host why the large wing had never been finished, he answered:
“Finished? Why, it war finished, but when the old man died, his son and
heir, one of the no-countist fellows what ever lived, moved in. Wal, ye
see them woods, yander?”
“Yes.”
“Not more ’en fifty yard away.”
“Just about that.”
“Wal, do you know thet thet man war too cussed lazy to go to them woods
for fire wood, and so tore down thet wing, piece by piece, flooring,
sidings, window sashes, doors—everything but the loft and roof, and
he’d a took them ef he hadn’t been too lazy to climb up stairs.”
“Wonder he didn’t take the whole house.”
“I spect he would ef I hadn’t bought him out when I did.{88} Why, man! this
whole farm-yard was an apple orchard then. How many trees do you see
now?”
“Three.”
“That’s all. Chopped down, every damned one of ’em, for the fire-place.
Lazy, why, dog my skin!—”
“Where is he now?”
“He lives in a poor chunk of a cabin over in them woods, close enough
now to fire-wood, shore.”
Down further on the Valley river the landscape grows more open, and the
rugged mountains become softened down to undulating hills, drawn far
back from the stream, and leaving between them wide vales, rich in soil,
generous in crops, and in places over three miles in width. This is in
Cherokee, the extreme southwest county of North Carolina. Murphy, the
county-seat, is a small, weather-worn village, located in nearly the
center of the county. The Western North Carolina Railroad, as projected,
will, on its way to Ducktown, soon intersect it.
Just before reaching Valley river, the traveler will notice a large,
white house, situated in a fine orchard. Mrs. Walker’s is known through
the western counties as a place of excellent accommodation. At this
point, the road to the lower valley of the Nantihala, turns abruptly to
the right. It is a rough way through an uninviting country, thinly
inhabited, poor in farming lands, and devoid of scenery. After miles of
weary travel, the road disappears from the sunlight into a deep ravine.
A stream disputes passage with the swampy road, which is fairly built
upon the springy roots of the rhododendrons. It seems to be the bottom
of some deep-sunk basin, which at one time was the center of a lake,
whose waters, finding a way out, left a rich deposit for a luxuriant
forest to spring from. The trunks of the trees are covered with
yellowish-green moss. Matted walls of living and dead rhododendrons and
kalmias line the way. Your horse will stumble wearily along, especially
if it is soon{89} after a rain; and if a buggy is behind him, it will take
a good reinsman to keep it from upsetting in the axle-deep ruts, over
low stumps and half-rotten logs. Keep up your spirits, and think little
of the convenience of the place for the accomplishment of a dark deed.
Soon it comes to an end, and a firmer, though rough, road leads into an
open forest, and gradually descends a narrow valley between prodigiously
high mountains.
The passage of Red Marble gap is now made, and the valley of the
Nantihala again entered twelve miles below where the State road crosses
at Monday’s. The first view of it will cause you to rise in your
stirrups. It is a narrow valley, with one farm-house lying in the
foreground. Around it rise massive mountain walls, perfectly
perpendicular, veiled with woods, and in height fully 2,000 feet.
Directly before you is a parting of the tremendous ranges, and through
this steep-sided gap, purple lines of mountains, rising one behind
another, bar the vision. The picture of these far-away ranges, in the
subdued coloring of distance, is of inspiring grandeur. The river is
unseen at this point; but, if the Cheowah Mountain road is ascended, its
white line of waters will be visible, as it issues from the wild gorge
at the head of the valley; and; bickering along between wood-fringed
banks, by the farm-house, under and out from under the birches, at
length disappears in the wilderness leading toward the great gap.
Widow Nelson lives in the only visible farm-house,—a low,
ill-constructed, frame dwelling with a log cabin in the rear, and small
barn near by. It is a hospitable shelter or dinner-place for the
traveler. On the widow’s porch is always seated a fat old man named
Reggles. He is short in stature, has red, puffed, smooth-shaven cheeks,
and appears like “a jolly old soul.” You will hear his sonorous voice,
if you draw rein at the fence to make inquiries concerning distances;
for he is an animated, universal guide-post, and answers in a set manner
all questions.{90}
So few settlers live along the Nantihala that the strongest friendship
binds them together; and every one considers all the people surrounding
him, within a radius of ten miles, his neighbors. The social ties
between the young folks are kept warm principally by the old-fashioned
“hoe-downs.” During a week’s stay in the valley, we improved an
opportunity to attend one of these dances. Satisfactory arrangements
being made, one evening before dark we started with Owenby, a guide. A
branch road led to our destination,—a path, that, though a faint cattle
trail in the beginning, had grown, after being traveled over by the
mountaineers’ oxen and their summer sleds, into a road. As is usually
the case, it followed up an impetuous little torrent. At a small, log
cabin, where we stopped after proceeding a mile on one journey, we were
joined by a party of twenty young men and women; and with this body we
began the ascent to Sallow’s, where the dance was to be held. Still
enough twilight remained for us to find our way without difficulty. All
walked with the exception of three men, who, each with his respective
young lady seated behind him, rode mules, and led the way. After a
steady climb for several miles we halted before the dim outlines of
another little cabin. The mounted ones dismounted and fastened their
steeds.
“I reckon we’ll surprise ’em, fer it ’pears they’ve all gone to roost,”
remarked Owenby, as we silently stepped over the leveled bars of the
fence into the potato patch bordering the road. Not a streak of light
shone through a crack of the cabin, not a sound came from the interior.
One of our party pushed the puncheon door, which easily swung open with
a creak of wooden hinges.
“Come to life in hyar! Up an’ out! Hi, yi, Dan and Molly!” he yelled,
while following his lead we all crowded into the single room. The fire
had smouldered until only a{91} few coals remained, and those were
insufficient to throw any light on the scene.
“Good Lord! what does this mean?” growled, from a dark corner, some one
who was evidently proprietor of the premises.
“Hit means we’re hyar for a dance, ole man; so crawl out,” laughingly
returned our self-constituted spokesman.
“Well, I reckon we’re in fer it,” continued the disturbed, as we heard a
bed creak, and bare feet strike the floor. “Pitch some pine knots on the
fire, and face hit an’ the wall while wife an’ me gits our duds on.”
A few seconds after, the host and hostess were ready to receive company,
and a blazing pine fire illuminated a room 20 × 25 feet in dimensions.
The beds were one side and the frowsy heads of eight children stuck with
wondering faces out from the torn covers. Two tables and a few chairs
were on the middle floor, and numerous garments and household articles
hung on the walls. The light from the great, gaping fire-place, in one
end of the room, showed the party off to advantage. The girls were
attired in their best garments; some of light yellow, though blue
dresses preponderated. The characters of most interest to all present
were two good-natured-looking young men dressed in “biled” shirts, green
neckties, “store-boughten” coats, and homespun pantaloons. With
self-important airs they accepted and immediately covered two chairs
before the blazing hearth. One of the twain had a home-made banjo on his
knee; the other, a violin. The necessary scraping and twanging to get
the instruments in tune took place; and then the older musician
announced that the ball was open.
“Trot out yer gals,” said he; “There mustn’t be enny hangin’ back while
these ’ere cat-gut strings last. Git up an’ shine!”
After some hesitation four couples stepped into the center of the floor,
forming two sets. Each one separated from and{92} stood facing his partner.
Then the music struck up, and such music! The tune was one of the
liveliest jigs imaginable, and the musicians sang as they played. The
dancers courtesied and then began a singular dance. There was no calling
off; it was simply a jig on the part of each performer. The girls danced
with arms akimbo, reeling sideways one way, and then sideways the other.
Their partners, with slouched hats still on their heads, hair swinging
loosely, every muscle in motion and all in time with the music, careered
around in like manner. The rest of the party stood silent and interested
looking on; and on the whole scene blazed the pine knots.
At intervals, parties of two, three, or more, of the men slipped out of
the door, then in a few minutes returned, apparently refreshed by a
draught of the night air, or something else. After the finish of one of
the dances, in which we strangers engaged, a fierce-mustached
mountaineer tapped me on the shoulder, whispering as he did so: “Come
outside a minnit.”
I hesitated for a moment, hardly knowing whether I would better follow
or not; then I stepped after him. As the light shone through the open
door, I saw that three men were outside with him. The door shut behind
me. It was intensely dark, every star was blotted out, and a damp,
chilly wind was sweeping down the mountain. We walked a few steps from
the house.
“What do you want?” I asked in an apprehensive tone.
No one spoke. I attempted to repeat the question, but before I could do
so, the man who had invited me out, said: “We don’t know your
principles, but we seed you ’aint got the big-head, an’ like yer way o’
joinin’ in. We want to do the fair thing, an’ no offence meant, we hope,
whichever way you decide.—Won’t you take a drink?”
I had feared some harm was intended, possibly for dancing with the girl
of one of the fellows. I felt relieved. In the{93} darkness I felt a small
jug placed in my hands, and heard the corn-cob stopper being drawn from
it.
For several hours longer the dancing kept up, and so did the outside
drinking, the motions of the drinkers growing wilder as they joined in
on the floor. It was two o’clock when the musicians’ powers failed them.
Preparations were made for departure.
“Hits blacker outside ’en the muzzle o’ my old flint-lock,” remarked
Sallow, as he opened the creaking door; “I reckon ye’d best light some
pine knots ter see yer way down the mounting.”
Each man selected a knot from a pile near the fire-place; lighted it,
and with flaming torch filed out into the night. The mules were mounted,
each animal carrying double, as spoken of above; and then into the dark,
still forest we went. The scene was striking. Those in front were close
in one body, the torches, with black smoke curling upwards, being held
high in air, rendering the carriers visible, and lighting up the woods
with a strange glare. The lights wavered and danced in circles, as if
those who held them were unsteady on their feet. Now and then, one of
the boisterous mountaineers would fire off his pistol, giving rise to
shrill screams from the fair sex, loud laughs from their partners, and
causing the mules to jump in a manner terrifying to their riders.
However, no accidents occurred, and journeying on, we soon reached our
temporary quarters, well satisfied with the night’s experience.
On this occasion the hilarity of a number of the party proved damaging
to them. Some one gave in evidence of their carrying concealed weapons;
and, soon after, several arrests were made and convictions followed. The
law against carrying concealed weapons is stringently enforced in the
mountain section of the State, and with good results.
Shooting matches are frequent, in the valley of the western{94} section.
The prize is generally a beef. The time is in October, when the cattle,
in sleek condition, are driven down from the mountain summits. Notice of
the proposed match is communicated to the settlers; and, on the stated
day, the adepts in the use of shooting-irons, assemble, with their cap
and flintlock rifles, at the place of contest. The gray-haired,
rheumatic, old settler, with bear scratches, will be there. His eyes are
as sharp as ever, and the younger men, who have never shot at anything
larger than a wild-cat or turkey, must draw fine beads if they excel
him. Every beef makes five prizes. The hind quarters form two; the fore
quarters the next two; and the hide and tallow the last choice.
Sometimes there is a sixth prize, consisting of the privilege of cutting
out the lead shot by the contestants into the tree forming the
back-ground for the target. The value of a beef is divided into shilling
shares, which are sold to purchasers and then shot off. The best shots
take first choice, and so on. Three judges preside.
It is an interesting sight to watch the proceedings of a shooting-match.
If it is to be in the afternoon, the long open space beside the creek,
and within the circle of chestnut trees, where the shooting is to be
done, is empty; but, just as the shadow of the sun is shortest, they
begin to assemble. Some of them come on foot; others in wagons, or, as
is most generally the case, on horseback galloping along through the
woods. The long-haired denizen of the hidden mountain cove drops in,
with his dog at his heels. The young blacksmith, in his sooty
shirt-sleeves, walks over from his way-side forge. The urchins who, with
their fish-rods, haunt the banks of the brook, are gathered in as great
force as their “daddies” and elder brothers.
A unique character, who frequently mingles with the crowd, is the
“nat’ral-born hoss-swopper.” He has a keen eye to see at a glance the
defects and perfections of horse or mule (in his own opinion), and
always carries the air of a man who feels a{95} sort of superiority over
his fellow men. At a prancing gait, he rides the result of his last
sharp bargain, into the group, and keeps his saddle, with the neck of
his horse well arched, by means of the curb-bit, until another
mountaineer, with like trading propensities, strides up to him, and
claps his hand on the horse’s mane, exclaiming:
“What spavined critter ye got a-straddle ov to-day, Bill?”
“He aint got nary blemish on ’im, you old cross-eyed sinner!”
“Bill, thet hoss looks ez tho’ he hed the sweeney, wunct?” remarks a
looker-on.
“Hits an infernal lie!” returns Bill, emphatically.
“Yas,” begins a cadaverous-cheeked, long-drawn-out denizen from over the
mountain, who has circled clear around the animal and his rider: “He’s
the very hoss-brute ez hed it. Tuk hit when they wuz drivin’ ’im in Toe
Eldridge’s sorghum mill.”
The rider, meanwhile, begins to look discouraged.
“He kicked Tom Malley powerful bad, ef thet’s the animal Tom uster own,”
chimes in another observer.
“Mebby you thinks this hoss needs buryin’,” remarks Bill, sarcastically;
“He’ll hev more life in ’im twenty ye’r from now than airy o’ you’uns
hey ter-day.”
“Ef he aint blind on his off side ye kin ride over me,” says one critic;
turning the horse’s head around, and then dropping the bridle as Bill
reaches over to strike him.
“He’s a good ’un on the go, tho’;” and at this bland remark of a
friendly farmer, Bill begins to revive.
“You’re right,” exclaims the rider.
“Is thet so!” thunders a heavy-set fellow, following his utterance by
clasping Bill around the waist and hauling him off the steed, which
proves to be old enough to stand still without demurring.{96}
“I reckon I’ll try him myself, Bill,” he says, as he thrusts one foot
into the stirrup, and throws a long leg over the saddle, “and ef he’s
got a fa’r gait I mought gin ye a swap. Look at yan mule, while I ride
him sorter peert for a few rod.”
An examination on the part of both swappers always results in a trade,
boot being frequently given. A chance to make a change in horseflesh is
never let slip by a natural-born trader. The life of his business
consists in quick and frequent bargains; and at the end of a busy month
he is either mounted on a good saddle horse, or is reduced to an old
rack, blind and lame. The result will be due to the shrewdness or
dullness of the men he dealt with, or the unexpected sickness on his
hands of what was considered a sound animal.
One or more of the numerous candidates (Democratic, Republican,
Independent, or otherwise) for county or state honors will likely
descend on the green before the sport is over. He will shake hands with
every full-fledged voter present,—shaking with his own peculiar grip,
which one, with some plausibility, might be misled into believing meant
“God bless you,” instead of “Be at the November polls for me—and
liberty.” Most of the men understand the soft solder of the fawning
politician, and exchange winks with one another, as in succession each
one is button-holed by the aspirant.
It is generally an orderly crowd, and arrangements are soon made for the
first shot. At sixty yards from the white piece of black-centered paper,
the shooter lays himself flat on the ground; and, with his rifle
(covered with a long tin shade to keep out the glaring sunlight) resting
over a rail, he takes deliberate aim and pulls the trigger. A center
shot meets with applause. Thus the day goes by, until every share has
been blazed away, the beef is butchered and divided, and the lucky
marksmen stagger homeward, each with his quarter in a sack on one
shoulder and his rifle on the other. If daylight still{97} remains, some of
the crowd often engage in a squirrel hunt. It is no trouble to kill gray
squirrels in any of the woods. The crack marksman with a rifle generally
barks his squirrel. Barking a squirrel is one of the fine arts. The
hunter takes aim and fires at the upper edge of the limb on which the
squirrel sits, instantly killing him from concussion created by the
splintered bark.
But let us pursue the river from the Cheowah mountain to the Little
Tennessee. It is a distance of twelve miles, and not once do the road
and stream part company. At Widow Nelson’s it is a white winding-sheet
of rapids, as far as the eye can reach. A hundred yards by the house,
and the mountains draw themselves together again. The road straggles
around the foot of a cliff. The waters roar and splash beside it.
Overhead, the foliage is of a brilliant green, and the sky usually a
transparent blue. By the dilapidated dwelling of Widow Jarett you soon
pass. There is a cleared tract of land here. Across the river, with its
foot in the water, one of the Nantihala range towers 2,000 feet above
the valley. You must lean back to look upward along its green face and
see the edge of the summit. Up one steep ravine is a trail leading to
Brier Town. It is termed the Cat’s Stairs. Your mule must be dragged by
the bridle if you attempt the ascent.
Three miles down the stream, as you issue from the forest on the brow of
a gentle declivity, a wild picture lies spread before the eyes. You are
looking across a long pent-in vale. On one side the Anderson Roughs,
lofty and impending, with steep ridges, one behind the other, descending
to the river, reach away to where the blue sky dips in between them and
the last visible perpendicular wall that frowns along the valley’s
opposite border. The wildness of the scene is heightened instead of
softened by the vision of Campbell’s lowly cabin in the center of the
narrow corn-fields. You see the smoke above its blackened{98} roof; several
uncombed children tumbling in the sunshine; the rail fence close by its
frail porch; and, beyond it, the limpid Nantihala, smooth and turbulent
alternately, and filling the ears with its loud monotone. (See
Frontispiece.)
“Buck” Campbell is a whole-souled fellow; his wife, a pleasant woman. If
you have time, stop here. Excepting the good-natured bearing of the
mountaineer and his wife, you will see nothing inviting about the place,
until the table is set for supper, out in the open air, at one end of
the cabin. The meal will be an appetizing one. Between each bite you
take of a smoking piece of corn-dodger, you can look up at the shadowed
front of the Anderson Roughs (for long since the western wall has
intercepted the sunlight from pouring on it), and watch how the shadows
thicken, while still the sky is bright and clear above. The
signification of noon-day sun, as applied to the river, will strike you
forcibly. Late in the morning and early in the evening the valley is in
shade. There is but one room in the cabin, consequently you will all
sleep together, and awake in the morning feeling that there is something
in the humblest path of life to keep a man happy.
Every morning, except in winter, a heavy fog fills the valley. This is
unfavorable for the cultivation of small grain, consequently corn is the
only profitable production on the Nantihala. Issuing from the cabin, you
jump the fence and go to the river to perform your ablutions. A tin
basin is not one of Campbell’s possessions. You are sure of clean water,
however; and, leaning over the river’s bosom, you have something to act
as a mirror, while you comb your hair with your fingers. If you yell for
it, a towel will be brought by one of a pair of black-eyed youngsters,
fondly called “Dutch” and “Curly” by their father. Campbell says he
believes in nicknaming his children; for he does not see why they should
go by their proper names{99} any more than people should call him “Buck,”
instead of Alexander.
By 9 o’clock the mist has rolled itself in clouds and drifted up the
heights, a belt of sunshine is half way down the mountain on the west,
and day has fairly dawned. If it is in the early fall, the drum of the
pheasant may be heard from the near woods. The quail has ceased his
piping for the season, but he has by no means migrated, as one might
infer from his silence; for if you stroll through the fields, great
bevies will frequently rise from your feet and start in all directions
with such a whirr of wings that you will jump in spite of yourself. I
have started wood-cock in the wet tangles of the mountain streams, but
they are rare birds.
Only two houses are between Campbell’s and the mouth of the river, ten
miles below. This sort of a solitude is not infrequent on a highway
across a mountain range, but the like is seldom seen along a river. Rich
forests are entered just below Campbell’s. The trees grow to an unusual
height. With underbrush they cover all the landscape, except the few
cliffs on the summits of the peaks, and at the water’s edge. The variety
is something remarkable. I counted twenty-three distinct species of
timber in one woodland. The road, at times, winds around the mountain
100 yards above the river. It sparkles directly below through the trees.
Across the gorge the Nantihalas lift their shaggy heads, at some points,
like that of the Devil’s chin, exposing bare rocks above the clambering
forests. Storms through this section are fierce, but of short duration.
With the wind bearing down the river, a flash of lightning in the clear,
narrow strip of sky will be the first premonitor of the storm. Then a
black shroud will drift over half the strip; and with it comes, along
between the valley’s green walls, thin clouds like smoke that fling
themselves upon the piny spurs of the mountains, hiding them from view.
Immediately you hear{100} the rain drops pattering through the leaves, and
the trees swaying beneath a blast that soon carries off the rack.
Frequently not a drop of rain will touch you, while close by, the
mountain steeps are drenched. The waters of the river grow deeper, roar
louder, and a few minutes after the last rain drop fell, a sullen flood
is sweeping between the banks. It is strange in how short a time a flood
is created in a mountain valley, and how soon it wears itself away. At
your stand far down the valley, you may not even know that a storm has
been visiting the sources of the stream, for the black clouds rolled
over the summits of the lofty mountains have escaped your observation.
But a few minutes elapse, and the fords are impassible. Wait patiently,
however, and you can see the waters subside and the landmarks appear as
before.
Between Campbell’s and the next farm there is an exposed vein of
soap-stone. From all indications it is inexhaustible, but at present it
is unworked. Wherever cliffs are exposed, huge marble slabs, white and
variegated, extend into the river. Where these slabs cross the road,
their angular corners make a road-bed of the roughest character. At
every road-working the gaps between the rocks are filled up, but the
next freshet carries away the filling. It is not advisable to attempt a
journey over it, except on horseback or a-foot. The Western North
Carolina railroad will occupy the larger portion of this road. The
question is, Where will they lay, for the mountaineers, a road in place
of the one they have taken? The requirements of the statute will not be
complied with, unless a miracle is performed.
Miller’s is a frame house that, from the fact of loose clapboards
hanging to it, looks well ventilated. If it was ever painted, there is
no evidence to show it; for the sides are as dingy as twenty years could
make them. A two-story porch is in front, and before that a treeless,
grassless yard. Miller looks like{101} Rip Van Winkle. The last time we
passed, he was carrying an armful of fodder to some starved-looking
cows. It was 2 o’clock, and we had had no dinner. On inquiring whether
our wants could be satisfied, he directed us to his “old woman.”
One of our number unfastened the rickety gate, and walked towards the
house. A vicious dog came forth with loud barking from a hole under the
porch, where he had been premeditating an onslaught. The sight of a
stone in the hand of the new-comer caused him to defer operations until
a more convenient season.
“Can we get something to eat here?” was asked of the woman who had
appeared to call the dog under shelter.
“I’ll see,” she said, and turned to go in.
A line of bee gums on the sagging upper porch had already been observed
by our forager, and consequently he was not taken by surprise when a
swarm of bees alighted on his head and shoulders. Nevertheless, he was
discomforted, and without waiting for the returns he struck in a
straight line for the fence. The dog, with considerable alacrity,
followed suit, and succeeded in securing a nip as he scaled the rails.
The bees reached us all just at that time, and turning up the collars of
our flannel shirts, we started our horses up the road like racers
bearing down on the winning pole. This was our only attempt to call at
Miller’s.
The scenery for the next four miles is a series in close succession of
views wilder than any on the French Broad. There is nothing like it
elsewhere in the Alleghanies. The valley between the mountains, through
which the Nantihala pours, is much deeper than that of any other
mountain river. The only passage-way that equals it in narrowness alone
is the cañon of Linville river, lying below the falls, and between the
craggy steeps of Jonas Ridge and Linville mountains. At the most
picturesque points the waters sweep in thundering rapids over{102} great
marble ledges. The road is stone-paved at the feet of broken-fronted
cliffs, dripping with icy water, green with mosses, or brown in
nakedness of rock. Across the narrow channel, brilliant leafed birches
lean over the agitated current. At the margin of the stream the slope of
the opposite mountains begins, which, with impending forests on their
precipitous fronts, lift themselves to dizzy altitudes. At times
whimpering hawks, circling above the crags, may be heard and seen; but
rarely will any other evidences of life be manifest. In two places
abandoned clearings lie by the road. They are over-run with wild
blackberry bushes and clumps of young forest trees. Two roofless cabins
are in their centers; and a few apple trees rise above the rank growth
of briers. From appearances, one would judge it to be a score of years
since last a barking dog raced back and forth behind the scattered fence
rails concealed by the thickets; or its owner, from the entrance to the
cabin, saluted the passing traveler.

A NARROW WATER-WAY
About one mile below Miller’s is a spot eminently characteristic of the
Nantihala’s scenery. The valley has narrowed to a cañon. The road runs
through a dense wood. Not a rock is exposed under the trees, or on the
perpendicular faces of the mountains. You seem to be in a great, deep
well. Only a small circle of sky is visible.
In the course of its windings, the road at length is crowded into the
river and fording is necessary. There is no danger, unless the water is
high from a freshet; and there is nothing to dread in the passage,
unless you are on foot. In the latter case you must wade. The water is
too deep for rolling up your{103} pantaloons, but your upper garments may be
kept on and dry, unless the swift current and slippery rocks conspire to
give you a gentle ducking. The river is quite wide at this only ford on
the valley road. From mid-stream a long stretch of river is visible.
Usually a shimmer of sunlight lies on the ripples down its center, while
cool shadows darken its surface by the banks. The green trees lean
lovingly over it, and a soft breeze, as constant in its blowing as the
flowing of the water, will fan your face. A fascinating solitariness
pervades the picture; and this was enhanced, when we saw it, by a group
of three deer, a buck and two does, which, with the antlered monarch in
the lead, had just left the forest and were standing knee-deep in the
icy water at some distance from our point of observation. A moment they
stood there with erected heads looking toward us; and then, with quick
movements, regained the nearest bank and disappeared into the wild wood.
If the traveler is observant, he will notice, soon after passing the
ford, a long dug-out fastened to the bank at the end of a beaten path;
and between the trees see a lonely cabin on the opposite side of the
river. The dug-out and a slippery ford near by, are the only links
connecting the cabin’s occupants with a road. The spot appears too
isolated to be either pleasant or romantic. One of the many fish traps
seen in all the mountain rivers is near this cabin. It is built, like
they all are, in a shallow reach of the river. It consists of a low V
shaped dam, constructed of either logs or rocks, with angle pointing
down stream. The volume of the water pours through the angle where is
arranged a series of slats, with openings between, large enough to admit
the passage of a fish into a box set below for its receptacle. Every day
its owner paddles his canoe out to the angle of the dam, and empties the
contents of the box into the boat. This method of fishing is
unsportsmanlike, to say the least.{104}
Near the head of one of the islands of the Nantihala, the road from over
Stecoah mountain appears on the opposite bank, and by a wide ford
reaches the main road. By the Stecoah mountain highway, it is twenty
miles to Robbinsville in the center or Graham county. There are no
scenes of striking grandeur along the route, but the traveler will be
interested in way-side pictures. A primitive “corncracker” at one point
is likely to produce a lasting impression. It is a tall, frail structure
with gaps a foot wide between every two logs. Through these cracks can
be seen the hopper, and the stones working at their daily bushel of
grain, deposited therein at dawn by the miller, and left, without
watching, to be converted into meal by his return. One would conceive
that other mills than the gods’ grind slowly. It is a small volume of
water that pours through the flume, by means of a race,—a long, small
trough, made of boards, rotten and moss-grown, and elevated on log
foundations, about ten feet above the ground. Reaching back toward the
wooded hill-side, fifty yards away, it receives the waters of a mountain
stream. I have seen mills in the mountains, forming with roof, hopper,
and all, a structure no larger than a hackney coach.
Along the road to Robbinsville, for fifteen miles, the predominating
family is Crisp. It is Crisp who lives in the valley, on the mountain
side, in the woods, by the mill, on the bank of Yellow creek, and in
numerous unseen cabins up the coves. In fact Crisp seems ubiquitous.
Robbinsville has eight or ten houses, one of which serves for a hotel; a
store; a court-house, church, and school-house. Near it flows Cheowah
creek, through fertile valleys. The finest tract of land in the county
is owned by General Smythe, of Newark, Ohio, and is called the Junaluska
farm. It is situated near the village, on the banks of Long creek, and
consists of 1,500 acres, 400 or{105} 500 acres of which are cleared valley
land of rich, loamy soil. In this locality a number of Indian families
own homes.
After this slight digression, let us turn to the Nantihala. A short
distance from the Stecoah highway ford, the river empties into the
Little Tennessee. Just before reaching that point, the road diverges
from beside the crystal current; the valley widens out; a deeper roar of
mightier waters arises; and, soon after, having reached the bank of the
Little Tennessee, you enter its ford, and, turning in the saddle, take a
parting look at the closely parallel mountain ranges, and the narrow
space between them, known as the valley of the Noon-day Sun.
{106}
{107}
TREAMS, from which the angler can soon fill his basket
with trout, are not wanting in these mountains. It is the cold, pure
waters, that spring from the perpetual fountains of the heights, that
this royal fish inhabits. Show me a swift and amber-colored stream,
babbling down the mountain slope under dense, luxurious forests, and,
between laureled banks, issuing with rapids and cascades into a
primitive valley, and I will insure that in it swims, in countless
numbers, the prized fish of the angler. You or I may not be able to
demonstrate this assertion; but the urchin with smiling face, yellow
hair, torn shirt, suspenderless pantaloons, bare feet, and legs nude to
his knees—this untaught boy, who lives in yonder homely hut amid the
chestnut trees—{108}will soon convince you of the truth of what I say, and
besides, give you a few points, impossible to secure from piscatorial
books, on how to catch the trout. I do not mean to say that the angler
will meet with success at every point on one of these streams; for along
its lower stretches, as the primeval character of the valley vanishes,
as the water grows warmer under frequent floods of sunshine, and, losing
its resinous color, flows with glassy surface between more open banks,
the sport becomes less captivating, until only the chub and shiner rise
to the fly.
The best trout-fishing, like the best hunting, is to be found in the
wildest sections. The advance of civilization lessens the sport as
rapidly as it thins the herds of deer along the wooded margins of the
streams. Whether it be the disturbance of the waters by the line of
active saw-mills, that with each year reaches deeper into the mountain
solitudes, and the receding of the forests beneath the woodman’s axe; or
the advent of the barefoot angler, that effects this change, makes no
difference with my statement; for it is advancing civilization that
brings them both.
But few persons are unfamiliar with the trout. What they have not
learned from actual experience concerning its habits and appearance, has
been obtained from books. The trout has been a standing theme for poets,
and more has been written about it than any other fish. That honest and
enthusiastic old angler, Isaak Walton, thus sums up, in a few words, his
nature and habits:
“The trout is a fish highly valued in this and foreign nations. He
may be justly said, as the old poet said of wine, and we English
say of venison, to be a generous fish: a fish that is so like the
buck, that he also has his seasons; for it is observed that he
comes in and goes out of season with the stag and buck. Gesner says
his name is of German offspring, and says he is a fish that feeds
clean and purely, in the swiftest streams, and on the hardest
gravel; and that he may justly contend with all fresh-water fish,
as the mullet may with all sea-fish, for precedency and daintiness
of taste, and that, being in right season, the most dainty palates
have allowed precedency to him.”
{109}
The brook trout of the North Carolina mountains seldom exceeds a foot in
length, and weighs from a few ounces to three-quarters of a pound. It is
of a brown color on its back with darker brown, reticulated stripes. Its
sides are of a lighter color and speckled with bright pink and golden,
round dots, while its belly is silver white or light yellow. The dorsal
fins are reddish; the first row of fins behind the gills and those on
its belly are generally edged with white and black. This is its usual
appearance, but trout caught in the same pool often vary in their
colors. Different waters also change the shade of the body-coloring and
strikingly vary the hue of the spots. In deep pools the trout is of a
darker shade with deep red spots; while in the shallow ripples it runs
to the other extreme, showing a silver belly and sides sprinkled with
bright pink. It has no scales; nor does it require—like its scaleless
brothers, the slimy cat-fish and bull-pout—hot water and a scraping
knife to fit it for the table.
The mountaineer’s plan of frying it with its head on in butter and
corn-meal is the best for the palate. The color of the trout when cooked
is generally salmon-yellow, but frequently it is as white as the flesh
of a bass. It would require a finely tempered palate to discover any
difference between the two varieties. As you buy them of the native
fish-boy, at the rate of a cent a piece, it takes a long string to make
a respectable meal for a man with a mountain appetite. The quaint
pronunciation of “mounting” for mountain might better be used, in this
connection, to convey an exact but wider meaning. I have knowledge, from
seeing the feat performed, of one man who, in a single meal, devoured
twenty-seven of these fish, and that without apparent discomfiture.
However, he probably picked out the smallest of the fry.
For fishing in the mountain brooks, the most important thing required is
a pair of rubber boots. Those knee-high will{110} suit the purpose; for,
although in the wildest streams a man is compelled to wade almost all
the time, he can avoid the deepest holes by springing from rock to rock.
The kind used for marsh, duck hunting, which reach to the hips, would be
too burdensome to wear for miles down an impetuous current. As far as
rods are concerned, a slender birch cut from the bank of the stream will
answer every purpose of a ringed and jointed rod; for reels with lines
of fifty or more yards can not be used with any advantage. A silk or
hair line, as long as the pole, is all the length required. If the
sportsman, however, wishes to indulge in fishing for bass, salmon, or
perch in the broad creeks or rivers, it would be well to have the
angler’s complete outfit. In many sections he can take a turn at this
sport in connection with what is considered the higher branch of the
art. As for artificial flies, have a supply with you, and use the one
nearest like the one in season; or, what is better, let the tow-head
urchin give you a suggestion. It makes a great difference in the choice
of your flies whether the stream is crystal in clearness, or is slightly
discolored by a recent rain; and whether you have ventured out before
breakfast, or the day is drawing to a close. It would be strange if at
the latter hour a white or yellow fly, like those dropping on the
surface of the stream, could not be used with pleasing returns.
The best fishing I ever saw done was by a mountaineer, one day in early
June, who used a green-winged, yellow-bodied, artificial fly with a
stick-bait worm strung on the hook. As we followed down the current, at
every cast of his line he pulled a speckled trout from the water. The
stick-bait is a small, white worm found in tiny bundles of water-soaked
twigs along the edges of the stream. The twigs seem glued together, and
when opened, reveal an occupant. In early spring, with a light sinker on
your line, the common, red angle-worm on a featherless hook can be used
with advantage.{111}
A great deal has been written on how to catch trout, but these kindly
suggestions are of about as much value as rules on how to swim without
practice in the water. It requires a knack to catch trout; it is really
an art; and no one can ever succeed in bringing into camp a long string
of the speckled beauties, until after a novitiate of several days actual
fishing,—or unless he meets and strikes a bargain with a small boy who
has had a successful morning sport.
May is the paragon of months for the angler. Take it in the middle of
the month, and if the tourist following and whipping some well-known
trout stream, fails to catch fish, let him neither condemn the stream or
the season, but with reason draw the conclusion that he is a bungler in
the art of trout-fishing. The genial breezes and soft skies should draw
every genuine lover of nature to the mountains. The deciduous forests of
the valleys are again beautiful with their fresh foliage, destroying the
contrast of the winter between their dun outlines and the green fronts
of the higher pine groves, or the bodies of the giant hemlocks scattered
in their midst. Winter’s traces, however, are not fully concealed; for
there is still a line of bare woods between the green line slowly
creeping up the slopes and the lower edges of the lofty, black balsam
wildernesses. But every day, new sprouts of leaves appear, and soon the
entire body of the wood-lands will have donned its summer mantle. The
grass is of a bright green on the hill-sides; in the orchards, the apple
trees are in full bloom; while the blossoms of the cherry are being
scattered on the wings of breezes from the aromatic balsams. The
valleys, on either side the narrow woods lining the banks of the
streams, are dark green with sprouting fields of wheat and rye, or of
lighter shade where the tender blades of the corn are springing.
In the forests which belt the streams, the bell-wood is white with
blossoms, and every dog-wood white with flowers.{112} “When the dog-wood is
in bloom, then is the time to catch trout,” is a true, though trite,
observation. At the same time the sassafras is yellow with buds, and the
red maple, purple. A straggler along the wood-land path, between hedges
of the budding kalmia, or ivy as the mountaineers term it, will be
regaled with the delicious fragrance of the wild-plum and crab-apple
whose white and pink blossomed trees are often entirely hidden by the
clumps of alder or the close sides of the hedges. The wild grape also
sheds an unequalled perfume. The path occasionally issues from the
shrubbery, and pursues its way under the open trees, with the hurrying
stream on one hand, and pleasing glades on the other. The woodland is
vocal with the robin, red-bird and oriole, and the liquid murmur of the
stream. The early violet still graces the sides of the path, and the
crimson-tipped daisy is to be found in sunny spaces.
Let the evening come. At its approach, the keen-piped “bob-white” of the
male quail grows less and less frequent in the fields, and after its
call has entirely ceased, and the mountains grow gray, then finally
resolve to black, formless masses, the cry of the whip-poor-will rings
wild and peculiar out of the darkness above the meadows. If the night is
free from rain, the forests and clearings will be ablaze with
fire-flies. Millions of these insects spring into life with the dusk.
Every yard of air is peopled with them; and for one who has never
ventured into the country at night, their bright bodies flashing above
the road, and under and amid the branches of the trees, would certainly
fill him with profound astonishment.
As has been described in the geographical sketch, in this volume,
Western North Carolina is a mountainous expanse, measuring about 200
miles in length by an average breadth of mountain plateau of 30 miles,
yet in all this area there is not one lake. This seems a singular fact
when contrasted with what is known of the waters of other mountain
regions. There is{113} no lack of water, however, in the Carolina mountains.
It gushes up from thousands of springs in every valley, on every
mountain slope and summit; but nowhere does it find a deep, wide basin
in which to rest itself before hurrying to the sea. There are a few
ponds in some of the valleys, but they are small, and are all
artificial. Many are stocked with trout, from which the owners’ tables
are easily supplied. One of these ponds is at Estes’ place near Blowing
Rock. Trout are, at intervals, bagged in the brooks near by, and then
freed in its waters. The tourist can be paddled in a boat over the clear
surface, under which the standing trunks of the flooded trees are
visible, and may be fortunate enough to pull out a few fish; but the
fascination of killing the game in the mountain torrents is wholly lost.
Colonel Hampton, of Cashier’s valley, has a well stocked trout pond
formed by the dammed up waters of Cashier creek. A screen fastened into
the dam allows the escape of nothing but the water. The spawn is
deposited high up the channels of the limpid streams, which empty into
this pond. A fortune could be made in fish culture in the Carolina
mountains. The valley of Jamestown, six miles east of Cashier’s valley,
is admirably suited for an enterprise of this kind. A lake of six square
miles could be formed here by damming, at a narrow gorge, a fork of
Toxaway.
The headwaters of all the rivers may be whipped with success for trout.
An exception to this general statement must be made of the slow-flowing
Little Tennessee; the headwaters of its tributaries, however, teem with
speckled habitants. Those streams most widely known as trout streams,
while they, in fact, afford fine sport, are not to be compared with many
loud-roaring little creeks, almost wholly unknown, even by the denizens
of the vales into which they descend. Let the angler go to the loneliest
solitudes, strike a stream as it issues from the balsams;{114} and,
following it to its mouth through miles of laurel tangle, he will cover
himself with glory. It will be a well filled basket which he carries;
therefore his wet clothes, his bruised body, tired legs, and depleted
box of lines and flies left behind him on the branches of the trees,
ought not to discourage him from trying it again.
For the angler of adventurous spirit and fond of the picturesque, that
prong of the Toe river which flows between the Black mountains and the
Blue Ridge, would be the stream for him to explore. With its North fork,
this fork unites to form a wide and beautiful river, which flows along
the line between Yancy and Mitchell counties, and empties into the
Nolechucky. Its course is due north. Along its upper reaches, for mile
after mile, not a clearing is to be seen; not a column of smoke curls
upward through the trees, unless it be from the open fire before the
temporary shelter of a benighted cattle-herder, or a party of
bear-hunters; not an echo from the cliffs of dog or man; only the
sombre, mossy woods, the rocks, crags and the stream beside the
primitive path; the loud roar of rapids and cascades, or the low murmur
of impetuous waters, sweeping under the rich drapery of the vines. One
is not only outside the pale of civilized life, but is widely separated
from visible connections with humanity. Let him shout with all the
strength of his lungs, no one will hear him or the deep, sepulchral echo
that comes up from the black-wooded defiles. A jay from out a wild
cherry may answer him, or an eagle, circling high over-head, scream back
as if in defiance to the intruder.
Here are the trout. Every few yards there are deep, clear pools, whose
dark-lined basins make the surface of the waters perfect mirrors, strong
and clear; so that the handsome man, for fear of the fate of Narcissus,
would better avoid leaning over them. Such pools are the haunts of trout
of largest size. They dwell in them as though protected by title-deeds;
and old{115} fishermen say that every trout clings to his favorite pool with
singular tenacity. Natural death, the delusive hook, or larger fish that
have been ousted from their own domains, are all the causes that can
take the trout from his hereditary haunts. Here, in the still waters
under a bridging log, or in some hole amid the exposed water-sunk roots
of the rhododendron, lie the king trout, during the middle of the day,
on the watch for stray worms, or silly gnats, and millers which flit
above, then drop in the waters, with as much wisdom and facility as they
hover around and burn up in the candle flame.
My presumption, in the following suggestions, is that the angler is
able-bodied, not disinclined to walking, and of the male gender. Leave
the railroad at Black Mountain station. From the station it is six miles
to the foot of the Black mountains. The walking is good along the roads,
if no rain is falling. One board nailed to a post on the bank of the
Swannanoa, will inform you that in the direction you have come is “Black
Mt. deepo 4 mi.” This will convince you that some one in the
neighborhood believes in the phonetic system of spelling. The Swannanoa
presents a few beautiful pictures along the roadside. The farm-houses,
with great chimneys on the outside at both gable ends, will look queer
to the Northerner; and to one who lives in a marshy, sandy, or prairie
section of country, the old fences along some stretches of road, made
wholly of boulders gathered from the fields, will excite interest. Many
of them are overrun with vines, and in sections are as green as the
hedge that lines the side of the rocky road nearest the stream. There
are a number of foot-logs on the route, but it requires no skill to
cross them, even if rude railings are not at their sides. It might be
advisable to state that there is a house in the vicinity where pure
whisky and apple-jack can be bought, for it is a wise thing to have a
little liquor in one’s pocket, on a mountain excursion. It is an
antidote for{116} the bite of a rattle-snake; and simply to provide for such
a dread emergency, should it be carried. There is a prevalent idea that
whisky drank during a mountain climb is a help to a man. It is the worst
thing a person can use at such a time. Water only should be drank; and,
if that does not help the exhausted climber, it takes no wise head to
advise an hour’s rest under a forest monarch beside the path.
Now, as there has been a casual mention made of rattle-snakes, a few
words on that subject is suggested. There are few of them in the
mountains, the numbers varying according to the condition of the
country. From most sections they have disappeared, and it is only by
singular mischance that the traveler stumbles across one. During four
summers, in which the writer traversed all of the mountain section, he
saw but one live rattle-snake, and only four dead ones. However, he
heard many snake stories; but he knows of only two men who were bitten
by the venomous reptiles. The mountaineers say that in one of the summer
months the snakes undertake a pilgrimage, crossing the valleys from one
peak to another. This report conflicts with the stories of their
hereditary dens. Perhaps they return after the flight of the summer.
From the same source, we learn that in August the snake is blind, and
strikes without the customary warning whirr of his buttoned tail.
Published natural histories are silent on this subject, and too close
observation from nature is dangerous. Also, at night in summer, the
rattle-snake forsakes the grass and rocks, and pursues its way along the
beaten paths. There is nothing particularly startling in this latter
statement, except to the trafficker in “moon-shine,” and the love-lorn
mountain lad. Still, if one who is at all timid, desires or is required
to take an evening walk, he can avoid all danger by taking to the grass
himself.
There are well-known cures for snake-bite, applied externally, but this
does not detract one particle from the fact of their efficacy.{117} They
consist in binding the opened body of the snake itself to the wound; or,
if a live chicken can be caught, cutting that open in front and applying
it to absorb the poison. All these means will fail, however, if a
leading artery has been directly struck; otherwise, a man with strong
constitution can struggle through.
Before you reach the mountain, engage the services of a guide to the
summit of Mitchell’s Peak, and then down the east side to the Toe. Do
not allow this senseless name to prejudice you against the stream. It is
as beautiful as the name is barbarous. The original name, as given by
the Indians, was Estatoe, pronounced with four syllables. Before you
engage any one’s services determine on the price. If you intend to scale
Mitchell’s Peak only, and then descend again to the valley of the
Swannanoa, as the path is a plain one, you might as well go alone as pay
$2.50 per day to the professional guide. That is their regular charge.
The climb up the Black mountains is arduous, and a half-day is required
to complete it. Along the path is a wealth of timber that will one day
entice into the forest depths something livelier than the perpendicular
saw and its overshot wheel. After a five mile tramp, the second base of
the Black is reached. Here, on an open, grassy tract, once stood the
summer residence of William Patton, of Charleston, South Carolina. All
that remains of it are the loose stones of its foundation, and a few
mouldering timbers. Cattle, grazing in this common pasture, will ring
their bells and low in notice of your arrival. Ravens croak from the
balsams, and sail with wings expanded overhead. Close before the vision,
appalling in its funereal coloring and immensity of height, rises the
front of the Black mountain, the king of the Appalachians, arrayed in
those forests which scorn to spring elsewhere but on the loftiest of
ranges.{118}
For the next five miles the bridle-path leads through woods similar to
those described at length in the sketch on bear hunting. If thin puffs
of cloud are scurrying through the trees and brushing against you, do
not betray your ignorance by asking the guide where the smoke comes
from. They have every appearance of smoke, and it is the most natural
thing in the world for you to ask this question. On Mitchell’s Peak it
is advisable to remain all night, and a shelving rock, a short distance
down from the summit, will furnish excellent quarters after wood is
brought for a great fire before it. Eat your cold snack, drink a cup of
clear, hot coffee, and, rolling up in your blanket dream of trout
fishing in the Toe. Most likely they will be waking dreams; for a high
old fire blazing in your eyes, and a cold rock under you, are not
conducive to slumber. Even in May your back will almost freeze while
your front grows hot enough to crackle.
If no clouds wrap the pinnacle of Mitchell’s Peak, this, the highest
mountain east of the Mississippi, will afford to the enthusiastic angler
the grandest of prospects,
No two mornings will present the same panoply of cloud over the eastern
mountainous horizon, the coloring will vary, the mists will cling in
differing silver folds in the hollows of the hills, but changeless in
its outlines will lie the soft purple mountain ocean.
Mitchell’s Peak rises to an elevation of 6,711 feet, and forms one of
the spurs in the short, lofty backbone of a range termed, from the
somber forests covering its upper slopes, the Black mountains. The range
is about twenty miles in length. It is wholly in Yancy county, and
trends due north toward the Iron mountains. A wide gap, filled with low
mountains and the valleys of the Toe, stretches between its northern
terminal point, Bowlen’s Pyramid, and the Smokies. On the summit of
Mitchell’s{119} Peak is the solitary grave of Professor Elisha Mitchell,
piled round with stones, and at present bare of monument.
The descent to the Toe is a difficult journey down the east slope of the
mountain. The exact distance in miles is unknown. You can guess at it as
well as the guide, and most likely there will be no difference between
his and your figures; for his will be stretched by exaggeration, and
your’s by the tediousness of the descent. As soon as you reach the
stream pay and dismiss him, and pursue your way, casting your flies
where the water is most inviting. There is no reason why 100 trout
should not grace the angler’s string by the time he has finished for the
day, and, at some humble cabin far below, is snugly ensconsed for the
night.

A GLIMPSE OF THE TOE.
There are many spots of rare, sylvan beauty in the region of the upper
Toe; many spots of wild and melancholy magnificence,—dells that seem
the natural haunts for satyrs and fawns, and where a modern Walter Scott
might weave and locate some most fascinating fictions. The mountaineer
is apparently devoid of superstition; and, as far as the writer could{120}
ascertain, no legends, like those of the Catskills, shed their hallowed
light on any portion of the solitude. In lieu of a legend let him tell a
ghost story.
One ghost has no known grave; the other’s lies beside the stream in an
umbrageous dale high up in the mountains. The careless stranger passing
down the mountain would not perceive it. It is a low mound scarcely
rising above the level ground. Covering it are light-green mosses, as
ancient apparently as the lichens which decorate the trunk of the
two-hundred-year-old water birch standing in lieu of a headstone at one
end of it. There are no rocks or stones to be seen, except on the
opposite side of the tree where its roots are exposed. The stream is
noisy; but it could not be otherwise in so rocky a channel, and so is
excusable for disturbing the quiet of the grave. There are other trees
shadowing the circle, but beside the monarch birch they sink into
insignificance. In the grave was once placed the cold form of a
white-haired old man; but half a century has passed since then, and what
was flesh and bone has long ago resolved to natural dust.
This dust was Daniel Smith. He came from Tennessee, up the Nolechucky
and the Toe to this dale. His widowed daughter and her baby boy were
with him when he built a log cabin, and formed a clearing. On the same
side of the creek, fifty steps from the grave, there is a space of
several acres grown with trees of fewer years and lesser height than the
surrounding pristine forest. In the center of this fresh wood, amid the
brambles and briers, the straggler, by pulling them aside, will perceive
a few crumbling stones piled in a heap like the ruin of a chimney. If
there is a single timber concealed under the bushes, the foot will sink
through it without resistance. It is the site of Smith’s cabin. A lofty
locust with wide-spread branches springs, from where once was the
hearth-stone. Where the babe crept on the puncheon floor, tree-sprouts,
with{121} thorns and thistles, are entangled. It is a desolate spot rendered
doubly so by the knowledge, had from sight of the chimney stones, of
what once was there; and by the black balsams which appear along the
steep above it. It seems that Hood had seen it before he wrote the
verse:
The old man showed no liking for outside associations, and scarcely ever
appeared at the cabins of the settlers far below him. This disposition
became more marked after the death of his daughter when the boy was
about ten years old. He was a bright, blue-eyed, curly-haired, little
fellow, and always went a-fishing with the old man, who was an ardent
angler. Never was father more wrapped up in his child, than this
venerable fisherman in his grandson. He was never seen without the boy;
and the stray hunter coming down the trail, often saw their forms before
him,—the silver-haired man with his fishing rod, and the merry,
laughing boy with his hand clasping his grandsire’s. But Death came.
During a heavy flood the boy was accidentally drowned, and his body was
never recovered.
The old man was now thought to be crazy. He allowed no one to enter his
cabin, and some said he fished from morning till night, in the insane
hope of catching his boy, whom he imagined, was transformed to a trout.
One who had watched him from his concealment in a thicket, said that
every fish the old man caught, he examined carefully, as if searching
for some peculiar mark, and mumbled to himself: “No, no, not Will this
time. Strange where the boy is!”
One day Daniel Smith’s dog, cowed apparently by hunger, appeared at a
Toe river cabin. The fierce nature of the animal was gone; he begged
piteously with his eyes and voice, and{122} then ate ferociously all that
was given him. The settlers, suspecting the worst, went to Smith’s
cabin; forced in the door, and found the occupant dead. They buried him
under the water birch, where the mound marks the place. The same figures
which attracted the attention of the stray hunter fifty years ago, are
seen by the hunter and traveler to-day; but while they interested then,
they frighten now; and no one, familiar with the story, passes through
the dale without turning his head in dread and hurrying on. At night,
when the moon bathes in golden light the dark forests, the straggler
professes often to have seen before him, in plainly visible, but weird,
out-lines, the stooped figure of the old angler and his blithe,
bare-foot companion.
There is good fishing in Cane river, on the west slope of the Black
mountains. If the angler prefers to try the latter stream, instead of
the Toe, he can, at a point a short distance before reaching the summit
of Mitchell’s Peak, turn to the left and follow down a plain trail,
fishing as he descends, to “Big Tom” Wilson’s. From Wilson’s it is
fifteen miles to Burnsville. It is a small, country village, amid
sublime surroundings. From the high knoll, where stands the academy, a
pleasant prospect can be obtained. In the morning, as it opens over the
rolling peaks in the east; or, as the sun descends behind the receding
lines of purple ranges, the scenes presented in their glory of
cloud-coloring, their brilliant effect of light and shade, and the soft,
poetic splendor of the mountains, are of beauty too divine, and of
duration too transient, to be caught by the painter.
Thirty miles west of Asheville, fine sport can be had along the Pigeon.
Leave the railroad at Pigeon River station. No teams can be procured
here; so if you are disinclined to walking ten or twelve miles, continue
your trip to Waynesville, and then drive to the desired point. It is an
inviting walk up the river. The stream flows broad, deep, and clear,
through{123} rich valleys, affording fine farming land. The level fields are
green with oats, corn and wheat; the farm houses are painted white, the
yards neat in appearance, and everything in keeping with the fertility
of the soil. The valley views are extremely picturesque; for you are
amid some of the loftiest mountains of the system. The Balsams lie
toward the south; and if you follow up the right fork, you will be
exalted by the sight of these mountains looming along the horizon. The
fishing is excellent, but the east prong is generally preferred.
Up the east prong, the wild beauty of stream and woods cannot be
surpassed. There is such a richness about the foliage, such a purity in
the waters, such an inspiration of atmosphere, that too long-continued
companionship might be disastrous to your outside, worldly connections.
Cold mountain rises on the west; Pisgah on the east. This latter peak is
a famous height for the sight-seer. It is easily accessible, and from
its summit the view is almost boundless. The broad valleys, watered by
the Hominy and French Broad, stretch toward the eastern limit. The vales
of the Pigeon lie on the west and north. All around, the skirts of the
plateau are pinned by mountains loftier than the one beneath your feet.
To the south and west the Balsams; to the north and northwest the
Smokies; and on the other verges of the horizon, the Blue Ridge, Saluda,
Swannanoa, Craggy, Black, Iron, and Newfound ranges. Your standpoint is
one of the most symmetrical of peaks, and is always marked out by the
observer on the streets of Asheville and Hendersonville.
There are agreeable people living on the Pigeon, and among them you will
fare well, especially if you are an expert angler. Explore the wildest
ramblings of the stream, and whip every pool from the white falls down
to the valley known as the old Lenoir farm, where there is such a
pleasant mingling of wild{124} and rugged mountain scenery, with rich
pastoral landscape, that one can never weary of viewing it.
A famous fishing ground is that section of the great Smokies watered by
the Cataluche. Besides the trout-fishing, there is enough in this region
to allure into it not only the angler, and hunter, but the painter and
poet. It is wildly romantic in every feature. By the well-traveled road
that leads from Waynesville to Knoxville, Tennessee, the tourist can
reach it by a 22 mile drive from the former village. The country along
Jonathan’s creek is as fine as that along the Pigeon. An air of
prosperity pervades; and as one rattles on over the pebbled road, by the
pink and white flowering hedges on one side, and the green fields on the
other, the friendly salutations received by him from every man, woman,
and child, will convince him that he is not in a land of strangers, and
that, if any accident befall him, kind and willing hands will be ready
to render assistance. Besides the farm dwellings and their
out-buildings, noisy mills are situate along the stream; and in cleared
spaces amid the woods, at intervals, can be seen country churches and
log and frame school-houses. Leaving the valley, the road ascends Cove
Creek mountain, whereon can be obtained a wide-sweeping view of nestling
vales and receding mountain ranges. Now follows a long ride around
mountain brows, until at length you draw rein before a small, unpainted,
frame house, hanging between the highway and the abrupt edge of a deep
valley, on whose steep side a road, like a great yellow snake, winds
downward to the river. If it is at the close of a bright afternoon, the
golden streaks of light, gleaming from the gaps and across the
pine-capped tops of Mount Starling and its black, brother peaks of the
Smokies, will set in indescribable splendor the mountains to the east;
and darker will lie the shadows filling the cañon, within whose depths,
1,000 feet below you, glistens the waters of Cataluche.{125}
In spite of the steepness of the cañon’s side, lofty woods cover it, and
are as thickly planted along the descending road that, after leaving the
main highway at the frame dwelling just mentioned, no glimpses can be
had of the lower landscape. If the angler has not brought a jointed rod
with him, before he has traveled far down this winding way, he can
secure from the roadside an excellent pole in the shape of a long, lithe
birch. There is a tumultuous ford of the river to cross just after
reaching the narrow valley, and then the road leads up stream.
Our party of sixteen ladies and gentlemen, which, on a fishing
excursion, visited the Cataluche river in the early part of June, 1879,
put up at Mr. Palmer’s, the first farm house reached after passing the
ford. At that time a high, pine picket fence enclosed the yard
surrounding a roomy house, with large, open hall through its center, and
a long, wide porch in the rear. In spite of our numbers, the farmer and
his wife volunteered to accommodate us all, and did so in a satisfactory
manner.
The river is no more than 100 yards from the house, and soon after our
arrival that day two of us, with our rods, started for its banks. It was
just before dusk, and white millers and gnats were fluttering above and
dropping on the rapid water. The stream seemed perfectly alive with
trout, coming up in sight with a splatter to secure these dainty
morsels. The hour was propitious, and we improved it. Without moving
from a line of smooth, deep-flowing pools, we secured a mess of forty
trout before it became too dark to cast our lines. Even if you have no
fishing tackle with you, it is interesting at evening to sit beside a
stream and watch the trout secure his prey. A miller drops on the water,
the swift current carries it for a few feet; then there is a splash and
the insect has vanished. If you had looked sharp, you would have seen a
wary trout dart through the water, rise to the surface, slap the miller
with his tail to kill it, and almost with the same movement suck it into
his{126} mouth. For the very reason that the live fly floats down stream
this ought to instruct the angler to let his artificial fly drift in the
same manner; and then, as the quick jerk informs him that a trout has
struck, pull the line up the current. You must be as quick in your
movements as the fish is in his, or you will lose him.
After brushing through the weeds and briers and climbing a rambling,
rail fence, we came out on the road beside one of our friends and a
small boy, who appeared to be striking a bargain over a long string of
trout. The boy “counted on” there being a hundred fish in the lot, and
just at our arrival he had accepted seventy-five cents for them, and was
making the transfer. We signified our perfect willingness to keep dark
to the rest of the party on how he had secured them. The young angler
was a bright-looking little fellow, with the clearest of complexions,
ruddy cheeks and dark hair. He was barefooted and wore a straw hat,
homespun pantaloons, jacket, and tattered shirt; and, as we stood with
him in the road, he regaled us as follows:
“Did you catch all those trout yourself?” was asked.
“Yes, sir; an’ all ov ’em sence dinner. I heerd you’uns war comin’, an’
I knowed some o’ you all cud’nt ketch trouts by yourselfs, so I reckoned
on arnin’ a little by fetchin’ in a string.”
“What did you catch them with?”
“This ’ere.”
He exhibited a hair line and a fly made of a crooked pin, wound with a
small piece of red flannel and a black and white feather. “I hid the
pole up yander,” he continued, pointing behind him.
“What, all with a pin hook?” exclaimed the purchaser of the trout.
“Law! yes. Why not? A pin hook’ll do ef you haint got{127} enny other; but
I’d like powerful well to hev one o’ them store hooks you’uns hev.”
We gave him one forthwith, and then asked: “When is the best time to
fish, son?”
“When the signs air in the head; the signs in the awmanac, you know.”
“Oh, yes. When you haven’t fly hooks, what bait is the best?”
“Young hornets.”
“What baits do you use for young hornets?” was next asked, and rightly
deemed a very important question under the circumstances.
“Rob a nest,” he answered, and continued: “Grasshoppers is good, too; so
is stickbaits. I don’t keer much which I hev; they’re all good.”
“Well, you’re an expert, my son. Why, I believe he could catch trout
without hook, line, or bait,” remarked the purchaser, with a laugh.
“In course, I could,” returned the boy in a matter-of-fact voice; “I
don’t need no hooks or bait, I don’t.”
“Come, buddy; no fish stories now.”
“I’d use a snare. They’re fust-rate tricks whar the water is still an’ a
little riley. You see I make a runnin’ noose in a long horse ha’r, or
two or three ov ’em tied together on the end o’ a pole. I watch behind a
log till I see a big trout, an then I drap the noose over his head, an’,
with a quick jerk, snake him out. I’ve caught lots that a way.”
This method of fishing, as described by the boy, is often practiced. It
is an outrage that nets are used in some of the trout streams. Hundreds
of fish are frequently killed in a few hours by this unsportsman-like
practice. In some counties (and it ought to be in all) it is a direct
infringement of the law; and{128} such practices should be exposed on every
occasion, and punished to the full extent of the statute.

ON THE CATALUCHE.
Whip-poor-wills whistled their shrillest that June night, and the air
was ablaze with millions of fire-flies. A grand scene was revealed when
the round, yellow moon came creeping up from behind the ragged ridge
that walls the eastern bank of Cataluche. The pines along the summit of
the ridge, stood out like black skeletons. A light, almost as bright as
day, flooded the shut-in valley, casting dark shadows on the stony
ground under the giant forest trees, silvering their tall tops, and
whitening the bare, mast-like pines, standing girdled in the fields of
sprouting corn. The valley was resonant with the roar of the river. A
refreshing evening breeze swept the porch of the old farm-house,
carrying with it a sleepy influence which knocked the props out from
under the drowsy eye-lids of our party, and caused one after another to
steal away to bed.
The more enterprising and enthusiastic anglers were out and fishing
before breakfast; but after that meal we all went. We pursued every bend
of the romantic stream, catching trout at every cast of our flies. One
day in particular is to be remembered. A soft, warm shower had fallen,
and then cleared brightly by 9 o’clock. The best of breezes, one from
the south, was blowing through the hemlocks. The current of the stream
was slightly riled; thus everything being propitious for{129} the sport.
From one pool alone, ten gold and pink-spotted trout were taken that
morning. It was a spot where a steep cliff, festooned with vines, lifted
itself from the water on one side. On the other, was a wide curve of the
bank, and along it grew azaleas and rhododendrons under the pines. The
Rhine-wine colored waters lay dark in this picturesque basin; and from
them were lifted trout after trout, beguiled by the treacherous fly.
Between four and five hundred fish were brought in that evening.
There are many other streams in the Great Smoky mountains about equal in
excellence to Cataluche. Among these are the Ocona Lufta, Forney, Hazel
and Eagle creeks in Swain county. Soco is a natural trout stream; but,
flowing as it does through the Cherokee reservation, its waters have
been so whipped by the aboriginal fishermen that it can not be
recommended to the angler. On its banks the angler, starting from
Waynesville, will travel to reach the Ocona Lufta. The waters of the
Ocona Lufta, even at its mouth in Tuckasege river, are of singular
purity, and through some portions of its course, from racing over a
moss-lined bed, appear clear emerald green. Above the Indian town the
valley grows narrow, and prosperous farmers live along its banks. The
forests are rich in cherry and walnut trees, and all necessary water
power is afforded by the river. Joel Conner’s is a pleasant place to
stop.
Forney creek empties into the Tuckasege at some distance below
Charleston. The ride to its mouth will interest even the most practical
of travelers. At times, the waters create a tumultuous uproar over a
broken channel; then with startling silence they run smooth and swift
for a hundred yards, and, making a bold sweep around a craggy mountain,
disappear as though the earth had swallowed them. There are several
islands in the stream; and at one place there is a twin pair lying close
together in a channel wider than usual. Wild ducks{130} will often be seen
keeping their unwavering flight around the bends; and frequently from
the water edge of a clump of alders, spice-wood and thunderberry bushes,
a blue heron, with lank neck outstretched, will sail lazily out over the
river. The mail man, mounted on a cadaverous horse, with leather
mailbags upon his saddle, is apt to meet the tourist; but, differing
from the general run of the natives, he travels on time and is loath to
stop and talk. Not so with the man who, with a bushel of meal over his
shoulders, is coming on foot from the nearest “corn-cracker.” At your
halt for a few points in regard to your route, he will answer to the
best of his ability; and then, if you feel so inclined, he will continue
planted in the road and talk for an hour without once thinking of
setting down his load. The fishing in Forney creek is excellent. It is
in a rugged section, and at its mouth the scenery is wild enough to hold
forth fine inducements. Hazel and Eagle creeks empty into the Little
Tennessee in a still more lonely and less inhabited section, a number of
miles below the mouth of the Tuckasege.
The Nantihala river is prolific in trout near its pure sources; and,
along its lower reaches, is alive with other fish, among which the gamey
black-bass is enough to allure the angler. A man may be an expert bass
fisher, but a veritable failure at trouting. When one discovers this
fact, with a sound pole, long line and reel, try the minnow and
trolling-hook at the mouth of the Nantihala. In the Tuckasege his
efforts may be rewarded with a salmon. A number of these royal fish were
placed in this stream a few years since, and are now frequently landed.
Nearly every creek that empties into the Tuckasege teems with trout.
Among these are the north fork of Scott’s creek, Dark Ridge creek, and
Caney Fork, all in Jackson county. A gentleman of undoubted veracity,
who has whipped nearly every stream in the mountains, pronounces the
Dark{131} Ridge creek to be the best of any he ever cast a fly in. Its
head-waters can be struck by turning from the State road about seven
miles from Waynesville, and pursuing a left-hand, unfrequented road,
into the wilderness. There are no farms along its banks. Great, silent
forests, in which the locust and hickory attain enormous size, embosom
it. Its edges are wild with tangled rhododendron and kalmia; its waters,
small in volume, but cold and crystal.
Fourteen miles south of Webster, the county-seat of Jackson, is the most
stupendous waterfall of the mountains. It is said that on certain
evenings, when that dead quiet, prophetic of a storm, dwells in the
valley, the dull roar of the falls can be heard eight miles down the
river. It is on the Tuckasege, about 20 miles below its sources. There
are three ways to reach it; two from above, on either bank, and one from
below, on the west bank. The one way by the east bank is exceedingly
arduous. To approach it from the west bank, the traveler journeys up the
Cullowhe road from Webster. It is a delightful ride, over a picturesque
highway, to where the river is struck at Watson’s. By dismounting there,
you can follow, without difficulty, on foot down stream to the desired
point. This latter approach is preferable to the one undertaken by our
party. We left the highway about three miles below Watson’s. It is a
rough walk of two miles to the waters, half a mile below the falls.
There is no trail to follow, and it requires some activity to scale the
rocks, jump the logs, and crawl through the thickets. Hard by the river,
over a cliff 200 feet high, Rough-running brook pours its waters in rain
and mist. If a certain guide’s story is to be believed, over this cliff,
three deer, closely followed by an eager pack of hounds, once plunged
unwittingly.
Along this part of the river the trout are thick and hungry enough to
afford all the sport you wish; and, if there is a dark sky and dark
water, it will be a gala-day. The scenery of the{132} falls is as
interesting as the fishing. On the left rises a gray, granite cliff,
perfectly plumb with its base, 150 feet above the river. It is somewhat
mantled with green vines and mosses, and a few shaggy cedars cling to
its front. On the right, the cliff is less precipitous, and on it the
forest and its undergrowth springs dense and rank. In front pours the
water, a great sparkling cloud. For 60 or 70 feet down, it is a
perpendicular, unbroken sheet; then a projecting ledge catches and
breaks it into two columns, to fall through the last 25 feet of space.
The frowning cliffs, primeval pines, gigantic boulders, and the vista of
blue sky sighted through the cañon, form a picture of striking
sublimity. If you do not object to getting wet from the mist and rain
created by the cataract, you can stand on a great rock in the whirling
pool and fish for trout and salmon, with success, for hours. The cliff
on the right can be scaled by a boy or man, and the river ascended for a
mile to Watson’s house on the road. However, before reaching the road,
the upper falls are to be passed. Here the scene is different. For
several hundred feet the waters pour over a bare mountain’s face, whose
slant is several degrees from a perpendicular. At its base the stream
widens out, for there are no cliffs to hem it in, and huge boulders
being absent, a level, little lake lies buried in the forests. A fine
point from which to view this fall is half way up the mountain on the
opposite side of the river.
Fair fishing is still to be found in the Cullasaja. It can be reached
from either Franklin or Highlands. In a beautiful valley, close by the
bank of this stream, stands the homestead of a pioneer settler of the
country, Silas McDowell. It is only a few years since he ended his
pilgrimage. In his old age he took great delight in narrating his early
experiences in the wilderness. The first trout fishing expedition
undertaken by him in 1839, and told by him to the writer, will serve as
an illustration of what the primitive angler had to encounter.{133}
One bright morning, he, with two young companions, started up the
Cullasaja. As a matter of course, they had excellent sport, and met with
no adventure, until, in the ravines of Lamb mountain, a magnificent,
antlered buck, startled by their sudden appearance, leaped up from
behind a cliff and started up the stream. There was no outlet for him on
either side, for the walls of the gorge are perpendicular. A short
distance ahead, a cliff, over which the water tumbled, would stop his
career. They had no guns with them, and, although the game was securely
bagged, their only way to kill him was with stones. They pushed on
pelting him with these. At length, maddened with the stoning, the old
stag turned and rushed by them, breaking the narrator’s fishing rod as
he passed. Just then he fell between two large boulders, and one of the
young men, springing on the animal’s back, soon dispatched him with his
knife. They sank the carcass in the cold, rushing water; fished until
noon, catching several hundred trout, and then returned home to send two
servants with a pack-horse after the game. The return of the servants
was expected that evening, but it was not until the following afternoon
that they appeared. They related that they had found the deer, but it
was dark before they were ready to start. Thinking it was best to wait
for the moon to rise, they placed the deer on a large, flat rock in mid
stream, and then laid down beside it to sleep until that time. An
unusual sound awoke them, and by the moonlight they saw an immense
panther crossing the foot-log toward them. He had scented the fresh
meat, and was about to investigate, but on the unexpected awakening of
two human beings, he fled, as much startled as they were. The night was
intensely cold, and finding it impossible to start, and also being
afraid of wild animals along the lonely way, they remained on the rock
until the sun had risen and warmed their numbed bodies. Thus they
accounted for their long absence.{134}
A few miles from Brevard, the headwaters of the French Broad, and
farther south, on the Jackson county side, the streams hidden in the
wilderness of the Hog-back and emptying into the Toxaway, and the
head-waters of the Chatooga, can be recommended to the followers of
Isaak Walton. The writer does not know from actual experience of any
trout inhabiting the Linville waters, but there are sign-boards on the
banks prohibiting fishing.
Close on the Mitchell and Watauga county boundary, is the Elk river, a
famous trout stream. The best approach is from Tennessee, up the
narrow-gauge railroad, through Carter county, to the Cranberry mines.
From the old forge to Louis Banner’s, or Dugger’s, the distance is eight
miles. The road winds upward along a clear, dark stream, rushing over
light-colored rocks. Steep mountain sides, heavy with wild, brilliant
forests, darken the highway with their shadows. In the morning and
evening, the woods are filled with melodious birds. Logging camps are
numerous in this neighborhood, the solitudes resounding with the crash
of falling timbers and the songs, or more likely the oaths, of the
lumbermen. Besides catching trout in the Elk, there is a good chance for
killing deer along its margin, or in some of the vast hemlock forests in
which the high valleys of the southwest corner of Watauga are embosomed.
In Ashe county, the tributary creeks to the North fork of New river rise
amid picturesque mountains, and teem with trout.{135}

OCHLAWAHA VALLEY, FROM DUN CRAGIN.
{136}
{137}
The Smoky chain, whose summit bears the long boundary
line of North Carolina and Tennessee, attains its culmination between
the deep, picturesque gaps of the French Broad and Little Tennessee, and
is known as the Great Smoky mountains. For the distance of sixty-five
miles it forms a mighty barrier, affording, with the exception of the
Big Pigeon, no passage-way for mountain waters, and broken, except
toward its southern end, by no gaps less than 5,000 feet in altitude.
Nineteen peaks of over 6,000 feet in altitude, and 14 more within 400
feet of these figures, connected by massive ridges and interspersed by
peaks but{138} little lower than those just mentioned, make a marked cluster
of massive mountains.
Clingman’s dome, 6,660 feet high, the most elevated summit in the range,
is 372 feet higher than Mount Washington of the White Mountains, and
only 47 feet lower than the loftiest peak of the Appalachian system.
From its dome-shaped summit, in close communion with the clouds, and
encircled by a dense grove of balsams, high above the line of scrubby
oak and beech, and higher still above the majestic forests of cherry,
locust, chestnut and the walnut, which clothe its lower slopes, the
observer, as from the basket of a balloon, looks down upon a varied
world spread wide and rolling beneath his feet. To the north lies that
level and fertile portion of East Tennessee, watered by the French Broad
and the Holston. Villages dot the plains; and, afar, the crests of the
Cumberland mountains and their spurs form with the transparent sky a
purple horizon. On the other hand, the lofty heights of the Bald, Black,
Blue Ridge, Balsam, Cowee and Nantihala ranges, with lapping ends and
straggling summits, make a distant, circling, boundary line to a central
ocean of rolling mountains. Directly south, one obtains a wide-spread
prospect of the most wild and picturesque portion of the eastern United
States—that land embraced by the counties of Swain and Macon—the once
romantic habitation and hunting ground of the Cherokee Nation. Here lies
the fertile valley of the upper Little Tennessee, and its picturesque
but almost uninhabited lower reaches; the emerald green Ocona Lufta with
its rich lands; the Indian reservation on the banks of the Soco; the
beautiful Tuckasege, and the narrow and wildly romantic vale down which
courses the Nantihala.
A noticeable feature of these mountains is their smooth, bald summits;
not a sterile baldness like that of ranges higher or in more rigorous
climates, but only bald as far as concerns the growth of trees and
underwood. Atmospheric forces have{139} played their parts on the pinnacles.
What once must have been sharp crowns of rock, have, with time, storm,
and frost, become rounded hillocks. Due, perhaps to the sweeping winds,
the dense balsam forests—the characteristic tree of the loftier heights
of the Smoky, Black, Balsam and Blue Ridge—stop around the brows of the
extreme tops, leaving, oftentimes, perfectly level tracts of treeless
land, in some instances of 1,000 acres in extent. The soil is a black
loam. A heavy sward, green, even in winter, covers these meadows. On
them, around occasionally exposed surfaces of rock, the scarlet,
blossom-bearing rhododendron, and clumps of heather, similar to that on
the Scottish hills, are found. Every spring, thousands of cattle,
branded, and sometimes hung with bells, are turned out on these upland
pastures. It is an unequalled grazing land. Water wells forth even from
the extreme higher edges of the forests, and on every slope are crystal
streams.
The same striking difference, between the slopes of the Blue Ridge, is
seen in the Great Smoky mountains. On the Tennessee side, the soil is
sterile, in comparison with the North Carolina side. Bare, rocky faces
are exposed to a stronger sun-light; the streams flow through slaty
channels, heaped with gigantic boulders, and a sultry air pervades at
the mountains’ base; still, flourishing forests cover the winding
hollows, secluded coves, and even the craggy heights. One notable
mountain cluster, the Chimneys, terminate in sharp, thin spurs of rock,
differing in this particular from all the peaks of the Alleghanies
south.
The North Carolina side is a luxuriant wilderness, where, not content
with spreading overhead an unbroken roof of branches, brilliant with a
foliage like that of tropical forests, Nature has carpeted the ground
with mosses and grasses, and planted in vast tracts impenetrable tangles
of the rhododendron and kalmia. These tangles are locally called
“Hells,” with a{140} proper noun possessive in remembrance of poor
unfortunates lost in their mazes. There is no better timbered country in
the United States. The wild cherry, of large growth, is found here in
abundance, and other hard woods of a temperate clime attain majestic
heights. The arrowy balsam shoots up to 150 feet, and the mast-like
cucumber tree dangles it red fruit high above the common forest top.
The valleys are cleared and filled with the pleasant homes of hardy
mountaineers. These farms, to the careless observer, appear to be the
only marks of civilized life on the Smokies; but high above the main
traveled roads, amid vast forest solitudes, beside small mountain
streams, and in rich coves under sheltering ridges, are located many
quiet cabins with no approach except by trail ways and known only to the
tax-collector and cattle-herder.
Some of these trails, or poorly-worked roads lead the unsuspecting
tourist into thickly-settled localities. Such a surprise awaits him if,
at the cañon of the Cataluche, he leaves the highway leading from
Haywood county to Knoxville. It is the most picturesque valley of the
Great Smoky range. The mountains are timbered, but precipitous; the
narrow, level lands between are fertile; farm houses look upon a
rambling road, and a creek, noted as a prolific trout stream, runs a
devious course through hemlock forests, around romantic cliffs, and
between laureled banks.
But, to the observer from Clingman’s Dome, the clearings on the slopes
of the Smokies are hidden from the eye. On all sides stretch wild, black
forests, funereal in their aspect, wakened only by the cry of the raven,
or the tinkle of the bell of some animal lost in their labyrinths. The
great wildernesses of the deciduous trees lie below, mantling the ridges
and hollows. In vain the eye endeavors to mark their limit: it is
blanked by the misty purple into which the green resolves itself. Here,
for the{141} bear, deer, wolf, and panther, appears the natural home.
Nowhere is there a more perfect roaming ground for these animals; but
the hound, rifle, and trap, brought into active use by the Indians and
mountaineers, have greatly thinned out the game; still, no better
hunting is to be found east of the Mississippi.
Swain county, along the Graham county line, appeared the least inhabited
section; and when, in the early part of October, we contemplated a deer
drive, the above information regarding the skirts of the Great Smokies
tended to drift us down the Little Tennessee. Our approach lay from that
point in Haywood county which was then the terminus of the Western North
Carolina Railroad, via Waynesville, Webster, and Charleston. We were
mounted on stout horses, and were dressed in a manner anything but
conspicuous; still, a party of four men, each with a Remington rifle or
a breech-loading shot-gun, strapped for easy carrying across his back,
forms a cavalcade of striking interest to denizens of mountain ways and
the citizens of quiet villages.
Had we paid any attention to the opinion that, in the wilderness, we
would be taken for revenue officers, and, as such, shot on sight by
blockaders, we would have ridden uneasily. There is bravery in numbers,
and then we knew better than to give countenance to such fears.
Blockading, or “moonshining” as it is sometimes called, because the
distiller works by the light of the moon, is not as prevalent in these
mountains as is generally supposed; and, besides, it is growing less
with every year. That an unobstrusive stranger stands in danger of being
shot down by a blockader on suspicion of any kind, is a bug bear, in
spite of its prevalence, almost too absurd for consideration. For the
commission of a crime of this nature, it would take a strange
combination of circumstances: a distiller with a murderous cast of mind;
a tourist representing himself to be a United{142} States officer, and the
presence of an illicit still. Now, the blockader, like the majority of
drinking men, is a good-natured fellow, who, while he deems himself a
citizen of the United States, confounds natural with civil liberty, and
believes he has the right to manufacture, drink and sell whisky in
whatever manner he pleases so long as he does not interfere with the
private rights of his neighbors. The tourist is generally a voluble
fellow, anxious to make friends as he travels, and showing stronger
inclination to have his bottle filled than to burst copper boilers or
smash any barrels of mash. The still is hidden in retreats where a
stranger would be as likely to stumble upon it as he would to finding
the philosopher’s stone.
The tourist, traveling the lonely mountain highways, need have no fears
as to the safety of his person or his pocket. It is true that murder
cases are often on the county dockets, but these are the results of
heated blood, and not of cupidity. Honesty is a strong trait of the
mountain people.
Charleston, the county-seat of Swain,—a pleasant little village, whose
existence dates only from the formation of the county in 1871,—is
situated by the Tuckasege river, and at the foot of Rich mountain. It is
in the midst of a new country. The two most conspicuous buildings,
standing directly opposite each other at one end of the village street,
are the new and old court-houses. The former is a substantial brick
structure, likened by a wag, who draws his comparisons from homely
observations, to the giant hopper of a mill, turned upside down. The
old, frame court-house has its upper story used as a grand jury room,
and its lower floor, as formerly, holds the jail. The dark interior of
the “cage,” used for petty misdoers, can be seen under the front outside
stairs, through a door with barred window. An apartment fitted up for
the jailer is on the same floor, and, by a spiked, open slit, about six
inches by two feet in dimensions, is connected with the “dungeon.” For
its peculiar{143} purposes this dungeon is built on a most approved pattern.
It is a log room within a log room, the space between the log walls
being filled up with rocks. It is wholly inside the frame building.
Besides the opening where the jailer may occasionally peek in, is
another one, similar to that described, where a few pale rays of
daylight or moonlight, as the case may be, can, by struggling, filter
through clapboards, two log walls, spikes, and rocks, to the gloomy
interior. A pad-locked trap-door in the floor above is the only
entrance. The daily rations for ye solitary culprit, like all our
blessings, come from above—through the trap-door. Here, suspected
unfortunates of a desperate stripe awaiting trial, and convicted
criminals, biding their day of departure for the penitentiary or
gallows, are confined in dismal twilight, and in turn are raised by a
summons from above, and a ladder cautiously lowered through the opening
in the floor. This invitation to clamber is always responded to with
alacrity by the occupant below. As Swain county is particularly
fortunate in having few crimes committed within its borders which call
for capital or very vindictory and exemplary punishment, the dungeon is
seldom put in use.
Along the main thoroughfare, and on the few side streets, are neat white
dwellings; well-stocked stores, where a man can buy anything from a
needle to an axe; and two good village hotels. Like all communities,
they have churches here, and possibly (for the writer does not speak on
this point from observation) on some grassy knoll, under the silence and
shadows of noble forest monarchs, may be found a few head-marked graves
forming the village cemetery.
The post-office is a good place, at the arrival of the mailhorse, to
survey and count the male population of Charleston; or, after papers and
letters are distributed, to meet, in the person of Postmaster Collins,
an intelligent man who will vouchsafe all information desired on matters
of local and county{144} interest. In the middle of the day, you can sit on
the counter in any of the stores and discuss politics or religion with
the merchant, who, in his shirtsleeves, and perched on a pile of muslins
and calicoes with his feet on a coal-oil barrel, smokes a pipe of
home-cured tobacco, and keeps his eyes alternately on the ceiling and
the road, as though expectant along the latter for the white or Indian
customer.
But the hants all fled when I cum near, and nuthin’ but an owl hooted
overhead; an’ one night I war knocked flat by some devil unseen,{310} an’
next thing I knowed I woke up a mile from hyar. Ye don’t catch me
foolin’ round sich things.’
“He went on to tell how the meal, which he had ground in the daytime,
had made persons sick, and also helped to stop business. That night I
determined to watch the ghostly millers in their midnight toils. A man
named Bun volunteered to stay with me. Just after dark we came up here
and ensconced ourselves in a close thicket near the fall, and about
fifty feet from the mill. The hours passed by monotonously. It was late
in the night, when suddenly, above the dull roar of the fall, I heard an
owl’s hoot up the river road. This would not have attracted my
attention, had not another hoot sounded at once from down the road, and
then another came from just before the mill. Nothing further was heard
to these calls, which I deemed were signals; but, a few moments after, a
light flared up in the mill, and through the unboarded side we saw two
figures in white garments.
“ ‘Let’s steal out of this,’ whispered Bun, in a trembling voice. ‘Didn’t
I say it war ha’nted?’
“I commanded him to remain silent if he loved his life. The wheel was
started, and the two ghosts began to pour corn from a bag into the
hopper. I had no idea that they were anything but living men; but the
light was faint. Their faces were covered with some white substance, and
I failed to recognize them. A little reason began to creep into Bun’s
superstitious brain. We crept closer. Then we saw that they were
talking, and their voices reached us. The sounds dazed me, and I started
as if shot. It was not our language these shadows conversed in; it was a
strange tongue, but I recognized it. It was the dialect of the
Cherokees!
“Under the impulse of the discovery, I leveled my rifle, aimed the
barrel in the darkness, and fired. Both millers stopped in their work,
and in an instant an intense darkness wrapped the{311} scene, followed by a
crashing in the thickets on the farther side of the mill. Several owl
hoots ensued, then all was silent. Having no means of procuring a light,
we did not venture to enter the mill that night, but quickly found our
way home. The next morning I returned here at an early hour. A bag of
corn, some ground meal, and a few drops of blood on the floor, were what
I discovered in the grinding-room; these were enough to convince the
most skeptical of the mountaineers of the truth of what Bun and I
related of our night’s adventure.
“The conclusion drawn was this: A settlement of half-civilized Cherokees
over the mountains, being in need of a mill, taking advantage of this
one being unused, and also of the mountaineers’ fears, had, by managing
to play the role of spectres, secured a good mill, rental free, for two
or three years.
“My shot that night, together with a sharp watch kept up for some time,
during which we fired, on two occasions, at parties approaching the
place after dark, had the desired effect, and the mill was run no more.”
“But who killed your brother? What were the cries that you heard? And
why was the mill, after you discovered who the millers were, deserted?”
I asked.
“The murder remained a mystery until a few days after we drove out the
Indians. The discovery occurred in this way: I determined to have the
old road cleared out and go to working again. The fallen ash was first
attacked. As we rolled away a severed part of it from before the hollow
in that oak, standing there, one of the choppers noticed a pair of boots
in the rotten wood within the hollow. He pulled them out and a full
skeleton was dragged with them. Part of the clothes was still preserved
on this lately securely-sepulchred corpse. A revolver was also scraped
out the rubbish. It was the body of a man who had disappeared four years
since, as believed up to that time, for the war.{312}
“Of course, I had no doubt but he was the murderer of my brother. He had
fired the shot; heard my rapid approach, and, knowing that to step from
behind the tree would reveal himself, he squeezed up into the hollow
trunk of the old oak. The lightning played the part of a slow
executioner. It was probably some time before he attempted to make exit
from his confinement. His endeavors, of course, were fruitless. Then he
began calling in his terror for help. These were the cries I heard
during that stormy night. Afterwards he probably became unconscious
through fright. His dreadful cries at intervals for a few days were what
startled the mountaineers, who, had they been less superstitious, might
have rescued him from a horrible lingering death. His motive in taking
the life of my brother remains a mystery.
“This revelation sickened me, and reviving, as it did, sad
recollections, I had the men stop work for a few days. In that time a
heavy flood aided in breaking down and sweeping away the worn-out race.
I never attempted to repair it, and the old mill was left to rot and
molder in solitary idleness.”
We had been so engaged with the stories that the rising of the wind had
passed unnoticed, and suddenly a few rain drops fell upon us and the
fire. I was about to resume my walk, but was prevailed upon to remain,
because of the storm. It began pouring in a few minutes; and, crawling
with two of the party into one of the wagons, in spite of the novelty of
the situation, I enjoyed a sound sleep on a pile of herb bags and under
the rain-beaten wagon-cover.
The valley watered by that prong of Richland creek, which rises in the
balsams of the Great Divide and beech groves of Old Bald, is one of
great beauty. It is quite narrow. The stream flows through its center,
overhung with oaks, buckeyes, beeches, maples, black gums, and a dozen
other varieties of{313} trees, and fringed with laurel, ivy, and the alder;
while at intervals cleared lands roll back to the mountains. Lickstone,
with gentle slope, walls it on one side; a lofty ridge on the other, and
the black front of the Balsams shuts off at its southern end all
communication with what lies beyond, except by a steep winding trail and
unfinished dug road over a mountain 5,786 feet in altitude. The road
along the creek’s bank, upward from the place of nightly encampments,
possesses all the charms of a woodland way. At places the umbrageous
branches of monarch trees cross themselves overhead; beautiful vistas of
a little stream, streaked with silver rapids and losing itself under the
bending laurels, are presented at every turn; at intervals, branch roads
wind away into some mountain cove; and here and there, disappearing into
leafy coverts, are smooth-beaten by-paths, which tell of a log
school-house back in the grove, a hill-side meadow, or some hidden
lonely cabin. Wayside log cabins and a few frame farm-houses, all widely
separated, are occasionally seen; the noise from a sooty blacksmith shop
attracts attention; a weird mill rises amid the chestnut trees; while
the roar of waters in its rotten flume awakes the landscape.
The most picturesque location for a house in this valley, is owned and
dwelt upon by W. F. Gleason, at present United States commissioner for a
portion of the western district. It is an old homestead site on the
round top of a little hill, which forms a step, as it were, to the
wooded mountain ridge towering above it. Before the front of the
dwelling, 100 yards away, down the hill and across a level strip of
land, runs the Richland around the edge of a chestnut grove which
springs on its opposite bank. Through the shady grove, beyond the
rivulet bridges, is the Richland road, up which the traveler will come,
and (unless he notices the branch path and turns under the trees) which
he will follow through woodland scenery like that{314} described. From the
door-yard of the commissioner’s unpretentious dwelling, a
mountain-walled picture is presented. Old Bald, the Balsams, Lickstone,
Wild Cat, Wolf’s Pen, and the ridge in the rear of the house, whose
highest point is the Pinnacle, bend around the valley like the
ragged-brimmed sides of a bowl with one rather deeply-broken nick in the
rim through which are visible the purple fronts of the Haywood
mountains. The valley view is too confined to be interesting, and only
one cabin, the indistinct outlines of an old farm-house, and a few acres
of cleared land amid the forests, are to be seen. It was at this
sequestered country home where, for several seasons while sojourning in
the Alleghanies, we made our head-quarters. Of the gorgeous sun-rises
over Lickstone, witnessed by us from the low porch of the cottage; of
the full-moon ascents above the night-darkened rim of the same
mountain,—we might write with enthusiasm, but with perhaps too tedious
detail for the reader.
During one of these sojourns, we roomed in an old frame house in the
valley, distant about three hundred yards from the hill-side place just
described. In the early October mornings, our way when going to
breakfast, was along a beaten path through the chestnut grove, where the
ground would be covered with nuts larger than any which ever find their
way to the market. Those short walks in the bright, clear mornings are
indelibly stamped in memory. Again the creaking, wood-latched gate of
the unpainted mansion closes with a rattle; the great piles of waste
mica around the shops gleam in the sunshine; the birds twitter in the
green vines so heavily clustered in the buckeyes that the limbs of
contiguous trees meeting, form overhead rich arbors for the passers
beneath; the rough planks of the bridge across one smooth branch of the
stream shake under our footsteps; the chestnut woods, turning yellow,
drop their dry burrs in our path; the two long, hewn-top logs,{315} with
their crooked hand-rail, bridging one of the maddest and most musical of
mountain streams, tremble as we run across them; the bordering alders
sparkle with dew-drops; the frame farm-yard gate stands shut before us.
Over this we leap and go chasing up the hill. If the family is still
slumbering, a gun is taken from its stand beside the chimney; a whistle
given for a dog, whose quick appearance, bright eyes, and wagging tail
show his pleasure; and at the foot of the hill the black-berry thickets
are beaten, until before the yelping dog a shivering rabbit bounds out
in sight, whose race is perhaps ended rather abruptly.
For mountain parties both Lickstone and Old Bald offer exceptional
attractions. The ascent of the latter peak and the character of the
views from its summit are described in the sketch on bear hunting.
Lickstone can be easily ascended on foot or on horse-back, and is
admirably situated for the observer to bring within his ken the most
prominent peaks of eight surrounding counties, and see unrolled below
him a mountain-bounded landscape of beauty and grandeur beyond the power
of delineation by poet or painter. Lickstone takes its curious name from
a huge flat rock near the summit of the mountain, whereon the
cattle-herders used formerly to place the salt brought by them to the
stock which range the summit meadows. On the east slope are located
valuable mica mines.
An interesting day’s journey, from Waynesville, is to and from Soco
Falls. The road can be traveled over by carriage, and leads up
Jonathan’s creek to its source. The falls are on the distant slope of
the mountain, sixteen miles from the village. The headwaters of the Soco
rise in a dark wilderness. At the principal fall, two prongs of the
stream, coming from different directions, unite their foaming waters by
first leaping over a series of rocky ledges, arranged like a stairway.
Into a boiling basin, fifty feet below, the stream whirls and eddies{316}
around, and then, with renewed impetuosity, rushes down the gradual
descent to the valley. By following down the road, the traveler will
soon find himself in the Indian reservation.

THE JUNALUSKAS.
One mile from Waynesville, on the state road toward Webster, is a level
and well-cultivated farm of about one hundred acres, forming a portion
of the wide, cleared valley between the base of the hills, on one side,
and the wood-fringed Richland on the other. It is the property of
Sanborn and Mears, two{317} young men who have lately moved into the
mountains. With enlarged ideas on farming, they are bringing the
naturally rich soil into a state of perfection for grain and grazing. A
cheery, comfortable farm-house stands under the door-yard trees beside
the driveway. Behind the house the ground rises gradually to the oak
woods along the summit of the hill. In the front, visible from the
doorway, is a wide-sweeping mountain prospect. The valley, broad, open,
level, diversified with farms and forests, crossed by winding fences and
roads hidden by green hedges, extends away for two miles or more, to the
steep fronts of lofty mountains. It is these mountains which so enhance
the picture, giving it, morning and evening, soft shadows, sunlight
intensified by shooting through the gap between the Junaluskas and Mount
Serbal, and a peaceful, pleasing slumber, like that of a noble grayhound
at the feet of his trusted master. A portion of this prospect is given
in the accompanying illustration.
From Waynesville to Webster, twenty miles distant, there was no regular
hack or stage line running in 1882, but either saddle-horses or
carriages can be obtained at reasonable rates in Waynesville. There are
no scenes along the route that the traveler would be likely to retain in
memory. Hills, mountains, woods, and farms fill up the way, with no
particularly striking features. Dr. Robert Welch’s farm, about two miles
from the village, is one which will not be passed unnoticed. The large,
white residence, white flouring mill opposite, high solid fences formed
from rocks picked from the roads and fields, and level lands of several
hundred acres, make up a pleasant homestead.
Webster is an antiquated village, on the summit of a red hill, silently
overlooking the Tuckasege river. It has a population of about 200, and
is the county-seat of a large and fertile section of the mountains.
About forty-five miles south of the{318} village, by the way of the river
road, is Highlands, an objective point for the tourist. East La Porte is
one of the points passed on the river. It is a country post, with two
stores, a school-house or academy, and a few houses. The academy,
resembling a Tell chapel, is situated on a hill-top in a bend of the
Tuckasege. As this structure rises from the forest-crowned hill, around
whose base sweeps the sparkling river, with a line of distant mountains
for its back ground, it is extremely picturesque.
The road up Shoal Creek mountain, on the way to Cashier’s Valley and
Highlands, is noted for its wild scenery. Frail wooden bridges span deep
ravines echoing with the roar of waters; the road winds at times around
the steep side of the wooded mountain; then again it dips down to the
margin of the stream. The falls of Grassy creek are close in full view
at one point. The water of this stream in order to empty into the larger
stream, flings itself over a perpendicular cliff, falling through space
with loud roar and white veil-like form.
The stupendous falls of the Tuckasege are near this Shoal creek road,
but it is not advisable for the tourist to attempt the tramp to them by
this wild approach. In our last pilgrimage up the mountain we attempted
it. A few incidents which occurred on this trip may prove interesting to
the reader. The artist was with me. Stopping at McCall’s lonely cabin,
we hired a twelve-year-old boy for a quarter to act as our guide. The
day was uncomfortably warm. We led our horses up a mile ascent, so
steep, that in scaling it not a dry spot remained on our underclothes.
Then we tied the panting animals and walked and slid down a mountain
side whose steepness caused us to grow pale when we contemplated the
return. When we reached the dizzy edge of the precipice above the
thundering cataract, the artist, unused to so arduous a journey, was in
such a state of prostration, that he could not hold a pencil between{319}
his thumb and fingers. To sketch was impossible; to breathe was little
less difficult for him. We rested a few minutes, viewing from above the
mad plunge of white waters, and then, with the small boy’s help, I
carried, pushed, and pulled my exhausted companion up the ascent to the
horses. How many times he fell prostrate on that desolate mountain
slope, stretching wide his arms and panting like a man in his last
agony, we failed to keep account of.
The last spoonfull of medicine in a flask taken from the saddle-bags
enabled him to mount his horse, and we rode off around a flinty mountain
with warm air circling through the trees and the hollow voice of the
upper falls of the Tuckasege, seen below us in the distance, sounding in
our ears. We dragged our horses after us down a steep declivity; passed
a muddy-looking cabin; wended through a deserted farm under an untrimmed
orchard, with rotten peaches hanging to the limbs; startled several
coveys of quails from the rank grass; entered a green, delicious forest
alive with barking gray squirrels; and then, through several rail fences
and troublesome gates, reached the sandy road leading into Hamburg,—a
store with a post office. It is the ancient site of a fort of that name
erected for use in case of Indian depredations.
Here we tried to get something to more fully resuscitate the still
trembling artist, but everything had gone dry; and all the encouragement
we received was a cordial invitation, from a man who was hauling a log
to a neighboring saw-mill, to come and spend a week at his house, and he
would have a keg of blockade on hand for us. This manner of the
mountaineers of inviting strangers to visit them is illustrative of
their warm-hearted natures. W. N. Heddin was the logger who extended
this invitation. I had met him once before while on a tramp through
Rabun county, Georgia, where he was then living. A minute’s stop at his
house, on that occasion to procure a drink{320} of water, was the extent of
our acquaintance. His farm was situated at the base of a frowning, rocky
wall called Buzzard cliffs, and although just outside the North Carolina
line deserves some mention, because of certain interest connected with
it. This interest is gold.
The sand in the beds of some of the smooth-flowing rivulets down the
sultry southern slope of the Blue Ridge have, as regards the precious
mineral, panned out well in the past. Over thirty years ago the stream
through Heddin’s property was discovered to contain gold; and for a
time, as he related, was worked at the rate of ten pennyweights a day
per man. After living with the gold fever for many years, he lately sold
his property, and removed across the Blue Ridge.
Declining Heddin’s proffered hospitality we pushed on, gradually but
imperceptibly ascending the Blue Ridge. I was riding on ahead. Suddenly
my companion called to me.
“Say, I’ve lost my overcoat.”
“Too bad! Shall we return and search for it?”
“No; but it’s strange how I’m losing everything.”
“Yes. You lost your pipe yesterday; your breath this morning, and now
it’s your coat.”
“Just so; and do you know, I’m getting demoralized. Something worse is
going to happen. Say!”
“What?”
“If you hear anything weighing about one hundred and ten pounds fall off
my horse, turn and come back, will you?”
“Yes. Why?”
“You’ll know I’m lost. Hang me, but I feel cut up!”
The overcoat was not recovered by its owner; and fortunately the fall,
of which forewarning had been given, did not occur.
We easily ascended the Ridge. Luxuriant forests—perfect tropical
tangles—spread over the last portion of the way. A{321} stream with water
the color of a pure topaz flows under the rich green rhododendron
hedges. Down the slope toward Cashier’s Valley the road is of white
sand, beaten as level as a floor. A drive in easy carriage over it with
the broad-sweeping limbs of the cool trees overhead, would be
delightful. These woods were filled with insects termed “chatteracks” by
the natives. Their shrill chirping toward evening is much louder than
the noise of the locust, and fairly deafens the traveler. Locusts also
joined in the chorus, giving a concert as melodious as it was singular
and primeval.
Cashier’s Valley is a mountain plateau of the Blue Ridge, 3,400 feet in
altitude, from four to five miles long and a mile and a half wide.
Attracted by its climate, freedom from dampness, its utter isolation
from the populated haunts of man, the rugged character of its scenery,
and deer and bear infested wildwoods, years since, wealthy planters of
South Carolina drifted in here with each recurring summer. Now, a few
homes of these people are scattered along the highland roads. One
residence, the pleasant summer home of Colonel Hampton, the earliest
settler from South Carolina, is situated, as it appears from the road,
in the gap between Chimney Top and Brown mountain, through which, twenty
miles away, can be seen a range of purple mountains. A grove of pines
surrounds the house. Governor Hampton formerly spent the summers here,
engaged, among other pastimes, in fishing for trout along the head
streams of the Chatooga, which have been stocked with this fish by the
Hampton family.
The sun had hidden himself behind the western ranges, but daylight still
pervaded the landscape, when through a break of the forest of the
hill-side around which the road winds, we came out before the massive
front of a peculiar mountain. Whiteside, or in literal translation of
the Cherokee title, Unakakanoos, White-mountain, is the largest exposure
of perpendicular,{322} bare rock east of the Rockies. It is connected,
without deeply-marked intervening gaps, with its neighboring peaks of
the Blue Ridge; but from some points of observation it appears
isolated—a majestic, solitary, dome-shaped monument, differing from all
other mountains of the Alleghanies in its aspect and form. The top line
of its precipitous front is 1,600 feet above its point of conjunction
with the crest of the green hill, which slopes to the Chatooga, 800 feet
lower. The face of the mountain is gray, not white; but is seared by
long rifts, running horizontal across it, of white rock. With the
exception of a single patch of green pines, half-way up its face, no
visible verdure covers its nakedness.
Below the eastern foot of the mountain spreads away rolling valley-land,
with hills forest-crowned, fertile depths drained by the Chatooga’s
headwaters, and portions of it laid out in cultivated fields, and dotted
with farm-houses. At the base of Whiteside, on one of a series of green
rounded hills, lives an independent, elderly Englishman, named
Grimshawe; and near by, in a commodious, sumptuously-furnished dwelling,
partially concealed by a hill and its natural grove, resides his son, a
pleasant man, with a healthy, English cast of countenance. In the dark
we passed unseen the latter place; and, pushing along on our dejected
and dispirited steeds, fording the cold, splashing streams, disappearing
from each other under the funereal shadows of the melancholy forests,
climbing the cricket-sounding hills, we at length drew rein before the
almost imperceptible outlines of a low building arising under some gaunt
trees.
I dismounted, tossed my bridle to my companion, felt my way through a
trembling gate, stumbled upon a black porch and approached a door
through whose latch-string hole and gaping slits rays of light were
sifting. My rattling knock was responded to by a savage growl from an
animal whose sharpness of teeth I could easily imagine, and whose
presence I felt{323} relieved in knowing was within. Then the door opened,
and a queer looking man stood before me. He was very short in stature.
His face was thin and colorless. A neglected brown moustache adorned his
upper lip. His hair was long and uncombed; and his person, attired in an
unbleached, unstarched shirt and dirty pantaloons, was odorous with
tallow. This was Picklesimer.
“Can my friend and I stay here all night?” I asked.
“I reckon. Our fare’s poor, but you’re welcome.”
The door swung wider. Several children, fac similes of their sire, and a
woman were eating at a table lighted by a tallow dip,—a twisted woolen
rag laid in a saucer of tallow and one end of it ablaze. There was
nothing inviting in this picture; but a shelter, however miserable, was
better than the night; and rest, in any shape, preferable to several
miles more of dark riding. In a few minutes our supper was ready.
Picklesimer sat opposite to us and to keep us company, poured out for
himself a cup of black coffee.
“Coffee is good fer stimilation,” said he.
“That’s so,” said the artist.
“When I drinks coffee fer stimilation,” he continued, running his
fingers back through his hair, “I drinks it without sugar or milk.”
We had evidently struck a coffee toper.
“Do you drink much of it?” inquired my companion, as Picklesimer began
pouring out another cup full.
“I drinks three and four cups to a meal. Hits powerful stimilation;” and
then he rolled his dark, deep-sunken eyes at us over the rim of his
saucer as he tipped the contents into the cavity under his moustache.
Evidently he drank coffee as a substitute for unattainable blockade. Our
host had no valuable information to impart; so, soon after supper we
retired to a{324} room set apart for us, and sank away for a sound night’s
sleep in a high bed of suffocating feathers.
After our breakfast the next morning we went out on the porch. We
supposed Picklesimer, too, had finished his repast, but were deceived. A
minute after, he followed us with a full cup of steaming coffee which he
placed on the window-sill, as it was too hot to hold steadily in his
fingers, and interlarded his remarks with swallows of the liquid. His
charges were one dollar apiece for our lodging, fare, and the stabling
and feed for our horses. We then shook hands and departed. For days his
short figure, with a steam-wreathing coffee-cup in hand, was before my
eyes, and in my ears the words:
“I drinks hit fer stimilation.”
Horse cove lies in the extreme southern part of Jackson county, and
within only three or four miles of the Georgia line. Its name is about
as euphonious as Little Dutch creek, and is applied to this charming
valley landscape for no other reason than that a man’s horse was once
lost in it. Black Rock, with bold, stony, treeless front, looms up on
one border, and on another, Satoola, with precipitous slope,
wood-covered, forms a sheltering wall for the 600 acres of fertile,
level land below. A hotel keeps open-doors in summer within the cove.
The picturesqueness is heightened by the sight of an elegant and
substantial residence, strangely but romantically situated, on the very
brow of Black Rock. It is the property of Mr. Ravenel, a wealthy
Charlestonian.
Through Horse cove there is a road leading to Walhalla, South Carolina,
the nearest railroad depot, twenty-five miles away. It is a decidedly
interesting route to be pursued by a tourist. You will follow the
Chatooga river, into Rabun county, Georgia, along a picturesque course
of falls and rapids, by primitive saw-mills, unworked and decaying,
through a wild and cheerless tract of uncultivated mountain country,
where{325} miserable farm-houses, and none others, but seldom show
themselves, and where the unbroken solitude breeds blockade whisky
stills, in its many dark ravines and pine forests. It would bother any
officer, in penetrating this section, to definitely ascertain when his
feet were on North Carolina, Georgia, or South Carolina soil.
The road, however, which we wish to take the traveler over, leads up the
Blue Ridge, in zigzag course, through the forested aisles of Black Rock.
Three miles and a half is the distance from its base to the hamlet of
Highlands. The engineering of the road is so perfect that, in spite of
the precipitousness of the mountain, the ascent is gradual. Let the man
on horse-back pay particular attention to his saddle-blankets while
ascending or descending a mountain. If he wishes to keep under him a
horse with a sound back, he will have to dismount every few minutes,
unbuckle the girth, and slip the blankets in place. Among the worst of
uncomfortable situations for the horseman, is that of being a hundred
miles from his destination with a sore-backed saddle animal, which will
kick or kneel at every attempt to mount. Imagine yourself, at every
stopping-place, morning and noon, leading that horse to a fence upon
which you, in the manner of a decrepit old fossil, are obliged to climb,
to throw yourself with one leap into the saddle. The rosy-cheeked
mountaineer’s daughter will most assuredly laugh at you, and ascribe to
inactivity the fact of your inability to mount from the ground. A sorry
figure! In every mountain stream forded, your steed will kneel to let
the water lave his back. No chance for dreaming on your part. But worst
of all, how disagreeable must a man’s sensations be, over the knowledge
of the sufferings of the animal under him. Get down and walk would be my
advice.
A word more on the subject of saddles and the beasts they cover. If it
is a mule, see that you have a crupper on him. In{326} descending a mountain
it is impossible to keep a saddle, without the restraint of a crupper,
from running against a mule’s ears. At such times, if you have
objections to straddling a narrow neck which need not necessarily be
kept stiff, you must walk. A breast-strap is often a valuable piece of
harness to have with you for either horse or mule.
On gaining the gap of the mountain the traveler will find himself on a
lofty table-land of the Blue Ridge, about 4,000 feet above ocean level.
Whiteside, Satoola, Fodderstack, Black Rock, and Short-off support it on
their shoulders, while their massive heads rise but little above the
level. From the center of the plateau, such of these mountains as are
visible appear insignificant hills when compared with their stupendous
fronts and azure-lancing summits as seen from the contiguous valleys at
the base of the Blue Ridge. This table-land contains 7,000 acres of rich
land, shaded by forests of hard-wood trees and the sharp
pyramidal-foliaged pines. The streams that drain it are of the color of
topaz, except where sleepless mills have dammed the waters, and, giving
them depth without apparent motion, have left dark, reflecting expanses,
unrippled except when, at your approach, the plunging bull-frog leaves
his widening rings, or a startled muskrat betrays by a silvery wake his
flight to a sequestered home among the roots of the stream-ward-leaning
hemlock.
In the most elevated portion of the center of the plateau is situated a
thriving hamlet of one hundred or more people; a colony, strictly
speaking, above the clouds, and appropriately called Highlands. It was
founded in 1874 by Mr. Kelsey and Mr. Hutchinson, men of the same
enterprising and enthusiastic mould that all founders of towns in
primitive countries are cast in. Our first sojourn at Highlands was with
Mr. Kelsey in 1877. Only a few dwellings and as many green clearings
were to be seen; still, with an arder which to us seemed savoring{327} of
monomania, the projector had already laid out by means of stakes,
streets of an incipient city, and talked as though the imaginary avenues
of the forests were already lined with peaceful homes and shadowed by
the walls and spires of churches. His aspirations are being slowly
realized. The village, with a nucleus of men of the spirit of its
founders, is rapidly assuming respectable proportions. Along the
principal thoroughfare and parallel side streets are many pleasant
dwellings, culminating with one of the cross streets in headquarters
comprising a good hotel kept by a genial landlord, several stores, the
post-office, two churches, and a school-house which is kept open for
full and regular terms. A wide-awake newspaper, on a sound financial
basis, made its first issue in January, 1883.
The farming lands surrounding the village are being settled principally
by northern families. A railroad at no distant day will penetrate this
plateau. A practicable route has been surveyed along the summit of the
Blue Ridge from where the Rabun Gap Short Line crosses at the lowest gap
in the range. A subscription list, in the form of enforceable contracts
wherein each signer has bound himself to grade ready for the ties and
rails certain sections of the route, has been completed. The prospects
for the coming of the iron horse are of an encouraging character. The
most convenient route to reach Highlands for the traveler who has not
already entered the mountains for the summer, is from Walhalla, South
Carolina, distant twenty-eight miles, on the Blue Ridge railroad.
The lofty altitude of this plateau, and the precipitous fronts of its
rimming mountains, bespeak, for its neighborhood, scenes of
grandeur,—waterfalls, gorges, mad streams, crags, and forests which,
when looked upon from above, with their appalling hush, wave back the
observer. Whiteside, a few miles from the village, is a point which no
sojourner in the mountains should fail to visit. A sight down a
precipice’s “headlong perpendicular”{328} of nearly 2,000 feet has something
in it positively chilling. As the observer to secure a fair view lies
flat on the ground with part of his head projected over a space of dread
nothingness, the horrible sensations created, which in some minds
culminate in an overpowering desire to gently slip away and out in air,
are fancifully attributed to the influences of a “demon of the abyss.”
The pure, apparently tangible air of the void, and the soft moss-like
bed of the deep-down forest bordered by a silver stream, have an
irresistible fascination, especially over one troubled with ennui. Get
the guide to hold your feet when you crawl to the verge.
There is a grand mountain prospect from the summit of Whiteside. The
landmarks of four states are crowded within the vision. Mount Yonah,
lifting its head in clouds, is the most marked point in Georgia; a white
spot, known as the German settlement of Walhalla, is visible in the
level plains of South Carolina; the Smoky Mountains bounding Tennessee
line the northwestern horizon, and on all sides lie the valleys and
peaks of the state, in which the feet of Whiteside are rooted.
The falls of Omakaluka creek, three miles west of Highlands, are a
succession of cascades, 400 feet in descent. The most noteworthy
cataract, of the plateau region, is located about four miles from
Highlands, and known as the Dry Fall of the Cullasaja. The name was
given, not for the reason of the fall being dry, but because of the
practicability of a man walking dry-shod between the falling sheet of
water and the cliff over which it plunges. The way to reach it is by the
turnpike wending toward Franklin twenty-two miles from Highlands. This
road is smooth as a floor, and runs for miles through unfenced forests,
principally of oak and hemlock. After pursuing it for three miles, a
sign board will direct you to turn to your left down a slope. You can
ride or walk, as suits your convenience. It is a pleasant ramble along a
wooded ridge, before{329} you reach the laureled bank of the river.
Meanwhile the solemn and tremendous roar of the cataract has been
resounding in your ears; and it is therefore with a faint foreshadowing
of what is to be revealed that you pass between the shorn hedge of
laurel, to the edge of a cliff, below which, between impending cañon
walls, fringed with pines, leaps the waters of the Cullasaja, in a sheer
descent of ninety feet.

The descent from Highlands into the level valley of the Cullasaja is one
possessing panoramic grandeur to an extent equalled by but few highways
in the Alleghanies.{330}
Six waterfalls lie in its vicinity. Down the wooded slope winds the
road, at times sweeping round points, from which, by simply halting your
horse in his tracks, can be secured deep valley views of romantic
loveliness.
On this descent a series of picturesque rapids and cascades enlivens the
way; and, in a deep gorge, where, on one precipitous side the turnpike
clings, and the other rises abruptly across the void, tumbles the lower
Sugar Fork falls. They are heard, but unseen, from the narrow road. The
descent is arduous, but all difficulties encountered are well repaid by
the sight from the bottom of the cañon.
From the foot of the mountain, on toward Franklin there is little of the
sublime to hold the attention. From this village the traveler en route
for iron ways would better travel toward the Georgia state line, which
runs along the low crest of the Blue Ridge. The road winds beside the
Little Tennessee, following it through wide alluvial bottoms until this
stream which, thirty miles below, is a wide and noble river, has
dwindled to an insignificant creek. At Rabun gap you pass out of North
Carolina.
The scenery of the southern slope of the Blue Ridge, in Northern
Georgia, is justly celebrated for its sublimity and wildness. Although
outside the prescribed limit of this volume, its proximity alone to the
picturesque regions of the high plateau of the Alleghanies, should
entitle it to some notice.
From Rabun gap it is four miles to Clayton, a dilapidated village,
consisting of a few houses grouped along a street which runs over a low
hill. On the north it is vision-bounded by the wooded heights of the
Blue Ridge; on the south, a stretch of low land, somewhat broken by
ridges, rolls away. It is the capital of Rabun county.
Twelve miles from Clayton are the cataracts of Tallulah. A comfortable
hotel stands near them. The scenery in their{331} vicinity is of wild
grandeur. Through a cañon, nearly 1,000 feet deep, and several miles
long, the waters of the Tallulah force their way. The character of the
scenery of the chasm is thus described:
“The walls are gigantic cliffs of dark granite. The heavy masses,
piled upon each other in the wildest confusion, sometimes shoot
out, overhanging the yawning gulf, and threatening to break from
their seemingly frail tenure, and hurl themselves headlong into its
dark depths. Along the rocky and uneven bed of this deep abyss, the
infuriated Terrora frets and foams with ever-varying course. Now,
it flows in sullen majesty, through a deep and romantic glen,
embowered in the foliage of the trees, which here and there spring
from the rocky ledges of the chasm-walls. Anon, it rushes with
accelerated motion, breaking fretfully over protruding rocks, and
uttering harsh murmurs, as it verges a precipice—
The other points of interest are the valley of Nacoochee, Mount Yonah,
the cascades of Estatoa visible from Rabun gap, and the Toccoa Falls,
five or six miles from Tallulah. At Toccoa the journey can be ended by
the traveler striking the Atlanta & Charlotte Air Line.
{332}
{333}
LTHOUGH the Alleghanies south of the Virginia line have
for many years been recognized as a summer resort, they have never
received due appreciation. The recognition has been almost wholly on the
part of Southerners. The people of the North, at the yearly advent of
the hot season, have had their attention turned to the sea shore, the
lakes, and the mountains of Vermont and New Hampshire. To go south in
summer seemed suicidal. Within comparatively late years the dissipation
of this false impression has begun; and other ideas than hot, sultry
skies and oppressive air have been associated in the minds of an
initiated few with the contemplation of a journey to North Carolina. A
knowledge of valleys 3,000{334} feet high, with mountains around as high
again, situated north of the thirty-fifth parallel north latitude, has
had some effect to bring about this change. The climate in such a
country would naturally be mild, pleasant and invigorating. To avoid
being statistical the figures of mean, extreme and average temperatures
of different seasons taken with accuracy for a number of successive
years, will not be given here; by comparison of the table of mean
temperatures with observations taken throughout the United States and
Europe, the climate of Asheville is found to be similar to that of
Venice, being the same in winter, and varying not more than two degrees
in any of the other seasons. The altitude of the entire mountain
country; the freedom of its air from dust; its excellent drainage; clear
skies; spring water and invigorating breezes recommend it to the notice
of invalids, and particularly to those with pulmonary diseases. The
winters, while more rigorous than those of the neighboring lowlands of
the South, are extremely mild when compared with the temperature of the
states north of this region. The mountain heights are frequently capped
with snow, but the fall in the valleys is light; sometimes the winter
passing without a snow storm.
For tourists from the western, north-western and southern states, the
great line of the East Tennessee, Virginia & Georgia railroad will place
them, at Morristown, in connection with a branch railway penetrating the
heart of the mountains, and after a journey across the state line, via
Warm Springs and the French Broad, will land them in the streets of the
capital of Western North Carolina. Another route for Southerners is the
Spartanburg & Asheville railroad leading up from South Carolina to
within eighteen miles of Asheville. The thoroughfare for travelers from
the eastern and northern states is via the Richmond & Danville system of
railroads to Salisbury, and{335} there changing to the Western North
Carolina railroad, which now crosses the entire breadth of the
Alleghanies.
The traveler over the Western North Carolina railroad is first brought
within view of the dim, waving outline of the Blue Ridge, as the train
rounds a bend just before reaching Hickory—a center of trade, spoken of
in another connection. This village is an agreeable place to spend a few
weeks. Many persons make it the starting place to distant points in the
mountains, while the number amounts to hundreds annually, who take the
stage here en-route to one of the oldest and most popular resorts west
of the Catawba—Sparkling Catawba springs, seven miles distant.
The road leading from Hickory to Catawba Springs, is so level and well
worked that less than an hour need be occupied in the journey. Rolling
fields of corn, cotton and tobacco, alternating with forests of pine,
oak and hickory, line the way. On the right the distant view is bounded
by the horizon obliquely resting upon an undulating surface; on the left
by the ever changing outline of mountain peaks, twenty to forty miles
distant. The stage at last turns, rumbles down a gentle hill, crosses a
bright stream, and stops at the entrance gate of the resort. While the
gate is being opened, there is time for a hurried glance at the
surroundings. The creek just crossed, enters a level plat of
smooth-shorn lawn, shaded by large forest trees, under which, without
order in their arrangement, are several low white building—bath houses,
tenpin alley and spring shelters. Your eye will soon settle upon an
interesting group around and within a low iron railing which guards the
sparkling mineral fountain. There are seen, with cup in hand, old and
middle-aged men and women, heavy-eyed and sallow-faced, drinking the
health-giving water; going to and fro, and mingling with them are the
airy devotees of pleasure—men and women; last but noisiest and most
numerous are the children{336} playing and chasing across the lawn. The
stage goes a few rods further, and then turns into a winding drive,
through the wooded amphitheater shown in the illustration on page 235.
Around the semi-circular summit of the hill up which you have ridden, is
a row of sixteen cottages, containing from two to four rooms each. Half
way round is a three-story hall known among guests as the “Castle.” On
the extreme left are two other large buildings; one containing the
reception rooms, and office on the ground floor, the other the kitchen
and dinning-room, and over them the dancing hall. There is ample
accommodation in these buildings for 300 guests, and nearly that number
has occupied them at one time. The grounds consist of 250 acres—forest,
fields and orchards.
Every resort has its sunrise views, its sunset views, its lover’s walks
and lover’s retreats, flirtation corners and acceptance glens. All these
places at Catawba springs are at proper distances, and conveniently
secluded. The Catawba river is one mile away, and Barrett’s mountain
five. From the summit of the highest peak the entire chain of the Blue
Ridge from Swannanoa gap to Ashe county is in plain view. Lying before
it and jutting into its spurs, is seen the whole valley of the Upper
Catawba.
The altitude of Catawba springs is 1,200 feet. The prevailing winds
being from the north and west over the mountain summits, produce cool
climate. Eighty-nine was the maximum temperature last season.
The principal spring which has given to the place its reputation as a
health resort, contains a variety of minerals in solution. A sparkle is
given to the water by the constant ebullition of phosphoric and carbonic
gases. There are four other springs within a radius of fifty steps, one
of them being pure freestone.
There is nothing of scenic interest between Hickory and{337} Morganton—the
oldest village in the mountain district, having been founded during the
Revolution. It subsequently became the home of the leading spirits among
the western settlers. From a society point of view the town sustains its
ancient reputation for polish and cleverness. The business buildings are
mostly old, but the avenues are pleasant, and the residences inviting.
There are several commanding views of scenery in the vicinity, that from
the dome of the Western Insane asylum surpassing all others in scope. It
is a charming panorama of cultivated fields, winding rivers, and distant
slopes terminating in rugged peaks. The asylum building itself is a
magnificent structure, having a capacity of 400 patients. The grounds
consists of 250 acres, mostly covered by the native forest.
Thirteen miles from Morganton, and two miles off the road to
Rutherfordton, is Glen Alpine. The building, as first seen from the gate
of the lawn, might be taken for the villa of a capitalist, so homelike
is it in appearance. Its capacity is 200 guests, though the façade view
does not indicate a structure half so large. Adjoining are small
buildings for gaming purposes. The terrace on which the hotel is
situated, is surrounded on three sides by slopes stretching from peaks
surmounting the South Mountain range, the highest being Probst’s knob,
in the rear. That elevated summit affords an extended view in all
directions. The South Mountain peaks are within range. Overlooking the
Catawba valley, the Blue Ridge and its spurs are seen in perfect outline
all the way from Hickory Nut gap to Watauga. Above and beyond the Blue
Ridge several peaks of the Blacks may be counted, and far in the
distance on a clear sky will be distinguished the hazy outline of the
Roan. There is a mineral spring in the vicinity of the hotel, which is
the attraction for many people afflicted, but by far the largest number
of guests are pleasure seekers.
Piedmont Springs hotel, about fifteen miles from Morganton{338} in Burke
county, is open for the reception of guests during the summer months.
After leaving Morganton, going west, following the Catawba river, you
have occasional glimpses of Table Rock, Hawk-Bill, and Grandfather, on
the right, and the frowning Blacks in front. Marion is the last town,
east of the Blue Ridge, where traveling equipages can be procured. It is
a pleasantly located village, of something less than 1,000 inhabitants,
having two hotels, a variety of stores, and a newspaper printing office.
It is from this point that most commercial travelers drive to reach
their customers at Burnsville, Bakersville and other points in Yancey