# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2017
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Johann Georg Zimmermann, Solitude
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/55898/55898-h/55898-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

The mind, exalted by the high and dignified sentiments
it acquires by lonely meditation, becomes proud[44]
of its superiority, withdraws itself from every base
and ignoble object, and avoids, with heroic virtue, the
effect of dangerous society. A noble mind observes the
sons of worldly pleasure mingling in scenes of riot and
debauchery without being seduced; hears it in vain
echoed from every side, that incontinence is among the
first propensities of the human heart, and that every
young man of fashion and spirit must as necessarily
indulge his appetite for the fair sex, as the calls of hunger
or of sleep. Such a mind perceives that libertinism
and dissipation not only enervate youth, and render the
feelings callous to the charms of virtue, and principles
of honesty, but that it destroys every manly resolution,
renders the heart timid, decreases exertion, damps the
generous warmth and fine enthusiasm of the soul, and
in the end, totally annihilates all its powers. The youth,
therefore, who seriously wishes to sustain an honorable
character on the theatre of life, must forever renounce
the habits of indolence and luxury; and when he no
longer impairs his intellectual faculties by debauchery,
or renders it necessary to attempt the renovation of his
languid and debilitated constitution by excess of wine
and luxurious living, he will soon be relieved from the
necessity of consuming whole mornings on horseback
in a vain search of that health from change of scene
which temperance and exercise would immediately
bestow.
All men without exception, have something to learn;
whatever may be the distinguished rank which they
hold in society, they can never be truly great but by
their personal merit. The more the faculties of the
mind are exercised in the tranquillity of retirement, the
more conspicuous they appear; and should the pleasures
of debauchery be the ruling passion, learn, O young
man! that nothing will so easily subdue it as an increasing
emulation in great and virtuous actions, a hatred of
idleness and frivolity, the study of the sciences, a frequent
communication with your own heart, and that
high and dignified spirit which views with disdain
every thing that is vile and contemptible. This generous
and high disdain of vice, this fond and ardent love
of virtue, discloses itself in retirement with dignity and
greatness, where the passion of high achievement
operates with greater force than in any other situation.
The same passion which carried Alexander
into Asia, confined Diogenes to his tub. Heraclius[45]
descended from his throne to devote his mind to the
search of truth. He who wishes to render his knowledge
useful to mankind, must first study the world;
not too intensely, or for any long duration, or with any
fondness for its follies; for the follies of the world
enervate and destroy the vigor of the mind. Cesar
tore himself from the embraces of Cleopatra, and became
the master of the world; while Antony took her
as a mistress to his bosom, sunk indolently into her
arms, and by his effeminacy lost not only his life, but
the government of the Roman empire.
Solitude, indeed, inspires the mind with notions too
refined and exalted for the level of common life. But
a fondness for high conceptions, and a lively, ardent
disposition, discovers to the votaries of solitude, the
possibility of supporting themselves on heights which
would derange the intellects of ordinary men. Every
object that surrounds the solitary man enlarges the
faculties of his mind, improves the feelings of his heart,
elevates him above the condition of the species, and
inspires his soul with views of immortality. Every day
in the life of a man of the world seems as if he expected
it would be the last of his existence. Solitude amply
compensates for every privation, while the devotee
of worldly pleasures conceives himself lost if he is deprived
of visiting a fashionable assembly, of attending
a favorite club, of seeing a new play, of patronizing a
celebrated boxer, or of admiring some foreign novelty
which the hand-bills of the day have announced.
I could never read without feeling the warmest emotions,
the following passage of Plutarch; “I live,” says
he, “entirely upon history; and while I contemplate
the pictures it presents to my view, my mind enjoys a
rich repast from the representation of great and virtuous
characters. If the actions of men produce some
instances of vice, corruption, and dishonesty; I endeavor,
nevertheless, to remove the impression, or to defeat
its effect. My mind withdraws itself from the
scene, and free from every ignoble passion, I attach
myself to those high examples of virtue which are so
agreeable and satisfactory, and which accord so completely
with the genuine feelings of our nature.”
The soul, winged by these sublime images, flies from
the earth, mounts as it proceeds, and casts an eye of
disdain on those surrounding clouds which, as they
gravitate to the earth, would impede its flight. At a[46]
certain height the faculties of the mind expand, and
the fibres of the heart dilate. It is, indeed, in the power
of every man to perform more than he undertakes;
and therefore it is both wise and praiseworthy to attempt
every thing that is morally within our reach.
How many dormant ideas may be awakened by exertion!
and then, what a variety of early impressions,
which were seemingly forgot, revive, and present
themselves to our pens! We may always accomplish
more than we conceive, provided passion fans the
flame which the imagination has lighted; for life is
insupportable when unanimated by the soft affections
of the heart.
Solitude leads the mind to those sources from
whence the grandest conceptions are most likely to
flow. But alas! it is not in the power of every person
to seize the advantages solitude bestows. Were
every noble mind sensible of the extensive information,
of the lofty and sublime ideas, of the exquisitely fine
feelings which result from occasional retirement, they
would frequently quit the world, even in the earliest
periods of youth, to taste the sweets of solitude, and lay
the foundation for a wise old age.
In conducting the low and petty affairs of life, common
sense is certainly a more useful quality than even
genius itself. Genius, indeed, or that fine enthusiasm
which carries the mind into its highest sphere, is clogged
and impeded in its ascent by the ordinary occupations
of the world, and seldom regains its natural liberty
and pristine vigor except in solitude. Minds anxious
to reach the regions of philosophy and science have,
indeed, no other means of rescuing themselves from
the burden and thraldom of worldly affairs. Sickened
and disgusted with the ridicule and obloquy they experience
from an ignorant and presumptuous multitude,
their faculties become, as it were, extinct, and mental
exertion dies away; for the desire of fame, that great
incentive to intellectual achievement, cannot long exist
where merit is no longer rewarded by praise. But, remove
such minds from the oppression of ignorance, of
envy, of hatred, of malice; let them enjoy liberty and
leisure; and with the assistance of pen, ink, and paper,
they will soon take an ample revenge, and their productions
excite the admiration of the world. How many
excellent understandings remain in obscurity, merely
on account of the possessor being condemned to follow[47]
worldly employments, in which little or no use of
the mind is required, and which, for that reason, ought
to be exclusively bestowed on the ignorant and illiterate
vulgar! But this circumstance can seldom happen
in solitude, where the mental faculties, enjoying
their natural freedom, and roaming unconfined through
all parts and properties of nature, fix on those pursuits
most congenial to their powers, and most likely to carry
them into their proper sphere.
The unwelcome reception which solitary men frequently
meet with in the world, becomes, when properly
considered, a source of enviable happiness; for to
be universally beloved, would prove a great misfortune
to him who is meditating in tranquillity the performance
of some great and important work: every one
would then be anxious to visit him, to solicit his visits
in return, and to press for his attendance on all parties.
But though philosophers are fortunately not in general
the most favored guests in fashionable societies, they
have the satisfaction to recollect, that it is not ordinary
or common characters against whom the public hatred
and disgust are excited. There is always something
great in that man against whom the world exclaims, at
whom every one throws a stone, and on whose character
all attempt to fix a thousand crimes, without being
able to prove one. The fate of a man of genius, who
lives retired and unknown, is certainly more enviable:
for he will then enjoy the pleasure of undisturbed retirement;
and naturally imagining the multitude to be
ignorant of his character, will not be surprised that
they should continually misinterpret and pervert both
his words and actions; or that the efforts of his friends
to undeceive the public with respect to his merit should
prove abortive.
Such was, in the mistaken view of the world, the
fate of the celebrated count Schaumbourg Lippe, better
known by the appellation of count de Buckebourg.
No character, throughout Germany, was ever more
traduced, or so little understood; and yet he was worthy
of being enrolled among the highest names his age
or country ever produced. When I first became acquainted
with him, he lived in almost total privacy,
quite retired from the world, on a small paternal farm,
in the management of which consisted all his pleasure
and employment. His exterior appearance was I confess,
rather forbidding, and prevented superficial observers[48]
from perceiving the extraordinary endowments of
his brilliant and capacious mind. The count de Lacy,
formerly ambassador from the court of Madrid to Petersburgh,
related to me during his residence at Hanover,
that he led the Spanish army against the Portuguese
at the time they were commanded by the count
de Buckebourg; and that when the officers discovered
him as they were reconnoitering the enemy with their
glasses, the singularity of his appearance struck them
so forcibly, that they immediately exclaimed, “Are
the Portuguese commanded by Don Quixote?” The
ambassador, however, who possessed a liberal mind,
did justice in the highest terms, to the merit and good
conduct of Buckebourg in Portugal; and praised, with
enthusiastic admiration, the goodness of his mind, and
the greatness of his character. Viewed at a distance,
his appearance was certainly romantic; and his heroic
countenance, his flowing hair, his tall and meagre
figure, and particularly the extraordinary length of his
visage, might, in truth, recall some idea of the celebrated
knight of La Mancha: but, on a closer view, both
his person and his manners dispelled the idea; for his
features, full of fire and animation, announced the elevation,
sagacity, penetration, kindness, virtue, and serenity
of his soul; and the most sublime and heroic
sentiments were as familiar and natural to his mind,
as they were to the noblest characters of Greece and
Rome.
The count was born in London, and possessed a disposition
as whimsical as it was extraordinary. The
anecdotes concerning him, which I heard from his relation,
a German prince, are perhaps not generally
known. Fond of contending with the English in every
thing, he laid a wager that he would ride a horse from
London to Edinburg backwards, that is, with the
horse’s head toward Edinburg, and the count’s face
toward London; and in this manner he actually rode
through several counties in England, he travelled
through the greater part of that kingdom on foot in
the disguise of a common beggar. Being informed
that part of the current of the Danube, above Regensberg,
was so strong and rapid, that no one dared to
swim across it; he made the attempt, and ventured
so far that he nearly lost his life. A great statesman
and profound philosopher at Hanover related to me,
that during the war in which the count commanded[49]
the artillery in the army of prince Ferdinand of Brunswick
against the French, he one day invited a number
of Hanoverian officers to dine with him in his tent.
While the company were in the highest state of festive
mirth and gayety, a succession of cannon balls passed
directly over the head of the tent. “The French cannot
be far off!” exclaimed the officers. “Oh! I assure
you,” replied the count, “they are not near us;” and
he begged the gentlemen would make themselves perfectly
easy, resume their seats, and finish their dinner.
Soon afterwards a cannon ball carried away the top of
the tent, when the officers again rose precipitately
from their seats, exclaiming, “The enemy are here!”
“No, no,” replied the count, “the enemy are not here;
therefore I must request, gentlemen, that you will
place yourselves at the table, and sit still, for you may
rely on my word.” The firing recommenced and the
balls flew about in the same direction: the officers,
however, remained fixed to their seats; and while they
ate and drank in seeming tranquillity, whispered to each
other their surmises and conjectures on this singular
entertainment. At length the count, rising from his
seat addressed the company in these words: “gentlemen,
I was willing to convince you how well I can rely
upon the officers of my artillery. I ordered them to
fire, during the time we continued at dinner, at the
pinnacle of the tent; and you have observed with what
punctuality they obeyed my orders.”
Characteristic traits of a man anxious to inure himself
and those about him to arduous and difficult exploits
will not be useless or unentertaining to curious
and speculative minds. Being one day in company
with the count at fort Wilhelmstein, by the side of a
magazine of gunpowder, which he had placed in the
room immediately under that in which he slept, I observed
to him, that I should not be able to sleep very contentedly
there during some of the hot nights of summer. The
count, however, convinced me, though I do not now
recollect by what means, that the greatest danger and
no danger, are one and the same thing. When I first
saw this extraordinary man, which was in the company
of two officers, the one English the other Portuguese,
he entertained me for two hours upon the physiology
of Haller, whose works he knew by heart. The
ensuing morning he insisted on my accompanying him
in a little boat, which he rowed himself, to fort Wilhelmstein,[50]
built under his direction in the middle of the
water, from plans, which he showed me of his own
drawing. One Sunday, on the great parade at Pyrmont,
surrounded by a vast concourse of men and women
occupied in music, dancing, and gallantries, he
entertained me during the course of two hours on the
same spot, and with as much serenity if we had been
alone, by detailing the various controversies respecting
the existence of God, pointing out their defective parts
and convincing me that he surpassed every writer in
his knowledge of the subject. To prevent my escaping
from this lecture, he held me fast the whole time by
one of the buttons of my coat. At his country seat at
Buckebourg, he showed me a large folio volume, in his
own hand-writing, upon “The Art of defending a
small town against a great force.” The work was completely
finished and intended as a present to the king
of Portugal. There were many passages in it, which
the count did me the favor to read relating to Swisserland,
a country and people which he considered as invincible;
pointing out to me not only all the important
places they might occupy against an enemy, but discovering
passes before unknown, and through which
even a cat would scarce be able to crawl. I do not believe
that any thing was ever written of higher importance
to the interests of my country than this work;
for it contains satisfactory answers to every objection
that ever has or can be made. My friend M. Moyse
Mendelsohm, to whom the cont read the preface to
this work while he resided at Pyrmont, considered it
as a master-piece of fine style and sound reasoning;
for the count, when he pleased, wrote the French language
with nearly as much elegance and purity as
Voltaire: while in the German he was labored, perplexed,
and diffuse. I must, however, add this in his
praise, that, on his return from Portugal, he studied
for many years under two of the most acute masters
in Germany: first, Abbt; and afterwards Herder.
Many persons who, from a closer intimacy and deeper
penetration, have had greater opportunities of observing
the conduct and character of this truly great and
extraordinary man, relate of him a variety of anecdotes
equally instructive and entertaining. I shall
only add one observation more respecting his character,
availing myself of the words of Shakspeare; the
count Guilaume de Schaumbourg Lippe
[51]
Such was the character, always misunderstood, of
this solitary man; and such a character might fairly
indulge a contemptuous smile, on perceiving the mistaken
sneers of an ignorant multitude. But what
must be the shame and confusion of the partial judges
of mankind, when they behold the monument which
the great Mendelsohm has raised to his memory; and
the faithful history of his life and manners which a
young author is about to publish at Hanover; the profound
sentiments, the elegant style, the truth, and the
sincerity of which will be discovered and acknowledged
by impartial posterity?
The men who, as I have frequently observed, are disposed
to ridicule this illustrious character on account
of his long visage, his flowing hair, his enormous hat,
or his little sword, might be pardoned, if, like him,
they were philosophers or heroes. The mind of the
count, however, was too exalted to be moved by their
insulting taunts, and he never smiled upon the world,
or upon men, either with spleen or with contempt.
Feeling no hatred, indulging no misanthropy, his
looks beamed kindness on all around him; and he enjoyed
with dignified composure the tranquillity of his
rural retreat in the middle of a thick forest, either alone
or in the company of a fond and virtuous wife, whose
death so sensibly afflicted even his firm and constant
mind, that it brought him almost to an untimely grave.
The people of Athens laughed at Themistocles, and
openly reviled him even in the streets, because he was
ignorant of the manners of the world, the ton of good
company, and that accomplishment which is called
good breeding. He retorted, however, upon these ignorant
railers with the keenest asperity: “It is true,”
said he, “I never play upon the lute; but I know how
to raise a small and inconsiderable city to greatness
and to glory.”
Solitude and philosophy may inspire sentiments[52]
which appear ludicrous to the eye of worldly folly,
but they banish all light and insignificant ideas, and
prepare the mind for the grandest and most sublime
conceptions. Those who are in the habit of studying
great and exalted characters, of cultivating refined and
elevated sentiments, unavoidably contract a singularity
of manners which may furnish ample materials for
ridicule. Romantic characters always view things differently
from what they really are or can be; and the
habit of invariably contemplating the sublime and
beautiful, renders them, in the eyes of the weak and
wicked, insipid and unsupportable. Men of this disposition
always acquire a high and dignified demeanor,
which shocks the feelings of the vulgar; but it is not
on that account the less meritorious. Certain Indian
philosophers annually quitted their solitude to visit
the palace of their sovereign, where each of them, in
his turn, delivered his advice upon the government of
the state, and upon the changes and limitations which
might be made in the laws; but he who three successive
times communicated false or unimportant observations,
lost for one year, the privilege of appearing in
the presence-chamber. This practice is well calculated
to prevent the mind from growing romantic: but there
are many philosophers of a different description, who
if they had the same opportunity, would not meet with
better success.
Plotinus requested the emperor Gallienus to confer
on him a small city in Campania, and the territory appendant
to it, promising to retire to it with his friends
and followers, and to realise in the government of it
the Republic of Plato. It happened then, however, as
it frequently happens now in many courts, to philosophers
much less chimerical than Plotinus; the statesmen
laughed at the proposal, and told the emperor that
the philosopher was a fool, in whose mind even experience
had produced no effect.
The history of the greatness and virtues of the ancients
operate in solitude with the happiest effect.
Sparks of that bright flame which warmed the bosoms
of the great and good, frequently kindled unexpected
fires. A lady in the country, whose health was impaired
by nervous affections, was advised to read with
attention the history of the Greek and Roman empires.
At the expiration of three months she wrote to me in
the following terms: “You have inspired my mind[53]
with a veneration for the virtues of the ancients.
What are the buzzing race of the present day, when
compared with those noble characters? History heretofore
was not my favorite study: but now I live only
in its pages. While I read of the transactions of
Greece and Rome, I wish to become an actor in the
scenes. It has not only opened to me an inexhaustible
source of pleasure, but it has restored me to health. I
could not have believed that my library contained so
inestimable a treasure: my books will now prove more
valuable to me than all the fortune I possess; in the
course of six months you will no longer be troubled
with my complaints. Plutarch is more delightful to
me than the charms of dress, the triumphs of coquetry,
or the sentimental effusions which lovers address to
those mistresses who are inclined to be all heart; and
with whom satan plays tricks of love with the same
address as a dilettante plays tricks of music on the violin.”
This lady, who is really learned, no longer fills
her letters with the transactions of her kitchen and
poultry yard; she has recovered her health; and will
experience hereafter, I conjecture, as much pleasure
among her hens and chickens, as she did before from
the pages of Plutarch.
But although the immediate effects of such writings
cannot be constantly perceived, except in solitude, or in
the society of select friends, yet they may remotely be
productive of the happiest consequences. The mind of
a man of genius, during his solitary walks, is crowded
with a variety of ideas, which, on being disclosed,
would appear ridiculous to the common herd of mankind:
a period, however, arrives, at which they lead
men to the performance of actions worthy of immortality.
The national songs composed by that ardent
genius Lavater, appeared at a moment when the republic
was in a declining state, and the temper of the
times unfavorable to their reception. The Schintzuach
society, by whose persuasion they had been written,
had given some offence to the French ambassador;
and from that time all the measures which the members
adopted were decried with the most factious virulence
in every quarter. Even the great Haller, who
had been refused admission, considering them as disciples
of Rousseau, whom he hated; and as enemies to
orthodoxy, which he loved; pointed his epigrams
against them in every letter I received from him; and[54]
the committee for the reformation of literature at Zurich
expressly prohibited the publication of these excellent
lyric compositions, on the curious pretence, that it was
dangerous and improper to stir up a dunghill. No poet
of Greece, however, ever wrote with more fire and
force in favor of his country than Lavater did in favor
of the liberties of Swisserland. I have heard children
chaunt these songs with patriotic enthusiasm; and seen
the finest eyes filled with tears of rapture while their
ears listened to the singers. Joy glowed in the breasts
of the Swiss peasants to whom they were sung: their
muscles swelled, and the blood inflamed their cheeks.
Fathers have, within my own knowledge, carried their
infant children to the chapel of the celebrated William
Tell, to join in full chorus the song which Lavater
composed upon the merits of that great man. I have
myself made the rocks re-echo to my voice, by singing
these songs to the music which the feelings of my heart
composed for them while wandering over the fields,
and climbing among the famous mountains where
those heroes, the ancestors of our race, signalized themselves
by their immortal valor. I fancied that I saw
them still armed with their knotted clubs, breaking to
pieces the crowned helmets of Germany; and although
inferior in numbers, forcing the proud nobility to seek
their safety by a precipitate and ignominious flight.
These, it may be said, are romantic notions, and can
only please solitary and recluse men, who see things
differently from the rest of the world. But great ideas
sometimes now make their way in spite of the most obstinate
opposition, and operating, particularly in republics,
by insensible degrees, sow the seeds of those principles
and true opinions, which, as they arrive to maturity,
prove so efficacious in times of political contest
and public commotion.
Solitude, therefore, by instilling high sentiments of
human nature, and heroic resolutions in defence of its
just privileges, unites all the qualities which are necessary
to raise the soul and fortify the character, and
forms an ample shield against the shafts of envy, hatred
or malice. Resolved to think and to act, upon
every occasion in opposition to the sentiments of
narrow minds, the solitary man attends to all the various
opinions he meets with, but is astonished at none.
Without being ungrateful for the just and rational esteem
his intimate friends bestow upon him; remembering,[55]
too, that friends, always partial, and inclined to
judge too favorably, frequently, like enemies, suffer
their feelings to carry them too far; he boldly calls upon
the public voice to announce his character to the world
at large: displays his just pretensions before this impartial
tribunal, and demands that justice which is due.
But solitude, although it exalts the sentiments, is
generally conceived to render the mind unfit for business:
this, however, is, in my opinion, a great mistake.
To avoid tottering through the walks of public duty, it
must be of great utility to have acquired a firm step,
by exercising the mind in solitude on those subjects
which are likely to occur in public life. The love of
truth is best preserved in solitude, and virtue there acquires
greater consistency: but I confess truth is not
always convenient in business nor the rigid exercise of
virtue propitious to worldly success.
The great and the good however, of every clime, revere
the simplicity of manners, and the singleness of
heart, which solitude produces. It was these inestimable
qualities which during the fury of the war between
England and France, obtained the philosophic Jean Andre
de Luc the reception he met with at the court of Versailles;
and inspired the breast of the virtuous, the immortal
de Vergennes with the desire to reclaim, by the
mild precepts of a philosopher, the refractory citizens
of Geneva, which all his remonstrances, as prime minister
of France, had been unable to effect. De Luc, at
the request of Vergennes made the attempt, but failed
of success; and France, as it is well known, was
obliged to send an army to subdue the Genevese. It
was upon his favorite mountains that this amiable philosopher
acquired that simplicity of manners, which he
still preserves amidst all the luxuries and seductions of
London; where he endures with firmness all the
wants, refuses all the indulgences, and subdues all the
desires of social life. While he resided at Hanover, I
only remarked one single instance of luxury in which
he indulged himself; when any thing vexed his mind,
he chewed a small morsel of sugar, of which he always
carried a small supply in his pocket.
Solitude not only creates simplicity of manners, but
prepares and strengthens the faculties for the toils of
busy life. Fostered in the bosom of retirement, the
mind becomes more active in the world and its concerns,
and retires again into tranquillity to repose itself,[56]
and prepare for new conflicts. Pericles, Phocion,
and Epaminondas, laid the foundation of all their greatness
in solitude, and acquired there rudiments, which
all the language of the schools cannot teach—the rudiments
of their future lives and actions. Pericles, while
preparing his mind for any important object, never appeared
in public, but immediately refrained from feasting,
assemblies, and every species of entertainment;
and during the whole time that he administered the affairs
of the republic, he only went once to sup with a
friend, and left him at an early hour. Phocion immediately
resigned himself to the study of philosophy:
not from the ostentatious motive of being called a wise
man, but to enable himself to conduct the business of
the state with greater resolution and effect. Epaminondas,
who had passed his whole life in the delights
of literature, and in the improvement of his mind, astonished
the Thebans by the military skill and dexterity
which he all at once displayed at the battles of
Mantinea and Leuctra, in the first of which he rescued
his friend Pelopidas: but it was owing to the frugal
use he made of his time, to the attention with which he
devoted his mind to every pursuit he adopted, and to
that solitude which his relinquishment of every public
employment afforded him. His countrymen, however,
forced him to abandon his retreat, gave him the absolute
command of the army; and by his military skill,
he saved the republic.
Petrarch, also a character I never contemplate but
with increasing sensibility, formed his mind, and rendered
it capable of transacting the most complicated
political affairs, by the habit he acquired in solitude.
He was, indeed, what persons frequently become in solitude,
choleric, satirical, and petulant: and has been
severely reproached with having drawn the manners of
his age with too harsh and sombrous a pencil, particularly
the scenes of infamy which were transacted at
the court of Avignon, under the pontificate of Clement
VI.; but he was a perfect master of the human heart,
knew how to manage the passions with uncommon
dexterity, and to turn them directly to his purposes.
The abbe de Sades, the best historian of his life, says,
“he is scarcely known, except as a tender and elegant
poet, who loved with ardor, and sung, in all the harmony
of verse, the charms of his mistress.” But was
this in reality the whole of his character?—Certainly[57]
not. Literature, long buried in the ruins of barbarity,
owes the highest obligations to his pen; he rescued
some of the finest works of antiquity from dust and rottenness;
and many of those precious treasures of learning,
which have since contributed to delight and instruct
mankind, were discovered by his industry, corrected
by his learning and sagacity, and multiplied in
accurate copies at his expense. He was the great restorer
of elegant writing and true taste; and by his
own compositions, equal to any that ancient Rome, previous
to its subjugation, produced, purified the public
mind, reformed the manners of the age, and extirpated
the prejudices of the times. Pursuing his studies with
unremitting firmness to the hour of his death, his last
work surpassed all that had preceded it. But he was
not only a tender lover, an elegant poet, and a correct
and classical historian, but an able statesman also, to
whom the most celebrated sovereigns of his age confided
every difficult negotiation, and consulted in their
most important concerns. He possessed, in the fourteenth
century, a degree of fame, credit, and influence,
which no man of the present day, however learned,
has ever acquired. Three popes, an emperor, a sovereign
of France, a king of Naples, a crowd of cardinals,
the greatest princes, and the most illustrious
nobility of Italy, cultivated his friendship, and solicited
his correspondence. In the several capacities of
statesman, minister, and ambassador, he was employed
in transacting the greatest affairs, and by that means
was enabled to acquire and disclose the most useful
and important truths. These high advantages he
owed entirely to solitude, with the nature of which as
he was better acquainted than any other person, so he
cherished it with greater fondness, and resounded its
praise with higher energy; and at length preferred his
leisure and liberty to all the enjoyments of the world.
Love, to which he had consecrated the prime of life,
appeared, indeed, for a long time, to enervate his mind;
but suddenly abandoning the soft and effeminate style
in which he breathed his sighs at Laura’s feet, he addressed
kings, emperors, and popes, with manly boldness,
and with that confidence which splendid talents
and a high reputation always inspires. In an elegant
oration, worthy of Demosthenes and Cicero, he endeavored
to compose the jarring interests of Italy; and exhorted
the contending powers to destroy with their[58]
confederated arms, the barbarians, those common enemies
of their country, who were ravaging its very bosom,
and preying on its vitals. The enterprises of Rienzi,
who seemed like an agent sent from heaven to
restore the decayed metropolis of the Roman empire
to its former splendor, were suggested, encouraged, directed,
and supported by his abilities. A timid emperor
was roused by his eloquence to invade Italy, and
induced to seize upon the reins of government, as successor
to the Cesars. The pope, by his advice, removed
the holy chair, which had been transported to the
borders of the Rhine, and replaced it on the banks of
the Tiber; and at a moment even when he confessed,
in one of his letters, that his mind was distracted with
vexation, his heart torn with love, and his whole soul
disgusted with men and measures. Pope Clement VI,
confided to his negotiation an affair of great difficulty
at the court of Naples, in which he succeeded to the
highest satisfaction of his employer. His residence at
courts, indeed, had rendered him ambitious, busy, and
enterprising; and he candidly acknowledged, that he
felt a pleasure on perceiving a hermit, accustomed to
dwell only in woods, and to saunter over plains, running
through the magnificent palaces of cardinals with
a crowd of courtiers in his suite. When John Visconti,
archbishop and prince of Milan, and sovereign of
Lombardy, who united the finest talents with ambition
so insatiable, that it threatened to swallow up all Italy,
had the happiness to fix Petrarch in his interests, by inducing
him to accept of a seat in his council, the friends
of the philosopher whispered one among another,
“This stern republican who breathed no sentiments
but those of liberty and independence; this untamed
bull, who roared so loud at the slightest shadow of
the yoke; who could endure no fetters but those of
love, and who even felt those too heavy: who has refused
the first offices at the court of Rome, because he
disdained to wear golden chains; has at length submitted
to be shackled by the tyrant of Italy; and this
great apostle of solitude, who could no longer live except
in the tranquillity of the groves, now contentedly
resides amidst the tumults of Milan.” “My friends,”
replied Petrarch, “have reason to arraign my conduct.
Man has not a greater enemy than himself. I acted
against my taste and inclination. Alas! through the
whole course of our lives, we do those things which[59]
we ought not to have done, and leave undone what
most we wish to do.” But Petrarch might have told
his friends, “I was willing to convince you how much
a mind, long exercised in solitude, can perform when
engaged in the business of the world; how much a
previous retirement enables a man to transact the affairs
of public life with ease, firmness, dignity and
effect.”
The courage which is necessary to combat the prejudices
of the multitude, is only to be acquired by a contempt
of the frivolous transactions of the world, and,
of course is seldom possessed, except by solitary men.
Worldly pursuits, so far from adding strength to the
mind, only weaken it; in like manner as any particular
enjoyment too frequently repeated, dulls the edge
of the appetite for every pleasure. How often do the
best contrived and most excellent schemes fail, merely
for want of sufficient courage to surmount the difficulty
which attend their execution!—How many happy
thoughts have been stifled in their birth, from an
apprehension that they were too bold to be indulged!
An idea has prevailed, that truth can only be freely
and boldly spoken under a republican form of government;
but this idea is certainly without foundation.
It is true, that in aristocracies, as well as under a more
open form of government, where a single demagogue
unfortunately possesses the sovereign power, common
sense is too frequently construed into public offence.
Where this absurdity exists, the mind must be timid,
and the people in consequence deprived of their liberty.
In a monarchy every offence is punished by the sword
of justice; but in a republic, punishments are inflicted
by prejudices, passions, and state necessity. The first
maxim which, under a republican form of government,
parents endeavor to instil into the minds of their children,
is, not to make enemies; and I remember,
when I was very young, replying to this sage counsel,
“My dear mother, do you not know that he who has
no enemies is a poor man?” In a republic the citizens
are under the authority and jealous observation
of a multitude of sovereigns; while in a monarchy the
reigning prince is the only man whom his subjects are
bound to obey. The idea of living under the control
of a number of masters intimidates the mind; whereas
love and confidence in one alone, raises the spirits and
renders the people happy.
[60]
But in all countries, and under every form of government,
the rational man, who renounces the useless
conversation of the world, who lives a retired life, and
who, independently of all that he sees, of all that he
hears, forms his notions in tranquillity, by an intercourse
with the heroes of Greece, of Rome, and of
Great Britain, will acquire a steady and uniform character,
obtain a noble style of thinking, and rise superior
to every vulgar prejudice.
These are the observations I had to make respecting
the influence of occasional solitude upon the mind.
They disclose my real sentiments on this subject:
many of them, perhaps, undigested, and many more certainly
not well expressed. But I shall console myself
for these defects, if this chapter affords only a glimpse
of those advantages, which, I am persuaded, a rational
solitude is capable of affording to the minds and manners
of men; and if that which follows shall excite a
lively sensation of the true, noble, and elevated pleasures
retirement is capable of producing by a tranquil
and feeling contemplation of nature, and by an exquisite
sensibility for every thing that is good and fair.
The highest happiness which is capable of being enjoyed
in this world, consists in peace of mind. The
wise mortal who renounces the tumults of the world,
restrains his desires and inclinations, resigns himself
to the dispensations of his Creator, and looks with an
eye of pity on the frailties of his fellow creatures;
whose greatest pleasure is to listen among the rocks to
the soft murmurs of a cascade; to inhale, as he walks
along the plains, the refreshing breezes of the zephyrs;
and to dwell in the surrounding woods, on the melodious
accents of the aerial choristers; may, by the simple
feelings of his heart, obtain this invaluable blessing.
To taste the charms of retirement, it is not necessary
to divest the heart of its emotions. The world may be
renounced without renouncing the enjoyment which
the tear of sensibility is capable of affording. But to
render the heart susceptible of this felicity, the mind[61]
must be able to admire with equal pleasure nature in
her sublimest beauties, and in the modest flower that
decks the vallies; to enjoy at the same time that harmonious
combination of parts which expands the soul,
and those detached portions of the whole which present
the softest and most agreeable images to the
mind. Nor are these enjoyments exclusively reserved
for those strong and energetic bosoms whose sensations
are as lively as they are delicate, and in which, for that
reason, the good and the bad make the same impression:
the purest happiness, the most enchanting tranquillity,
are also granted to men of colder feelings, and
whose imaginations are less bold and lively; but to
such characters the portraits must not be so highly colored,
nor the tints so sharp; for as the bad strikes them
less, so also they are less susceptible of livelier impressions.
The high enjoyments which the heart feels in solitude
are derived from the imagination. The touching
aspect of delightful nature, the variegated verdure of
the forests, the resounding echoes of an impetuous torrent,
the soft agitation of the foliage, the warblings of
the tenants of the groves, the beautiful scenery of a
rich and extensive country, and all those objects which
compose an agreeable landscape, take such complete
possession of the soul, and so entirely absorb our faculties,
that the sentiments of the mind are by the charms
of the imagination instantly converted into sensations
of the heart, and the softest emotions give birth to the
most virtuous and worthy sentiments. But to enable
the imagination thus to render every object fascinating
and delightful, it must act with freedom, and dwell
amidst surrounding tranquillity. Oh! how easy is it
to renounce noisy pleasures and tumultuous assemblies
for the enjoyment of that philosophic melancholy which
solitude inspires!
Religious awe and rapturous delight are alternately
excited by the deep gloom of forests, by the tremendous
height of broken rocks, and by the multiplicity of majestic
and sublime objects which are combined within
the site of a delightful and extensive prospect. The
most painful sensations immediately yield to the serious,
soft, and solitary reveries to which the surrounding
tranquillity invites the mind; while the vast and
awful silence of nature exhibits the happy contrast between
simplicity and grandeur; and as our feelings become[62]
more exquisite, so our admiration becomes more
intense, and our pleasures more complete.
I had been for many years familiar with all that
nature is capable of producing in her sublimest works,
when I first saw a garden in the vicinity of Hanover,
and another upon a much larger scale at Marienwerder,
about three miles distant, cultivated in the English
style of rural ornament. I was not then apprized of
the extent of that art which sports with the most ungrateful
soil, and, by a new species of creation, converts
barren mountains into fertile fields and smiling landscapes.
This magic art makes an astonishing impression
on the mind, and captivates every heart, not insensible
to the delightful charms of cultivated nature. I
cannot recollect without shedding tears of gratitude
and joy, a single day of this early part of my residence
in Hanover, when, torn from the bosom of my country,
from the embraces of my family, and from every
thing that I held dear in life, my mind, on entering the
little garden of my deceased friend, M. de Hinuber,
near Hanover, immediately revived, and I forgot, for
the moment, both my country and my grief. The
charm was new to me. I had no conception that it
was possible, upon so small a plot of ground, to introduce
at once the enchanting variety and the noble simplicity
of nature. But I was then convinced, that her
aspect alone is sufficient, at first view, to heal the wounded
feelings of the heart, to fill the bosom with the
highest luxury, and to create those sentiments in the
mind, which can, of all others, render life desirable.
This new re-union of art and nature, which was not
invented in China, but in England, is founded upon
a rational and refined taste for the beauties of nature,
confirmed by experience, and by the sentiments which
a chaste fancy reflects on a feeling heart.
But in the gardens I have before mentioned, every
point of view raises the soul to heaven, and affords the
mind sublime delight; every bank presents a new and
varied scene, which fills the heart with joy: nor, while
I feel the sensation which such scenes inspire, will I
suffer my delight to be diminished by discussing whether
the arrangement might have been made in a better
way, or permit the dull rules of cold and senseless
masters to destroy my pleasure. Scenes of serenity,
whether created by tasteful art, or by the cunning
hand of nature, always bestow, as a gift from the imagination,[63]
tranquillity to the heart. While a soft silence
breathes around me, every object is pleasant to my
view; rural scenery fixes my attention, and dissipates
the grief that lies heavy at my heart; the loveliness of
solitude enchants me, and, subduing every vexation,
inspires my soul with benevolence, gratitude, and content.
I return thanks to my Creator for endowing me
with an imagination, which, though it has frequently
caused the trouble of my life, occasionally leads me, in
the hour of my retirement, to some friendly rock, on
which I can climb, and contemplate with greater composure
the tempests I have escaped.
There are, indeed, many Anglicised gardens in Germany,
laid out so whimsically absurd, as to excite no
other emotions than those of laughter or disgust. How
extremely ridiculous is it to see a forest of poplars,
scarcely sufficient to supply a chamber stove with fuel
for a week; mere molehills dignified with the name of
mountains; caves and aviaries, in which tame and
savage animals, birds and amphibious creatures, are attempted
to be represented in their native grandeur;
bridges, of various kinds, thrown across rivers, which
a couple of ducks would drink dry; and wooden fishes
swimming in canals, which the pump every morning
supplies with water! These unnatural beauties are incapable
of affording any pleasure to the imagination.
A celebrated English writer has said, that “solitude,
on the first view of it, inspires the mind with terror,
because every thing that brings with it the idea of privation
is terrific, and therefore sublime like space,
darkness, and silence.”
The species of greatness which results from the idea
of infinity, can only be rendered delightful by being
viewed at a proper distance. The Alps, in Swisserland,
and particularly near the canton of Berne, appear inconceivably
majestic; but on a near approach, they excite
ideas certainly sublime, yet mingled with a degree
of terror. The eye, on beholding those immense and
enormous masses piled one upon the other, forming
one vast and uninterrupted chain of mountains, and
rearing their lofty summits to the skies, conveys to the
heart the most rapturous delight, while the succession
of soft and lively shades which they throw around the
scene, tempers the impression, and renders the view as
agreeable as it is sublime. On the contrary, no feeling
heart can on a close view, behold this prodigious wall[64]
of rocks without experiencing involuntary trembling.
The mind contemplates with affright their eternal
snows, their steep ascents, their dark caverns, the torrents
which precipitate themselves with deafening clamor
from their summits, the black forests of firs that
overhang their sides, and the enormous fragments of
rocks which time and tempests have torn away. How
my heart thrilled when I first climbed through a steep
and narrow track upon these sublime deserts, discovering
every step I made, new mountains rising over my
head, while upon the least stumble, death menaced me
in a thousand shapes below! But the imagination immediately
kindles when you perceive yourself in the
midst of this grand scene of nature, and reflect from
these heights on the weakness of human power, and
the imbecility of the greatest monarchs!
The history of Swisserland evinces, that the natives
of these mountains are not a degenerate race of men,
and that their sentiments are as generous as their feelings
are warm. Bold and spirited by nature, the liberty
they enjoy gives wings to their souls, and they trample
tyrants and tyranny under their feet. Some of the
inhabitants of Swisserland, indeed, are not perfectly
free; though they all possess notions of liberty, love
their country, and return thanks to the Almighty for
that happy tranquillity which permits each individual
to live quietly under his vine, and enjoy the shade of
his fig-tree; but the most pure and genuine liberty is
always to be found among the inhabitants of these
stupendous mountains.
The Alps in Swisserland are inhabited by a race of
men sometimes unsocial, but always good and generous.
The hardy and robust characters given to them
by the severity of their climate, is softened by pastoral
life. It is said by an English writer, that he who has
never heard a storm in the Alps, can form no idea of
the continuity of the lightning, the rolling and the burst
of the thunder which roars round the horizon of these
immense mountains; and the people never enjoying
better habitations than their own cabins, nor seeing any
other country than their own rocks, believe the universe
to be an unfinished work, and a scene of unceasing
tempest. But the skies do not always lower; the
thunder does not incessantly roll, nor the lightnings
continually flash; immediately after the most dreadful
tempests, the hemisphere clears itself by slow degrees,[65]
and becomes serene. The dispositions of the Swiss
follow the nature of their climate; kindness succeeds
to violence, and generosity to the most brutal fury:
this may be easily proved, not only from the records of
history, but from recent facts.
General Redin, an inhabitant of the Alps, and a native
of the canton of Schwitz, enlisted very early in
life into the Swiss Guards, and attained the rank of
lieutenant-general in that corps. His long residence
at Paris and Versailles, however, had not been able to
change his character; he still continued a true Swiss.
The new regulation made by the king of France, in the
year 1764, relating to this corps, gave great discontent
to the canton of Schwitz. The citizens, considering it
as an innovation extremely prejudicial to their ancient
privileges, threw all the odium of the measures on the
lieutenant-general, whose wife, at this period, resided
on his estate in the canton, where she endeavored to
raise a number of young recruits; but the sound of the
French drum had become so disgusting to the ears of
the citizens, that they beheld with indignation the white
cockade placed in the hats of the deluded peasants.
The magistrate apprehensive that this ferment might
ultimately cause an insurrection among the people, felt
it his duty to forbid madame de Redin to continue her
levies. The lady requested he would certify his prohibition
in writing; but the magistrate not being disposed
to carry matters to this extremity against the court
of France, she continued to beat up for the requested
number of recruits. The inhabitants of the canton, irritated
by this bold defiance of the prohibition, summoned
a General Diet, and madame de Redin appeared
before the Assembly of Four Thousand. “The drum,”
said she, “shall never cease to sound, until you give
me such a certificate as may justify my husband to the
French court for not completing the number of his
men.” The Assembly accordingly granted her the required
certificate, and enjoining her to procure the interest
and interposition of her husband with the court
in favor of her injured country, waited in anxious expectation
that his negotiation would produce a favorable
issue. Unhappily the court of Versailles rejected
all solicitation on the subject, and by this means drove
the irritated and impatient inhabitants beyond the
bounds of restraint. The leading men of the canton
pretended that the new regulation endangered not only[66]
their civil liberties, but, what was dearer to them, their
religion. The general discontent was at length fomented
into popular fury. A General Diet was again
assembled, and it was publicly resolved not to furnish
the King of France in future with any troops. The
treaty of alliance concluded in the year 1713 was torn
from the public register, and general de Redin ordered
instantly to return from France with the soldiers under
his command, upon pain, if he refused, of being irrevocably
banished from the republic. The obedient general
obtained permission from the king to depart with
his regiment from France, and entering Schwitz, the
metropolis of the canton, at the head of his troops, with
drums beating and colors flying, marched immediately
to the church, where he deposited his standards
upon the great altar, and falling on his knees, offered
up his thanks to God. Rising from the ground, and
turning to his affectionate soldiers, who were dissolved
in tears, he discharged their arrears of pay, gave them
their uniforms and accoutrements, and bid them forever
farewell. The fury of the populace, on perceiving
within their power the man whom the whole country
considered as the perfidious abettor, and traitorous
adviser, of the new regulation, by which the court of
Versailles had given such a mortal blow to the liberties
of the country, greatly increased; and he was ordered
to disclose before the General Assembly the origin of
that measure, and the means by which it had been carried
on, in order that they might learn their relative
situation with France, and ascertain the degree of punishment
that was due to the offender. Redin, conscious
that, under the existing circumstances, eloquence would
make no impression on minds so prejudiced against
him, contented himself with coolly declaring, in a few
words, that the cause of framing a new regulation was
publicly known, and that he was as innocent upon the
subject as he was ignorant of the cause of his dismission.
“The traitor then will not confess!” exclaimed
one of the most furious members: “Hang him on the
next tree—cut him to pieces.” These menaces were
instantly repeated throughout the Assembly; and
while the injured soldier continued perfectly tranquil
and undismayed, a party of the people, more daring
than the rest, jumped upon the tribune, where he stood
surrounded by the judges. A young man, his godson,
was holding a parapluie over his head, to shelter him[67]
from the rain, which at this moment poured down in
incessant torrents, when one of the enraged multitude
immediately broke the parapluie in pieces with his
stick, exclaiming, “Let the traitor be uncovered!”
This exclamation conveyed a correspondent indignation
into the bosom of the youth, who instantly replied,
“My god-father a betrayer of his country! Oh! I was
ignorant, I assure you, of the crime alleged against
him; but since it is so, let him perish! Where is the
rope? I will be first to put it round the traitor’s neck!”
The magistrates instantly formed a circle round the
general, and with uplifted hands exhorted him to avert
the impending danger, by confessing that he had not
opposed the measures of France with sufficient zeal,
and to offer to the offended people his whole fortune as
an atonement for his neglect; representing to him that
these were the only means of redeeming his liberty,
and perhaps his life. The undaunted soldier, with perfect
tranquillity and composure, walked through the
surrounding circle to the side of the tribune, and while
the whole Assembly anxiously expected to hear an
ample confession of his guilt, made a sign of silence
with his hand: “Fellow-citizens,” said he, “you are
not ignorant that I have been two-and-forty years in
the French establishment. You know, and many
among you, who were with me in the service, can testify
its truth, how often I have faced the enemy, and
the manner in which I conducted myself in battle. I
considered every engagement as the last day of my
life. But here I protest to you, in the presence of that
Almighty Being who knows all our hearts, who listens
to all our words, and who will hereafter judge all
our actions, that I never appeared before an enemy with
a mind more pure, a conscience more tranquil, a heart
more innocent, than at present I possess; and if it is
your pleasure to condemn me because I refuse to confess
a treachery of which I have not been guilty, I
am now ready to resign my life into your hands.”
The dignified demeanor with which the general made
this declaration, and the air of truth which accompanied
his words, calmed the fury of the Assembly, and saved
his life. Both he and his wife, however, immediately
quitted the canton; she entering into a convent at Uri,
and he retiring to a cavern among the rocks, where
he lived two years in solitude. Time, at length, subdued[68]
the anger of the people, and softened the general’s
sense of their injustice. He returned to the bosom of
his country, rewarded its ingratitude by the most signal
services, and made every individual recollect and
acknowledge the integrity of their magnanimous countryman.
To recompense him for the injuries and injustice
he had suffered, they elected him bailli, or chief
officer of the canton; and afforded him an almost singular
instance of their constancy and affection, by successively
conferring on him three times this high and
important dignity. This is the characteristic disposition
of the Swiss who inhabit the Alps; alternately
violent and mild: and experiencing, as the extremes
of a delighted or vexed imagination happen to prevail,
the same vicissitudes as their climate. The rude
scenes of greatness which these stupendous mountains
and vast deserts afford, render the Swiss violent
in sentiment, and rough in manners; while the tranquillity
of their fields, and the smiling beauties of their
vallies, soften their minds, and render their hearts kind
and benevolent.
English artists confess that the aspect of nature in
Swisserland is too sublime and majestic for the pencil
of art faithfully to reach; but how exquisite must be
the enjoyments they feel upon those romantic hills, in
those delightful vallies, upon the charming borders of
those still and transparent lakes, where nature unfolds
her various charms, and appears in the highest pomp
and splendor; where the majestic oaks, the deep embowering
elms, and dark green firs, which cover and
adorn these immense forests, are pleasingly interspersed
with myrtles, almond trees, jasmines, pomegranates,
and vines, which offer their humbler beauties to
the view, and variegate the scene! Nature is in no
country of the globe more rich and various than in
Swisserland. It was the scenery around Zurich, and
the beauties of its adjoining lake, that first inspired the
Idylls of the immortal Gessner.
These sublime beauties, while they elevate and inflame
the heart, give greater action and life to the imagination
than softer scenes; in like manner as a fine
night affords a more august and solemn spectacle than
the mildest day.
In coming from Frescati, by the borders of the small
lake of Nemi, which lies in a deep valley, so closely
sheltered by mountains and forest, that the winds are[69]
scarcely permitted to disturb its surface, it is impossible
not to exclaim with an English poet, that here—
But how the soul expands, and every thought becomes
serene and free, when, from the garden of the
Capuchins, near Albano, the eye suddenly discovers
the little melancholy lake, with Frescati and all its rural
vallies on one side: on the other, the handsome
city of Albano, the village and castle of Riccia and
Gensano, with their hills beautifully adorned with
clusters of the richest vines: below, the extensive
plains of Campania, in the middle of which Rome,
formerly the mistress of the world, raises its majestic
head; and lastly, beyond all these objects, the hills of
Tivoli, the Appenines, and the Mediterranean sea!
How often, on the approach of spring, has the magnificent
valley, where the ruins of the residence of
Rodolpho de Hapsburg rise upon the side of a hill,
crowned with woods of variegated verdure, afforded
me the purest and most ineffable delight! There the
rapid Aar descends in torrents from the lofty mountains;
sometimes forming a vast basin in the vale; at
others, precipitating through the narrow passages
across the rocks, winding its course majestically
through the middle of the vast and fertile plains: on
the other side the Ruffs, and, lower down, the Limmat,
bring their tributary streams, and peaceably unite them
with the waters of the Aar. In the middle of this rich
and verdant scene, I beheld the Royal Solitude, where
the remains of the emperor Albert I. repose in silence,
with those of many princes of the house of Austria,
counts, knights, and gentlemen, killed in battle by the
gallant Swiss. At a distance I discovered the valley
where lie the ruins of the celebrated city of Vindonissa,
upon which I have frequently sat, and reflected
upon the vanity of human greatness. Beyond this
magnificent country, ancient castles raise their lofty
heads upon the hills! and the far distant horizon is
terminated by the sublime summits of the Alps. In
the midst of all this grand scenery, my eyes were instinctively[70]
cast down into the deep valley immediately
below me, and continually fixed upon the little village
where I first drew my breath. It is thus that the sublime
or beautiful operates differently on the heart! the
one exciting fear and terror, the other creating only
soft and agreeable sensations; but both tending to enlarge
the sphere of the imagination, and enabling us
more completely to seek enjoyment within ourselves.
Pleasures of this description may, indeed be enjoyed,
without visiting the romantic solitudes of either Swisserland
or Italy. There is no person who may not,
while he is quietly traversing the hills and dales, learn
to feel how much the aspect of nature may, by the assistance
of the imagination, affect the heart. A fine
view, the freshness of the air, an unclouded sky, and
the joys of the chase, give sensations of health, and
make every step seem too short. The privation of all
ideas of dependance, accompanied by domestic comfort,
useful employments, and innocent recreations, produce
a strength of thought, and fertility of imagination,
which present to the mind the most agreeable images,
and touch the heart with the most delightful sensations.
It is certainly true, that a person possessed of a
fine imagination may be much happier in prison, than
he could possibly be without imagination amidst the
most magnificent scenery. But even to a mind deprived
of this happy faculty, the lowest enjoyments of
rural life, even the common scenery of harvest time, is
capable of performing miracles on his heart. Alas!
who has not experienced, in the hours of langor and
disgust, the powerful effects which a contemplation of
the pleasures that surround the poorest peasant’s cot is
capable of affording! How fondly the heart participates
in all his homely joys! With what freedom,
cordiality, and kindness, we take him by the hand, and
listen to his innocent and artless tales!—How suddenly
do we feel an interest in all his little concerns; an
interest which, while it unveils, refines and meliorates
the latent inclinations of our hearts!
The tranquillity of retired life, and the view of rural
scenes, frequently produce a quietude of disposition,
which, while it renders the noisy pleasures of the world
insipid, enables the heart to seek the charms of solitude
with increased delight.
The happy indolence peculiar to Italians, who, under
the pleasures of a clear, unclouded sky, are always poor[71]
but never miserable, greatly augments the feelings of
the heart: the mildness of the climate, the fertility of
their soil, their peaceful religion, and their contented
nature, compensate for every thing. Dr. Moore, an
English traveller, whose works afford me great delight,
says, that “the Italians are the greatest loungers in the
world; and while walking in the fields, or stretched in
the shade, seem to enjoy the serenity and genial
warmth of their climate with a degree of luxurious indulgence
peculiar to themselves. Without ever running
into the daring excesses of the English, or displaying
the frisky vivacity of the French, or the stubborn
phlegm of the Germans, the Italian populace discover
a species of sedate sensibility to every source of enjoyment,
from which, perhaps, they derive a greater degree
of happiness than any of the others.”
Relieved from every afflicting and tormenting object,
it is, perhaps, impossible for the mind not to resign itself
to agreeable chimeras and romantic sentiments:
but this situation notwithstanding these disadvantages,
has its fair side. Romantic speculations may lead the
mind into certain extravagancies and errors from
whence base and contemptible passions may be engendered;
may habituate it to a light and frivolous style of
thinking; and, by preventing it from directing its faculties
to rational ends, may obscure the prospect of
true happiness; for the soul cannot easily quit the illusion
on which it dwells with such fond delight; the ordinary
duties of life, with its more noble and substantial
pleasures, are perhaps thereby obstructed: but it is
very certain that romantic sentiments do not always
render the mind that possesses them unhappy. Who,
alas! is so completely happy in reality as he frequently
has been in imagination!
Rousseau, who, in the early part of his life, was extremely
fond of romances, feeling his mind hurried
away by the love of those imaginary objects with which
that species of composition abounds, and perceiving
the facility with which they may be enjoyed, withdrew
his attention from every thing about him, and by this
circumstance laid the foundation of that taste for solitude
which he preserved to an advanced period of his
life; a taste in appearance dictated by depression and
disgust, and attributed by him to the irresistible impulse
of an affectionate, fond, and tender heart, which,
not being able to find in the regions of philosophy and[72]
truth sentiments sufficiently warm and animated, was
constrained to seek its enjoyments in the sphere of
fiction.
But the imagination, may, in retirement, indulge its
wanderings to a certain degree without the risk of injuring
either the sentiments of the mind or the sensations
of the heart. Oh! if the friends of my youth in
Swisserland knew how frequently, during the silence
of the night, I pass with them those hours which are
allotted to sleep; if they were apprized that neither
time nor absence can efface the remembrance of their
former kindness from my mind, and that this pleasing
recollection tends to dissipate my grief, and to cast the
veil of oblivion over my woes; they would, perhaps,
also rejoice to find that I still live among them in imagination,
though I may be dead to them in reality.
The solitary man, whose heart is warmed with refined
and noble sentiments, cannot be unhappy.—While
the stupid and vulgar bewail his fate, and conceive
him to be the victim of corroding care and loathed melancholy,
he frequently tastes the most delightful pleasure.
The French entertained a notion that Rousseau
was a man of a gloomy and dejected disposition; but he
was certainly not so for many years of his life, particularly
when he wrote to M. de Malesherbes, the chancellor’s
son, in the following terms: “I cannot express
to you, Sir, how sensibly I am affected by perceiving
that you think me the most unhappy of mankind; for
as the public will, no doubt, entertain the same sentiment
of me as you do, it is to me a source of real affliction!—Oh!
if my sentiments were really known, every
individual would endeavor to follow my example.
Peace would then reign throughout the world; men
would no longer seek to destroy each other; and wickedness,
by removing the great incentives to it, no longer
exist. But it may be asked, how I could find employment
in solitude?—I answer, in my own mind; in
the whole universe; in every thing that dies, in every
thing that can exist; in all that the eye finds beautiful
in the real, or the imagination in the intellectual world.
I assembled about me every thing that is flattering to
the heart, and regulated my pleasures by the moderation
of my desires. No! The most voluptuous have never experienced
such refined delights; and I have always enjoyed
my chimeras much more than if they had been
realized.”
[73]
This is certainly the language of enthusiasm; but,
ye stupid vulgar! who would not prefer the warm fancy
of this amiable philosopher to your cold and creeping
understandings?—Who would not willingly renounce
your vague conversation, your deceitful felicities,
your boasted urbanity, your noisy assemblies, puerile
pastimes, and inveterate prejudices, for a quiet and
contented life in the bosom of a happy family?—Who
would not rather seek in the silence of the woods, or
upon the daisied borders of a peaceful lake, those pure
and simple pleasures of nature, so delicious in recollection,
and productive of joys so pure, so affecting, so different
from your own?
Eclogues, which are representatives of rural happiness
in its highest perfection, are also fictions; but
they are fictions of the most pleasing and agreeable
kind. True felicity must be sought in retirement,
where the soul, disengaged from the torments of the
world, no longer feels those artificial desires which
render it unhappy both in prospect and fruition. Content
with little, satisfied with all, surrounded by love
and innocence, we perceive in retirement, the golden
age, as described by the poets, revived; while in the
world every one regrets its loss. The regret however,
is unjust; for those enjoyments were not peculiar to
that happy period; and each individual may, whenever
he pleases, form his own Arcadia. The beauties of a
crystal spring, a silent grove, a daisied meadow, chasten
the feelings of the heart, and afford at all times, to
those who have a taste for nature, a permanent and
pure delight.
“The origin of poetry,” says Pope, “is ascribed to
that age which succeeded the creation of the world:
as the keeping of flocks seems to have been the first
employment of mankind, the most ancient sort of poetry
was pastoral. It is natural to imagine, that the leisure
of these ancient shepherds admitting and inviting
some diversion, none was so proper to that solitary
and sedentary life as singing, and that in their songs
they took occasion to celebrate their own felicity.
From hence a poem was invented, and afterward improved
to a perfect image of that happy time, which,
by giving us an esteem for the virtues of a former age,
might recommend them to the present.”
These agreeable though fictitious descriptions of the
age of innocence and virtue, communicate joy and[74]
gladness to our hearts; and we bless the poet, who, in
the ecstacy of his felicity contributes to render others
as happy as himself. Sicily and Zurich have produced
two of these benefactors to mankind. The aspect of
nature never appears more charming, the bosom never
heaves with such sweet delight, the heart never beats
more pleasantly, the soul never feels more perfect happiness
than is produced by reading the Idylls of Theocritus
and Gessner.
By these easy simple modes the beauties of nature are
made, by the assistance of the imagination, to operate
forcibly on the heart. The mind, indeed, drawn away
by these agreeable images, often resigns itself too easily
to the illusions of romance; but the ideas they create
generally amend the heart without injuring the understanding,
and spread some of the sweetest flowers along
the most thorny paths of human life.
Leisure, the highest happiness upon earth, is seldom
enjoyed with perfect satisfaction, except in solitude.
Indolence and indifference do not always afford leisure:
for true leisure is frequently found in that interval of
relaxation which divides a painful duty from the agreeable
occupations of literature and philosophy. P. Scipio
was of this opinion when he said, that he was never less
idle when he had most leisure, and that he was never
less alone than when he was alone. Leisure is not to
be considered a state of intellectual torpidity, but a new
incentive to further activity; it is sought by strong and
energetic minds, not as an end, but as a means of restoring
lost activity; for whoever seeks happiness in a
situation merely quiescent, seeks for a phantom that
will elude his grasp. Leisure will never be found in
mere rest; but will follow those who seize the first impulse
to activity; in which, however, such employments
as best suit the extent and nature of different capacities,
must be preferred to those which promise compensation
without labor, and enjoyment without pain.
Thus rural retirement dries up those streams of discontent
which flow so plentifully through public life;
changes most frequently the bitterest feeling into the
sweetest pleasures; and inspires an ecstacy and content
unknown to the votaries of the world. The tranquillity
of nature buries in oblivion the criminal inclinations
of the heart; renders it blithe, tender, open, and
confident; and, by wisely managing the passions, and
preventing an overheated imagination from fabricating[75]
fancied woes, strengthens in it every virtuous sensation.
In towns, the solitude which is necessary to produce
this advantage cannot be conveniently practised.
It seems indeed, no very difficult task for a man to retire
into his chamber, and by silent contemplation, to
raise his mind above the mean consideration of sensual
objects; but few men have sufficient resolution to
perform it; for, within doors, matters of business every
moment occur, and interrupt the chain of reflection;
and without, whether alone or in company, a variety of
accidents may occasionally happen, which will confound
our vain wisdom, aggravate the painful feelings
of the heart, and weaken the finer powers of the
mind.
Rousseau was always miserable during his residence
at Paris. This extraordinary genius, it is true, wrote
his immortal works in that agitated metropolis; but the
moment he quitted his study, and wandered through
the streets, his mind was bewildered by a variety of
heterogeneous sentiments, his recollection vanished;
and this brilliant writer and profound philosopher, who
was so intimately acquainted with the most intricate
labyrinths of the human heart, was reduced to the condition
of a child. But in the country we issue from the
house in perfect safety, and feel increasing cheerfulness
and satisfaction. Tired with meditation, the
rural recluse has only to open the doors of his study,
and enjoy his walk, while tranquillity attends his steps,
and new pleasures present themselves to his view on
every turn. Beloved by all around him, he extends
his hand with cordial affection to every man he meets.
Nothing occurs to vex and irritate his mind. He runs
no risk of being tortured by the supercilious behavior
of some haughty female proud of her descent, or of
enduring the arrogant egotism of an upstart peer: is
in no danger of being crushed beneath the rolling carriages
of Indian nabobs: nor dares frontless vice, on
the authority of mouldy parchments, attack his property,
or presumptuous ignorance offer the least indignity
to his modest virtue.
A man, indeed, by avoiding the tumultuous intercourse
of society, and deriving his comforts from
his own breast, may, even in Paris, or any other
metropolis, avoid these unpleasant apprehensions, if
his nerves be firm, and his constitution strong:[76]
for to a frame disjointed by nervous affections every
object is irritating, and every passion tremblingly alive.
The passions are the gales by which man must steer
his course through the troubled ocean of life; they fill
the sails which give motion to the soul; and when
they become turbulent and impetuous, the vessel is always
in danger, and generally runs aground. The
petty cares and trifling vexations of life, however, give
but shortlived disturbance to a heart free from remorse.
Philosophy teaches us to forget past uneasiness, to forbear
idle speculations of approaching felicity, and to
rest contented with present comforts, without refining
away our existing happiness by wishing that which is
really good to be still better. Every thing is much better
than we imagine. A mind too anxious in the expectation
of happiness is seldom satisfied, and generally
mixes with its highest fruition a certain portion of
discontent. The stream of content must flow from a
deliberate disposition in our minds to learn what is
good, and a determined resolution to seek for and
enjoy it, however small the portion may be.
The content, however, which men in general so confidently
expect to find in rural retirement, is not to be
acquired by viewing objects either with indiscriminate
admiration or supine indifference. He who without labor,
and without a system of conduct previously digested
and arranged, hopes for happiness in solitude,
will yawn with equal fatigue at his cottage in the country
and his mansion in town; while he who keeps
himself continually employed, may in the deepest solitude,
by the mere dint of labor, attain true tranquillity
and happiness.
Petrarch, in his solitude at Vaucluse, would have experienced
this tranquillity, if his bosom had not been
disturbed by love; for he perfectly understood the art
of managing his time. “I rise,” said he, “before the
sun, and on the approach of day wander contemplatively
along the fields, or retire to study. I read, I write,
I think, I vanquish indolence, banish sleep, avoid luxury,
and forget sensuality. From morning till night I
climb the barren mountains, traverse the humid vallies,
seek the deepest caves, or walk, accompanied only by
my thoughts, along the banks of my river. I have
no society to distract my mind; and men daily become
less annoying to me; for I place them either far before
or far behind me. I recollect what is past, and contemplate[77]
on what is to come. I have found an excellent
expedient to detach my mind from the world. I
cultivate a fondness for my place of residence, and I am
persuaded that I could be happy any where except at
Avignon. In my retreat at Vaucluse, where I am at
present, I occasionally find Athens, Rome, or Florence,
as the one or the other of those places happens
to please the prevailing disposition of my mind. Here
I enjoy all my friends, as well as those who have long
since entered the vale of death, and of whom I have no
knowledge, but what their works afford.”
What character, however luxurious, ever felt the
same content at any splendid entertainment, as Rousseau
experienced in his humble meal! “I return
home,” says he, “with tired feet, but with a contented
mind, and experience the calmest repose in resigning
myself to the impression of objects, without exercising
thought, indulging imagination, or doing any thing to
interrupt the peaceful felicity of my station. The table
is ready spread on my lawn, and furnished with refreshments.
Surrounded by my small and happy family,
I eat my supper with healthy appetite, and without
any appearance of servitude or dependance to annoy
the love and kindness by which we are united. My
faithful dog is not a subservient slave, but a firm friend,
from whom, as we always feel the same inclination, I
never exact obedience. The gaiety of the mind throughout
the evening testifies that I live alone throughout
the day; for, being seldom pleased with others, and
never, when visiters have disturbed me, with myself, I
sit, during the whole evening of the day when company
has interrupted me, either grumbling or in silence:
so at least my good housekeeper has remarked; and
since she mentioned it, I have from my own observation
found it universally true. Having thus made
my humble and cheerful meal, I take a few turns round
my little garden, or play some favorite air upon my
spinette, and experience upon my pillow a soft content,
more sweet, if possible, than even undisturbed repose.”
At the village of Richterswyl, situated a few
leagues from Zurich, and surrounded by every object
the most smiling, beautiful, and romantic that Swisserland
presents, dwells a celebrated physician. His
soul, like the scenery of nature which surrounds him,
is tranquil and sublime. His habitation is the temple[78]
of health, of friendship, and of every peaceful virtue.
The village rises on the borders of the lake, at a place
where two projecting points form a fine bay of nearly
half a league. On the opposite shores, the lake, which
is not quite a league in extent, is enclosed from the
north to the east by pleasant hills covered with vineyards,
intermixed with fertile meadows, orchards,
fields, groves, and thickets, with little hamlets, churches,
villas, and cottages scattered up and down the
scene. A wide and magnificent amphitheatre, which
no artist has yet attempted to paint, except in detached
scenes, opens itself from the east to the south. The
view towards the higher part of the lake, which on
this side is four leagues long, presents to the eye jutting
points of land, detached aytes, the little town of
Rapperschwyl, built on the side of a hill, and a bridge
which reaches from one side of the lake to the other.
Beyond the town the inexhaustible valley extends itself
in a half circle to the sight; and upon the foreground
rises a peak of land which swells as it extends
into beautiful hills. Behind them, at the distance of
about half a league, is a range of mountains covered
with trees and verdure, and interspersed with villages
and detached houses; beyond which, at a still greater
distance, are discovered the fertile and majestic Alps,
twisted one among the other, and exhibiting, alternately,
shades of the lightest and darkest azure: and in the
back ground high rocks, covered with eternal snows,
lift their towering heads, and touch the skies. On the
south side of this rich, enchanting, and incomparable
scene, the amphitheatre is extended by another range
of mountains reaching toward the west; and at the
feet of these mountains, on the borders of the lake, lies
the village of Richterswyl, surrounded by rich fallows
and fertile pastures, and overhung by forests of firs.
The streets of the village, which in itself is extremely
clean, are nearly paved; and the houses, which are
mostly built of stone, are painted on the outside.
Pleasant walks are formed along the banks of the
lake, and lead quite round the town, through groves of
fruit-trees and shady forests, up to the very summit of
the hills. The traveller, struck with the sublime and
beautiful scenery that every where surrounds him,
stops to contemplate with eager curiosity the increasing
beauties which ravish his sight; and while his
bosom swells with excess of pleasure, his suspended[79]
breath bespeaks his fear of interrupting the fulness of
his delight. Every acre of this charming country is
in the highest state of cultivation and improvement.
Every hand is at work; and men, women, and children,
of every age and of every description, are all usefully
employed.
The two houses of the physician are each of them
surrounded by a garden; and although situated in the
centre of the village, are as rurally sequestered as if
they had been built in the bosom of the country.
Through the gardens, and close beneath the chamber
of my valued friend, runs a pure and limpid stream,
on the opposite of which, at an agreeable distance, is
the high road; where, almost daily, numbers of pilgrims
successively pass in their way to the hermitage.
From the windows of these houses, and from every
part of the gardens, you behold, toward the south, at
the distance of about a league, the majestic Ezelberg
rear its lofty head, which is concealed in forests of deep
green firs; while on its declivity hangs a neat little village,
with a handsome church, upon the steeple of which
the sun suspends his departing rays, and shows its career
is nearly finished. In the front is the lake of Zurich,
whose peaceful water is secured from the violence of
tempests, and whose transparent surface reflects the
beauties of its delightful banks.
During the silence of the night, if you repair to the
chamber windows of this enchanting mansion, or
walk through its gardens, to taste the exhaling fragrance
of the shrubs and flowers, while the moon, rising
in unclouded majesty over the summit of the mountains,
reflects on the smooth surface of the water a
broad beam of light, you hear, during this awful sleep
of nature, the sound of the village clocks, echoing from
the opposite shores; and, on the Richterswyl side, the
shrill proclamation of the watchmen, blended occasionally
with the barkings of the faithful house-dog.
At a distance you hear the boats gliding gently along
the stream, dividing the water with their oars, and perceive
them, as they cross the moon’s translucent beam,
playing among the sparkling waves.
Riches and luxury are no where to be seen in the
happy habitation of this wise philanthropist. His chairs
are made of straw; his tables are worked from the
wood of the country; and the plates and dishes on
which he entertains his friends are all of earthen-ware.[80]
Neatness and convenience reign throughout. Drawings,
paintings, and engravings, of which he has a
large well-chosen collection, are his sole expense. The
earliest beams of Aurora light the humble apartment
where this philosophic sage sleeps in undisturbed repose,
and awake him to new enjoyments every day.
As he rises from his bed, the cooing of the turtle-doves,
and the morning songs of various kinds of birds, who
make their nightly nests in an adjoining aviary, salute
his ears, and welcome his approach. The first hour of
the morning, and the last at night, are sacred to himself;
but he devotes all the intermediate hours of every
day to a sick and afflicted multitude, who daily attend
him for advice and assistance. The benevolent exercise
of his professional skill, indeed, engrosses almost
every moment of his life, but it constitutes his highest
happiness and joy. The inhabitants of the mountains
of Swisserland, and of the vallies of the Alps, flock to
his house, and endeavor in vain to find language capable
of expressing to him the grateful feelings of their
hearts for the favors they receive from him. Convinced
of his affection, satisfied of his medical skill, and
believing that the good doctor is equally well acquainted
with every subject, they listen with the deepest attention
to his words, answer all his inquiries without the
least hesitation or reserve, treasure up his advice and
counsel with more solicitude than if they were grains
of gold, and depart from his presence with more regret,
comfort, hope, resignation, and virtuous feelings, than
if they had quitted their confessor at the hermitage.
It may perhaps be conceived, that after a day spent in
this manner, the happiness which this friend to mankind
must feel cannot in any degree be increased.
But, when a simple, innocent, and ingenuous country
girl, whose mind has been almost distracted by the
fear of losing her beloved husband, enters his study,
and seizing him with transport by the hand, joyfully
exclaims, “Oh! Sir, my dear husband, ill as he was
only two days since, is now quite recovered! Oh! my
dear Sir, how, how shall I thank you!” this philanthropic
character feels that transcending felicity, which
ought to fill the bosom of a monarch in rendering happiness
to his people.
Of this description is the country of Swisserland,
where doctor Hotze, the ablest physician of the present
age, resides; a physician and philosopher, whose[81]
variety of knowledge, profound judgment, and great
experience, have raised him to an equal eminence with
Trissot and Hirtzel, the dearest friends of my heart.
It is in this manner that he passes the hours of his life,
with uniformity and happiness. Surrounded, except
during the two hours I have already mentioned, by a
crowd of unfortunate fellow-creatures, who look up to
him for relief, his mind, active and full of vigor, never
knows repose; but his labors are richly rewarded by the
high and refined felicity which fills his heart. Palaces,
alas! seldom contain such characters. Individuals,
however, of every description may cultivate and enjoy
an equal degree of felicity, although they do not reside
among scenes so delightful as those which surround my
beloved Hotze at Richterswyl, as those of the convent
of Capuchins near Albano, or as those which surround
the rural retreat of my sovereign George III. at Windsor.
Content can only be found in the tranquillity of the
heart; and in solitude the bosom gladly opens to receive
the wished-for inmate, and to welcome its attendant
virtues. While nature smiles around us, decorated in
all its beauties, the heart expands to the cheering scene;
every object appears in the most favorable and pleasing
point of view; our souls overflow with kind affections;
the antipathies created by the ingratitude of the world
instantly vanish; we even forget the vain, the wicked,
the profligate characters with whom we were mixed;
and being perfectly at peace with ourselves, we feel ourselves
at peace with all mankind. But in society the
rancorous contention which jarring interests daily
create, the heavy yoke which subordination is continually
imposing, “the oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s
contumely,” and the shocks which reason and good
sense hourly receive from fools in power, and insolent
superiors, spread torrents of misery over human life,
embitter the happiness of their more worthy though
inferior fellow-creatures, poison all pleasure, break
through social order, spread thorns in the paths of
virtue, and render the world a vale of tears.
Blockheads in power are of all other characters,
the most baneful and injurious; they confound all
just distinctions, mistake one quality for another; degrade
every person and thing to their own level; and
in short, change white into black, and black into
white.[82]
To escape from the persecution of such characters,
men even of fine talents and ingenious dispositions
must act like the fox of Saadi, of the Persian poet. A
person one day observing a fox running with uncommon
speed to earth, called out to him, “Reynard,
where are you running in so great a hurry! Have
you been doing any mischief, for which you are apprehensive
of punishment?”—“No, Sir,” replied the fox,
“my conscience is perfectly clear, and does not reproach
me with any thing; but I have just overheard
the hunters wish that they had a camel to hunt this
morning.”—“Well, but how does that concern you?
you are not a camel.”—“Oh, my good Sir,” replied
the fox, “are you not aware that sagacious heads have
always enemies at their heels? and if any one should
point me out to those sportsmen, and cry, there runs a
camel, they would immediately seize me without examining
whether I was really the kind of animal the
informer had described me to be.” Reynard was certainly
right in his conclusion; for men are in general
wicked in proportion as they are ignorant or envious,
and the only means of eluding their mischievous intentions
is to keep out of their way.
The simplicity, regularity, and serenity which accompany
retirement, moderate the warmest tempers,
guard the heart against the intrusion of inordinate desires,
and at length render it invulnerable to the shafts
of malice and detraction; while the self-examination
it necessarily imposes, teaches us, by exhibiting to our
view our own defects, to do justice to the superior
merit of others. The delightful solitudes of Lausanne
exhibit every where captivating examples of domestic
felicity. The industrious citizen, after having faithfully
performed his daily task, is sure of experiencing, on
his return at evening to his wife and children, real
comfort and unalloyed content. The voice of slander,
the neglect of ingratitude, the contempt of superiors,
and all the mortifications attendant upon worldly intercourse,
are forgot the moment he beholds his happy
family ready with open arms to receive him, and to
bestow upon their friend and benefactor the fond caresses
he so justly merits. With what exquisite delight
his beating bosom feels their rapturous affection.
If his mind has been vexed by the crosses of life, the
ostentation of courts, the insolence of riches, the arrogance
of power, or his temper irritated and soured by[83]
the base practices of fraud, falsehood, or hypocrisy, he
no sooner mixes with those whom he cherishes and
supports, than a genial warmth reanimates his dejected
heart, the tenderest sentiments inspire his soul, and
the truth, the freedom, the probity, and the innocence
by which he is surrounded, tranquillize his mind, and
reconcile him to his humble lot. Oh! observe him, all
ye who are placed in more elevated stations, whether
ye enjoy the confidence of statesmen, are the beloved
companions of the great, the admired favorites of the
fair, the envied leaders of the public taste, of high birth,
or of ample fortunes; for if your rich and splendid
homes be the seats of jealousy and discord, and the
bosoms of your families strangers to that content which
the wise and virtuous feel within walls of clay, and
under roofs of humble thatch, you are, in comparison,
poor indeed.
Characters enervated by prosperity feel the smallest
inconvenience as a serious calamity, and, unable to
bear the touch of rude and violent hands, require to be
treated, like young and tender flowers, with delicacy,
and attention; while those who have been educated in
the rough school of adversity, walk over the thorns of
life with a firm and intrepid step, and kick them from
the path with indifference and contempt. Superior to
the false opinions and prejudices of the world, they
bear with patient fortitude the blow of misfortune, disregard
all trifling injuries, and look down with proud
contempt on the malice of their enemies, and the infidelity
of their friends.
The lofty zephyr, the transparent spring, the well-stored
river, the umbrageous forest, the cooling grotto,
and the daisied field, however, are not always necessary
to enable us to despise or forget the consequences of
adversity. The man who firmly keeps his course, and
has courage to live according to his own taste and
inclinations, cannot be affected by the little crosses of
life, or by the obloquy or injustice of mankind. What
we do voluntarily always affords us more pleasure than
that which we do by compulsion. The restraints of
the world and the obligations of society, disgust liberal
minds, and deprive them, even in the midst of all
their splendor and fortune, of that content they seek so
anxiously to obtain.
Solitude, indeed, not only tranquillizes the heart,
renders it kind and virtuous, and raises it above the[84]
malevolence of envy, wickedness, and conceited ignorance,
but affords advantages still more valuable. Liberty,
true liberty, flies from the tumultuous crowd,
and the forced connexions of the world. It has been
truly observed, that in solitude man recovers from the
distraction which had torn him from himself; feels a
clear conception of what he once was, and may yet
become; explores the nature, and discovers the extent,
of his freeborn character: rejects every thing artificial;
is guided by his own sentiments; no longer dreads a
severe master or imperious tyrant; and neither suffers
the constraints of business or the blandishments of
pleasure, to disturb his repose; but, breaking boldly
through the shackles of servile habit and arbitrary custom,
thinks for himself with confidence and courage,
and improves the sensibility of his heart by the sentiments
of his mind.
Madame de Stael considered it a great error, to imagine
that freedom and liberty could be indulged at
court, where the mind, even on the most trifling occasions,
is obliged to observe a multitude of ceremonies,
where it is impossible to speak one’s thoughts, where
our sentiments must be adapted to those around us,
where every person assumes a control over us, and
where we never have the smallest enjoyment of ourselves.
“To enjoy ourselves,” says she, “we must seek
solitude. It was in the Bastile that I first became acquainted
with myself.”
A courtier, fearful of every person around him, is continually
upon the watch, and tormented incessantly by
suspicion; but while his heart is thus a prey to corroding
anxiety, he is obliged to appear contented and serene,
and, like the old lady, is always lighting one taper
to Michael the archangel, and another to the devil,
because he does not know for which of them he may
have most occasion. A man of a liberal, enlightened
mind, is as little calculated to perform the office of master
of the ceremonies, or to conduct the etiquette of a
court, as a woman is to be a religieuse.
Liberty and leisure render a rational and active mind
indifferent to every other kind of happiness. It was
the love of liberty and solitude which rendered the
riches and honors of the world so odious to Petrarch.
Solicited at an advanced period of his life, to act as
secretary to several popes, under the tempting offer of
great emolument, he replied, “Riches when acquired[85]
at the expense of liberty, become the source of real
misery. A yoke formed of gold and silver is not less
galling and restrictive than one made of wood or iron.”
And he frankly told his friends and patrons, that to him
there was no quantity of wealth equal in value to his
ease and liberty: that, as he had despised riches at a
time when he was most in need of them, it would be
shameful in him to seek them now, when he could
more conveniently live without them: that every man
ought to apportion the provision for his journey according
to the distance he had to travel; and that, having
almost reached the end of his course, he ought to think
more of his reception at the inn, than of his expenses
on the road.
Petrarch, disgusted by the vicious manners which
surrounded the papal chair, retired into solitude when
he was only three-and-twenty years of age, and in possession
of that exterior, both with respect to person
and dress, which forms so essential a part in the character
of an accomplished courtier. Nature had decorated
him with every pleasing attribute. His fine form
struck observers so forcibly, that they stopped as he
passed along to admire and point out his symmetry.
His eyes were bright and full of fire; his lively countenance
proclaimed the vivacity of the mind; the freshest
color glowed on his cheeks; his features were uncommonly
expressive; and his whole appearance was
manly, elegant, and noble. The natural disposition of
his heart, increased by the warm climate of Italy, the
fire of youth, the seductive charms of the various beauties
who resorted to the papal court, from every nation
of Europe, and especially the prevailing dissipation of
the age, attached him, very early in life, to the society
of women. The decoration of dress deeply engaged
his attention; and the least spot or improper fold on
his garments, which were always of the lightest color,
seemed to give him real uneasiness. Every form which
appeared inelegant was carefully avoided, even in the
fashion of his shoes; which were so extremely tight,
and cramped him to such a degree, that he would soon
have been deprived of the use of his feet, if he had not
wisely recollected, that it was much better to displease
the eyes of the ladies than to make himself a cripple.
To prevent the dress of his hair from being discomposed,
he protected it with anxiety from the rudeness
of the winds as he passed along the streets. Devoted,[86]
however, as he was to the service of the sex, he maintained
a rival fondness for literature, and an inviolable
attachment to moral sentiment; and while he celebrated
the charms of his fair favorites in choice Italian, he
reserved his knowledge of the learned languages for
subjects more serious and important. Nor did he permit
the warmth of his constitution, or the sensibility of
his heart, great and exquisite as they were, to debauch
his mind, or betray him into the most trifling indiscretion,
without feeling the keenest compunction and repentance.
“I wish,” said he, “that I had a heart as
hard as adamant, rather than be so continually tormented
by such seducing passions.” The heart of
this amiable young man, was, indeed, continually assailed
by the crowd of beauties that adorned the papal
court; and the power of their charms, and the facility
with which his situation enabled them to enjoy his
company, rendered him in some degree their captive;
but, alarmed by the approaching torments and disquietudes
of love, he cautiously avoided their pleasing
snares, and continued, previous to the sight of his beloved
Laura, to roam “free and unconquered through
the wilds of love.”
The practice of the civil law was at this period the
only road to eminence at Avignon; but Petrarch detested
the venality of the profession; and though he
practised at the bar, and gained many causes by his
eloquence, he afterwards reproached himself with it.
“In my youth,” says he, “I devoted myself to the
trade of selling words, or rather fabricating falsehoods;
but that which we do against our own inclinations, is
seldom attended with success; my fondness was for
solitude, and therefore I attended the practice of the
bar with aversion and disgust.” The secret consciousness
however, which he entertained of his own merit,
gave him all the confidence natural to youth; and, filling
his mind with that lofty spirit which begets the
presumption of being equal to the highest achievements,
he relinquished the bar for the church; but
his inveterate hatred of the manners of the Episcopal
court prevented his exertions, and retarded his promotion.
“I have no hope,” said he, in the thirty-fifth
year of his age, “of making my fortune in the court of
the vicar of Jesus Christ; to accomplish that, I must assiduously
attend the palaces of the great, and practise
flattery, falsehood, and deceit.” A task of this kind[87]
was too painful to his feelings to perform; not because
he either hated the society of men, or disliked
advancement, but because he detested the means he
must necessarily have used to gratify his ambition.
Glory was his warmest wish, and he ardently endeavored
to obtain it; not, indeed, by the ways in which it
is usually obtained, but by delighting to walk in the
most unfrequented paths, and of course, by retiring
from the world. The sacrifices he made to solitude
were great and important; but his mind and his heart
were formed to enjoy the advantages it affords with a
superior degree of delight; a happiness which resulted
to him from his hatred of a profligate court, and from
his love of liberty.
The love of liberty was the secret cause which gave
the mind of Rousseau so inveterate a disgust to society,
and became in solitude the spring of all his pleasures.
His Letters to Malesherbes are as remarkable
for the discovery they make of his real disposition, as
his Confessions, which have been as much misunderstood
as his character. “I mistook for a great length
of time,” says he, in one of these letters, “the cause of
that invincible disgust which I always felt in my intercourse
with the world. I attributed it to the mortification
of not possessing that quick and ready talent
necessary to display in conversation the little knowledge
I possessed; and this reflected an idea, that I did
not hold that reputation in the opinion of mankind
which I conceived I merited. But although, after
scribbling many ridiculous things, and perceiving myself
sought after by all the world, and honored with
much more consideration than even my own ridiculous
vanity would have led me to expect, I found that I
was in no danger of being taken for a fool; yet, still
feeling the same disgust rather augmented than diminished,
I concluded that it must arise from some other
cause, and that these were not the kind of enjoyments
which I must look for. What then, in fact, was the
cause of it? It was no other than that invincible spirit
of liberty which nothing can overcome, and in competition
with which, honor, fortune, and even fame itself,
are to me as nothing. It is certain that this spirit of
liberty is engendered less by pride than by indolence;
but this indolence is incredible; it is alarmed at every
thing; it renders the most trifling duties of civil life
insupportable. To be obliged to speak a word, to[88]
write a letter, or to pay a visit, are to me, from the moment
the obligation arises, the severest punishments.
This is the reason why, although the ordinary commerce
of men is odious to me, the pleasures of private
friendship are so dear to my heart; for in the indulgence
of private friendships there are no duties to perform;
we have only to follow the feelings of the heart,
and all is done. This is the reason also why I have so
much dreaded to accept of favors; for every act of
kindness demands an acknowledgment, and I feel that
my heart is ungrateful only because gratitude becomes
a duty. The kind of happiness, in short, which pleases
me best, does not consist so much in doing what I wish,
as in avoiding that which is disagreeable to me. Active
life affords no temptations to me. I would much rather
do nothing at all than that which I dislike; and I
have frequently thought that I should not have lived
very unhappily even in the Bastile, provided I was free
from any other constraint than that of merely residing
within the walls.”
An English author asks, “Why are the inhabitants
of the rich plains of Lombardy, where nature pours her
gifts in such profusion, less opulent than those of the
mountains of Swisserland?—Because freedom, whose
influence is more benign than sunshine and zephyrs;
who covers the rugged rock with soil, drains the sickly
swamp, and clothes the brown heath in verdure; who
dresses the laborer’s face with smiles, and makes him
behold his increasing family with delight and exultation—Freedom
has abandoned the fertile fields of
Lombardy, and dwells among the mountains of Swisserland.”
This observation, though dressed in such
enthusiastic expressions, is literally true at Uri, Schwitz,
Underwalde, Zug, Glaris, and Appenzel; for those who
have more than their wants require are rich; and those
who are enabled to think, to speak, and to act as inclination
may dictate, are free.
Competency and liberty, therefore, are the true
sweeteners of life. That state of mind, so rarely possessed,
in which a man can sincerely say, I have enough,
is the highest attainment of philosophy. Happiness
does not consist in having much, but in having sufficient.
This is the reason why kings and princes are
seldom happy; for they always desire more than they
possess, and are urged incessantly to attempt more
than it is in their power to achieve. He who wants[89]
little has always enough. “I am contented,” says Petrarch,
in a letter to his friends, the cardinals Talleyrand
and Bologna: “I desire nothing more; I enjoy
every thing that is necessary to life. Cincinnatus, Curtius,
Fabricius, and Regulus, after having conquered
nations, and led kings in triumph, were not so rich as
I am. But I should always be poor if I were to open a
door to my passions. Luxury, ambition, avarice know
no bounds, and desire is an unfathomable abyss. I
have clothes to cover me; victuals to support me; horses
to carry me; lands to lie down or walk upon while
I live, and to receive my remains when I die. What
more was any Roman emperor possessed of?—My body
is healthy; and being engaged in toil, is less rebellious
against my mind. I have books of every kind, which
are to me inestimable treasures; they fill my soul with
a voluptuous delight, untinctured with remorse. I
have friends whom I consider more precious than any
thing I possess, provided their counsels do not tend to
abridge my liberty: and I know of no other enemies
than those which envy has raised against me.”
Solitude not only restrains inordinate desires, but discovers
to mankind their real wants; and where a simplicity
of manners prevails, the real wants of men are
not only few, but easily satisfied; for being ignorant
of those desires which luxury creates, they can have
no idea of indulging them. An old country curate, who
had all his life resided upon a lofty mountain near the
lake of Thun, in the canton of Berne, was one day
presented with a moor-cock. The good old man,
ignorant that such a bird existed, consulted with his
cook-maid in what manner this rarity was to be disposed
of, and they both agreed to bury it in the garden. If
we were all, alas! as ignorant of the delicious flavor of
moor-cocks, we might be all as happy and contented
as the simple pastor of the mountain near the lake of
Thun.
The man who confines his desires to his real wants,
is more wise, more rich, and more contented, than any
other mortal existing. The system upon which he acts
is, like his soul, replete with simplicity and true greatness;
and seeking his felicity in innocent obscurity and
peaceful retirement, he devotes his mind to the love of
truth, and finds his highest happiness in a contented
heart.
A calm and tranquil life renders the indulgence of[90]
sensual pleasures less dangerous. The theatre of sensuality
exhibits scenes of waste and brutality, of noisy
mirth and tumultuous riot; presents to observation
pernicious goblets, overloaded tables, lascivious dancing,
receptacles for disease, tombs with faded roses,
and all the dismal haunts of pain. But to him who retires
in detestation from such gross delights, the joys
of sense are of a more elevated kind; soft, sublime,
pure, permanent, and tranquil.
Petrarch one day inviting his friend, the cardinal
Colonna, to visit his retirement at Vaucluse, wrote to
him, “If you prefer the tranquillity of the country
to the noise of the town, come here and enjoy yourself.
Do not be alarmed by the simplicity of my table, or the
hardness of my beds. Kings themselves are frequently
disgusted by the luxury in which they live, and sigh
for comforts of a more homely kind. Change of scene
is always pleasing; and pleasures, by occasional interruption,
frequently become more lively. If, however,
you should not accord with these sentiments you
may bring with you the most exquisite viands, the
wines of Vesuvius, silver dishes, and every thing
else that the indulgence of your senses requires. Leave
the rest to me. I promise to provide you with a bed of
the finest turf, a cooling shade, the music of the nightingales,
figs, raisins, water drawn from the freshest
springs; and, in short, every thing that the hand of
Nature prepares for the lap of genuine pleasure.”
Ah! who would not willingly renounce those things
which only produce disquietude in the mind, for those
which render it contented! The art of occasionally
diverting the imagination, taste, and passions, affords
new and unknown enjoyments to the mind and confers
pleasure without pain, and luxury without repentance.
The senses deadened by satiety, revive to new enjoyments.
The lively twitter of the groves, and the murmur
of the brooks, yield a more delicious pleasure to
the ear than the music of the opera, or the compositions
of the ablest masters. The eye reposes more agreeably
on the concave firmament, on an expanse of waters,
on mountains covered with rocks, than it
does on all the glare of balls and assemblies. In
short, the mind enjoys in solitude objects which
were before insupportable, and reclining on the bosom
of simplicity, easily renounces every vain delight. Petrarch
wrote from Vaucluse to one of his friends, “I[91]
have made war against my corporeal powers, for I find
they are my enemies. My eyes, which have rendered
me guilty of so many follies, are now confined to the
view of a single woman, old, black, and sunburnt. If
Helen, or Lucretia had possessed such a face, Troy
would never have been reduced to ashes, nor Tarquin
driven from the empire of the world. But, to compensate
these defects, she is faithful, submissive, and
industrious. She passes whole days in the fields, her
shrivelled skin defying the hottest rays of the sun.
My wardrobe still contains fine clothes, but I never
wear them; and you would take me for a common laborer
or a simple shepherd; I, who formerly was so
anxious about my dress. But the reasons which then
prevailed, no longer exist: the fetters by which I was
enslaved are broken: the eyes which I was anxious
to please are shut; and if they were still open, they
would not perhaps, now be able to maintain the same
empire over my heart.”
Solitude, by stripping worldly objects of the false
splendor in which fancy arrays them, dispels all vain
ambition from the mind. Accustomed to rural delights
and indifferent to every other kind of pleasure, a wise
man no longer thinks high offices and worldly advancement
worthy of his desires. A noble Roman was
overwhelmed with tears on being obliged to accept of
the consulship, because it would deprive him for one
year of the opportunity of cultivating his fields. Cincinnatus,
who was called from the plough to the supreme
command of the Roman legions, defeated the
enemies of his country, added to it new provinces, made
his triumphal entry into Rome, and at the expiration
of sixteen days returned to his plough. It is true, that
the inmate of an humble cottage, who is forced to earn
his daily bread by labor, and the owner of a spacious
mansion, for whom every luxury is provided, are not
held in equal estimation by mankind. But let the man
who has experienced both these situations, be asked
under which of them he felt the most content. The
cares and inquietudes of the palace are innumerably
greater than those of the cottage. In the former, discontent
poisons every enjoyment; and its superfluity
is only misery in disguise. The princes of Germany
do not digest all the palatable poison which their cooks
prepare, so well as a peasant upon the heaths of Limbourg
digests his buck-wheat pie. And those who[92]
may differ from me in this opinion, will be forced to acknowledge,
that there is great truth in the reply which
a pretty French country girl, made to a young nobleman,
who solicited her to abandon her rustic taste, and
retire with him to Paris: “Ah! my lord, the further
we remove from ourselves, the greater is our distance
from happiness.”
Solitude, by moderating the selfish desires of the
heart, and expelling ambition from the breast, becomes
a real asylum to the disappointed statesman or discarded
minister; for it is not every public minister who can
retire, like Neckar, through the portals of everlasting
fame. Every person, indeed, without distinction, ought
to raise his grateful hands to heaven, on being dismissed
from the troubles of public life, to the calm repose
which the cultivation of his native fields, and the care
of his flocks and herds, afford. In France, however,
when a minister, who has incurred the displeasure of
his sovereign, is ordered to retire, and thereby enabled
to visit an estate which he has decorated in the highest
style of rural elegance, this delightful retreat, alas!
being considered a place of exile, becomes intolerable
to his mind: he no longer fancies himself its master;
is incapable of relishing its enchanting beauties; repose
flies from his pillow; and turning with aversion
from every object, he dies at length, the victim of
spleen, petulance, and dejection. But in England it is
just the reverse. There a minister is congratulated on
retiring, like a man who has happily escaped from a
dangerous malady. He feels himself still surrounded
by many friends much more worthy than his adherents
while in power; for while those were bound to him by
temporary considerations of interest, these are attached
to him by real and permanent esteem. Thanks, generous
Britons! for the examples you have given to us of
men sufficiently bold and independent to weigh events
in the scales of reason, and to guide themselves by the
intrinsic and real merits of each case: for notwithstanding
the freedom with which many Englishmen
have arraigned the dispensations of the Supreme Being;
notwithstanding the mockery and ridicule with
which they have so frequently insulted virtue, good
manners, and decorum; there are many more among
them, who, especially at an advanced period of their
lives, perfectly understand the art of living by themselves;
and in their tranquil and delightful villas think[93]
with more dignity, and live with more real happiness,
than the haughtiest noble in the zenith of his power.
Of the ministers who retire from the administration
of public affairs, the majority finish their days in cultivating
their gardens, in improving their estates, and,
like the excellent de la Roche, at Spire, certainly
possess more content with the shovel and the rake,
than they enjoyed in the most prosperous hours in their
administration.
It has, indeed, been said, that observations like these
are common to persons who, ignorant of the manners
of the world, and the characters of men, love to moralize
on, and recommend a contempt of, human greatness;
but that rural innocence, the pure and simple
pleasures of nature, and an uninterrupted repose, are
very seldom the companions of this boasted solitude.
Those who maintain this opinion, assert, that man,
though surrounded with difficulties, and obliged to employ
every art and cunning to attain his ends, feels
with his success the pleasing power which attaches to
the character of master, and fondly indulges in the exercise
of sovereignty. Enabled to create and to destroy,
to plant and to root up, to make alterations when
and where he pleases, he may grub up a vineyard, and
plant an English grove on its site; erect hills where
hills never were seen; level eminences to the ground;
compel the stream to flow as his inclination shall direct;
force woods and shrubberies to grow where he
pleases; graft or lop as it shall strike his fancy; open
views and shut out boundaries; construct ruins where
buildings never existed; erect temples of which he
alone is the high priest; and build hermitages in which
he may seclude himself at pleasure. It is said, however,
that this is not a reward for the restraints he formerly
experienced, but a natural inclination; for that
a minister must be, from the habits of his life, fond
of command and sovereignty, whether he continues at
the head of an extensive empire, or directs the management
of a poultry yard.
It would most undoubtedly discover a great ignorance
of the world, and of the nature of man, to contend
that it is necessary to renounce all the inclinations
of the human heart, in order to enjoy the advantages
of solitude. That which nature has implanted in the
human breast must there remain. If, therefore a minister,
in his retirement, is not satiated with the exercise[94]
of power and authority, but still fondly wishes for
command, let him require obedience from his chickens,
provided such a gratification is essential to his happiness
and tends to suppress the desire of again exposing
himself to those tempests and shipwrecks which he can
only avoid in the safe harbor of rural life. An ex-minister
must sooner or later, learn to despise the appearances
of human greatness, when he discovers that true greatness
frequently begins at that period of life which statesmen
are apt to consider a dreary void; that the regret
of being no longer able to do more good, is only ambition
in disguise; and that the inhabitants of the country,
in cultivating their cabbages and potatoes, are a hundred
times happier than the greatest minister.
Nothing contributes more to the advancement of
earthly felicity, than a reliance on those maxims which
teach us to do as much good as possible, and to take
things just as we find them; for it is certainly true that
no characters are so unhappy as those who are continually
finding fault with every thing they see. My barber
at Hanover, while he was preparing to shave me, exclaimed,
with a deep sigh, “It is terribly hot to day,”
“You place heaven,” said I to him, “in great difficulties.
For these nine months last past, you have
regularly told me every other day, It is terribly cold to
day.” Cannot the Almighty, then any longer govern
the universe, without these gentlemen barbers finding
something to be discontented with? “Is it not,” I asked
him, “much better to take the seasons as they change,
and to receive with equal gratitude, from the hand of
God, the winter’s cold, and the summer’s warmth?”
“Oh! certainly,” replied the barber.
Competency, and content, therefore, may in general,
be considered as the basis of earthly happiness; and
solitude, in many instances, favors both the one and the
other.
Solitude not only refines the enjoyments of friendship,
but enables us to acquire friends from whom nothing
can alienate our souls, and to whose arms we never fly
in vain.
The friends of Petrarch sometimes apologized to him
for their long absence. “It is impossible for us,” said
they, “to follow your example; the life you lead at
Vaucluse is contrary to human nature. In winter you
sit like an owl in the chimney corner. In summer[95]
you are running incessantly about the fields.” Petrarch
smiled at these observations. “These people,”
said he, “consider the pleasures of the world as the
supreme good; and cannot bear the idea of renouncing
them. I have friends whose society is extremely
agreeable to me: they are of all ages, and of every
country. They have distinguished themselves both in
the cabinet and in the field, and obtained high honors
for their knowledge of the sciences. It is easy to gain
access to them, for they are always at my service; and
I admit them to my company, and dismiss them from
it whenever I please. They are never troublesome, but
immediately answer every question I ask them. Some
relate to me the events of past ages, while others reveal
to me the secrets of nature. Some teach me how to live,
and others how to die. Some, by their vivacity, drive
away my cares, and exhilarate my spirits; while others
give fortitude to my mind, and teach me the important
lesson how to restrain my desires, and to depend on
myself. They open to me, in short, the various avenues
of all the arts and sciences; and upon their information
I safely rely in all emergencies. In return for
all these services, they only ask me to accommodate
them with a convenient chamber in some corner of my
humble habitation, where they may repose in peace:
for these friends are more delighted with the tranquillity
of retirement, than with the tumults of society.”
Love! the most precious gift of heaven,
appears to merit a distinguished rank among the advantages
of solitude.
Love voluntarily unites itself with the aspect of
beautiful nature. The view of a pleasing landscape
makes the heart beat with the tenderest emotions. The
lonely mountain and the silent grove increase the susceptibility
of the female bosom, inspire the mind with
rapturous enthusiasm, and, sooner or later, draw aside
and subjugate the heart.
Women feel the pure and tranquil pleasures of rural
life with a higher sensibility than men. They enjoy
more exquisitely the beauties of a lonely walk, the
freshness of a shady forest, and admire with higher[96]
ecstacy the charms of nature. Solitude is to them the
school of true philosophy. In England, at least, where
the face of the country is so beautiful, and where the
taste of its inhabitants is hourly adding to it new embellishments,
the love of rural solitude is certainly
stronger in the women than the men. A nobleman
who employs the day in riding over his estates or in
following the hounds, does not enjoy the pleasures of
rural life with the same delight as his lady, who devotes
her time, in her romantic pleasure grounds, to needle
work, or to the reading of some instructive, interesting
work. In this happy country, indeed, where the people,
in general, love the enjoyments of the mind, the calm
of rural retirement is doubly valuable, and its delights
more exquisite. The learning which has of late years
so considerably increased among the ladies of Germany,
is certainly to be attributed to their love of retirement:
for, among those who pass their time in the country,
we find much more true wit and rational sentiment,
than among the beaux esprits of the metropolis.
Minds, indeed, apparently insensible in the atmosphere
of a metropolis, unfold themselves with rapture
in the country. This is the reason why the return of
spring fills every tender breast with love. “What can
more resemble love,” says a celebrated German philosopher,
“than the feeling with which my soul is inspired
at the sight of this magnificent valley, thus illuminated
by the setting sun!” Rousseau felt an inexpressible
delight on viewing the first appearances of spring: the
earliest blossoms of that charming season gave new life
and vigor to his mind; the tenderest dispositions of his
heart were awakened and augmented by the soft verdure
it presented to his eyes; and the charms of his mistress
were assimilated with the beauties that surrounded
him on every side. The view of an extensive and pleasing
prospect softened his sorrows; and he breathed his
sighs with exquisite delight amidst the rising flowers of
his garden, and the rich fruits of his orchard.
Lovers constantly seek the rural grove to indulge, in
the tranquillity of retirement, the uninterrupted contemplation
of the beloved object which forms the sole happiness
of their lives. Of what importance to them are
all the transactions of the world, or, indeed, any thing
that does not tend to indulge the passion that fills their
hearts? Silent groves, embowering glades, or the lonely
borders of murmuring streams, where they may freely[97]
resign themselves to their fond reflections, are the
only confidants of their souls. A lovely shepherdess,
offering her fostering bosom to the infant she is nursing,
while at her side her well-beloved partner sits dividing
with her his morsel of hard black bread, is an hundred
times more happy than all the fops of the town: for
love inspires his mind, in the highest degree, with all
that is elevated, delightful and affecting in nature; and
warms the coldest bosoms with the greatest sensibility
and the highest rapture.
Love’s softest images spring up anew in solitude.
The remembrance of these emotions which the first
blush of conscious tenderness, the first gentle pressure
of the hand, the first dread of interruption, create,
recurs incessantly! Time, it is said, extinguishes the
flame of love; but solitude renews the fire, and calls
forth those agents which lie long concealed, and only
wait a favorable moment to display their powers. The
whole course of youthful feeling again beams forth;
and the mind—delicious recollection!—fondly retracing
the first affection of the heart, fills the bosom with
an indelible sense of those high ecstacies which a connoisseur
has said, with as much truth as energy, proclaim,
for the first time, that happy discovery, that fortunate
moment, when two lovers first perceive their
mutual fondness.
Herder mentions a certain cast of people in Asia,
whose mythology thus divided the felicities of eternity.
“That men, after death, were, in the celestial regions,
immediately the objects of female love during the course
of a thousand years; first by tender looks, then by a
balmy kiss, and afterwards, by immediate alliance.”
It was this noble and sublime species of affection
that Wieland, in the warmest moments of impassioned
youth felt for an amiable, sensible, and beautiful lady
of Zurich; for that extraordinary genius was perfectly
satisfied, that the metaphysical effects of love, begin
with the first sigh, and expire, to a certain degree, with
the first kiss. I one day asked this young lady when
it was that Wieland had saluted her for the first time?
“Wieland,” replied the amiable girl, “did not kiss my
hand for the first time until four years after our acquaintance
commenced.”
Young persons, in general, however, do not, like
Wieland, adopt the mystic refinements of love. Yielding
to the sentiments which the passion inspires, and[98]
less acquainted with its metaphysical nature, they
feel at an earlier age, in the tranquillity of solitude,
that irresistible impulse to the union of the sexes which
the God of nature has so strongly implanted in the
human breast.
A lady who resided in great retirement, at a romantic
cottage upon the banks of the lake of Geneva, had three
innocent and lovely daughters. The eldest was about
fourteen years of age, the youngest was about nine,
when they were presented with a tame bird, which hopped
and flew about the chamber the whole day, and
formed the sole amusement and pleasure of their lives.
Placing themselves on their knees, they offered, with
unwearied delight, their little favorite, pieces of biscuit
from their fingers, and endeavored, by every means, to
induce him to fly to, and nestle in, their bosoms; but the
bird, the moment he had got the biscuit, with cunning
coyness eluded their hopes, and hopped away. The little
favorite at length died. A year after this event,
the youngest of the three sisters said to her mother,
“Oh, I remember that dear little bird! I wish, mamma,
you could procure me such a one to play with.” “Oh!
no,” replied her elder sister, “I should like to have a
little dog to play with better than any thing. I could
catch a little dog, take him on my knee, hug him in my
arms. A bird affords me no pleasure; he perches a
little while on my finger, then flies away, and there is
no catching him again: but a little dog, oh! what
pleasure.…”
I shall never forget the poor religieuse in whose apartment
I found a breeding cage of canary birds, nor forgive
myself for having burst into a fit of laughter at the
discovery. It was, alas! the suggestion of nature; and
who can resist what nature suggests? This mystic
wandering of religious minds, this celestial epilepsy of
love, this premature effect of solitude, is only the fond
application of natural inclination raised superior to all
others.
Absence and tranquillity appear so favorable to the
indulgence of this pleasing passion, that lovers frequently
quit the beloved object, to reflect in solitude on
her charms. Who does not recollect to have read, in
the Confessions of Rousseau, the story related by Madame
de Luxemberg, of a lover who quitted the presence
of his mistress, only that he might have the pleasure
of writing to her. Rousseau replied to Madame de[99]
Luxemberg, that he wished he had been that man; and
his wish was founded on a perfect knowledge of the
passion: for who has ever been in love, and does not
know that there are moments when the pen is capable
of expressing the fine feelings of the heart with much
greater effect than the voice, with its miserable organ
of speech? The tongue, even in its happiest elocution,
is never so persuasive as the speaking eyes, when lovers
gaze with silent ecstacy on each other’s charms.
Lovers not only express, but feel their passion with
higher ecstacy and happiness in solitude than in any
other situation. What fashionable lover ever painted
his passion for a lovely mistress with such laconic tenderness
and effect, as the village chorister of Hanover
did on the death of a young and beautiful country girl
with whom he was enamored, when, after erecting
in the cemetery of the cathedral, a sepulchral stone to
her memory, he carved, in an artless manner, the figure
of a blooming rose on its front, and inscribed beneath
it these words: C’est ainsi qu’elle fut.
It was at the feet of those rocks which overhung the
celebrated retreat at Vaucluse, that Petrarch composed
his finest sonnets to deplore the absence, or to complain
of the cruelty of his beloved Laura. The Italians are
of opinion, that when love inspired his muse, his poetry
soared far beyond that of any poet who ever wrote
before or since his time, either in the Greek, the Latin,
or the Tuscan languages. “Ah! how soft and tender
is this language of the heart!” they exclaim. “Petrarch
alone was acquainted with its power: he has
added to the three graces a fourth—the grace of delicacy.”
Love, however, when indulged in rural solitude or
amidst the romantic scenery of an ancient castle, and,
assisted by the ardent imagination of impetuous youth,
frequently assumes a more bold and violent character.
Religious enthusiasm, blended with a saturnine disposition,
forms, in effervescent minds, a sublime and extraordinary
compound of the feelings of the heart. A
youthful lover of this description, when deprived of the
smiles of his mistress, takes his first declaration of love
from the text of the apocalypse and thinks his passion
an eternal melancholy; but when he is inclined to
sharpen the dart within his breast, his inspired mind
views in the beloved object the fairest model of divine
perfection.
[100]
The lovers of this romantic cast, placed in some
ancient solitary castle, soar far beyond the common
tribe, and, as their ideas refine, their passions become
proportionably sublime. Surrounded by stupendous
rocks, and impressed by the awful stilness of the scene,
the beloved youth is considered not merely as an amiable
and virtuous man, but as a god. The inspired
mind of the fond female fancies her bosom to be the
sanctuary of love, and conceives her affection for the
youthful idol of her heart to be an emanation from
heaven: a ray of the Divine Presence. Ordinary lovers,
without doubt, in spite of absence, unite their souls,
write by every post, seize all occasions to converse with,
or hear from, each other; but our more sublime and
exalted female introduces into her romance of passion
every butterfly she meets with, and all the feathered
songsters of the groves; and, except in the object of
her love, no longer sees any thing as it really is.
Reason and sense no longer guide: the refinements of
love direct all her movements; she tears the world from
its poles, and the sun from its axis; and to prove that
all she does is right, establishes for herself and her lover
a new gospel, and a new system of morality.
A lover, separated, perhaps, forever, from a mistress
who has made the most important sacrifices to his happiness;
who was his only consolation in affliction, his
only comfort in calamity; whose kindness supported
his sinking fortitude; who remained his faithful and
his only friend in dire adversity and domestic sorrow;
seeks, as his sole resource, a slothful solitude. Nights
passed in sleepless agonies; a distaste of life, a desire
of death, an abhorrence of all society, and a love of
dreary seclusion, drive him, day, after day, wandering,
as chance may direct, though the most solitary retirements
far from the hated traces of mankind. Were he,
however, to wander from the Elbe to the lake of Geneva;
were he to seek relief in the frozen confines of the
north, or the burning regions of the west, to the utmost
extremities of the earth or seas, he would still be like
the hind described by Virgil:
Petrarch, on returning to Vaucluse, felt with new and
increasing stings the passion which perturbed his breast.[101]
Immediately on his arrival at this sequestered spot, the
image of his beloved Laura incessantly haunted his
imagination. He beheld her at all times, in every place,
and under a thousand different forms. “Three times
in the middle of the night when every door was closed,
she appeared to me,” says he, “at the feet of my bed,
with a steadfast look, as if confident of the power of her
charms. Fear spread a chilling dew over all my limbs.
My blood thrilled through my veins towards my heart.
If any one had then entered my apartment with a candle,
they would have beheld me as pale as death, with
every mark of terror on my face. Rising before the
break of day, with trembling limbs, from my disordered
bed, and hastily leaving my house, where every thing
created alarm, I climbed to the summit of the rocks,
and ran wildly through the woods, casting my eyes
incessantly on every side, to see if the form which had
haunted my repose, still pursued me. Alas! I could
find no asylum. Places the most sequestered, where
I fondly flattered myself that I should be alone, presented
her continually to my mind; and I beheld her
sometimes issuing from the hollow trunk of a tree,
from the concealed source of a spring, or from the
dark cavity of a broken rock. Fear rendered me insensible,
and I neither know what I did, or where I
went.”
The heart of Petrarch was frequently stimulated by
ideas of voluptuous pleasure, even among the rocks of
Vaucluse, where he sought an asylum from love and
Laura. He soon, however, banished sensuality from
his mind, and, by refining his passion, acquired that vivacity
and heavenly purity which breathes in every line
of those immortal lyrics he composed among the rocks.
But the city of Avignon, in which the object thus tenderly
beloved resided, was not sufficiently distant from
the place of his retreat, and he visited it too frequently.
A passion indeed, like that which Petrarch felt, leaves
the bosom, even when uncorrupted, totally incapable
of tranquillity. It is a violent fever of the soul, which
inflicts upon the body a complication of painful disorders.
Let lovers, therefore, while they possess some
control over the passion which fills their breasts, seat
themselves on the borders of a river, and reflect that
love, like the stream, sometimes precipitates itself with
violence down the rocks; and sometimes flowing with
soft tranquillity along the plain, meanders through meadows,[102]
and loses itself beneath the peaceful shades of
solitary bowers.
The tranquillity of solitude, however, may, to a mind
disposed to resign itself with humility to all the dispensations
of heaven, be found not disadvantageous to
the perturbations of love. A lover whom death has
bereaved of the dear object of his affection, seeks only
those places which his favorite inhabited; considers
every other as desert and forlorn; and expects that death
alone is able to stop the torrent of his tears. Such an
indulgence of sorrow, however, cannot be called a resignation
to the will of God. A lover of this description
is attached solely to the irrecoverable object of his increasing
sorrows. His distracted mind fondly hopes
that she may still return; he thinks he hears her soft
enchanting voice in every breeze; he sees her lovely
form approaching, and opens his expecting arms to
clasp her once again to his still throbbing breast. But
he finds, alas! his hopes are vain: the fancy-breathing
form eludes his grasp, and convinces him that the
delightful vision was only the light and love-formed
phantom of his sorrow-sickened mind. A sad remembrance
of her departed spirit is the only comfort of his
lingering life: he flies to the tomb where her mortal
remains were deposited, plants roses round her shrine,
waters them with his tears, cultivates them with the
tenderest care, kisses them as emblems of her blushing
cheeks, and tastes, with sighing transports, their balmy
fragrance as the fancied odor of her ruby lips.
It must afford infinite pleasure to every philosophic
mind, to reflect on the victory which the virtuous Petrarch
gained over the passion that assailed his heart.
During his retreat into Italy from love and Laura, his
friends in France used every endeavor to induce him
to return. One of them wrote to him:—“What demon
possesses you;—How could you quit a country in which
you indulged all the propensities of youth, and where
the graceful figure which you formerly adorned with
so much care, procured you such unbounded admiration?—How
can you live thus exiled from Laura, whom
you love with so much tenderness, and whose heart is
so deeply afflicted by your absence?”
Petrarch replied: “Your anxiety is vain: I am resolved
to continue where I am. I ride here safely at
anchor; and all the hurricanes of eloquence shall never
drive me from it. How then can you expect to persuade[103]
me to change this resolution, merely by placing
before my eyes the deviations of my youth which I
ought to forget; by describing an illicit passion which
left me no other resource than a precipitate flight; and
by extolling the meretricious advantages of a handsome
person, which too long occupied my attention. These
are follies I must no longer think of. I am now rapidly
approaching toward the last goal on the course of life.
Objects more serious and important now occupy my
thoughts. God forbid, that, listening to your flattering
observations, I should again throw myself into the
snares of love, again put on a yoke which so severely
galled me!—The natural levity of youth apologizes,
in some degree, for the indiscretions it creates; but I
should despise myself, if I could now be tempted to
revisit either the bower of love, or the theatre of ambition.
Your suggestions, however, have produced a
proper effect; for I consider them as the oblique censures
of a friend upon my past misconduct. The solicitudes
of the gay and busy world no longer disturb
my mind; for my heart has tenaciously rooted all its
fibres in this delightful solitude, where I rove at large,
free and unconstrained, without inquietude or care. In
summer I repose upon the verdant turf beneath the
shade of some embowering tree, or saunter along the
enamelled boarders of a cool, refreshing stream. At
the approach of autumn I seek the woods, and join the
muses’ train. This mode of life is surely preferable to
a life at court, where nothing but disgusting jealousies
and corroding cares exist. I have now, in short, no
wish, except that, when death relieves me both from
pleasure and from pain, I may recline my head upon
the bosom of a friend, whose eyes, while he performs
the last office of closing mine, will drop a deploring
tear upon my departing spirit, and convey my remains,
with friendly care, to a decent tomb in my native country.”
These were the sentiments of the philosopher: but,
after a short interval the man returned once again to
the city of Avignon, and only visited his retreat at
Vaucluse occasionally.
Petrarch, however, by these continued endeavors to
subdue the violence of his passion, acquired a sublimity
and richness of imagination, which distinguished
his character, and gave him an ascendency over the
age in which he lived, greater than any of the literati[104]
have since attained. To use the expression of the
poet, he was capable of passing, with the happiest facility,
and was enabled, as occasion required, to conceive the
boldest enterprises, and to execute them with the most
heroic courage. He who languished, sighed, and even
wept with unmanly softness, at the feet of his mistress,
breathing only the tender and affectionate language of
gentle love, no sooner turned his thoughts toward the
transactions of Rome, than he assumed a higher tone,
and not only wrote, but acted with all the strength and
spirit of the Augustan age. Monarchs have relinquished
the calls of hunger, and the charms of rest, to indulge
the tender luxuries his love-lorn muse afforded.
But at a more advanced age he was no longer a sighing
minstrel, chaunting amorous verses to a relentless fair;
he was no longer an effeminate slave, that kissed the
chains of an imperious mistress, who treated him with
disdain: he became a zealous republican, who spread
by his writings the spirit of liberty throughout Italy,
and sounded a loud alarm against tyranny and tyrants.
Great as a statesman, profound and judicious as a public
minister, he was consulted in the most important
political transactions of Europe, and frequently employed
in the most arduous and difficult negotiations. Zealously
active in the cause of humanity, he anxiously
endeavored, on occasions, to extinguish the torch of
discord. The greatest princes, conscious of his extraordinary
genius, solicited his company, and endeavored,
by listening to his precepts, to learn the noble art of
rendering their countries respectable, and their people
happy.
These traits of Petrarch’s character clearly evince
that, oppressed as he was by the passion of love, he
derived great advantages from solitude. The retirement
at Vaucluse was not, as is commonly imagined, a
pretence to be nearer the person of Laura, for Laura resided
altogether at Avignon; but a means of avoiding the
frown of his mistress, and of flying from the contagion
of a corrupt court. Seated in his little garden, which
was situated at the foot of a lofty mountain, and surrounded
by a rapid stream, his soul rose superior to
the adversities of his fate. His disposition, indeed, was
naturally restless and unquiet; but in his tranquil moments,[105]
a sound judgment, joined to an exquisite sensibility,
enabled him to enjoy the delights of solitude with
singular advantage; and to find in his retreat at Vaucluse,
the temple of peace, the residence of calm repose,
and a safe harbor against all the tempests of the soul.
The flame of love, therefore, although it cannot be
entirely extinguished, may be greatly purified and refined
by solitude. Man indeed, ought not to extirpate
the passions which the God of nature has planted in
the human heart, but to direct them to their proper
ends.
To avoid such miseries as Petrarch endured, the
pleasures of retirement should be shared with some
amiable female, who, better than the cold precepts of
philosophy, will beguile or banish, by the charms of
conversation, all the cares and torments of life.
It has been said by a very sensible author, that “the
presence of one thinking being like ourselves, whose
bosom glows with sympathy, and whose affection we
possess, so far from destroying the advantages of solitude,
renders them more favorable. If, like me you
owe your happiness to the fond attention of a wife, you
will soon be induced, by her kindness, by her tender
and unreserved communication of every sentiment of
her mind, every feeling of her heart, to forget the society
of the world; and your happiness will be as pleasingly
diversified, as the employments and vicissitudes
of your lives.”
The orator who speaks so eloquently must have felt
with exquisite sensibility the pleasures he describes;
“Here,” says he, “every kind expression is remembered;
the emotions of one heart correspond with those of
the other; every thought is treasured up; every testimony
of affection is returned; the happy pair enjoy
in each other’s company all the pleasures of the mind;
and there is no felicity which does not communicate
itself to their hearts. To beings thus united by the
sincerest affection, and the closest friendship, every
thing that is said or done, every wish, and every event,
becomes mutually important. No jealous fears, no envious
stings, disturb their happiness; faults are pointed
out with cautious tenderness and good nature; looks
bespeak the inclinations of the soul; every wish and
every desire is anticipated; every view and intention
assimilated; and, the sentiments of one, conforming
to those of the other, each rejoices with cordiality at
the smallest advantage which the other acquires.”
[106]
Thus it is that the solitude which we share with an
amiable object produces tranquillity, satisfaction, and
heartfelt joy; and makes the humblest cottage a dwelling
place of the purest pleasure.
Love, in the shades of retirement, while the mind
and the heart are in harmony with each other, inspires
the noblest sentiments; raises the understanding to the
highest sphere of intellect: fills the bosom with increased
benevolence; destroys all the seeds of vice, and meliorates
and extends all the virtues. By its delightful influence
the attack of ill-humor is resisted; the violence
of our passions abated; the bitter cup of human affliction
sweetened; all the injuries of the world alleviated;
and the sweetest flowers plentifully strewed along the
thorny paths of life. Every unhappy sufferer, whether
the malady be of the body or the mind, derives from
this source extraordinary comfort and consolation. At
a time, alas! when every thing displeased me, when
every object was disgusting, when my sufferings had
destroyed all the energy and vigor of my soul, when
grief had shut from my streaming eyes the beauties of
nature, and rendered the whole universe a dreary tomb,
the kind attentions of a wife were capable of conveying
a secret charm, a silent consolation to my mind. Oh!
nothing can render the bowers of retirement so serene
and comfortable, or can so sweetly soften all our woes,
as a conviction that woman is not indifferent to our
fate.
Solitude, it is true, will not completely heal every
wound which this imperious passion is capable of inflicting
on the human heart; but it teaches us to endure
our pains without wishing for relief, and enables us to
convert them into soft sorrow and plaintive grief.
Both sexes in early youth, but particularly females
from fifteen to eighteen years of age, who possess high
sensibilities, and lively imaginations, generally feel
during the solitude of rural retirement, a soft and pleasing
melancholy, when their bosoms begin to heave with
the first propensities of love. They wander every
where in search of a beloved object, and sigh for one
alone, long before the heart is fixed in its affection, or
the mind conscious of its latent inclination. I have
frequently observed this disposition unaccompanied by
any symptom of ill health. It is an original malady.
Rousseau felt its influence at Vevay, upon the borders
of the lake of Geneva. “My heart,” says he, “rushed[107]
with ardor from my bosom into a thousand innocent
felicities; and melting into tenderness, I sighed and
wept like a child. How frequently, stopping to indulge
my feelings, and seating myself on a piece of broken
rock, did I amuse myself with seeing my tears drop
into the stream!”
Retirement, however, is not equally favorable to
every species of affliction. Some bosoms are so exquisitely
alive to the sense of misfortune, that the indelible
remembrance of the object of their affection
preys upon their minds: the reading of a single line
written by the hand they loved, freezes their blood;
the very sight of the tomb which has swallowed up the
remains of all their soul held dear, is intolerable to
their eyes. On such beings, alas! the heavens smile in
vain: to them the new-born flowers and the twittering
groves, proclaiming the approach of spring and the regeneration
of vegetable nature, bring no charms; the
garden’s variegated hues irritate their feelings; and the
silent retreats, from which they once expected consolation,
only increase their pains. Such refined and exquisite
feelings, the offspring of warm and generous
passion, are real misfortunes; and the malady they engender
requires to be treated with the mildest attention
and the tenderest care.
But to minds of softer temper solitude possesses many
powerful charms, although the losses they deplore are
equally great. Such characters feel, indeed, a sense of
their misfortune in its utmost possible extent, but they
soften its acuteness by yielding to the natural mildness
of their dispositions: they plant upon the fatal tomb
the weeping willow and the ephemeral rose; they erect
mausolea; compose funeral dirges; and render the
very emblems of death, the means of consolation.
Their hearts are continually occupied by the idea of
those whom their eyes deplore; and they exist under
the sensations of the truest and most sincere sorrow, in
a kind of middle state between earth and heaven. This
species of sorrow is of the happiest kind. Far be it from
me to suppose it in the least degree affected. But I
call such characters happy mourners; because, from
the very frame and texture of their constitutions, grief
does not destroy the energy of their minds, but permits
them to find consolation in those things which, to minds
differently constructed, would create aversion. They
feel a heavenly joy in pursuing employments which[108]
preserve the memory of those who are the subjects of
their sorrow.
Solitude will enable the heart to vanquish the most
painful sense of adversity, provided the mind will
generously lend its aid, and fix its attention to a different
object. If men think there is any misfortune from
which they have no other resource than despair or death
they deceive themselves; for despair is no resource.
Let such men retire to their studies, and there seriously
trace out a series of important and settled truths, and
their tears will no longer fall; but the weight of their
misfortunes will grow light, and sorrow fly from their
breasts.
Solitude, by encouraging the enjoyments of the heart,
by promoting domestic felicity, and by creating a taste
for rural scenery, subdues impatience, and drives away
ill-humor. Impatience is a stifled anger, which men silently
manifest by looks and gestures, and weak minds
ordinarily reveal by a shower of complaints. A grumbler
is never further from his proper sphere than when he is
in company; solitude is his only asylum. Ill-humor is
an uneasy and insupportable condition, which the soul
frequently falls into when soured by a number of those
petty vexations which we daily experience in every step
of our progress through life; but we need only to shut
the door against improper and disagreeable intrusions,
to avoid this scourge of happiness.
Vexations, indeed, of every kind, are much sooner
quieted in the silence of retirement than in the noise
of the world. A cheerful disposition, a placid temper,
and well-regulated passions, will prevent worldly vexations
from interrupting our happiness. By these attainments,
the deepest melancholy, and most settled uneasiness
of life, have been frequently banished from the
heart. It is true, that the progress in this case is much
more rapid in women than in men. The mind of a
lively female flies immediately to happiness, while that
of a melancholy man still creeps on with pain: the
yielding bosoms of the fair are easily elevated or depressed.
These effects, it is true, may be produced by
means less abstracted than solitude; by any thing that
strikes the senses, and penetrates the heart. Men, on
the contrary, augment the disease, and fix it more firmly
in the bosom, by brooding over its cause and consequences,
and are obliged to apply the most efficacious
remedies, with unshaken constancy, to effect a cure;[109]
for feeble prescriptions are, in such cases, of no avail.
The only chance, indeed, of success, is by exerting every
endeavor to place the body under the regimen of
the mind. Vigorous minds frequently banish the most
inveterate evils, or form a powerful shield against all
the darts of fate, and, by braving every danger, drive
away those feelings by which others are irritated and
destroyed; they boldly turn their eyes from what
things are, to what they ought to be; and with determined
resolution support the bodies they are designed
to animate; while weak minds surrender every thing
committed to their care.
The soul, however, always follows what is most
agreeable to its ruling passion. Worldly men generally
delight in gaming, feasting, and debauchery; while
those who are fond of solitude feel, from a consciousness
of its advantages, no enjoyments equal to those its
peaceful shades afford.
I now conclude my reflections upon the advantages
of Solitude to the Heart. May they give greater currency
to useful sentiments, to consolatory truths, and
contribute in some degree to diffuse the enjoyment of a
happiness which is so much within our reach!
Retirement engages the affections of men whenever
it holds up a picture of tranquillity to their view.
The doleful and monotonous sound of the clock of a
sequestered monastery, the silence of nature in a still
night, the pure air on the summit of a high mountain,
the thick darkness of an aged forest, the sight of a temple
fallen into ruins, inspire the soul with a soft melancholy,
and banish all recollection of the world and its
concerns.
The man who cannot hold a friendly correspondence
with his own heart; who derives no comfort from the
reflections of his mind; who dreads the idea of meditation,
and is fearful of passing a single moment with
himself, looks with equal dread on solitude and on
death. He endeavors to enjoy all the voluptuousness
which the world affords; drains the pernicious cup of[110]
pleasure to its dregs; and, until the dreadful moment
approaches when he beholds his nerves shattered, and
all the powers of his soul destroyed, has not the courage
to make the delayed confession, “I am tired of the
world and all its idle follies!”
The legions of fantastic fashions to which a man of
pleasure is obliged to sacrifice his time, impair the rational
faculties of his mind, and destroy the native
energies of his soul. Forced continually to lend himself
to the performance of a thousand little trifles, a thousand
mean absurdities, he becomes by habit frivolous
and absurd. The face of things no longer wears its true
and genuine aspect; and his depraved taste loses all relish
for rational entertainment or substantial pleasure.
The infatuation seizes on his brain, and his corrupted
heart teems with idle fancies and vain imaginations.
The inevitable consequences of this ardent pursuit of
entertainments and diversions are langor and dissatisfaction.
He has drained the cup of pleasure to the
last drop, who is at length obliged to confess that all
his hopes are fled; who finds disappointment and disgust
mingled with every enjoyment; who feels astonished
at his own insensibility, and who no longer possesses
the magic of the enchantress, imagination, to
gild and decorate the scene, calls in vain to his assistance
the daughters of sensuality and intemperance:
their caresses can no longer delight his dark and melancholy
mind: the soft and syren song of luxury no
longer can dispel the cloud of discontent that hovers
round his head.
Behold that debilitated weak old man running after
pleasures he can no longer enjoy. The airs of gayety
which he affects render him ridiculous; his attempts
to shine expose him to derision; his endeavors to display
the wit and eloquence of youth betray him into
the garrulity of old age. His conversation, filled with
repetition and tiresome narrative, creates disgust, and
only forces the smile of pity from the lips of his youthful
rivals. To the eye of wisdom, however, who observed
him through all the former periods of his life,
sparkling in the noisy circles of extravagance and vice,
his character always appeared the same.
The wise man, in the midst of the most tumultuous
pleasures, frequently retires within himself, and silently
compares what he might do with what he is doing. Surrounded
by, and even when accidentally engaged in, the[111]
excesses of intoxication, he associates only with those
warm and generous souls whose highly elevated minds
are drawn toward each other by the most virtuous inclinations
and sublime sentiments. The silent retreat
of the mind within itself, has more than once given
birth to enterprizes of the greatest importance and
utility; and it is not difficult to imagine, that some of
the most celebrated actions of mankind were first inspired
among the sounds of music, or conceived amidst
the mazes of the dance. Sensible and elevated minds
never commune more closely with themselves than in
those places of public resort in which the low and vulgar,
surrendering themselves to illusion and caprice, become
incapable of reflection, and blindly suffer themselves
to be overwhelmed by the surrounding torrent
of folly and distraction.
The unceasing pursuit of sensual enjoyment is merely
a mean used by the votaries of worldly pleasure, of
flying from themselves; they seize with avidity upon
any object that promises to occupy the present hour
agreeably, and provide entertainment for the day that is
passing over their heads. To such characters the man
who can invent hour after hour new schemes of pleasure
and open day after day fresh sources of amusement,
is a valuable companion indeed; he is their best,
their only friend. Are then these lazy and luxurious votaries
of sensual pleasures destitute of those abilities
which might prevent this sacrifice of time, and, if properly
exerted, afford them relief? Certainly not. But,
having been continually led from object to object in the
pursuit of pleasure, the assistance of others has habitually
become the first want and greatest necessity of
their lives: they have insensibly lost all power of acting
for themselves, and depend, for every object they
see, for every sensation they feel, for every sentiment
they entertain, on those by whom they are attended.
This is the reason why the rich, who are seldom acquainted
with any other pleasures than those of sense,
are, in general, the most miserable of mankind.
The nobility and courtiers of France think their enjoyments
appear vain and ridiculous only to those who
have not the opportunity of partaking in them; but I
am of a different opinion. Returning one Sunday from
Trianon to Versailles, I perceived at a distance a number
of people assembled upon the terrace of the castle; and
on a nearer approach, I beheld Louis XV. surrounded[112]
by his court, at the windows of his palace. A man
very richly dressed, with a large pair of branching antlers
fastened upon his head, whom they called the stag,
was pursued by about a dozen others who composed
the pack. The pursued and the pursuers leaped into
the great canal, scrambled out again, and ran wildly
round and round, amidst the acclamations of the assembly,
who loudly clapped their hands to testify their delight,
and to encourage the diversion. “What can all
this mean?” said I to a French gentleman who stood
near me. “Sir,” he replied, with a very serious countenance,
“it is for the entertainment of the court.” The
most obscure and indigent individuals may certainly
be much happier than these masters of mankind with
their melancholy slaves and miserable entertainments.
Direful condition! Is there then no occupation whatsoever,
no useful employment, no rational recreation
sufficiently high and dignified for such characters?—Are
they reduced to the melancholy condition of not
being able to perform one good and virtuous action
during the intervals of suspended pleasure? Can they
render no services to friendship, to their country, to
themselves? Are there no poor and miserable beings
to whose bosom they might afford charitable comfort
and relief? Is it, in short, impossible for such characters
in any way to improve themselves in wisdom or
in virtue?
The powers of the human mind are of greater extent
than is generally imagined. He who, either from taste
or necessity, exercises them frequently, soon finds
that the highest felicities of which our nature is capable,
reside entirely within ourselves. The wants of
life are, for the greater part, merely artificial; and although
sensual objects contribute most efficaciously to
our happiness and delight, it is not because they are
indispensably necessary for this purpose, but because
they have been rendered desirable by habit; and, from
the pleasures they produce, we flatter ourselves that
they are absolutely necessary to our felicity. If, however,
we had fortitude to resist their charms, and courage
to seek our happiness in ourselves, we should frequently
find in our own bosoms a greater variety of resources
than all the objects of sense are capable of affording.
Amusements, indeed, may sometimes be found in
those places to which the sexes resort merely to see
and to be seen. The eye may be occasionally gratified by[113]
the sight of objects really agreeable; the ear may listen
to observations truly flattering. Lively thoughts and
sensible remarks now and then prevail. Characters
equally amiable and interesting occasionally mix
among the group. We may form acquaintance with
men of distinguished merit, whom we should not otherwise
have had an opportunity of knowing; and meet
with women of amiable qualities, and irreproachable
conduct, whose refined conversation ravishes the ear
with a delight equal to that with which their exquisite
beauty captivates the heart. But by what a number
of painful sensations must the chance of receiving these
pleasures be purchased! Those whom reason or disgust
restrain from mixing in the idle dissipations of
life, cannot see without a sigh, the gay conceit, the airy
confidence, the blind arrogance, and the bold loquacity,
with which these votaries of worldly pleasure proclaim
a felicity which is almost invariably deceitful; nor
observe without a sigh, the extravagant joy of so many
great men, and the absurd airs of so many gray-headed
children.
Honor, fame, and pleasure are conceived to accompany
an invitation to the board of luxury; although
disease, with leaden sceptre, is known to preside; and
reproach and calumny are indiscriminately cast upon
the purest characters. But he who feels the least energy
of mind, turns with aversion from all society
which tends to weaken its effect; and finds the simplest
fare, enjoyed with freedom and content amidst a
happy and affectionate family, ten thousand times
more agreeable than the rarest dainty, and the richest
wine, with a society where he must sit ceremoniously
silent in compliment to some reputed wit, from whose
lips nothing but absurdities and nonsense proceed.
The spiritless and crowded societies of the world,
where a round of low and trifling amusements fills the
hour of entertainment, and where to display a pomp of
dress and levity of manners is the only ambition,
may afford some pleasure to those light and empty minds
who are impatient of the weight of idleness; but the
wise man, who occasionally resorts to them in search
of rational conversation or temporary amusement, and
only finds a dull unvaried jargon, and a tiresome round
of compliments, will turn with aversion from these temples
of false delight, and exclaim, in the language of
the poet,
[114]
True social pleasure is founded on unlimited confidence,
on an affectionate and reciprocal interchange of
sentiment and opinions. A tender, faithful, refined,
and rational friendship, renders the pleasures of the
world spiritless and disgusting. How joyfully do we
disencumber ourselves from the shackles of society,
for that close and sublime intercourse in which our inclinations
are free, our feelings generous, our sentiments
unbiassed; where a mutuality of thought and
action, of pleasure and of pains uninterruptedly prevail;
where the gentle hand of love conducts us along the
paths of truth and virtue; where every thought is anticipated
before it escapes from the lips; where advice,
consolation, and succor, are reciprocally given and received
in all the accidents and in all the misfortunes of
life! The soul, touched by the charms of friendship,
springs from its apathy and dejection, and views the enlivening
beam of hope awakening it to activity. The
happy pair, casting a retrospective glance on the time
passed, mutually exclaim with the tenderest emotions,
“Oh the delights that we have already experienced!—Oh
the joys that we have already felt!” If the tear of
affliction steal down the cheek of the one, the other
with affection wipes it tenderly away. The sorrows of
one are felt with equal sensibility by the other: and what
sorrow will not an intercourse of hearts so closely and
affectionately united, entirely subdue!—Day after day
they communicate to each other all they have seen, all
they have heard, all that they feel, and every thing that
they know. Time flies before them on his swiftest
pinions. They are never tired of each other’s company
and conversation. The only misfortune they fear, the
greatest indeed they can possibly experience, is the
misfortune of being separated by occasional absence
or untimely death.
But human happiness is continually exposed to interruption.
At the very moment alas; when we vainly
think ourselves the most secure, fate, by a sudden blow,[115]
strikes its unhappy victim even in our arms. All the
pleasure of life then seems forever extinguished, every
object alarms our mind, and every place seems desert
and forlorn. In vain are our arms extended to embrace
our loved, though lost companion; in vain do we
invoke her return. Her well known step still seems to
beat upon the listening ear, and promise her approach;
but suspended sense returns, and the delusive sounds
are heard no more. A death-like silence reigns around,
and involves us in the shades of dreary solitude, unconscious
of every thing but our bleeding hearts.
Wearied and dejected, we imagine ourselves no longer
capable of loving or of being beloved; and life without
love, to the heart that has once felt its pleasures, is
more terrible than death. So sudden a transition from
the highest happiness to the deepest misery overpowers
the mind. No kind friend appears to assuage our sufferings,
or seems capable of forming an adequate idea
of our distress. The pangs, indeed, which such a loss
inflicts, cannot be conceived, unless they have been felt.
The only consolation of the unhappy sufferer is to live
in solitude, and his only wish to die alone. But it is
under circumstances like these that solitude enjoys its
greatest triumph, and the afflicted sufferer receives the
greatest benefits; for there is no sorrow, however great,
no pang, however powerful, that it will not, when wisely
indulged, at first soften, and at length subdue. The
remedy which solitude “administers to a mind diseased,”
is slow and gradual; for the art of living alone
requires much experience, is subject to so many casualties,
and depends so materially upon the temperament
of the patient, that it is necessary we should attain a
complete maturity before any great advantages can be
derived from it. But he who is able to throw off the
galling yoke of prejudice, and possesses a natural esteem
and fondness for retirement, will not be embarrassed
as to the choice he ought to make under such
circumstances. Indifferent to external objects, and
averse from the dissipations of the world, he will rely
on the powers of his mind, and will never be less alone
than when he is in the company of himself.
Men of genius are frequently condemned to employments
as disagreeable to the turn and temper of their
minds, as the most nauseous medicine must be to an
empty stomach. Confined to toil on a dry and disgusting
subject, fixed to a particular spot, and harassed by
subordinate duties, they relinquish all expectation of[116]
tranquillity on this side the grave. Deprived of enjoying
the common pleasures of nature, every object increases
their disgust. “It is not for us,” they exclaim,
“that the youthful zephyrs call forth the budding foliage
with their caressing breath; that the feathered
choir chant in enlivening strains their rural songs; that
the verdant meadows are decked with fragrant flowers.”
But set these complainers free, give them liberty
and leisure to think for themselves, and the enthusiasm
of their minds will soon regenerate, and soar into the
highest regions of intellectual happiness, with the bold
wing and penetrating eye of the bird of Jove.
If solitude be capable of dissipating the afflictions of
persons thus circumstanced, what may not be expected
from its influence on those who are enabled to retire,
at pleasure, to its friendly shades, and who have no
other wish than to enjoy pure air and domestic felicity!
When Antisthenes was asked what advantages philosophy
had afforded him, he answered, “It has taught
me to subdue myself.” Pope says, he never laid his
head upon his pillow, without acknowledging that the
most important lesson of life is to learn the art of being
happy within ourselves. And it seems to me that we
shall all find what Pope looked for, when home is our
content, and every thing about us, even to the dog and
the cat, partakes of our affection.
Health is certainly essential to happiness, and yet
there are circumstances and situations, under which
the privation of it may be attended with tranquillity.
How frequently have I returned thanks to God, when
indisposition has prevented me from going abroad, and
enabled me to recruit my weakened powers in solitude
and silence! Obliged to drag through the streets of
the metropolis day after day during a number of years,
feeble in constitution, weak in limbs; susceptible, on
feeling the smallest cold, to the same sensation as if
knives were separating the flesh from the bone; continually
surrounded, in the course of my profession,
with the most afflicting sorrows; it is not surprising
that I should thank the Almighty with tears of gratitude,
on experiencing even the relief which a confinement
by indisposition procured. A physician, if he possesses
sensibility, must, in his anxiety to relieve the sufferings
of others, frequently forget his own. But, alas!
how frequently must he feel all the horrors of his situation,
when he is summoned to attend patients whose
maladies are beyond the reach of medicine! Under[117]
such circumstances, the indisposition which excuses
my attendance, and leaves me the powers of thought,
affords me comparatively a sweet repose; and, provided
I am not disturbed by the polite interruptions of
ceremonious visiters, I enjoy a pleasing solitude. One
single day passed undisturbed at home in literary leisure,
affords to the mind more real pleasure than all
the circles of fashionable entertainment are able to
bestow.
The fear of being alone is no longer felt either by
the young or old, whenever the mind has acquired the
power of employing itself in some useful or agreeable
study. Ill humor may be banished by adopting a regular
course of reading. Books, indeed, cannot be inspected
without producing a beneficial effect, provided
we always read with a pen or pencil in our hand, and
note down the new ideas that may occur, or the observations
which confirm the knowledge we before possessed;
for reading becomes not only useless, but fatiguing,
unless we apply the information it affords
either to our own characters, or to those of other men.
This habit, however, may be easily acquired; and then
books become one of the most safe and certain antidotes
to lassitude and discontent. By this means a
man becomes his own companion, and finds his best
and most cheerful friend in his own heart.
Pleasures of this kind certainly surpass in a great
degree all those which result merely from the indulgence
of the senses. The pleasures of the mind, generally
speaking, signify sublime meditation, the profound
deductions of reason, and the brilliant effusions
of the imagination; but there are also others, for the
perfect enjoyment of which, neither extensive knowledge
nor extraordinary talents are necessary. Such
are the pleasures which result from active labor;
pleasures equally within the reach of the ignorant and
learned, and not less exquisite than those which result
from the mind. Manual exertions, therefore, ought
never to be despised. I am acquainted with gentlemen
who understand the mechanism of their watches, who
are able to work as painters, locksmiths, carpenters,
and who are not only possessed of the tools and implements
of every trade, but know how to use them.
Such men never feel the least disquietude from the
want of society, and are in general the happiest characters
in existence.
Mental pleasures are within the reach of all persons[118]
who, free, tranquil, and affectionate, are contented
with themselves, and at peace with their fellow-creatures.
The mind contemplates the pranks of school,
the sprightly aberrations of our boyish days, the wanton
stories of early youth, our plays and pastimes, and
all the little hopes and fears of infancy, with fond
delight. Oh! with what approving smiles and soft
regret, the aged cast their eyes upon those happy times
when youthful inclination prompted all their actions,
when every enterprise was undertaken with lively
vigor, and executed with undaunted courage; when
difficulties were sought merely for the purpose of
surmounting them! Let us compare what we were
formerly with what we are at present; or rather, by
giving our thoughts a freer range, reflect on the
various events we have experienced or observed; upon
the means that the Almighty employs to raise or sink
the prosperity of empires; upon the rapid progress
made, even in our time, in every art and science;
upon the diffusion of useful knowledge, and the destruction
of dangerous prejudices; upon the empire
which barbarism and superstition have gained, notwithstanding
the exertions of genius and reason to
prevent them; upon the sublime power of the human
mind and its inefficient productions; and languor will
instantly disappear, and tranquillity, peace, and good
humor prevail.
Thus advantage may in solitude be attained and
relished at every period of our lives; at the most
advanced age, as well as during the vigor of youth.
He who to an unbroken constitution joins a free and
contented mind, and assiduously cultivates the powers
of his understanding, will, if his heart be innocent, at
all times enjoy the purest and most unalterable pleasures.
Employment animates all the functions of the
soul, and calls forth their highest energies. It is the
secret consciousness which every person of a lively
imagination possesses, of the powers of the mind, and
the dignity they are capable of attaining, that creates
the noble anxiety and ardor, which carries their efforts
to the sublimest heights. But if, either by duty or
situation, we maintain too close an intercourse with
society, if we are obliged, in spite of inclination, to
submit to frivolous and fatiguing dissipations, it is only
by quitting the tumult, and entering into silent meditation,
that we feel that effervescence, that desire to
break from bondage, to fly from past errors, and avoid
in future every noisy and tumultuous pleasure.
[119]
The mind never feels with more energy and satisfaction
that it lives, that it is rational, great, active, free,
and immortal, than during those moments in which it
excludes idle and impertinent intruders.
Of all the vexations of life, there are none so insupportable,
as those insipid visits, those annoying partialities,
which occupy the time of frivolous and fashionable
characters. “My thoughts,” says Rousseau, “will
only come when they please, and not when I choose:”
and therefore the intrusions of strangers, or of mere
acquaintances, were always extremely odious to him.
It was for this reason alone that this extraordinary
character, who seldom experienced an hour of tranquillity,
felt such indignation against the importunate
civilities and empty compliments of common conversation,
whilst he enjoyed the rational intercourse of sensible
and well-informed minds with the highest delight.
How frequently are the brightest beams of intellect
obscured by associating with low and little minds!
How frequently do the soundest understandings become
frivolous, by keeping frivolous company! For,
although these bright beams are immediate emanations
from the Deity on the mind of man, they must be matured
by meditation and reflection, before they can
give elevation to genius, and consistency to character.
Virtues to which the mind cannot rise even when
assisted by the most advantageous intercourse, are frequently
the fruits of solitude. Deprived for ever of the
company and conversation of those whom we love and
esteem, we endeavor to charm the uneasy void by
every effort in our power; but while love and friendship
lead us by the hand, and cherish us by their care,
we lean incessantly on their bosoms, and remain inert.
Solitude, were it for this reason alone, is indispensably
necessary to the human character; for when men are
enabled to depend on themselves alone, the soul, tossed
about by the tempest of life, acquires new vigor; learns
to bear with constancy, or avoid with address, those
dangerous rocks on which vulgar minds are inevitably
wrecked; and discovers continually new resources, by
which the mind resists, with stoic courage, the rigors
of its fate.
Weak minds always conceive it most safe to adopt the
sentiments of the multitude. They never venture to
express an opinion upon any subject until the majority
have decided; and blindly follow the sentiments of the
many, whether upon men or things, without troubling[120]
themselves to inquire who are right, or on which side
truth preponderates. A love of equity and truth, indeed,
is seldom found, except in those who have no dread of
solitude. Men of dissipation never protect the weak,
or avenge the oppressed. If the various and powerful
hosts of knaves and fools are your enemies; if you have
been injured in your property by injustice, or traduced
in your fame by calumny, you must not fly for protection
and redress to men of light and dissipated characters;
for they are merely the organs of error, and the
conduit pipes of prejudice.
The knowledge of ourselves is in solitude more easily
and effectually acquired than in any other situation;
for we there live in habits of the strictest intimacy with
our own bosoms. It is certainly possible for men to be
deliberate and wise, even amidst all the tumultuous
folly of the world, especially if their principles be well
fixed before they enter on the stage of life; but integrity
is undoubtedly more easily preserved in the innocent
simplicity of solitude, than in the corrupted intercourses
of society. In the world how many men please only by
their vices! How many profligate villains, and unprincipled
adventurers of insinuating manners, are well
received only because they have learnt the art of administering
to the follies, the weaknesses, and the vices
of others! The mind, intoxicated with the fumes of
that incense which artful flattery is continually offering
to it, is rendered incapable of justly appreciating the
characters of men. On the contrary, we truly discover
in the silence of solitude, the inward complexion of the
heart; and learn not only what the characters of men
are, but what in truth and nature they ought to be.
How many new and useful discoveries may be made
by occasionally forcing ourselves from the vortex of
the world, and retiring to the calm enjoyments of study
and reflection! To accomplish this end, it is only necessary
to commence seriously with our hearts, and to
examine our actions with impartiality. The worldly-minded
man, indeed, has reason to avoid this self-examination,
for the result would in all probability be
painful to his feelings; as he who only judges of himself
by the flattering opinions which others may have expressed
of his character, will, in such a scrutiny, behold
with surprise that he is the miserable slave of
habit and public opinion; submitting himself with scrupulous
exactness, and the best possible grace, to the
tyranny of fashion and established ceremony; never[121]
venturing to oppose their influence, however ridiculous
and absurd it may be; and obsequiously following the
example of others, without daring to resist pursuits
which every one seems so highly to approve. He will
perceive, that almost all his thoughts and actions are
engendered by a base fear of himself, or arise from a
servile complaisance to others; that he only seeks to
flatter the vanities, and indulge the caprices of his superiors,
and becomes the contemptible minister of these
men, without daring to offer them the smallest contradiction,
or hazard an opinion that is likely to give them
the least displeasure. Whoever, with calm consideration,
views this terrifying picture, will feel, in the silent
emotions of his heart, the necessity of occasionally retiring
into solitude, and seeking society with men of
nobler sentiments and purer principles.
Let every one, therefore, who wishes to think with
dignity, or live with ease, seek the retreats of solitude,
and enter into a friendly intercourse with his own heart.
How small a portion of true philosophy, with an enlightened
understanding, will render it humble and
compliant! But in the mists of prejudice, dazzled by
the intellectual glimmer of false lights, every one mistakes
the true path, and seeks for happiness in the
shades of darkness, and in the labyrinths of obscurity.
The habits of retirement and tranquillity can alone
enable us to make a just estimate of men and things,
and it is by renouncing all the prepossessions which
the corruptions of society have implanted in the mind,
that we make the first advances toward the restoration
of reason, and the attainment of felicity.
We have hitherto only pointed out one class of the
general advantages which may be derived from rational
solitude, but there are many others which apply
still more closely to men’s business and bosoms. Who,
alas! is there that has not experienced its comforting
influence in the keenest adversities of life? Who is
there that does not seek relief from its friendly shades
in the langors of convalescence, in the pangs of affliction,
and even in that distressful moment when death
deprives us of those whose company was the charm
and solace of our lives? Happy are they who know
the advantages of a religious retirement, of that holy
rest in which the virtues rivet themselves more closely
to the soul, and in which every man, when he is on
the bed of death, devoutly wishes he had lived.
But these advantages become more conspicuous,[122]
when we compare the manner of thinking which employs
the mind of a solitary philosopher with that of a
worldly sensualist; the tiresome tumultuous life of the
one, with the ease and tranquillity of the other; the
horrors which disturb the death bed of vice, with the
calm sigh which accompanies the expiring soul of virtue.
This is the awful moment in which we feel how
important it is to commune morally with ourselves,
and religiously with our Creator; to enable us to bear
the sufferings of life with dignity, and the pains of
death with ease.
The sick, the sorrowful, and the discontented, may
find equal relief in solitude; it administers a balm to
their tortured souls, heals the deep and painful wounds
they have received, and in time restores them to their
pristine health and vigor. The deceitful shrine in which
the intoxication of sensuality involved health and happiness
disappears, and they behold, in the place of imaginary
joys, those objects only which afford real pleasure.
Prosperity arrays every object in the most glowing and
delightful colors; but to adversity every thing appears
black and dismal. Nor are the errors of these contrary
extremes discovered until the moment when the curtain
drops, and dissipates the illusion: the deceitful
dream continues until the imagination is silenced.
The unhappy then perceive that the Almighty was
watching over them, even when they conceived themselves
entirely abandoned: the happy then discover
the vanity of those pleasures and amusements to which
they surrendered themselves so implicitly during the
intoxication of the world, and reflect seriously upon
their misconduct; upon their present state and future
destiny; and upon the modes most likely to conduct
them to true felicity. How miserable should we be,
were the Divine Providence to grant us every thing we
desire! At the very instant when we conceive all the
happiness of our lives annihilated, God, perhaps, is performing
something extraordinary in our favor. Certain
it is, that patience and perseverance will, in solitude,
convert the deepest sorrow into tranquillity and
joy. Those objects which, at a distance, appear menacing,
lose, on a nearer approach, their disagreeable aspect,
and, in the event, frequently produce the most
agreeable pleasures. He who tries every expedient,
who boldly opposes himself to every difficulty, who
steadily resists every obstacle, who neglects no exertion
within his power, and relies with confidence on the assistance[123]
of God, extracts from affliction both its poison
and its sting, and deprives misfortune of its victory.
Sorrow, misfortune, and sickness, soon render solitude
easy and familiar to our minds. How willingly
do we renounce the world, and become indifferent to
all its pleasures, when the insidious eloquence of the
passions is silenced, and our powers are debilitated by
vexation or ill health! It is then we perceive the weakness
of those succors which the world affords. How
many useful truths, alas! has the bed of sickness and
sorrow instilled even into the minds of kings and
princes! truths which, in the hour of health, they
would have been unable to learn amidst the deceitful
counsels of their pretended friends. The time, indeed,
in which a valetudinarian is capable of employing his
powers with facility and success, in a manner conformable
to his designs, is short, and runs rapidly away.
Those only who enjoy robust health can exclaim,
“Time is my own;” for he who labors under continual
sickness and suffering, and whose avocations depend
on the public necessity or caprice, can never say that
he has one moment to himself. He must watch the
fleeting hours as they pass, and seize an interval of leisure
when and where he can. Necessity, as well as reason,
convinces him that he must, in spite of his daily sufferings,
his wearied body, or his harassed mind, firmly
resist his accumulating troubles; and, if he would
save himself from becoming the victim of dejection,
he must manfully combat the difficulties by which he
is attacked. The more we enervate ourselves, the
more we become the prey of ill health; but determined
courage, and obstinate resistance, frequently renovate
our powers; and he who, in the calm of solitude, vigorously
wrestles with misfortune, is, in the event, sure
of gaining the victory.
The influence of the mind upon the body is a consolatory
truth to those who are subject to constitutional
complaints. Supported by this reflection, the efforts of
reason continue unsubdued; the influence of religion
maintains its empire; and the lamentable truth, that
men of the finest sensibility, and most cultivated understanding,
frequently possess less fortitude under affliction
than the most vulgar of mankind, remains unknown.
Campanella, incredible as it may seem, suffered
by the indulgence of melancholy reflections, a
species of mental torture more painful than any bodily
torture could have produced. I can, however, from[124]
my own experience, assert, that, even in the extremity
of distress, every object which diverts the attention,
softens the evils we endure, and frequently drives them
entirely away. By diverting the attention, many celebrated
philosophers have been able not only to preserve
a tranquil mind in the midst of the most poignant sufferings,
but have even increased the strength of their
intellectual faculties, in spite of their corporeal pains.
Rousseau composed the greater part of his immortal
works under the continual pressure of sickness and
sorrow. Gellert, who, by his mild, agreeable, and instructive
writings, has become the preceptor of Germany,
certainly found, in this interesting occupation, the
secret remedy against melancholy. Mendelsohm, at
an age far advanced in life, and not, in general, subject
to dejection, was for a long time oppressed by an
almost inconceivable derangement of the nervous system;
but, by submitting with patience and docility to
his sufferings, he still maintains all the noble and high
advantages of youth. Garve, who was for several
years unable to read, to write, or even to think, has
since produced his treatise upon Cicero, in which this
profound writer, so circumspect in all his expressions
that he appears hurt if any improper word escapes his
pen, thanks the Almighty, with a sort of rapture, for
the weakness of his constitution, because it had taught
him the extraordinary influence which the powers of
the mind have over those of the body.
Solitude is not merely desirable, but absolutely necessary,
to those characters who possess sensibilities too
quick, and imaginations too ardent, to live quietly in
the world, and who are incessantly inveighing against
men and things. Those who suffer their minds to be
subdued by circumstances which would scarcely produce
an emotion in other bosoms; who complain of
the severity of their misfortunes on occasions which
others would not feel; who are dispirited by every occurrence
which does not produce immediate satisfaction
and pleasure; who are incessantly tormented by
the illusion of fancy; who are unhinged and dejected
the moment prosperity is out of their view; who repine
at what they possess, from an ignorance of what they
really want; whose minds are for ever veering from
one vain wish to another; who are alarmed at every
thing, and enjoy nothing; are not formed for society,
and, if solitude have no power to heal their wounded
spirits, are certainly incurable.
[125]
Men who in other respects possess rational minds
and pious dispositions, frequently fall into low spirits
and despair; but it is in general almost entirely their
own fault. If it proceed, as is generally the case, from
unfounded fears; if they love to torment themselves
and others on every trivial disappointment or slight indisposition;
if they constantly resort to medicine for
that relief which reason alone can bestow; if they
fondly indulge, instead of repressing, these idle fancies;
if, after having endured the most excruciating pains
with patience, and supported the greatest misfortunes
with fortitude, they neither can nor will learn to bear
the puncture of the smallest pin, or those trifling adversities
to which human life is unavoidably subject;
they can only attribute their unhappy condition to their
own misconduct; and, although they might, by no
very irksome effort of their understandings, look with
an eye of composure and tranquillity on the multiplied
and fatal fires issuing from the dreadful cannon’s
mouth, will continue shamefully subdued by the idle
apprehensions of being fired at by pop-guns.
All these qualities of the soul, fortitude, firmness, and
stoic inflexibility, are much sooner acquired by silent
meditation than amidst the noisy intercourse of mankind,
where innumerable difficulties continually oppose
us; where ceremony, servility, flattery, and fear, contaminate
our dispositions; where every occurrence
opposes our endeavors; and where, for this reason,
men of the weakest minds, and the most contracted
notions, become more active and popular, gain more
attention, and are better received, than men of feeling
hearts and liberal understandings.
The mind, in short, fortifies itself with impregnable
strength in the bowers of solitary retirement against
every species of suffering and affliction. The frivolous
attachments which, in the world, divert the soul from
its proper objects, and drive it wandering, as chance
may direct, into an eccentric void, die away. Contented,
from experience, with the little which nature requires,
rejecting every superfluous desire, and having
acquired a complete knowledge of ourselves, the visitations
of the Almighty, when he chastises us with affliction,
humbles our presumptuous pride, disappoints
our vain conceits, restrains the violence of our passions,
and makes us sensible of our inanity and weakness, are
received with composure and felt without surprise.
How many important truths do we here learn, of which[126]
the worldly minded man has no idea! Casting the eye
of calm reflection on ourselves, and on the objects
around us, how resigned we become to the lot of humanity!
How different every object appears! The
heart expands to every noble sentiment; the bloom of
conscious virtue brightens on the cheek; the mind
teems with sublime conceptions; and, boldly taking
the right path, we at length reach the bowers of innocence,
and the plains of peace.
On the death of a beloved friend, we constantly feel
a strong desire to withdraw from society; but our
worldly acquaintances unite in general to destroy this
laudable inclination. Conceiving it improper to mention
the subject of our grief, our companions, cold and
indifferent to the event, surround us, and think their
duties sufficiently discharged by paying the tributary
visit, and amusing us with the current topics of the
town. Such idle pleasantries cannot convey a balm of
comfort into the wounded heart.
When I, alas! within two years after my arrival in
Germany, lost the lovely idol of my heart, the amiable
companion of my former days, I exclaimed a thousand
times to my surrounding friends, Oh! leave me to myself!
Her departed spirit still hovers round me: the
tender recollection of her society, the afflicting remembrance
of her sufferings on my account, are always
present to my mind. What mildness and affability!
Her death was as calm and resigned as her life was
pure and virtuous. During five long months, the lingering
pangs of dissolution hung continually around
her. One day, as she reclined upon her pillow, while
I read to her “The Death of Christ,” by Rammler,
she cast her eyes over the page, and silently pointed
out to me the following passage; “My breath grows
weak, my days are shortened, my heart is full of affliction,
and my soul prepares to take its flight.” Alas!
when I recall all those circumstances to my mind, and
recollect how impossible it was for me to abandon the
world at that moment of anguish and distress, when I
carried the seeds of death within my bosom; when I
had neither fortitude to bear my afflictions, nor courage
to resist them, while I was yet pursued by malice,
and traduced by calumny; I can easily conceive, in
such a situation, that my exclamation might be, leave
me to myself. To a heart thus torn by too rigorous a
destiny from the bosom that was opened for its reception;[127]
from a bosom in which it fondly dwelt; from an
object that it dearly loved, detached from every object,
at a loss where to fix its affections or communicate its
feelings, solitude alone can administer comfort.
Solitude, when it has ripened and preserved the tender
and humane feelings of the heart, and created in
the mind a salutary distrust of our vain reason and
boasted abilities, may be considered to have brought
us nearer to God. Humility is the first lesson we learn
from reflection, and self distrust the first proof we give
of having obtained a knowledge of ourselves. When,
in attending the duties of my profession, I behold, on
the bed of sickness, the efforts of the soul to oppose its
impending dissolution, and discover, by the increasing
torments of the patient, the rapid advances of death;
when I see the unhappy sufferer extend his cold and
trembling hands to thank the Almighty for the smallest
mitigation of his pains; when I hear his utterance
choked by intermingled groans, and view the tender
looks, the silent anguish of his attending friends; all
my fortitude abandons me; my heart bleeds; and I
tear myself from the sorrowful scene, only to pour my
tears more freely over the lamentable lot of humanity, to
regret the inefficacy of those medical powers which I
am supposed only to have sought with so much anxiety
as a mean of prolonging my own miserable existence,
The wisdom that teaches us to avoid the snares of
the world, is not to be acquired by the incessant pursuit
of entertainments; by flying, without reflection,
from one party to another; by continual conversation
on low and trifling subjects; by undertaking every
thing and doing nothing. “He who would acquire
true wisdom,” says a celebrated philosopher, “must
learn to live in solitude.” An uninterrupted course of
dissipation stifles every virtuous sentiment. The dominion
of reason is lost amidst the intoxications of
pleasure; its voice is no longer heard; its authority is[128]
no longer obeyed; the mind no longer strives to surmount
temptations; but instead of shunning the perils
which the passions scatter in our way, we run eagerly
to find them. The idea of God, and the precepts of his
holy religion, are never so little remembered as in the
ordinary intercourses of society. Engaged in a multiplicity
of absurd pursuits, entranced in the delirium of
gayety, inflamed by the continual ebriety which raises
the passions and stimulates the desires, every connexion
between God and man is dissolved; the bright and
noble faculty of reason obscured; and even the great
and important duties of religion, the only source of
true felicity, totally obliterated from the mind, or remembered
only with levity and indifference. On the
contrary, he who, entering into a serious self-examination,
elevates his thoughts in silence toward his God;
who consults the theatre of nature, the spangled
firmament of heaven, the meadows enamelled with
flowers, the stupendous mountains, and the silent
groves, as the temples of the Divinity; who directs the
emotions of his heart to the great Author and Conductor
of every thing; who has his enlightened providence
continually before his eyes, must, most assuredly, have
already lived in pious solitude and religious retirement.
The pious disposition which a zealous devotion to
God engenders in solitude, may, it is true, in certain
characters, and under particular circumstances, degenerate
into the gloom of superstition, or rise into the
phrenzy of fanaticism; but these excesses soon abate;
and, compared with that fatal supineness which extinguishes
every virtue, are really advantageous. The
sophistry of the passions is silent during the serious
hours of self-examination, and the perturbations we
feel on the discovery of our errors and defects, is converted
by the light of a pure and rational faith, into
happy ease and perfect tranquillity. The fanatic enthusiast
presents himself before the Almighty much oftener
than the supercilious wit who derides an holy religion,
and calls piety a weakness. Philosophy and morality
become in solitude the handmaids of religion, and join
their powers to conduct us into the bowers of eternal
peace. They teach us to examine our hearts, and exhort
us to guard against the dangers of fanaticism.
But if virtue cannot be instilled into the soul without
convulsive efforts, they also admonish us not to be intimidated
by the apprehension of danger. It is not in
the moment of joy, when we turn our eyes from God[129]
and our thoughts from eternity, that we experience
those salutary fervors of the soul, which even religion,
with all her powers, cannot produce so soon as a mental
affliction or a corporeal malady. The celebrated
M. Grave, one of the greatest philosophers of Germany,
exclaimed to Dr. Spalding and myself, “I am indebted
to my malady for having led me to make a
closer scrutiny and more accurate observation on my
own character.”
In the last moments of life, it is certain that we all
wish we had passed our days in greater privacy and
solitude, in stricter intimacy with ourselves, and in
closer communion with God. Pressed by the recollection
of our errors, we then clearly perceive that
they were occasioned by not having shunned the snares
of the world, and by not having watched with sufficient
care over the inclinations of our hearts. Oppose the
sentiments of a solitary man, who has passed his life
in pious conference with God, to those which occupy
a worldly mind, forgetful of its Creator, and sacrificing
its dearest interests to the enjoyment of the moment:
compare the character of a wise man, who reflects in
silence on the importance of eternity, with that of a
fashionable being, who consumes all his time at
ridottos, balls, and assemblies; and we shall then perceive
that solitude, dignified retirement, select friendships,
and rational society, can alone afford true pleasure,
and give us what all the vain enjoyments of the
world will never bestow, consolation in death, and
hope of everlasting life. But the bed of death discovers
most clearly the difference between the just man,
who has quietly passed his days in religious contemplation,
and the man of the world, whose thoughts have
only been employed to feed his passions and gratify his
desires. A life passed amidst the tumultuous dissipations
of the world, even when unsullied by the commission
of any positive crime, concludes, alas! very
differently from that which has been spent in the bowers
of solitude, adorned by innocence, and rewarded by
virtue.
But, as example teaches more effectually than precept,
and curiosity is more alive to recent facts than remote
illustrations, I shall here relate the history of a man of
family and fashion, who a few years since shot himself
in London; from which it will appear, that men possessed
even of the best feelings of the heart, may be[130]
rendered extremely miserable, by suffering their principles
to be corrupted by the practice of the world.
The honorable Mr. Damer, the eldest son of Lord
Milton, was five and thirty years of age when he put
a period to his existence by means perfectly correspondent
to the principles in which he had lived. He was
married to a rich lady, the daughter-in-law of General
Conway. Nature had endowed him with extraordinary
talents; but a most infatuated fondness for excessive
dissipation obscured the brightest faculties of his
mind, and perverted many of the excellent qualities of
the heart. His houses, his carriages, his horses, and
his liveries, surpassed in splendor and magnificence
every thing sumptuous and costly even in the superb
and extravagant metropolis of Great Britain. The
fortune he possessed was great; but the variety of lavish
expenditures in which he engaged exceeded his income,
and he was reduced at length to the necessity of
borrowing money. He raised, in different ways, near
forty thousand pounds, the greater part of which he
employed with improvident generosity in relieving
the distresses of his less opulent companions; for his
heart overflowed with tenderness and compassion; but
this exquisite sensibility, which was ever alive to the
misfortunes of others, was at length awakened to his
own embarrassed situation; and his mind driven by
the seeming irretrievable condition of his affairs, to the
utmost verge of despair. Retiring to a common brothel,
he sent for four women of the town, and passed
several hours in their company with apparent good
spirits and unencumbered gayety; but, when the
dead of night arrived, he requested of them, with visible
dejection, to retire; and immediately afterward
drawing from his pocket a pistol, which he had carried
about him the whole afternoon, blew out his brains. It
appeared that he had passed the evening with these
women in the same manner as he had been used to pass
many others with different women of the same description,
without demanding favours which they
would most willingly have granted, and only desiring,
in return for the money he lavished on them, the dissipation
of their discourse, or at most, the ceremony
of a salute, to divert the sorrow that preyed upon his
tortured mind. But the gratitude he felt for the temporary
oblivion which these intercourses afforded, sometimes
ripened into feelings of the warmest friendship.
A celebrated actress of the London theatre, whose conversations[131]
had already drained him of considerable
sums of money, requested of him, only three days before
his death, to send her five and twenty guineas.
At that moment he had only ten guineas about him;
but he sent her, with an apology for his inability to
comply immediately with her request, all he had, and
soon afterward borrowed the remainder of the money,
and sent it to her without delay. This unhappy young
man, shortly before the fatal catastrophe, had written
to his father, and disclosed to him the distressed situation
he was in; and the very night on which he terminated
his existence, his affectionate parent, the good
Lord Milton, arrived in London, for the purpose of discharging
all the debts, and arranging the affairs of his
unhappy son. Thus lived and died this destitute and
dissipated man! How different from that life which
the innocent live, or that death which the virtuous die!
I hope I may be permitted in this place to relate the
story of a young lady whose memory I am extremely
anxious to preserve; for I can with great truth say of
her, as Petrarch said of his beloved Laura, “the world
was unacquainted with the excellence of her character:
for she was only known to those whom she has
left behind to bewail her loss.” Solitude was all the
world she knew; for her only pleasures were those
which a retired and virtuous life affords. Submitting
with pious resignation to the dispensations of heaven,
her weak frame sustained, with steady fortitude, every
affliction of mortality. Mild, good, and tender, she endured
her sufferings without a murmur or sigh; and
although naturally timid and reserved, disclosed the
feelings of her soul with all the warmth of filial enthusiasm.
Of this description was the superior character
of whom I now write; a character who convinced me,
by her fortitude under the severest misfortunes, how
much strength solitude is capable of conveying to the
mind even of the feeblest being. Diffident of her own
powers, she listened to the precepts of a fond parent,
and relied with perfect confidence on the goodness of
God. Taught by my experience, submitting to my
judgment, she entertained for me the most ardent affection;
and convinced me, not by professions, but
by actions, of her sincerity. Willingly would I
have sacrificed my life to have saved her; and I am
satisfied that she would as willingly have given
up her own for me. I had no pleasure but in pleasing
her, and my endeavors for that purpose were most[132]
gratefully returned. A rose was my favorite flower,
and she presented one to me almost daily during the
season. I received it from her hand with the highest
delight, and cherished it as the richest treasure. A
malady of almost a singular kind, a hæmorrhage in the
lungs, suddenly deprived me of the comfort of this beloved
child, and tore her from my protecting arms.
From the knowledge I had of her constitution, I immediately
perceived that the disorder was mortal.
How frequently during that fatal day did my wounded,
bleeding heart, bend me on my knees before God to
supplicate for her recovery. But I concealed my feelings
from her observation. Although sensible of her
danger, she never discovered the least apprehension
of its approach. Smiles played around her pallid
cheeks whenever I entered or quitted the room; and
when worn down by the fatal distemper, a prey to the
most corroding grief, a victim to the sharpest and most
intolerable pains, she made no complaint; but mildly
answered all my questions by some short sentence,
without entering into any detail. Her decay and impending
dissolution became obvious to the eye; but to the
last moment of her life, her countenance preserved a
serenity correspondent to the purity of her mind, and
the affectionate tenderness of her heart. Thus I beheld
my dear and only daughter, at the age of five and
twenty, after a lingering suffering of nine long, long
months, expire in my arms. So long and so severe an
attack was not necessary to the conquest: she had
been the submissive victim of ill health from her earliest
infancy; her appetite was almost gone when we
left Swisserland: a residence which she quitted with
her usual sweetness of temper, and without discovering
the smallest regret: although a young man, as
handsome in his person as he was amiable in the qualities
of his mind, the object of her first, her only affection,
a few weeks afterward put a period to his existence.
During the few happy days we passed at Hanover,
where she rendered herself universally respected and
beloved, she amused herself by composing religious
prayers, which were afterward found among her papers,
and in which she implores death to afford her a
speedy relief from her pains. During the same period
she wrote also many letters, always affecting, and frequently
sublime. They were couched in expressions
of the same desire speedily to reunite her soul with
the Author of her days. The last words that my dear,[133]
my beloved child uttered, amidst the most painful agonies,
were these—“To-day I shall taste the joys of
heaven!”
How unworthy of this bright example should we be,
if, after having seen the severest sufferings sustained
by a female in the earliest period of life, and of the
weakest constitution, we permitted our minds to be dejected
by misfortunes which courage might enable us
to surmount! A female who under the anguish of inexpressible
torments, never permitted a sigh or complaint
to escape from her lips, but submitted with silent
resignation to the will of heaven, in hope of meeting
with reward hereafter. She was ever active, invariably
mild, and always compassionate to the miseries of
others. But we, who have before our eyes the sublime
instructions which a character thus virtuous and noble
has here given us; we, who like her, aspire to a seat
in the mansions of the blessed, refuse the smallest sacrifice,
make no endeavor to stem with courage the
torrent of adversity, or to acquire that degree of patience
and resignation, which a strict examination of
our own hearts, and silent communion with God, would
certainly afford.
Sensible and unfortunate beings! The slight misfortunes
by which you are now oppressed, and driven to
despair (for slight, indeed, they are, when compared
with mine,) will ultimately raise your minds above the
low considerations of the world, and give a strength to
your power which you now conceive to be impossible.
You now think yourselves sunk into the deepest abyss
of suffering and sorrow; but the time will soon arrive
when you will perceive yourselves in that happy state
in which the mind verges from earth and fixes its attention
on heaven. You will then enjoy a calm repose,
be susceptible of pleasures equally substantial and sublime,
and possess in lieu of tumultuous anxieties for
life, the serene and comfortable hope of immortality.
Blessed, supremely blessed, is he who knows the value
of retirement and tranquillity, who is capable of enjoying
the silence of the groves, and all the pleasures of
rural solitude. The soul then tastes celestial delight
even under the deepest impressions of sorrow and dejection;
regains its strength, collects new courage, and
acts with perfect freedom. The eye then looks with
fortitude on the transient sufferings of disease; the
mind no longer feels the dread of being alone; and we
learn to cultivate, during the remainder of our lives, a
bed of roses round even the tomb of death.
[134]
The advantages of solitude are not confined to rank,
or fortune, or to circumstances. Fragrant breezes,
magnificent forests, richly tinted meadows, and that
endless variety of beautiful objects which the birth of
spring spreads over the face of nature, enchant not
only philosophers, kings, and heroes, but ravish the
mind of the meanest spectator with exquisite delight.
An English author has very justly observed, that “it
is not necessary that he who looks with pleasure on
the color of a flower, should study the principles of vegetation;
or that the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems
should be compared, before the light of the sun
can gladden, or its warmth invigorate. Novelty in
itself is a source of gratification; and Milton justly
observes, that to him who has been long pent up in
cities, no rural object can be presented which will not
delight or refresh some of his senses.”
Exiles themselves frequently experience the advantages
and enjoyments of solitude. Instead of the
world from which they are banished, they form, in the
tranquillity of retirement, a new world for themselves;
forget the false joys and fictitious pleasures which they
followed in the zenith of greatness, habituate their
minds to others of a nobler kind, more worthy the
attention of rational beings; and to pass their days
with tranquillity, invent a variety of innocent felicities,
which are only thought of at a distance from society,
far removed from all consolation, far from their
country, their families, and their friends.
But exiles, if they wish to insure happiness in retirement,
must, like other men, fix their minds upon some
one object, and adopt the pursuit of it in such a way as
to revive their buried hopes, or to excite the prospect
of approaching pleasure.
Maurice, prince of Isenbourg, distinguished himself
by his courage during a service of twenty years under
Ferdinand, duke of Brunswick, and Marshal Broglio,
and in the war between the Russians and the Turks.
Health and repose were sacrificed to the gratification
of his ambition and love of glory. During his service
in the Russian army, he fell under the displeasure of
the empress, and was sent into exile. The calamitous[135]
condition to which persons exiled by this government
are reduced is well known; but this philosophic prince
contrived to render even a Russian banishment agreeable.
While oppressed both in body and mind by the painful
reflections which his situation at first created, and
reduced by his anxieties to a mere skeleton, he accidentally
met with the little essay written by Lord Bolingbroke
on the subject of Exile. He read it several
times, and, “in proportion to the number of times I
read,” said the prince, in the preface to the elegant and
nervous translation he made of this work, “I felt all
my sorrows and disquietudes vanish.”
This essay by Lord Bolingbroke upon exile, is a master-piece
of stoic philosophy and fine writing. He there
boldly examines all the adversities of life. “Let us,”
says he, “set all our past and present afflictions at once
before our eyes: let us resolve to overcome them instead
of flying from them, or wearing out the sense of
them with long and ignominious patience. Instead of
palliating remedies, let us use the incision knife and
the caustic, search the wound to the bottom, and work
an immediate and radical cure.”
Perpetual banishment, like uninterrupted solitude,
certainly strengthens the powers of the mind, and enables
the sufferer to collect sufficient force to support his
misfortunes. Solitude, indeed, becomes an easy situation
to those exiles who are inclined to indulge the
pleasing sympathies of the heart; for they then experience
pleasures that were before unknown, and from
that moment forget those they tasted in the more flourishing
and prosperous conditions of life.
Brutus, when he visited the banished Marcellus in his
retreat at Mitylene, found him enjoying the highest felicities
of which human nature is susceptible, and devoting
his time, as before his banishment, to the study
of every useful science. Deeply impressed by the example
this unexpected scene afforded, he felt, on his return,
that it was Brutus who was exiled, and not Marcellus
whom he left behind. Quintus Metellus Numidicus
had experienced the like fate a few years before.
While the Roman people, under the guidance of Marius
were laying the foundation of that tyranny which Cesar
afterward completed, Metellus, singly, in the midst
of an alarmed senate, and surrounded by an enraged
populace, refused to take the oath imposed by
the pernicious laws of the tribune Saturnius; and his
intrepid conduct was converted, by the voice of faction,[136]
into a high crime against the state; for which he
was dragged from his senatorial seat by the licentious
rabble, exposed to the indignity of a public impeachment,
and sentenced to perpetual exile. The more
virtuous citizens, however, took arms in his defence,
and generously resolved rather to perish than behold
their country unjustly deprived of so much merit: but
this magnanimous Roman, whom no persuasion could
induce to do wrong, declined to increase the confusion
of the commonwealth by encouraging resistance, conceiving
it a duty he owed to the laws, not to suffer any
sedition to take place on his account. Contenting himself
with protesting his innocence, and sincerely lamenting
the public phrenzy, he exclaimed, as Plato
had done before during the distractions of the Athenian
commonwealth, “If the times should mend, I
shall recover my station; if not, it is a happiness to be
absent from Rome;” and departed without regret into
exile, fully convinced of its advantages to a mind incapable
of finding repose except on foreign shores, and
which at Rome must have been incessantly tortured
by the hourly sight of a sickly state and an expiring
republic.
Rutilius also, feeling the same contempt for the sentiments
and manners of the age, voluntarily withdrew
himself from the corrupted metropolis of the republic.
Asia had been defended by his integrity and courage
against the ruinous and oppressive extortion of the
publicans. These noble and spirited exertions, which
he was prompted to make not only from his high sense
of justice, but in the honourable discharge of the particular
duties of his office, drew on him the indignation
of the equestrian order, and excited the animosity
of the faction which supported the interests of Marius.
They induced the vile and infamous Apicius to become
the instrument of his destruction. He was accused of
corruption; and as the authors and abettors of this false
accusation sat as judges on his trial, Rutilius, the most
innocent and virtuous citizen of the republic, was of
course condemned: for, indeed, he scarcely condescended
to defend the cause. Seeking an asylum in
the east, this truly respectable Roman, whose merits
were not only overlooked, but traduced, by his ungrateful
country, was every where received with profound
veneration and unqualified applause. He had
however, before the term of his exile expired, an opportunity
of exhibiting the just contempt he felt for[137]
the treatment he had received; for when Sylla earnestly
solicited him to return to Rome, he not only refused
to comply with his request, but removed his residence
to a greater distance from his infatuated country.
Cicero, however, who possessed in an eminent degree
all the resources and sentiments which are necessary
to render solitude pleasant and advantageous, is a
memorable exception to these instances of happy and
contented exiles. This eloquent patriot, who had been
publicly proclaimed, “the saviour of his country,”
who had pursued his measures with undaunted perseverance,
in defiance of the open menaces of a desperate faction,
and the concealed daggers of hired assassins, sunk
into dejection and dismay under a sentence of exile. The
strength of his constitution had long been impaired by
incessant anxiety and fatigue; and the terrors of banishment
so oppressed his mind, that he lost all his powers,
and became, from the deep melancholy into which
it plunged him, totally incapable of adopting just sentiments,
or pursuing spirited measures. By this weak
and unmanly conduct he disgraced an event by which
Providence intended to render his glory complete.
Undetermined where to go, or what to do, he lamented,
with effeminate sighs and childish tears, that he could
now no longer enjoy the luxuries of his fortune, the
splendor of his rank, or the charms of his popularity.
Weeping over the ruins of his magnificent mansion,
which Clodius levelled with the ground, and groaning
for the absence of his wife, Terentia, whom he soon
afterward repudiated, he suffered the deepest melancholy
to seize upon his mind: became a prey to the
most inveterate grief; complained with bitter anguish
of wants, which, if supplied, would have afforded him
no enjoyment; and acted, in short, so ridiculously, that
both his friends and his enemies concluded that adversity
had deranged his mind. Cesar beheld with secret
and malignant pleasure, the man who had refused
to act as his lieutenant, suffering under the scourge of
Clodius. Pompey hoped that all sense of his ingratitude
would be effaced by the contempt and derision to
which a benefactor, whom he had shamefully abandoned,
thus meanly exposed his character. Atticus
himself, whose mind was bent on magnificence and
money, and who, by his temporizing talents, endeavored
to preserve the friendship of all parties, without enlisting
in any, blushed for the unmanly conduct of Cicero;
and in the censorial style of Cato, instead of his[138]
own plausible dialect, severely reproached him for continuing
so meanly attached to his former fortunes.
Solitude had no influence over a mind so weak and depressed
as to turn the worst side of every subject to its
view. He died, however, with greater heroism than
he lived; “approach, old soldier!” cried he, from his
litter, to Popilius Lœnas, his former client and present
murderer, “and, if you have the courage, take my
life.”
“These instances,” says Lord Bolingbroke, “show
that as change of place, simply considered, can render
no man unhappy; so the other evils which are objected
to exile, either cannot happen to wise and virtuous
men, or, if they do happen to them, cannot render
them miserable. Stones are hard, and cakes of ice are
cold, and all who feel them feel alike; but the good or
the bad events which fortune brings upon us, are felt
according to the qualities that we, not they, possess.
They are in themselves indifferent and common accidents,
and they acquire strength by nothing but our
vice or our weakness. Fortune can dispense neither
felicity nor infelicity, unless we co-operate with her.
Few men who are unhappy under the loss of an estate,
would be happy in the possession of it; and those who
deserve to enjoy the advantages which exile takes
away, will not be unhappy when they are deprived of
them.”
An exile, however, cannot hope to see his days glide
quietly away in rural delights and philosophic repose,
except he has conscientiously discharged those duties
which he owed to the world, and given that example
of rectitude to future ages which every character exhibits
who is as great after his fall as he was at the
most brilliant period of his prosperity.
The decline of life, and particularly the condition
of old age, derive from solitude the purest sources of
uninterrupted enjoyment. Old age when considered
as a period of comparative quietude and repose, as a
serious and contemplative interval between a transitory
existence and an approaching immortality, is, perhaps,[139]
the most agreeable condition of human life: a
condition to which solitude affords a secure harbor
against those shattering tempests to which the frail
bark of man is continually exposed in the short but
dangerous voyage of the world; a harbor from whence
he may securely view the rocks and quicksands which
threatened his destruction, and which he has happily
escaped.
Men are by nature disposed to investigate the various
properties of distant objects before they think of contemplating
their own characters; like modern travellers
who visit foreign countries before they are acquainted
with their own. But prudence will exhort
the young, and experience teach the aged, to conduct
themselves on very different principles; and both the
one and the other will find that solitude and self-examination
are the beginning and the end of true wisdom.
The levity of youth, by this communion large and
high, will be repressed, and the depression which sometimes
accompanies old age entirely removed. An unceasing
succession of gay hopes, fond desires, ardent
wishes, high delights, and unfounded fancies, form
the character of our early years; but those which
follow are marked with melancholy and increasing
sorrows. A mind, however that is invigorated
by observation and experience, remains dauntless
and unmoved, amidst both the prosperities
and adversities of life. He who is no longer forced to
exert his powers, and who at an early period of his
life has well studied the manners of men, will complain
very little of the ingratitude with which his
favors and anxieties have been requited. All he asks
is, that the world will let him alone: and having a
thorough knowledge not only of his own character,
but of mankind, he is enabled to enjoy the comforts of
repose.
It is finely remarked by a celebrated German, that
there are political as well as religious Carthusians, and[140]
that both orders are sometimes composed of most excellent
and pious characters. “It is,” says this admirable
writer, “in the deepest and most sequestered recesses
of forests that we meet with the peaceful sage,
the calm observer, the friend of truth, and the lover of
his country, who renders himself beloved by his wisdom,
revered for his knowledge, respected for his veracity,
and adored for his benevolence; whose confidence
and friendship every one is anxious to gain;
and who excites admiration by the eloquence of his
conversation, and esteem by the virtue of his actions,
while he raises wonder by the obscurity of his
name, and the mode of his existence. The giddy multitude
solicit him to relinquish his solitude, and seat
himself on the throne: but they perceive inscribed on
his forehead, beaming with sacred fire, odi profanum
vulgus et arceo; and instead of being his seducers,
become his disciples.” But, alas! this extraordinary
character, whom I saw some years ago in Weteravia,
who inspired me with filial reverence and affection,
and whose animated countenance announced the superior
wisdom and happy tranquillity of his mind, is now
no more. There did not perhaps at that time exist in
any court a more profound statesman: he was intimately
acquainted with all, and corresponded personally
with some of the most celebrated sovereigns of Europe.
I never met with an observer who penetrated with
such quick and accurate sagacity into the minds and
characters of men, who formed such true opinions of
the world, or criticised with such discerning accuracy
the actions of those who were playing important parts
on its various theatres. There never was a mind more
free, more enlarged, more powerful, or more engaging;
or an eye more lively and inquisitive. He was the man,
of all others, in whose company I could have lived with
the highest pleasure, and died with the greatest comfort.
The rural habitation in which he lived, was simple in
its structure, and modest in its attire; the surrounding
grounds and gardens laid out in the happy simplicity
of nature; and his fare healthy and frugal. I never
felt a charm more powerful than that which filled my
bosom while I contemplated the happy solitude of the
venerable Baron de Schautenbach at Weteravia.
Rousseau, feeling his end approach, also passed the
few remaining years of an uneasy life in solitude. It
was during old age that he composed the best and
greater part of his admirable works; but, although he[141]
employed his time with judicious activity, his feelings
had been too deeply wounded by the persecutions of
the world, to enable him to find complete tranquillity in
the bowers of retirement. Unhappily he continued ignorant
of the danger of his situation, until the vexations
of his mind, the disorders of his body, and his
unpardonable neglect of health, had rendered his recovery
impossible. It was not until he had been many
years tormented by physicians, and racked by a painful
malady, that he took up his pen; and his years increased
only to increase the visible effect of his mental and
corporeal afflictions, which at length became so acute,
that he frequently raved wildly or fainted away under
the excess of his pains.
It is observed by one of our refined critics, that “all
Rousseau wrote during his old age is the effect of madness.”
“Yes,” replied his fair friend, with greater
truth, “but he raved so pleasantly, that we are delighted
to run mad with him.”
The mind becomes more disposed to seek its “guardian
angel and its God,” the nearer it approaches the
confines of mortality. When the ardent fire of youth
is extinguished, and the meridian heat of life’s short
day subsides into the soft tranquillity and refreshing
quietude of its evening, we feel the important necessity
of devoting some few hours to pious meditation before
we close our eyes in endless night; and the very
idea of being able to possess this interval of holy leisure,
and to hold this sacred communion with God, recreates
the mind, like the approach of spring after a
dull, a dreary, and a distressing winter.
Petrarch scarcely perceived the approaches of old
age. By constant activity he contrived to render retirement
always happy, and year after year rolled unperceived
away in pleasures and tranquillity. Seated
in a verdant arbor in the vicinity of a Carthusian monastery,
about three miles from Milan, he wrote to his
friend Settimo with a simplicity of heart unknown in
modern times. “Like a wearied traveller, I increase
my pace in proportion as I approach the end of my
journey, I pass my days and nights in reading and
writing; these agreeable occupations alternately relieve
each other, and are the only sources from whence
I derive my pleasures. I lie awake and think, and divert
my mind by every means in my power; and my
ardor increases as new difficulties arise. Novelties incite,
and obstacles sharpen, my resistance. The labors[142]
I endure are certain, for my hand is tired of holding
my pen: but whether I shall reap the harvest of my
toils I cannot tell. I am anxious to transmit my name
to posterity: but if I am disappointed in this wish I am
satisfied the age in which I live, or at least my friends,
will know me, and this fame will satisfy me. My
health is so good, my constitution so robust, and my
temperament so warm, that neither the advance of years
nor the most serious occupation, have power to conquer
the rebellious enemy by which I am incessantly
attacked. I should certainly become its victim, as I have
frequently been, if Providence did not protect me. On
the approach of spring, I take up arms against the flesh,
and am even at this moment struggling for my liberty
against this dangerous enemy.”
A rural retreat, however lonely or obscure, contributes
to increase the fame of those great and noble
characters who relinquish the world at an advanced
period of their lives, and pass the remainder of their
days in solitude: their lustre beams from their retirement
with brighter rays than those which shone
around them in their earliest days, and on the theatre of
their glory. “It is in solitude, in exile, and on the
bed of death,” says Pope, “that the noblest characters
of antiquity shone with the greatest splendor; it was
then they performed the greatest services; for it was
during those periods that they became useful examples.”
And Rousseau appears to have entertained the same
opinion: “It is noble,” says he, “to exhibit to the eyes
of men an example of the life they ought to lead. The
man who, when age or ill health has deprived him of
activity, dares to resound from his retreat the voice of
truth, and to announce to mankind the folly of those
opinions which render them miserable, is a public benefactor.
I should be of much less use to my countrymen,
were I to live among them, than I can possibly be
in my retreat. Of what importance can it be, whether
I live in one place or in another, provided I discharge
my duties properly?”
A certain young lady of Germany, however, was of
opinion that Rousseau was not entitled to praise. She
maintained that he was a dangerous corrupter of the
youthful mind, and that he had very improperly discharged
his duties, by discovering in his Confessions
the moral defects and vicious inclinations of his heart.
“Such a work written by a man of virtue,” said she,
“would render him an object of abhorrence: but Rousseau,[143]
whose writings are circulated to captivate the
wicked, proves, by his story of the Ruban Vole, that he
possesses a heart of the blackest dye. It is evident,
from many passages in that publication, that it was
vanity alone which guided his pen; and from many
others, that he felt himself conscious he was disclosing
falsehoods. There is nothing, in short, throughout
the work that bears the stamp of truth; and all it informs
us of is, that Madame de Warens was the original
from which he drew the character of Julia. These
unjustly celebrated Confessions contain, generally
speaking, a great many fine words, and but very few
good thoughts. If, instead of rejecting every opportunity
of advancing himself in life, he had engaged in
some industrious profession, he might have been more
useful to the world than he has been by the publication
of his dangerous writings.”
This incomparable criticism upon Rousseau merits
preservation; for, in my opinion, it is the only one of
its kind. The Confessions of Rousseau is a work
certainly not proper for the eye of youth; but to me it
appears one of the most remarkable philosophic publications
that the present age has produced. The fine
style and enchanting colors in which it is written are
its least merits. The most distant posterity will read
it with rapture, without inquiring what age the venerable
author had attained when he gave to the world
this last proof of his sincerity.
Age, however advanced, is capable of enjoying real
pleasure. A virtuous old man passes his days with
serene gayety, and receives, in the happiness he feels
from the benedictions of all around him, a rich reward
for the rectitude and integrity of his past life; for the
mind reviews with joyful satisfaction its honorable and
self-approving transactions: nor does the near prospect
of the tomb give fearful emotion to his undismayed
and steady soul.
The empress Maria Theresa has caused her own
mausoleum to be erected, and frequently, accompanied
by her family, visits with serenity and composure, a
monumental depository, the idea of which conveys
such painful apprehension to almost every mind.
Pointing it out to the observation of her children,
“Ought we to be proud or arrogant,” says she, “when
we here behold the tomb in which, after a few years,
the poor remains of royalty must quietly repose?”
There are few men capable of thinking with so[144]
much sublimity. Every one, however, is capable of
retiring, at least occasionally, from the corruptions of
the world; and if, during this calm retreat, they shall
happily learn to estimate their past days with propriety,
and to live the remainder in private virtue and public
utility, the tomb will lose its menacing aspect, and
death appear like the calm evening of a fine and well
spent day.
When Addison perceived that he was given over by
his physicians, and felt his end approaching, he sent
for Lord Warwick, a young man of very irregular life
and loose opinions, whom he had diligently, but vainly
endeavored to reclaim, but who by no means wanted
respect for the person of his preceptor, and was sensible
of the loss he was about to sustain. When he entered
the chamber of his dying friend, Addison, who
was extremely feeble, and whose life at that moment
hung quivering on his lips, observed a profound silence.
The youth, after a long and awful pause, at
length said, in low and trembling accents, “Sir, you
desired to see me: signify your commands, and be assured
I will execute them with religious fidelity.”
Addison took him by the hand, and with his expiring
breath replied, “observe with what tranquillity a Christian
can die.” Such is the consolation which springs
from a due sense of the principles, and a proper practice
of the precepts of our holy religion: such is the
high reward a life of simplicity and innocence bestows.
He who during the retirement of the day seriously
studies, and during the silence of the night piously
contemplates the august doctrines of revelation, will[145]
be convinced of their power by experiencing their effect.
He will review with composure his past errors
in society, perceive with satisfaction his present comfort
in solitude, and aspire with hope to future happiness
in heaven. He will think with the freedom of a
philosopher, live with the piety of a Christian, and renounce
with ease the poisonous pleasures of society
from a conviction that they weaken the energies of his
mind, and prevent his heart from raising itself toward
his God. Disgusted with the vanities and follies of
public life, he will retire into privacy, and contemplate
the importance of eternity. Even if he be still obliged
occasionally to venture on the stormy sea of busy life,
he will avoid with greater skill and prudence the rocks
and sands by which he is surrounded, and steer with
greater certainty and effect from the tempests which
most threaten his destruction; rejoicing less at the
pleasant course which a favorable wind and clear sky
may afford him, than at his having happily eluded
such a multitude of dangers.
The hours consecrated to God in solitude, are not
only the most important, but when we are habituated
to this holy communion, the happiest of our lives.
Every time we silently elevate our thoughts toward
the great Author of our being, we recur to a contemplation
of ourselves: and being rendered sensible of
our nearer approach, not only in idea, but in reality, to
the seat of eternal felicity, we retire, without regret,
from the noisy multitude of the world. A philosophic
view and complete knowledge of the nature of the species
creep by degrees upon the mind: we scrutinize
our characters with greater severity; feel with redoubled
force the necessity of a reformation; and reflect
with substantial effect on the glorious end for which
we were created. Conscious that human actions are
acceptable to the Almighty mind only in proportion as
they are prompted by motives of the purest virtue, men
ought benevolently to suppose that every good work
springs from an untainted source and is performed
merely for the benefit of mankind; but human actions
are exposed to the influence of a variety of secondary
causes, and cannot always be the pure production of
an unbiassed heart. Good works, however, from
whatever motive they arise, always convey a certain
satisfaction and complacency to the mind. But when
the real merit of the performer is to be actually investigated,
the inquiry must always be, whether the mind[146]
was not actuated by sinister views, by the hope of gratifying
a momentary passion, by the feelings of self
love, rather than by the sympathies of brotherly affection:
and these subtle and important questions are
certainly discussed with closer scrutiny, and the motives
of the heart explored and developed with greater
sincerity, during those hours when we are alone before
God than in any other situation.
Firm and untainted virtue, indeed, cannot be so
easily and efficaciously acquired, as by practising the
precepts of Christianity in the bowers of solitude. Religion
refines our moral sentiments, disengages the
heart from every vain desire, renders it tranquil under
misfortunes, humble in the presence of God, and steady
in the society of men. A life passed in the practice of
every virtue, affords us a rich reward for all the hours
we have consecrated to its duties, and enables us in the
silence of solitude to raise our pure hands and chaste
hearts in pious adoration to our Almighty Father!
How “low, flat, stale, and unprofitable, seem all the
uses of this world,” when the mind, boldly soaring beyond
this lower sphere, indulges the idea that the pleasures
which result from a life of innocence and virtue
may be faintly analogous to the felicities of heaven!
At least, I trust we may be permitted unoffendingly to
conceive, according to our worldly apprehensions, that
a free and unbounded liberty of thought and action, a
high admiration of the universal system of nature, a
participation of the divine essence, a perfect communion
of friendship, and a pure interchange of love, may
be a portion of the enjoyments we hope to experience
in those regions of peace and happiness where no impure
or improper sentiment can taint the mind. But
notions like these, although they agreeably flatter our
imaginations, shed at present but a glimmering light
upon this awful subject, and must continue, like dreams
and visions of the mind, until the clouds and thick darkness
which surrounded the tomb of mortality no longer
obscure the bright glories of everlasting life; until the
veil shall be rent asunder, and the Eternal shall reveal
those things which no eye hath seen, no ear has heard,
and, which passeth all understanding. For I acknowledge,
with awful reverence and silent submission, that
the knowledge of eternity is to the human intellect
like that which the color of crimson appeared to be in
the mind of a blind man, who compared it to the sound
of a trumpet. I cannot, however, conceive, that a notion[147]
more comfortable can be entertained, than that
eternity promises a constant and uninterrupted tranquillity;
although I am perfectly conscious that it is impossible
to form an adequate idea of the nature of that
enjoyment which is produced by happiness without
end. An everlasting tranquillity is, in my imagination,
the highest possible felicity, because I know of no felicity
upon earth higher than that which a peaceful mind
and contented heart afford.
Since, therefore, internal and external tranquillity is,
upon earth, an incontestable commencement of beatitude,
it may be extremely useful to believe, that a rational
and qualified seclusion from the tumults of the
world, may so highly rectify the faculties of the human
soul, as to enable us to acquire in “blissful solitude”
the elements of that happiness we expect to enjoy in
the world to come.
END OF PART I.
[148]
[149]
Solitude, in its strict and literal acceptation, is
equally unfriendly to the happiness, and foreign to the
nature of mankind. An inclination to exercise the faculty
of speech, to interchange the sentiments of the
mind, to indulge the affections of the heart, and to receive
themselves, while they bestow on others, a kind
assistance and support, drives men, by an ever active,
and almost irresistible impulse, from solitude to society:
and teaches them that the highest temporal felicity
they are capable of enjoying, must be sought for in a
suitable union of the sexes, and in a friendly intercourse
with their fellow creatures. The profoundest
deductions of reason, the highest flights of fancy, the
finest sensibilities of the heart, the happiest discoveries
of science, and the most valuable productions of art,
are feebly felt, and imperfectly enjoyed, in the cold and
cheerless regions of solitude. It is not to the senseless
rock, or to the passing gale, that we can satisfactorily
communicate our pleasures and our pains. The heavy
sighs which incessantly transpire from the vacant bosoms
of the solitary hermit and the surly misanthropist,
indicate the absence of those high delights which ever
accompany congenial sentiment and mutual affection.
The soul sinks under a situation in which there are no
kindred bosoms to participate its joys, and sympathise
in its sorrows; and feels, strongly feels, that the beneficent
Creator has so framed and moulded the temper
of our minds, that society is the earliest impulse and
the most powerful inclination of our hearts.
[150]
Society, however, although it is thus pointed out to
us, as it were by the finger of the Almighty, as the
means of reaching our highest possible state of earthly
felicity, is so pregnant with dangers, that it depends
entirely on ourselves, whether the indulgence of this
instinctive propensity shall be productive of happiness
or misery.
The pleasures of society, like pleasures of every other
kind, must, to be pure and permanent, be temperate
and discreet. While passion animates, and sensibility
cherishes, reason must direct, and virtue be the object
of our course. Those who search for happiness in a
vague, desultory, and indiscriminate intercourse with
the world; who imagine the palace of pleasure to be
surrounded by the gay, unthinking, and volatile part of
the species; who conceive that the rays of all human
delight beam from places of public festivity and resort;
will, instead of lasting and satisfactory fruition, meet
only with sorrowful disappointment. This mode of
seeking society is not a rational indulgence of that natural
passion which heaven, in its benevolence to man,
has planted in the human heart; but merely a factitious
desire, an habitual pruriency, produced by restless
leisure, and encouraged by vanity and dissipation.
Social happiness, true and essential social happiness,
resides only in the bosom of love and in the arms of
friendship, and can only be really enjoyed by congenial
hearts and kindred minds, in the domestic bowers
of privacy and retirement. Affectionate intercourse produces
an inexhaustible fund of delight. It is the perennial
sunshine of the mind. With what extreme anxiety
do we all endeavor to find an amiable being with
whom we may form a tender tie and close attachment,
who may inspire us with unfading bliss, and receive
increase of happiness from our endearments and attention!
How greatly do such connexions increase the
kind and benevolent dispositions of the heart! and
how greatly do such dispositions, while they lead the[151]
mind to the enjoyment of domestic happiness, awaken
all the virtues, and call forth the best and strongest
energies of the soul! Deprived of the chaste and endearing
sympathies of love and friendship, the species
sink into gross sensuality or mute indifference, neglect
the improvement of their faculties, and renounce all
anxiety to please; but incited by these propensities, the
sexes mutually exert their powers, cultivate their talents,
call every intellectual energy into action; and,
by endeavoring to promote each other’s happiness,
mutually secure their own.
Adverse circumstances, however, frequently prevent
well disposed characters, not only from making the
election which their hearts would prompt, and their
understandings approve, but force them into alliances
which both reason and sensibility reject. It is from
the disappointments of love or of ambition that the
sexes are generally repelled from society to solitude.
The affection, the tenderness, the sensibility of the
heart, are but too often torn and outraged by the cruelty
and malevolence of an unfeeling world, in which
vice bears on its audacious front the mask of virtue,
and betrays innocence into the snares of unsuspected
guilt. The victims, however, whether of love or of
ambition, who retire from society to recruit their depressed
spirits, and repair their disordered minds, cannot,
without injustice, be stigmatized as misanthropists,
or arraigned as anti-social characters. All relish
for scenes of social happiness may be lost by an extreme
and over ardent passion for the enjoyments of
them; but it is only those who seek retirement from
an aversion to the company of their fellow creatures,
that can be said to have renounced, or be destitute of,
the common sympathies of nature.
The present age, however, is not likely to produce
many such unnatural characters, for the manners of
the whole world, and particularly of Europe, were
never, perhaps, more disposed to company. The rage
for public entertainments seems to have infected all
the classes of society. The pleasures of private life
seem to be held in universal detestation and contempt;
opprobrious epithets, defame the humble enjoyments of
domestic love, and those whose hours are not consumed
in unmeaning visits, or unsocial parties, are regarded
as censors of the common conduct of the world, or
as enemies to their fellow creatures; but although
mankind appear so extremely social, they certainly[152]
were never less friendly and affectionate. Neither
rank, nor sex, nor age, is free from this pernicious habit.
Infants, before they can well lisp the rudiments of
speech, are initiated into the idle ceremonies and parade
of company: and can scarcely meet their parents
or their playmates without being obliged to perform a
punctilious salutation. Formal card parties, and petty
treats, engross the time that should be devoted to
healthful exercise and manly recreation. The manners
of the metropolis are imitated with inferior splendor,
but with greater absurdity, in the country; every
village has its routs and its assemblies, in which the
curled darlings of the place blaze forth in feathered
lustre and awkward magnificence; and while the
charming simplicity of one sex is destroyed by affectation,
the honest virtues of the other by dissolute gallantry,
and the passions of both inflamed by vicious and
indecent mirth, the grave elders of the districts are trying
their tempers and impoverishing their purses at
sixpenny whist and cassino.
The spirit of dissipation has reached even the vagrant
tribe. The Gypsies of Germany suspend their
predatory excursions, and on one previously-appointed
evening in every week, assemble to enjoy their guilty
spoils in the fumes of strong waters and tobacco. The
place of rendezvous is generally the vicinity of a mill,
the proprietor of which, by affording to these wandering
tribes an undisturbed asylum, not only secures
his property from their depredations, but, by the idle
tales with which they contrive to amuse his ear, respecting
the characters and conduct of his neighbors,
furnishes himself with new subjects of conversation
for his next evening coterie.
Minds that derive all their pleasure from the levity
and mirth of promiscuous company, are seldom able
to contribute, in any high degree, to their own amusement.
Characters like these search every place for entertainment,
except their own bosoms and the bosoms
of their surrounding families, where by proper cultivation,
real happiness, the happiness arising from love
and friendship, is alone capable of being found.
The wearied pleasurist, sinking under the weight
that preys upon his spirits, flies to scenes of public gayety
or private splendor, in fond but vain expectation
that they will dispel his discontent, and recreate his mind;
but he finds, alas! that the fancied asylum affords him
no rest. The ever-craving appetite for pastime grows[153]
by what it feeds on; and the worm, which devoured
his delight amidst his sylvan scenery of solitude, still
accompanies him to crowded halls of elegance and festivity.
While he eagerly embraces every object that
promises to supply the dreadful vacancy of his mind,
he exhausts his remaining strength; enlarges the wound
he is so anxiously endeavoring to heal; and by too eagerly
grasping at the phantom pleasure, loses, perhaps
for ever, the substantial power of being happy.
Men whose minds are capable of higher enjoyments
always feel these perturbed sensations, when deluded
into a fashionable party, they find nothing to excite curiosity,
or interest their feelings! and where they are
pestered by the frivolous importunities of those for
whom they cannot entertain either friendship or esteem.
How, indeed, is it possible for a sensible mind to feel
the slightest approbation, when a coxcomb enamored
of his own eloquence, and swoln with the pride of self-conceited
merit, tires by his loquacious nonsense, all
around him?
The great Leibnitz was observed by his servant frequently
to take notes while he sat at church; and the
domestic very rationally conceived that he was making
observations on the subject of the sermon: but it is
more consistent with the character of this philosopher
to conclude, that he was indulging the powers of his
own capacious and excursive mind, when those of the
preacher ceased to interest him. Thus it happens, that
while the multitude are driven from solitude to society,
by being tired of themselves, there are some, and those
not a few, who seek refuge in rational retirement from
the frivolous dissipation of company.
An indolent mind is as irksome to itself as it is intolerable
to others; but an active mind feels inexhaustible
resources in its own power. The first is forced to
fly from itself for enjoyment, while the other calmly
resigns itself to its own suggestions, and always meets
with the happiness it has vainly sought for in its communion
with the world.
To rouse the soul from that lethargy into which its
powers are so apt to drop from the tediousness of life,
it is necessary to apply a stimulus both to the head and
to the heart. Something must be contrived to strike
the senses and interest the mind. But it is much more
difficult to convey pleasure to others, than to receive it
ourselves; and while the many wait in anxious hope of
being entertained, they find but few who are capable[154]
of entertaining. Disappointment increases the eagerness
of desire; and the uneasy multitude rush to places
of public resort, endeavoring, by noise and bustle, festive
gratification, elegant decoration, rich dresses, splendid
illuminations, sportive dances, and sprightly music,
to awaken the dormant faculties, and agitate the stagnant
sensibilities of the soul. These scenes may be considered
the machineries of pleasure; they produce a temporary
effect, without requiring much effort or co-operation
to obtain it; while those higher delights, of
which retirement is capable, cannot be truly enjoyed
without a certain degree of intellectual exertion. There
are, indeed, many minds so totally corrupted by the
unceasing pursuits of these vain and empty pleasures,
that they are utterly incapable of relishing intellectual
delight; which, as it affords an enjoyment totally unconnected
with, and independent of, common society,
requires a disposition and capacity which common company
can never bestow. Retirement, therefore, and
its attendant enjoyments, are of a nature too refined
for the gross and vulgar capacities of the multitude,
who are more disposed to gratify their intellectual indolence,
by receiving a species of entertainment which
does not require from them the exertion of thought,
than to enjoy pleasures of a nobler kind, which can only
be procured by a rational restraint of the passions, and
a proper exercise of the powers of the mind. Violent
and tumultuous impressions can alone gratify such
characters, whose pleasures like those of the slothful
Sybarites, only indicate the pain they undergo in striving
to be happy.
Men, eager for the enjoyment of worldly pleasures,
seldom attain the object they pursue. Dissatisfied with
the enjoyments of the moment, they long for absent
delight, which seems to promise a more poignant gratification.
Their joys are like those of Tantalus, always
in view, but never within reach. The activity of such
characters lead to no beneficial end; they are perpetually
in motion, without making any progress: they spur on
“the lazy foot of time,” and then complain of the rapidity
of its flight, only because they have made no good
use of its presence: they “take no note of time but by
its loss;” and year follows year, only to increase their
uneasiness. If the bright beam of Aurora wake them
from their perturbed repose, it is only to create new
anxiety how they are to drag through the passing day.
The change of season produces no change in their[155]
wearied dispositions; and every hour comes and goes
with equal indifference and discontent.
The pleasures of society, however, although they are
attended with such unhappy effects, and pernicious
consequences, to men of weak heads and corrupted
hearts, who only follow them for the purpose of indulging
the follies, and gratifying the vices, to which they
have given birth, are yet capable of affording to the
wise and the virtuous, a high, rational, sublime, and
satisfactory enjoyment. The world is the only theatre
upon which great and noble actions can be performed,
or the heights of moral and intellectual excellence usefully
attained. The society of the wise and good, exclusive
of the pleasing relaxation it affords from the
anxieties of business, and the cares of life, conveys
valuable information to the mind, and virtuous feelings
to the breast. There experience imparts its wisdom in
a manner equally engaging and impressive; the faculties
are improved, and knowledge increased. Youth
and age reciprocally contribute to the happiness of
each other. Such a society, while it adds firmness to
the character, gives fashion to the manners; and opens
immediately to the view the delightful models of wisdom
and integrity. It is only in such society that man
can rationally hope to exercise, with any prospect of
success, the latent principle, which continually prompts
him to pursue the high felicity of which he feels his
nature capable, and of which the Creator has permitted
him to form a faint idea.
Sorrow frequently drives its unhappy victims from
solitude into the vortex of society as a means of relief;
for solitude is terrible to those whose minds are torn
with anguish for the loss of some dear friend, whom
death has, perhaps, taken untimely from their arms;
and who would willingly renounce all worldly joys to
hear one accent of that beloved voice, which used, in
calm retirement, to fill his ear with harmony, and his
heart with rapture.
[156]
Solitude also is terrible to those whose felicity is
founded on popular applause; who have acquired a degree
of fame by intrigue, and actions of counterfeited
virtue; and who suffer the most excruciating anxiety
to preserve their spurious fame. Conscious of the
fraudulent means by which they acquire possession of
it, and of the weak foundation on which it is built, it
appears continually to totter, and always ready to overwhelm
them in its ruins. Their attention is sedulously
called to every quarter; and, in order to prop up the
unsubstantial fabric, they bend with mean submission
to the pride of power; flatter the vanity, and accommodate
themselves to the vices of the great; censure the
genius that provokes their jealousy; ridicule the virtue
that shames the conduct of their patrons; submit to all
the follies of the age; take advantage of its errors;
cherish its prejudices; applaud its superstition, and defend
its vices. The fashionable circles may, perhaps,
welcome such characters as their best supporters and
highest ornaments; but to them the calm and tranquil
pleasures of retirement are dreary and disgusting.
To all those, indeed, whom vice has betrayed into
guilt, and whose bosoms are stung by the adders of remorse,
solitude is doubly terrible; and they fly from
its shades to scenes of worldly pleasure, in the hope of
being able to silence the keen reproaches of violated
conscience in the tumults of society. Vain attempt!
Solitude, indeed, as well as religion, has been represented
in such dismal, disagreeable colors, by those
who were incapable of tasting its sweets, and enjoying
its advantages, that many dismiss it totally from all
their schemes of happiness, and fly to it only to alleviate
the bitterness of some momentary passion, or temporary
adversity, or to hide the blushes of approaching
shame. But there are advantages to be derived from
solitude, even under such circumstances, by those who
are otherwise incapable of enjoying them. Those who
know the most delightful comforts, and satisfactory
enjoyments, of which a well regulated solitude is productive,
like those who are acquainted with the solid
benefits to be derived from religion, will seek retirement,
in the hours of prosperity and content, as the
only means by which they can be enjoyed in true perfection.
The tranquillity of its shades will give richness
to their joys; its uninterrupted quietude will enable
them to expatiate on the fullness of their felicity; and
they will turn their eyes with soft compassion on the[157]
miseries of the world, when compared with the blessings
they enjoy.
Strongly, therefore, as the social principle operates in
our breast; and necessary as it is, when properly regulated,
to the improvement of our minds, the refinement
of our manners, and the melioration of our hearts; yet
some portion of our time ought to be devoted to rational
retirement: and we must not conclude that those
who occasionally abstain from the tumultuous pleasures,
and promiscuous enjoyments of the world, are
morose characters, or of peevish dispositions; nor stigmatize
those who appear to prefer the calm delights of
solitude to the tumultuous pleasures of the world, as
unnatural and anti-social.
The motives which induce men to exchange the tumultuous
joys of society, for the calm and temperate
pleasures of solitude, are various and accidental; but
whatever may be the final cause of such an exchange,
it is generally founded on an inclination to escape from
some present or impending constraint; to shake off the
shackles of the world; to taste the sweets of soft repose;
to enjoy the free and undisturbed exertion of the
intellectual faculties; or to perform, beyond the reach
of ridicule, the important duties of religion. But the
busy pursuits of worldly minded men prevent the greater
part of the species from feeling these motives, and,
of course, from tasting the sweets of unmolested existence.
Their pleasures are pursued in paths which lead
to very different goals: and the real, constant, and unaffected
lover of retirement is a character so rarely
found, that it seems to prove the truth of lord Verulam’s[158]
observation, that he who is really attached to solitude,
must be either more or less than man; and certain
it is, that while the wise and virtuous discover in
retirement an uncommon and transcending brightness
of character, the vicious and the ignorant are buried
under its weight, and sink even beneath their ordinary
level. Retirement gives additional firmness to the
principles of those who seek it from a noble love of independence,
but loosens the feeble consistency of those
who only seek it from novelty and caprice.
To render solitude serviceable, the powers of the
mind, and the sensibilities of the heart, must be co-equal,
and reciprocally regulate each other; weakness
of intellect, when joined with quick feelings, hurries
its possessor into all the tumult of worldly pleasure;
and when mingled with torpid insensibility, impels him
to the cloister. Extremes, both in solitude and in society,
are equally baneful.
A strong sense of shame, the keen compunctions of
conscience, a deep regret for past follies, the mortification
arising from disappointed hopes, and the dejection
which accompanies disordered health, sometimes so
affect the spirits, and destroy the energies of the mind,
that the soul shrinks back upon itself at the very approach
of company, and withdraws to the shades of
solitude, only to brood and languish in obscurity. The
inclination to retire, in cases of this description, arises
from a fear of meeting the reproaches or disregard of
an unpitying and unreflecting world, and not from that
erect spirit which disposes the mind to self enjoyment.
The disgust arising from satiety of worldly pleasures,
frequently induces a temporary desire for solitude.
The dark and gloomy nature, indeed, of this disposition,
is such as neither the splendors of a throne, nor
the light of philosophy, are able to irradiate and dispel.
The austere and petulant Heraclitus abandoned all the
pleasures and comforts of society, in the vain hope of
being able to gratify his discontented mind, by indulging
an antipathy against his fellow creatures; flying
from their presence he retired, like his predecessor
Timon, to a high mountain, where he lived for many
years among the beasts of the desert, on the rude produce
of the earth, regardless of all the comforts a civilized
society is capable of bestowing. Such a temper
of mind proceeds from a sickened intellect and disordered
sensibility, and indicates the loss of that fine, but
firm sense of pleasure, from which alone all real enjoyment[159]
must spring. He who having tasted all that
can delight the senses, warm the heart, and satisfy the
mind, secretly sighs over the vanity of his enjoyments,
and beholds all the cheering objects of life with indifference,
is, indeed, a melancholy example of the sad
effects which result from an intemperate pursuit of
worldly pleasures. Such a man may, perhaps, abandon
society, for it is no longer capable of affording him delight;
but he will be debarred from all rational solitude,
because he is incapable of enjoying it, and a refuge
to the brute creation seems his only resource. I
have, indeed, observed even noblemen and princes in
the midst of abundance, and surrounded by all the
splendor that successful ambition, high state, vast
riches, and varying pleasures can confer, sinking the
sad victims of satiety; disgusted with their glories;
and dissatisfied with all those enjoyments which are
supposed to give a higher relish to the soul; but they
had happily enriched their minds with notions far superior
to all those which flow from the corrupted
scenes of vitiated pleasures; and they found, in solitude,
a soft and tranquil pillow, which invited their
perturbed minds, and at length lulled their feelings
into calm repose. These characters were betrayed for a
time by the circumstances which surrounded their exalted
stations into an excess of enjoyment; but they
were able to relish the simple occupations, and to enjoy
the tranquil amusements of retirement, with as
much satisfaction as they had formerly pursued the
political intrigues of the cabinet, the hostile glories of
the field, or the softer indulgences of peaceful luxury;
and were thereby rendered capable of deriving comfort
and consolation from that source which seems only to
heighten and exasperate the miseries of those whose
minds are totally absorbed in the dissipations of life.
The motives, indeed, which lead men either to temporary
retirement, or absolute solitude, are innumerably
various. Minds delicately susceptible to the impressions
of virtue, frequently avoid society, only to
avoid the pain they feel in observing the vices and follies
of the world. Minds active and vigorous, frequently
retire to avoid the clogs and incumbrances by which
the tumults and engagements of society distract and
impede the free and full enjoyment of their faculties.
The basis, indeed, of every inclination to solitude is
the love of liberty, either mental or corporeal; a freedom
from all constraint and interruption: but the form[160]
in which the inclination displays itself, varies according
to the character and circumstances of the individual.
Men who are engaged in pursuits foreign to the
natural inclination of their minds, sigh continually for
retirement, as the only means of recruiting their fatigued
spirits, and procuring a comfortable repose.
Scenes of tranquillity can alone afford them any idea
of enjoyment. A refined sense of duty, indeed, frequently
induces noble minds to sacrifice all personal
pleasures to the great interests of the public, or the private
benefits of their fellow creatures; and they resist
every opposing obstacle with courage, and bear every
adversity with fortitude, under those cheering sentiments,
and proud delights, which result from the pursuits
of active charity and benevolence, even though
their career be thwarted by those whose advantages
they design to promote. The exhilarating idea of
being instrumental in affording relief to suffering humanity,
reconciles every difficulty, however great:
prompts to new exertions, however fruitless; and sustains
them in those arduous conflicts, in which all who
aspire to promote the interest, and improve the happiness
of mankind, must occasionally engage, especially
when opposed by the pride and profligacy of the rich
and great, and the obstinacy and caprice of the ignorant
and unfeeling. But the most virtuous and steady
minds cannot always bear up against “a sea of troubles,
or by opposing, end them:” and, depressed by
temporary adversities, will arraign the cruelty of their
condition, and sigh for the shades of peace and tranquillity.
How transcendent must be the enjoyment of
a great and good minister who, after having anxiously
attended to the important business of the state, and disengaged
himself from the necessary but irksome occupation
of official detail, refreshes his mind in the calm
of some delightful retreat, with works of taste, and
thoughts of fancy and imagination! A change, indeed,
both of scene and sentiment, is absolutely necessary,
not only in the serious and important employments, but
even in the common occupations and idle amusements
of life. Pleasure springs from contrast. The most
charming object loses a portion of its power to delight,
by being continually beheld. Alternate society and solitude
are necessary to the full enjoyment of both the
pleasures of the world and the delights of retirement.
It is, however, asserted that the celebrated Pascal,[161]
whose life was far from being inactive, that quietude is
a beam of the original purity of our nature, and that
the height of human happiness is in solitude and tranquillity.
Tranquillity, indeed, is the wish of all: the
good, while pursuing the track of virtue; the great
while following the star of glory; and the little, while
creeping in the styes of dissipation, sigh for tranquillity
and make it the great object which they ultimately
hope to attain. How anxiously does the sailor, on the
high and giddy mast, when rolling through tempestuous
seas, cast his eyes over the foaming billows, and
anticipate the calm security he hopes to enjoy when he
reaches the wished for shore! Even kings grow weary
of their splendid slavery, and nobles sicken under increasing
dignities. All, in short, feel less delight in the
actual enjoyment of worldly pursuits, however great
and honorable they may be, than in the idea of their
being able to relinquish them and retire to
The restless and ambitious Pyrrhus hoped that ease
and tranquillity would be the ultimate reward of his enterprising
conquests. Frederic the great, discovered,
perhaps unintentionally, how pleasing and satisfactory
the idea of tranquillity was to his mind, when immediately
after he had gained a glorious and important
victory, he exclaimed on the field of battle, “Oh that
my anxieties may now be ended!” The emperor Joseph
also displayed the predominancy of his passion for
tranquillity and retirement, when on asking the famous
German pedestrian, Baron Grothaus, what countries he
next intended to traverse, was told a long number in
rapid succession. “And what then?” continued the
emperor. “Why then,” replied the baron, “I intend
to retire to the place of my nativity, and enjoy myself
in rural quietude, and the cultivation of my patrimonial
farm.” “Ah, my good friend,” exclaimed the emperor,
“if you will trust the voice of sad experience, you had
better neglect the walk, and retire before it is too late,
to the quietude and tranquillity you propose.”
Publius Scipio, surnamed Africanus, during the time
that he was invested with the highest offices of Rome,
and immediately engaged in the most important concerns
of the empire, withdrew whenever an opportunity
occurred, from public observation, to peaceful privacy;[162]
and though not devoted, like Tully, to the elegant
occupations of literature and philosophy, declared
that “he was never less alone than when alone.” He
was, says Plutarch, incomparably the first both in virtue
and power, of the Romans of his time; but in his
highest tide of fortune, he voluntarily abandoned the
scene of his glory, and calmly retired to his beautiful
villa in the midst of a romantic forest, near Liturnum,
where he closed, in philosophic tranquillity, the last
years of a long and splendid life.
Cicero, in the plenitude of his power, at a time when
his influence over the minds of his fellow citizens was
at its height, retired, with the retiring liberties of his
country, to his Tusculum villa, to deplore the approaching
fate of his beloved city, and to ease, in soothing
solitude, the anguish of his heart.
Horace, also, the gay and elegant favorite of the
great Augustus, even in the meridian rays of royal favor,
renounced the smiles of greatness, and all the seductive
blandishments of an imperial court, to enjoy
his happy muse among the romantic wilds of his sequestered
villa of Tibur, near the lake Albunea.
But there are few characters who have passed the
concluding scenes of life with more real dignity than
the emperor Dioclesian. In the twenty-first year of
his reign, though he had never practised the lessons of
philosophy either in the attainment or the use of supreme
power, and although his reign had flowed with
a tide of uninterrupted success, he executed his memorable
resolution of abdicating the empire, and gave the
world the first example of a resignation which has not
been very frequently imitated by succeeding monarchs.
Dioclesian was at this period only fifty-nine years of
age, and in the full possession of his mental faculties;
but he had vanquished all his enemies, and executed
all his designs; and his active life, his wars, his journeys,
the cares of royalty, and his application to business
having impaired his constitution, and brought on
the infirmities of a premature old age, he resolved to
pass the remainder of his days in honorable repose; to
place his glory beyond the reach of fortune, and to relinquish
the theatre of the world to his younger and
more active associates. The ceremony of his abdication
was performed in a spacious plain, about three
miles from Nicomedia. The emperor ascended a lofty
throne, and, in a speech full of reason and dignity,
declared his intention both to the people and to the soldiers,[163]
who were assembled on this extraordinary occasion.
As soon as he had divested himself of the purple,
he withdrew from the gazing multitude; and traversing
the city in a covered chariot, proceeded without
delay to the favorite retirement which he had chosen in
his native country of Dalmatia. The emperor, who,
from a servile origin, had raised himself to the throne,
passed the last nine years of his life in a private condition
at Salona. Reason had dictated, and content
seems to have accompanied, his retreat, in which he
enjoyed for a long time the respect of those princes to
whom he had resigned the possession of the world. It
is seldom that minds long exercised in business have
formed any habits of conversing with themselves,
and in the loss of power, they principally regret the
want of occupation. The amusements of letters and
of devotion, which afford so many resources in solitude,
were incapable of fixing the attention of Dioclesian:
but he had preserved, or, at least, he soon recovered, a
taste for the most innocent as well as natural pleasures;
and his leisure hours were sufficiently employed in
building, planting, and gardening. His answer to
Maximian is deservedly celebrated. He was solicited
by that restless old man to resume the reins of government
and the imperial purple. He rejected the temptation
with a smile of pity, calmly observing, that if he
could show Maximian the cabbages he had planted at
Salona, he should be no longer urged to relinquish the
enjoyment of happiness for the pursuit of power. In
his conversations with his friends he frequently acknowledged,
that of all the arts the most difficult was
that of reigning; and he expressed himself on that
favorite topic with a degree of warmth which could be
the result only of experience. “How often,” was he accustomed
to say, “is it the interest of four or five ministers
to combine together to deceive the sovereign!
Secluded from mankind by his exalted dignity, the
truth is concealed from his knowledge: he can only
see with their eyes; he hears nothing but their misrepresentations.
He confers the most important offices upon
vice and weakness, and disgraces the most virtuous
and deserving among his subjects; and by such infamous
acts the best and wisest princes are sold to the
venal corruption of their courtiers.” A just estimate
of greatness, and the assurance of immortal fame, improve
our relish for the pleasures of retirement.
Zenobia, the celebrated queen of Palmyra and the[164]
east; a female whose superior genius broke through
the servile indolence imposed on her sex by the climate
and manners of Asia, the most lovely as well as the
most heroic of her sex, who spread the terror of her
arms over Arabia, Armenia, and Persia, and kept even
the legions of the Roman empire in awe, was, after the
two great battles of Antioch and Emesa, at length subdued,
and made the illustrious captive of the emperor
Aurelian; but the conqueror, respecting the sex, the
beauty, the courage and endowments of the Syrian
queen, not only preserved her life, but presented her
with an elegant villa at Tibur or Tivoli, about twenty
miles from Rome; where, in happy tranquillity, she
fed the greatness of her soul with the noble images of
Homer, and the exalted precepts of Plato; supported
the adversity of her fortunes with fortitude and resignation;
and learnt that the anxieties attendant on ambition
are happily exchanged for the enjoyments of
ease and the comforts of philosophy.
Charles V. resigned the government of the empire
to his brother the king of the Romans; and transferred
all claims of obedience and allegiance to him from
the Germanic body, in order that he might no longer
be detained from that retreat for which he long had
languished. In passing, some years before, from Valladolid
to Placentia, in the Province of Estremadura,
he was struck with the delightful situation of the
monastery of St. Justus, belonging to the order of St.
Jerome, not many miles distant from the town; and observed
to some of his attendants, that this was a spot
to which Dioclesian might have retired with pleasure.
The impression remained upon his mind, and he determined
to make it the place of his own retreat. It
was seated in a vale of no great extent, watered by a
small brook, and surrounded by rising grounds covered
with lofty trees; and from the nature of the soil, as
well as the temperature of the climate, was esteemed
the most healthful and delicious situation in Spain.
Some months before his resignation, he had sent an
architect thither to add a new apartment to the monastery
for his accommodation; but he gave strict orders
that the style of the building should be such as suited
his present station rather than his former dignity. It
consisted only of six rooms; four of them in the form
of friar’s cells, with naked walls; the other two, each
twenty feet square, were hung with brown cloth, and
furnished in the most simple manner; they were all on[165]
a level with the ground, with a door on one side into a
garden of which Charles himself had given the plan,
and had filled it with various plants, which he intended
to cultivate with his own hands. On the other side
they communicated with the chapel of the monastery,
in which he was to perform his devotions. In this
humble retreat, hardly sufficient for the comfortable
accommodation of a private gentleman, did Charles
enter with twelve domestics only, and buried in solitude
and silence his grandeur, his ambition, and all those
vast projects which, during almost half a century, had
alarmed and agitated Europe; filling every kingdom in
it by turns with the terror of his arms, and the dread
of being subdued by his power.
These instances of resignation and retirement, to
which many others might have been added, sufficiently
prove that a desire to live in free leisure, independent
of the restraints of society, is one of the most
powerful affections of the human mind; and that solitude,
judiciously and rationally employed, amply compensates
all that is sacrificed for the purpose of enjoying
it.
But there are many other resources from whence
an anti-social disposition may arise, which merits consideration.
That terrible malady, the hypocondria,
frequently renders the unhappy sufferer not only
averse to society in general, but even fearful of meeting
a human being; and the still more dreadful malady
a wounded heart, increases our antipathy to mankind.
The fear of unfounded calumny also sometimes drives
weak and dejected minds into the imaginary shelter of
obscurity; and even strong and honest characters, prone
to disclose their real sentiments, are disgusted at the
world from a consciousness of its being unable to listen
temperately to the voice of truth. The obstinacy with
which mankind persist in habitual errors, and the violence
with which they indulge inveterate passions, a
deep regret for their follies, and the horror which their
vices create, drives us frequently from their presence.
The love of science, a fondness for the arts, and an attachment
to the immortal works of genius, induce, I
trust, not a few to neglect all anxiety to learn the common
news of the day, and keep them in some calm,
sequestered retreat far from the unmeaning manners
of the noisy world, improving the genuine feelings of
their hearts, and storing their minds with the principles
of true philosophy. There are others, though I fear they[166]
are few, who, impressed by a strong sense of the duties
of religion, and feeling how incompatible with
their practice are most, if not all, the factitious joys of
social life, retire from the corrupted scene, to contemplate,
in sacred privacy, the attributes of a Being unalterably
pure, and infinitely good; to impress upon their
minds so strong a sense of the importance of obedience
to the divine will, of the value of the reward promised
to virtue, and the terrors of the punishment denounced
against crimes, as may overbear all temptations which
temporal hope or fear can bring in their way, and enable
them to bid equal defiance to joy and sorrow; to
turn away at one time from the allurements of ambition,
and press forward at another against the threats
of calamity.
The dejection occasioned by the hypochondria renders
the mind not only averse from, but wholly incapable
of, any pleasure, and induces the unhappy sufferer
to seek a solitude by which it is increased. The influence
of this dreadful malady is so powerful, that it
destroys all hope of remedy, and prevents those exertions,
by which alone, we are told it can be cured.
But, alas! the heart shuts itself against every pleasing
sensation, and the mind dismisses every cheering
sentiment. Joy opens in vain its festal arms to receive
him; and he shuns embraces, whose light and mirthful
air would only serve to increase the melancholy of his
dreary and distempered mind. Even the tender, affectionate
offices of friendship, in endeavoring to sooth
and divert his mind by lively conversation and social
intercourse, appear officious and ill-timed. His spirits
are quite dejected; his faculties become torpid; and his
sense of enjoyment is annihilated. The charming air
which breathes to us the sweetest fragrance, and most
invigorating delights, feels to him like a pestilent congregation
of vapors.
Conscious that his frame is totally unstrung, and that
his pulse is incapable of beating in any pleasant unison
with the feelings of his healthful friends, he withers
into sorrowful decay. Every object around him appears
to be at enmity with his feelings, and comes
shapeless and discolored to his disordered eyes. The
gentle voice of pity grates his ears with harsh and hollow
sounds, and seems to reproach him with insulting
tones. Stricken by his dreadful malady, the lamentable
effects of which a cruel and unfeeling world so often
ridicule and despise, and constantly tearing open
the wound it has occasioned, the afflicted spirit flies
from every scene of social joy and animating pleasure,
seeks as a sole resource, to hide its sorrows in solitary
seclusion, and awaits, in lingering sufferance, the stroke
of death.
The erroneous opinions, perverse dispositions, and
inveterate prejudices of the world, are sometimes the
causes which induce men to retire from society, and
seek in solitude the enjoyments of innocence and truth.
Careless of a commerce with those for whom they can
entertain no esteem, their minds naturally incline toward
those scenes in which their fancy paints the fairest
form of felicity. He, indeed, whose free and independent
spirit is resolved to permit his mind to think for
itself; who disdains to form his feelings, and to fashion
his opinions, upon the capricious notions of the world;
who is too candid to expect that others should be guided
by his notions, and sufficiently firm not to obey implicitly
the hasty notions of others; who seeks to cultivate
the just and manly feelings of the heart, and
to pursue truth in the paths of science, must detach
himself from the degenerate crowd, and seek his enjoyments
in retirement. For to those who love to
consult their own ideas, to form opinions upon their
own reasonings and discernment, and to express only
such sentiments as they really feel, a society whose
judgments are borrowed, whose literature is only specious,
and whose principles are unfounded, must not
only be irksomely insipid, but morally dangerous. The
firm and noble minded disdain to bow their necks to
the slavish yoke of vulgar prejudice, and appeal, in
support of their opinions, to the higher tribunal of sense
and reason, from the partial and ill-formed sentences of[168]
conceited critics, who, destitute themselves of any
sterling merit, endeavor to depreciate the value of that
coin whose weight and purity render it current, and to
substitute their own base and varnished compositions
in its stead. Those self-created who proudly place
themselves in the professor’s chair, look with an envious
and malignant eye on all the works of genius, taste,
and sense; and as their interests are intimately blended
with the destruction of every sublime and elegant production,
their cries are raised against them the moment
they appear. To blast the fame of merit is their chief
object and their highest joy: and their lives are industriously
employed to stifle the discoveries, to impede
the advancement, to condemn the excellency, and to
pervert the meaning of their more ingenious contemporaries.
Like loathsome toads, they grovel on the
ground, and, as they move along, emit a nasty slime,
or frothy venom, on the sweetest shrubs and fairest
flowers of the fields.
From the society of such characters, who seem to
consider the noble productions of superior intellect,
the fine and vigorous flights of fancy, the brilliant effusions
of a sublime imagination, and the refined feelings
of the heart, as fancied conceits or wild deliriums,
those who examine them by a better standard than
that of fashion or common taste, fly with delight.
The reign of envy, however, although it is perpetual
as to the existence of the passion, is only transitory as
to the objects of its tyranny; and the merit which has
fallen the victim of its rage, is frequently raised by the
hand of truth, and placed on the throne of public applause.
A production of genius, however the ears of
its author were deafened, during his life, by the clamors
of calumny, and hisses of ignorance, is reviewed
with impartiality when he dies, and revived by the acclamations
of ingenuous applause. The reproach
which the life of a great and good man is continually
casting on his mean and degenerate contemporaries, is
silenced by his death. He is remembered only in the
character of his works; and his fame increases with
the successive generations, which his sentiments and
opinions contribute to enlighten and adorn.
The history of the celebrated English philosopher,
David Hume, affords, perhaps, a stronger instance of
the dangers to which wit and learning are exposed
from the malicious shafts of envy, ignorance, and intolerance,
than that of any other author. The tax indeed,[169]
is common to authors of every description, but
it frequently falls the heaviest on the highest heads.
This profound philosopher and elegant historian, possessed
a mild temper; a lively, social disposition; a
high sense of friendship, and incorruptible integrity.
His manners, indeed, appeared, at first sight, cold and
repulsive; for he had sacrificed little to the graces: but
his mind was invariably cheerful, and his affections uncommonly
warm and generous: and neither his ardent
desire of fame, nor the gross and unfounded calumnies
of his enemies, were capable of disturbing the happy
tranquillity of his heart. His life was passed in the
constant exercise of humanity and benevolence; and
even those who had been seduced, by the jealous and
vindictive artifices of others, wantonly to attack his
fame and character with obloquy and reproach, experienced
his kindness, and acknowledged his virtues.
He would never indeed confess that his friends had
ever had occasion to vindicate any one circumstance of
his character or conduct, or that he had ever been attacked
either by the baleful tooth of envy, or the rage
of civil or religious faction. His company, indeed, was
equally agreeable to all classes of society; and
young and old, rich and poor, listened with pleasure to
his conversation, and quitted his company with regret;
for although he was deeply learned, and his discourses
replete with sagacity and science, he had the happy art
of delivering his sentiments upon all subjects without
the appearance of ostentation, or in any way offending
the feelings of his hearers.
The interests of religion are said to have suffered by
the abuse of his talents; but the precepts of Christianity
were never more powerfully recommended, than by
the integrity of his morals, and the purity of his life.
His benign and gentle spirit, attached to virtue, and
averse from every species of vice, essentially promoted
the practice of piety, and the duties of a religious mind;
and did not, as is always the case with the zeal of persecution
and martyrdom, tear away the very foundation
of that fabric which it pretends to support. The
excellency, indeed, both of the head and the heart of
this great and good man, enabled him not only to enjoy
himself with perfect felicity, but to contribute to
the improvement, and increase the happiness of mankind.
This is the opinion now generally entertained
of the character of Hume; but far different were the
sentiments of his contemporaries upon this subject. It[170]
was neither in a barbarous country, or in an unenlightened
age, that he lived; but although the land was
free, the people philosophical, and the spirit of the
times provoked the minds of learned men to metaphysical
inquiry, the fame of Hume was wrecked upon his
moral and religious writings. He was charged with
being a sceptic; but from the propagation of certain
doctrines, and the freedom of inquiry which had then
gone forth, it is impossible to attribute his disappointments
to this cause. A kind of natural prejudice, indeed,
prevailed in England at this period against the
Scots; but as he did not experience much favor from
his own countrymen, no conclusion can be fairly
drawn from this circumstance; and the extraordinary
History of his Literary Transactions, a work written
by himself, cannot be perused without an equal degree
of surprise and concern. The contemptuous repulses
which his several compositions received from the public,
appear incredible; but the facts he relates are undoubtedly
authentic; and while they raise a sorrowful
regret for the fate of Hume in particular, they most
unhappily tend to diminish the ardor of the student,
who contemplates the various dangers to which his
desire of fame may be exposed, and may, perhaps, induce
him to quit the pursuit of an object “so hard to
gain, so easy to be lost.”
The melancholy history of the literary career of the
celebrated Hume, as appears from the short sketch he
made of his own life, while he calmly waited, under
an incurable disorder, the moment of approaching dissolution;
a work which proclaims the mildness, the
modesty, and the resignation of his temper, as clearly
as his other works demonstrate the power and extent
of his mind. The history, indeed, of every man who
attempts to destroy the reigning prejudices, or correct
the prevailing errors, of his age and country, is nearly
the same. He who has the happiness to see objects of
any description with greater perspicuity than his contemporaries,
and presumes to disseminate his superior
knowledge, by the unreserved publication of his opinions,
sets himself up as a common mark for the shafts
of envy and resentment to pierce, and seldom escapes
from being charged with wicked designs against the
interests of mankind. A writer, whatever his character,
station, or talents may be, will find that he has a
host of malevolent inferiors ready to seize every opportunity
of gratifying their humbled pride, by attempting[171]
to level his superior merits, and subdue his rising fame.
Even the compassionate few, who are ever ready to
furnish food to the hungry, clothing to the naked, and
consolation to the afflicted, seldom feel any other sensation
than that of jealousy on beholding the wreath of
merit placed on the brow of a deserving rival. The
Ephesians, with republican pride, being unable to endure
the reproach which they felt from the pre-eminency
of any individual, banished to some other
state, the citizen who presumed to excel the generality
of his countrymen. It would be, in some measure,
adopting this egregious and tyrannical folly, were I to
exhort the man whose merits transcend those who are
his equals in rank, or station, to break off all intercourse
and connexion with them; but I am certain
that he might, by an occasional retirement, elude the
effects of their envy, and avoid those provocations to
which, by his superiority, he will otherwise be continually
exposed.
To treat the frailties of our fellow creatures with
tenderness, to correct their errors with kindness, to
view even their vices with pity, and to induce, by every
friendly attention, a mutual complacency and good
will, is not only an important moral duty, but a means
of increasing the sum of earthly happiness. It is, indeed,
difficult to prevent an honest mind from bursting
forth with generous indignation against those artful
hypocrites who, by specious and plausible practices,
obtain the false character of being wise and good, and
obtrude their flimsy and heterodox opinions upon the
unthinking world, as the fair and genuine sentiments
of truth and virtue. The anger which arises in a generous
and ardent mind, on hearing a noble action
calumniated, or a useful work illiberally attacked, is
not easily restrained; but such feelings should be
checked and regulated with a greater degree of caution
than even if they were less virtuous and praiseworthy;
for, if they are indulged with frequency, their
natural violence may weaken the common charities of
the mind, and convert its very goodness and love of
virtue into a mournful misanthropy, or virulent detestation
of mankind.
Let not the man, whose exalted mind, improved by
study and observation, surveys with a discriminating
eye the moral depravities and mental weaknesses of human
nature, submit to treat his envious inferiors with
inveterate anger, and undistinguishing revenge. Their[172]
envy as a tribute of approbation to his greatness. Let
him look with the gentle eye of pity upon those who
err rather from the wicked suggestions of others, than
from the malevolence of their own hearts: let him not
confound the weak and innocent reptile with the scorpion
and the viper; let him listen, without emotion, to
the malignant barking and envious hissings that everywhere
attend the footsteps of transcendent merit; let
him disregard, with philosophic dignity, the senseless
clamors of those noisy adversaries who are blinded by