# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2017
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, Italian Fantasies
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/56264/56264-h/56264-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

But from the heart in a more romantic sense the most learned
atmosphere is not safe, and I am reminded of another University
affair of the heart which I stumbled upon in Bologna.
As we know from old coins, Bononia docet. But somewhere
about 1320 Bologna ceased to teach. For there was a strike of
students. An old stone relief in the Museo Civico, representing
a crowned figure holding a little scholar in his lap and stretching
his hands to a kneeling group, celebrates the reconciliation of the
Rector with his scholars and sets down in Latin a record of the
episode. “The scholars of our University being reconciled with
the city, from which they had departed in resentment at the
capital punishment inflicted upon their colleague Giacomo da
Valenza, for the ravishing of Constanzia Zagnoni, by him beloved,
the Church of Peace was erected in the year 1322, in the
Via S. Mamolo and this memorial was placed there.”
What a tragic romance! What a story for a novelist, the
Church, the World, and the University all intermingled, what a
riot of young blood all stilled six hundred years ago!
The Doctors of that day still sit in carven state beside this
memorial; learned petrifactions, holding their stone chairs for a
term of centuries, Bartoluzzo de’ Preti, Reader of Civil Law, who
died in 1318, and Bonandrea de’ Bonandrei, Reader of Decretals,
who died in 1333. The “pleasant” Doctor this Bonandrea is
styled; seasoning, no doubt, his erudition with graces of style.
I figure him deeply versed in the decisions published by Gregory
IX in 1234, and a profound expounder of the Isidorian
Decretals.
Befitting was it at Mantua to feel so poignantly the lachrymæ
rerum. I should perhaps have felt it at Virgil’s own tomb at
Naples, had that not been so vague and rambling a site that
no moment of concentration or even of conviction was possible.
But the ancient Ducal Palace of the Gonzagas in the Piazza
Sordello had the pathos of the unexpected. Nothing in its
exterior suggested ruin and desolation, nay the scaffolding across
the façade spoke rather of restoration and repair. The tall red
brick arches of the portico beneath, the double row of plain
straight windows in the middle, and the top tier of ornamental
arched windows, surmounted by the battlements, conveyed an
impression of Gothic solidity and moderate spaciousness. It
was not till I had walked for many minutes through an endless
series of dilapidated chambers and mutilated magnificences—propped-up
ceilings and walled-up windows and rotting floors,
and marble and gold and rich-dyed woods and gorgeous ceilings,
and mouldering tapestries and paintings, and musty grandeurs
multiplied in specked mirrors, and faded hangings and forlorn
frescoes, and chandeliers without candles, and fly-blown gilding
and broken furniture and beautiful furniture and whitewash and
blackened plaster and bare brick and a vast unpeopled void—that
there began to grow upon my soul the sense of a colossal
tragedy of ruin, a monstrous and melancholy desolation, an
heroic grandeur of disarray, a veritable poem of decay and
destruction. Not the Alhambra itself is so dumbly eloquent of
the passing of the Magnificent Ones.
“Babylon is fallen, is fallen.”
For the interior answers not to the exterior, whether in
preservation or in character. It is renaissance and ruin, with a
minor note of the Empire; all the splendours of the world fallen
upon evil days. Only by remembering the mutations of Mantua
can one account for this hybrid Cortile Reale of dishevelled
grandeurs, whose face so belies its character and its fortunes.
The Palace was begun under the dynasty which preceded the
Gonzagas, it saw all the glories of the Renaissance, saw Mantua
sacked by the Germans, and the Gonzaga dynasty extinguished
by the Austrians, and the city fallen to the French, and re-fallen
to Austria, and caught up into the Cisalpine Republic,
and then into the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy, and then
Austrian again till the yoke was broken by Victor Emmanuel
and the stable dulness of to-day established. It is in fact a
microcosm of Mantuan history from the day Guido Bonacolsi
laid the first stone somewhere near the year 1300. The building
had not proceeded very far before the Gonzagas came into power
in 1328, in time to stamp the apartments with their character,
and it is with Isabella d’Este that its most inventive features are
associated.
A hundred and eighty rooms, said the janitor, and when one
remembers the crowd of resident courtiers and the great trains
with which the Magnificent Ones travelled, one should not be
astonished at the resemblance of an ancient Palace to a modern
Grand Hotel. Isabella d’Este’s brother-in-law, Lodovico the
Moro, once visited her here with a suite of a thousand persons, and
that was only half the number with which Lodovico’s brother,
Galeazzo, Duke of Milan, descended upon Florence in 1471.
But no modern hotel could keep open a week with such apartments.
I do not refer merely to their dearth of conveniences,
but to their mutual accessibility, their comparative scarcity of
corridors. I do not see how a man could go to bed without
passing through another man’s bedroom. Grandeur without
comfort, art without privacy, such was the Palace in its peopled
prime. Think of it to-day—grandeur in rags, art torn from its
sockets, and a lonely scribe trailing through vaulted and frescoed
emptiness.
The portraits of the Gonzagas are still in the Hall of the
Dukes, but when I ascended the beautiful staircase to the vast
armoury, I found an aching void. The weapons had been
carried off in the sack of Mantua—a sack so complete that
Duke Carlo on his return had to accept a few sticks of furniture
from the Grand Duke of Tuscany. The Hall of the Caryatides
preserves its paintings but the Apartment of the Tapestry is a
chandeliered vacancy. The Apartment of the Empress (for
Maria Theresa crossed Mantua’s line of life) is in yellow silk
upholstery with gilded ceilings and an antique chandelier from
Murano, but one wall is relapsed to rough brick, in sharp
contrast with the white medallioned ceiling. The Refectory or
Hall of the Rivers survives, a curious symphony in brown, a long
vaulted room with frescoes of Father Po and his brother-rivers
and lakes, with grottoes, and caryatides, and marmoreal
mosaics, its windows looking on a hanging garden—yea,
Babylon is fallen!—with a piazza of Tuscan columns and a
central temple.
A sense of passing through a fantastic dream-world began
to steal upon me as I wandered through the Hall of the Zodiac
with its great blue roof of stars and celestial signs and ships
drawn by dogs, and its walls gay with figures in green and gold,
and came to a bed with tall green curtains, in which the
inevitable Napoleon had once slept. He was not, I mused, of
those who could not sleep in a new bed. Followed a suite of
three rooms of the Emperor, decorated with painted tapestry,
the real removed to Vienna.
And the nightmare continued—one long succession of cold
stone floors below and crystal chandeliers on high, bleakly
glittering. There was a Hall of the Popes, bare as a barrack.
There was a long shiny gallery of bad pictures, which was once
a shrine of the Masters. There was a Ducal Apartment
modernised, but with the old gilded and bossed ceiling, and
dark cobwebbed canvases of the Flemish school. There was
the Hall of the Archers, picturesque with the great wooden
rafters of its ruined roof and still painted with illusive white
pillars, statues, and scenes. Most monstrous of all was the many
mirrored, many chandeliered Ball-room—its rows of mirrors
reflecting what dead faces, its gold frieze of putti still echoing
what madrigals and toccatas, the gods of Olympus looking down
from its frescoed ceiling, Apollo driving his chariot and four,
and the Arts, the Sciences, Parnassus, Virgil, Sordello, peeping
from every arch and lunette. And from the Hall of the Archers
my nightmare led me through Ducal Halls and still other
Ducal Halls, till I had passed through seven—vasty Halls of
Death, with marvellous gilded ceilings and unplastered walls, or
with plaster or whitewash over frescoes, or with a sixteenth-century
ceiling swearing at an elegant Austrian bathroom (hot
and cold). Vivid, even in this strange dream, stood out a ceiling
intaglioed with a labyrinth of gilded wood recording the victory
of Vincenzo over the Turks:
“Contra Turcos pugnavit
     Vincenzo Gonzaga”
—and intertangled repeatedly with the labyrinth the device which
d’Annunzio has borrowed for his latest novel—Forse che si, forse
che no—and reproduced upon the cover. An old mirror with
the glass half-sooted over reflected these glories drearily and
showed me the only living face in this labyrinthine tomb.
And so at last by many rooms and ways and up a little staircase
of eleven steps under a painted ceiling, I came, like a soul
that has travailed, to the Apartment of Paradise, the bower of
the beautiful sweet-voiced Isabella d’Este, where, under her
ceiling-device “nec spe nec metu,” she lived her married life and
her long years of widowhood, with her books and her pictures
and her antiquities, playing on her silver lyre and her lute and
her clavichord, and corresponding with her scholars and poets,
“the first lady of the Renaissance.” Piety for this legendary
“dame du temps jadis” seems to have preserved her six-roomed
apartment much as it was, with her wonderful polychrome
wooden ceilings and her wonderful doors fretted with porphyry
and marbles and her bird’s-eye views of great cities she had not
seen—Algiers, Jerusalem, Lisbon, Madrid—and her real view of
the panorama sloping towards the Po; this combination of a
river, a garden and a lake being so stupendo to the inhabitants
of that melancholy region of Italy that Isabella’s apartment
took thence its name of Paradise, much as that dull Damascus
is “the pearl of the East.” Her music-room, too, is intact,
save for the rifling of its pictures. Its intarsia depicting
dulcimer, virginal, harp, and viol, and musical notation, its
heavy-gilded vaulted ceiling with its musical staves and other
decorations, and the little bas-relief showing herself with her
beloved instruments, remain as in the days when Gian Trissino
wrote a canzone “To Madonna Isabella playing on her lute.”
But the Mantegnas she commanded, the Lottos and the
Perugino, are at the Louvre, doubtless at the behest of
Napoleon, that despot of a greater Renaissance to whom even
Isabella’s formidable brother-in-law, the Moro, was a pigmy,
though both of them died in prison and exile, as is the habit of
the Magnificent Ones.
Did my nightmare end in this Paradise, softening in this
quiet bower into a sleep
“Full of sweet dreams and health and quiet breathing”?
Nay, it grew only more incoherent—vast Halls ruined by being
turned into barracks, the statues smashed by a rude soldiery,
the pictures slashed, and only the inaccessible splendours of the
ceiling safe—though not from the damp; in the Hall of the
Triumphs no Triumph remaining save the Triumph of Time
and of Fate, Mantegna’s pictures of the Triumphs of Cæsar
haled to Hampton Court, only their empty oaken frames here
gaping; corridors, empty and long, corridors echoing under the
footstep, corridors adorned with stuccos and rafaellesques; the
Hall of the Moors with a splendid old ceiling and figures of
Moors on a frieze of gilded wood; the Corte Vecchia; the
Apartment of Troy, with crowded wall-frescoes by Giulio
Romano, Mantegna, Primaticcio; the lovely salon of Troy,
dismantled, discoloured, its frescoed legend of Troy undecipherable,
its ceiling of intaglioed wood dilapidated; the Hall of the
Oath of the Primo Capitano, the Hall of the Virtues, Halls
anonymously mouldering; the Saletta of the Eleven Emperors
denuded of Titian’s portraits, to the profit of the British
Museum; the Hall of the Capitani with a Jove of Giulio
Romano thundering from the ceiling but ironically damaged
by real rainstorms; the Saletta of Troy, with more Homer and
Virgil—do you begin to have a sense of the monumental
desolation? But you have yet to figure me drifting in my
dream through the Court of the Marbles and the empty
Sculpture Gallery with its great ruined ceiling and the
Cavallerizza, or Hippodrome, the largest of its time, now stilled
of the clangour of tournament and the plaudits of ladies, and
the Apartment of the Boots and the Gallery over the lake, and
another garden hanging dead, with a Triton for a tombstone
and owls for mourners, the Apartment of the Four Rooms,
blackened by the smoke of days when they were let as lodgings,
and Halls and more Halls, and still more Halls and Cabinets, and
the Hall of the Shells, with its tasty pictures of fish and venison,
and the Hall of the Garlands, and the Apartment of the Dwarfs,
with their miniature chambers and their staircases with small
squat steps—a quarter in itself!
Basta! The nightmare grows too oppressive. Why wake
the buffoons from their pigmy coffins of dwarf oak?
Poor little jesters! Are their souls, too, I wonder, stunted,
and is there for them in heaven some Lilliputian quarter, where
the Magnificent Ones must make sport for them?
“Isabella Estensis, niece of the Kings of Aragon, daughter
and sister of the Dukes of Ferrara, wife and mother of the
Marquises of Gonzaga, erected this in the year 1522 from the
Virgin’s bearing.”
So runs—O rare Renaissance lady—the Italian vaunt in
the frieze round thy Grotto, and I reading it from thy little
courtyard, sit and chew the cud of bitter fancy. Poor Madonna
Isabella, whose inwoven name still clings so passionately to thy
bourdoir walls, in what camera of Paradise dost thou hold thy
court? Methinks thy talent for viol and harp, and that lovely
singing voice of thine, should find fit service in that orchestral
heaven, where thou—always desiderosa di cosa nuova—enjoyest
perchance an ampler pasture for thy sensibilities. Forse che si,
forse che no. But from earth thou art vanished utterly, and
Renaissance for thee is none. Where be thy pages and poets
and buffoons, thy singing seraphs, thy painters and broiderers,
thy goldsmiths and gravers, thy cunning artificers in ivory and
marble and precious woods? Where is Niccolò da Correggio,
thy perfect courtier? Where be Beatrice and Violante, who
combed thy hair, and Lorenzo da Pavia who built thy organ,
and Cristoforo Romano who carved thy doorway and designed
thy medal, and Galeotto del Carretto who sent thee roundelays
to carol to thy lute? Have all these less substance than the
very brocades in which thy soul was wont to bask? Can these
chalcedony jars of thy Grotto outlive them, these shells mock
their flippant fleeting? And thy rhyming and thy reasoning,
and thy gay laughter and that zest to ride all day and dance all
night—could all this effervescence of life settle into mere slime?
And this hideous doubt—this fluctuant forse—can we really
face it nec spe nec metu?
A horn sounds and steeds clatter up and down thy graded
staircase. The hounds give tongue, the hawk flutters on thy
wrist. The great spaces of the Cavallerizza fill with jousting
paladins; dames in cloth of gold and silver look down from
the balconies, princes and ambassadors dispute their smiles.
Where has it vanished, all that allegro life—for I must speak
to thee by the stave—that gay gavotte that went tripping its
merry rhythm through the vasty vaulted halls? Whither has
it ebbed? On what shore breaks that music?
And that Mantuan populace that poured in like a stage-crowd
to hear its Dukes take the oath of fidelity—are the
supers, too, dismissed for ever with the run of the dynasty?
And the Dukes themselves, the haughty Gonzagas, is it possible
that they are crumbled even more irredeemably than those
plasterless walls of their palace? Can it be that Mantegna’s
portraits are less phantasmal than the originals?
“For the honour of the illustrious Lodovico the Magnificent
and Excellent Prince, and unconquered in Faith, and his illustrious
Consort Barbara, the incomparable glory of women, his
Andrea Mantegna, the Paduan, executed this work in 1473.”
At last, at last something lives and breathes in this vast
wilderness of shadows. Bless you, Barbara, incomparable glory
of women, with your strong masculine face; and you, too,
Magnificent long-nosed Lodovico. Far have I been driven in
my dream—I am wandered even to the adjoining ruin of the
Ducal Castle—but now I am with the quick, with pigments
whose life, though it has its fading, is a quasi-immortality compared
with our transience. Go, get you to my lady’s chamber,
and tell her to be painted, for this canvas complexion is the sole
that will last.
Isabella d’Este lives at Vienna, recreated by Titian, and at
Paris Vittore Pisano shows us what a princess of her house was
like, painting beauty of face and brocade against a Japanese
background of flowers and butterflies. A more shadowy life she
lives in this legend of the princess of the Renaissance, which the
prince of Italian writers has revived in his novel, “Forse che
si, forse che no,” a book in which my Italian friends tell me
d’Annunzio has won yet another triumph of language, old words
being so cunningly mingled with new that they do not jar, but
chime. D’Annunzio is a demi-incarnation of the Renaissance
spirit, exanimate of the Christian half, and it is characteristic
that the qualities round which his adoration of Isabella plays
are the qualities not of a great lady, but of a great courtesan;
a leader of the demi-monde. But as d’Annunzio lives in a
half-world, what can his heroines do but lead it? His Isabella
d’Este—as re-created through the worshipful eyes of Aldo—is
the rival in dress of Beatrice Sforza, Renata d’Este, and Lucrezia
Borgia; marchionesses borrow her old clothes as models, Ippolita
Sforza, Bianca Maria Sforza, and Leonora of Aragon are hopelessly
out-dressed. Her sister Beatrice alone sticks like a thorn
in her side—Beatrice whose wardrobe had eighty-four accessions
in two years! But Isabella squeezed ninety-three into one
year!! Lucrezia Borgia, when she went to marry Alfonso
d’Este, had two hundred marvellous chemises; Isabella outdid
her, and even Lucrezia must have recourse to her for a fan of
gold sticks with black ostrich feathers. Isabella invented new
styles and new modes, and the fashion of the carriage at Rome.
Isabella loved gems, particularly emeralds, and succeeded in
obtaining the most beautiful in existence. She had her goldsmiths
at Venice, at Milan, at Ferrara. She possessed not only
the finest jewels, but the finest settings, rings, collars, chains,
bracelets, seals, and so through the list of gewgaws and baubles.
She was the admiration of France. She adored perfumes and
compounded them, and masks, and sent Cæsar Borgia a hundred,
and had the most exquisite nail-files for manicuring, and was
head over ears in debt—per sopra ai capelli—for she had a mad
desire to buy everything that took her whimsy. Has any one
ever better summarised the eternal courtesan?
Not a word about the nobler Isabella, the kind-hearted lady
who was always interceding for criminals or unfortunates; not
a word of the Isabella of unspotted reputation in an age of
demireps (naturally d’Annunzio would hush this up); not a
whisper of the Isabella who felt the defence of Faenza against
Cæsar Borgia “as a vindication of the honour of Italy.” Scarce
a hint of the inspirer of humanism, the patroness of some of the
finest artists of all time; still less any suggestion of the other
Isabella, the housewife who sent salmon-trout to her friends, the
philosopher who, when the King of France had entered Naples,
pointed out to her lord that the discontent of the people is more
dangerous to a monarch than all the might of his enemies on
the battlefield, and the worldly wise woman who, when he was
hesitating over an inglorious military appointment, bade him
take the cash and let the credit go.
So complex an Isabella is beyond the scope of d’Annunzio,
whose Isabella Inghirami is an elemental creature of passion
and tragedy.
“Forse che si, forse che no.” An inhabitant of the full world,
beholding this motto written and rewritten in the ceiling-labyrinth
of the Gonzaga Palace, might fall into contemplation
of the labyrinth of human life, and see this device scribbled all
over it; he might hail it as the philosophy of Montaigne in a
nutshell, and jump, if he were a novelist, at this magnificent
setting for some tale of high speculative fantasy. But for
d’Annunzio there can be only one problem lying between these
mighty opposites. Will a woman yield to her lover, or will
virtue resist him? To this petty issue must these measureless
words be narrowed. ’Tis not even a forse. With d’Annunzio
there can be no negative in such an alternative. And so the
mighty Mantuan ruin which has known so many desolations
receives its last humiliation, and passes into literature as a
background for lust. Sunt lachrymæ rerum.
The true Isabella d’Este has been as much rarefied by the
Renaissance legend as she has been materialised by d’Annunzio.
For she cannot be wholly exonerated from d’Annunzio’s
panegyric. “Would to God,” she cried at sight of her brother-in-law’s
treasure, “that we who are so fond of money possessed
as much.” It was this treasure of the Duke of Milan’s that
did, indeed, make her sister Beatrice a thorn in her side, if also
a rose in her breast, since darling Duchess Beatrice set the pace
at a rate ruinous to the Marchioness of Mantua. Isabella
could not even go to Venice at the same time as Beatrice, lest
all that magnificence (whose very leavings overwhelmed me in
her Palace) should appear shabbiness. And when she lost her
mother, she appeared more anxious about the proper shade
of mourning than the proper sentiment of grief. (How came
d’Annunzio to have missed this trait? What a chance for
analysis of the æsthetic temperament!) More pardonable was
her anxiety as to the colour of the hangings in the Moro’s
rooms, her hurried borrowing of plate and tapestries, when he
impended with that suite of a thousand. But even for
Beatrice’s death she seemed to find some satisfaction in the
ultimate reversion of her much-coveted clavichord, and she
found it possible to borrow a Da Vinci portrait from the Duke’s
former mistress—her sister’s cross. Nor—after the Duke was
in exile—does it seem very loyal to that fallen idol and faithful
admirer, to have ingratiated herself with the French conqueror.
That she should rejoice in the election to the papacy of her
profligate kinsman, Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia, was perhaps not
unnatural, but when every allowance is made for her virtues,
it must be admitted that she was not utterly unworthy of
d’Annunzio’s admiration.
She was, in brief, a Magnificent One, and if the Magnificent
Ones are, as a rule, less monstrous when they are women, at the
best they are a seamy shady lot, grinding the faces of the poor,
that their babes may lie in foolish cradles of gold, and building
themselves lordly pleasure-houses designed by hirelings of
genius. Even Da Vinci prostituted his genius to plan a bathroom
for that minx of a Beatrice, and a pavilion with a round
cupola for the castle-labyrinth of his Most Illustrious Prince,
Signor Lodovico. Yet Lodovico must be commended for his
taste, which is more than can be said for the Magnificent Ones
of to-day, who are apt to combine the libertine with the Philistine.
Save for the mad King of Bavaria, I can recall no modern
monarch who has had a man of genius at his Court. The late
King Leopold exacted gold and executed evil on a scale beyond
the dreams of the Moro, but where were his Leonardos and
Bramantes? Burckhardt tells us that the Renaissance Despot,
whose sway was nearly always illegitimate, gathered a Court
of genius and learning to give himself a standing; the pompous
dulness of our modern Courts shows that Gibbon’s plea for
stability of succession failed to reckon with the stagnation of
security.
Prosaic compared with the fate of the Palace at Mantua is
the fate of the Castle of Ferrara, the cradle of Isabella d’Este.
’Tis one of those gloomy massive four-towered structures that
recall the fables of the giants, with its moat still two yards
deep and its drawbridge intact—a barbarous mediæval pile,
forbidding by daylight and sinister in the moon, with a great
clock that has so much leisure that it strikes the hour before
every quarter.
Yet this grim fortress, originally built by a despot as a
refuge from his subjects, is merely the seat of telegraph and
other civic offices; like some antediluvian dragon tamed and
harnessed, instead of wastefully slain, by the St. George who
gleams above the portcullis.
In the piazza before the castle, where I saw only a cab-rank
of broken-down horses, the festa of this patron-saint of Ferrara
was wont to set Barbary horses racing for the pallium, and
splendid battle-chargers ramped in that great tournament
which was held by Duke Ercole, Isabella’s father, in honour
of his son-in law, the Moro, and which was won by Galeazzo di
Sanseverino, the model of the Cortigiano. Isabella d’Este in
her glad virginal youth walked her palfrey up and down the
great equine staircase, now given over to messenger boys and
clerks. Under the sportive ceilings and adipose angels of
Dosso Dossi, or within that girdling frieze of putti driving their
teams of birds, beasts, snakes or fishes, pragmatic councillors
hold debate. In the castle ball-room are held—charity dances!
But infinitely the saddest relic of the Magnificent Moro is
his former palace in Ferrara. Why he needed a palace in
Ferrara I do not know, unless to accommodate the overflowings
of his suite when he visited his ducal father-in-law. Of this
palace the excellent Baedeker discourses thus: “To the
S. of S. Maria in Vado, in the Corso Porta Romana, is the
former Palazzo Costabili or Palazzo Scrofa, now known as the
Palazzo Beltrami-Calcagnini. It was erected for Lodovico il
Moro, but is uncompleted. Handsome court. On the ground-floor
to the left are two rooms with excellent ceiling-frescoes,
by Ercole Grandi; in the first, prophets and Sybils; in the
second, scenes from the Old Testament in grisaille.”
It could not have been done better by an auctioneer. Here
is the reality. A courtyard with arches, dirty, refuse-littered,
surrounded by a barrack of slum-dwellings. The first room I
penetrated into was palatial in size but occupied by three beds,
and a stove replaced the old hearth. The floor was of bare
brick. Sole touch of colour, a canary sang in a cage, as cheerfully
as to a Magnificent One. The crone whose family
inhabited this room conducted me at my request to the
chamber with the ceilings by Ercole Grandi. She opened the
door, and—like Maria of Sicily—entered crying, “È permesso?”
with retrospective ceremoniousness, and I followed her into a
vast lofty room, dingy below, but glorious above, though more
to faith than to sight, for the firmament of fresco was difficult
to see clearly in the gloom. The floor was of stone, and held
two beds, a chair or two, a cradle, a stout dwarfish old woman
and a sprawl of children with unkempt heads. In the adjoining
room sat a sickly and silent woman working a sewing machine
under the hovering Sybils and Prophets, dim and faded as
herself.
For those who covet a Renaissance chamber, even after this
exposure of the auctioneer, let me say that the rent of this last
room was thirty-two scudi a year, Sybils and Prophets thrown
in.
The entire Palace Beltrami-Calcagnini is, I imagine, to be
acquired for a song. When I first read in Ruskin’s “A Joy
for Ever,” his exhortation to Manchester manufacturers to
purchase palaces in Verona so as to safeguard stray Titians
and Veroneses, I felt that the Anglo-Saxon aspiration to play
Atlas had reached its culminating grotesquerie. But now that
I have seen the state of the Ercole Grandi frescoes, I feel
that the Anglo-Saxon might do worse than step in, and I
cannot understand why Italy, so rigid against the exportation
of her treasures, is so callous to their extinction.
And this is the Palace built by the great Moro, who
“boasted that the Pope Alexander was his chaplain, the
Emperor Maximilian his condottiere, Venice his chamberlain,
and the King of France his courier”; for whose wedding
procession, which was preceded by a hundred trumpeters,
Milan draped itself in satins and brocades; who patronised
the immortals of Art; and who wore to death in an underground
dungeon in France.
An older than Virgil hath spoken the final word: Vanitas
vanitatum, omnia vanitas.
There are few livelier expressions of vitality than tombs,
especially tombs designed or commissioned by their occupants.
These be projections of personality beyond the grave, extensions
of egotism beyond the body. The Magnificent Ones have invariably
the mausolean habit. It is another of their humilities.
The majesty of death, they know, is not enough to cover their
nakedness. Moses, the true Superman, had his sepulchre hidden
that none might worship at it. The false Superman ostentates
his sepulchre in the hope that some one may worship at it. His
Magnificence is only Serene in his tomb: his life passes in uneasy
tiptoeings after greatness. Sometimes his mortuary tumefactions
are softened by his spouse being made co-tenant of his tomb, as
in the Taj Mahal of Agra, or in that beautiful monument ordered
by Lodovico of Milan for himself and Beatrice d’Este. And
sometimes when “the Bishop orders his tomb” it may be with
an extenuating design to beautify his church—“ad ornatum
ecclesiae” as “Leo Episcopus” says of the monument he designed
for himself in Pistoja Cathedral. Unfortunately Bishop Leo’s
worthy object is scarcely attained by the two fat angels leaning
sleepily against his sarcophagus, or by the skull and the shell-work
over it, though in comparison with Verrocchio’s adjacent
monument of Cardinal Forteguerra—or rather the bust and the
black sarcophagus superimposed upon the original marble—the
Bishop’s tomb is a thing of beauty.
But it is only when the corpse has not commanded the monument
that I am able to endure its magnificence. The Cardinal
of Portugal in San Miniato, the poisoned Pope Benedict in
Perugia, St. Dominic in Bologna, St. Agatha in Venice, and even
the mysterious Lazaro Papi, “Colonel for the English in Brazil,”
the “esteemed writer of verses and history,” whose friends raised
him so elaborate a memorial in the cathedral of Lucca in 1835,
all lie as guiltless of their monumental follies as Mausolus himself,
who, it will be remembered, was the victim of his designing
widow. Nor could the Ossa Dantis well escape that domed mausoleum
at Ravenna, though they lay low for a century and a half.
Still further removed from responsibility for his own posthumous
pomp is St. Augustine, who with all his inspiration could
not foresee the adventures of his corpse; how from Hippo it
should come to rest at Pavia, by way of Sardinia, and there, a
thousand years after his death, have that marvellous Arca erected
over it by the Eremitani. Nor could St. Donato, when he slew
the water-dragon of Arezzo by spitting into its mouth, foresee the
great shrine embodying this and other miracles of his which the
millennial piety of the town would rear over his desiccated dust.
But the Medici, the magnificent Medici! Not their chapel
in Santa Croce, full though it be of the pomp of marble and
majolica; not their San Marco monastery with their doctor-saints—St.
Cosmo and St. Damian—not their Medici Palace,
despite that joyous Benozzo fresco with its gay glamour of
landscape and processions; not the Pitti with its incalculable
treasures; not the Villa Medici, nor even the Venus herself, so
reeks with the pride of life as all that appertains to their tombs.
When I gaze upon the monuments of these serene Magnificences
in the Old Sacristy of Florence, with the multiple allusions to
the family and its saints—in marble and terra-cotta, in stucco
and bronze, in fresco and frieze, in high-relief and low-relief—I
feel a mere grave-worm. And when I crawl into the Capella
dei Principi where stand the granite sarcophagi of the Grand
Dukes, there glances at me from every square inch of the
polished walls and the pompous crests and rich mosaics a
glacial radiation of the pride of life—nay, the hubris of life.
That hushed spaciousness is yet like an elaborate funeral
mass perpetually performed by an orchestra opulently over-paid.
I wonder how in their life-time men dared to apply to these
Magnificent Ones the common Italian words for the body and its
operations and why there was not evolved for them—as for the
bonzes of the Cambodgians—a specific vocabulary to differentiate
their eating and drinking from the munching and lapping of
such as I. And yet in the New Sacristy I find consolation.
For, inasmuch as the genius of Michelangelo was harnessed to
the funeral car of his patrons, I perceive that here at last they
are truly buried. They are buried beneath the majestic sculptures
of Day and Night, Evening and Dawn, and ’tis Michelangelo
that lives here, not they. Peace to their gilded dust.
Far more reposeful, at least for the spectator, is Michelangelo’s
own burial place in Santa Croce, which is the most
satisfactory church the Franciscans have produced, and in its
empty spaciousness an uplifting change from the stuffy, muggy
atmosphere, the tawdry profusion of overladen chapels, which
make up one’s general sense of an Italian church. It is not
free from poor pictures and monuments, and only some of the
coloured glass is good, but the defects are lost in the noble
simplicity of the whole under its high wooden roof. Michelangelo’s
monument is unfortunately impaired by one of the few
errors of overcrowding, for the frescoes above it make it look
inferior to the Dante cenotaph, though it is really rather
superior. Curiously enough the line anent the “great poet”
“Ingenio cujus non satis orbis erat,”
does not come from Dante’s monument, but from that of a
certain Karolus, presumably Carlo Marsuppini!
I have spoken of the museum as the mausoleum of reality.
But mausolea too, turn into museums; in losing their dead
they, too, die and become a mere spectacle. Such is the melancholy
fate of the Mausoleum of Theodoric the Great outside
Ravenna, robbed of its imperial heretical bones by avenging
Christian orthodoxy. Infinitely dreary this dead tomb when I
saw it in the centre of its desolate plain, to which I had trudged
through sodden marshland that would have been malarious in
summer; snowbound it lay, its arched substructure flooded, its
upper chamber only just accessible by a snow-crusted marble
staircase: a bare rotundity, a bleak emptiness, robbed even of
its coffin, uncheered even by its corpse. O magnificent Ostrogoth,
conqueror of Italy, O most Christian Emperor, when you turned
from the splendour of your court at Ravenna to build your last
home, you with your imperial tolerance could hardly foresee
that because you held Christ an originated being, as Arius had
gone about singing, a Christian posterity would scatter you to
the four winds. And that rival gigantic tomb in the Appian
Way at Rome, does Cæcilia Metella still inhabit it, I wonder?
I mourn to see such spacious tombs stand empty when there are
so many living Magnificences whom they would fit to a span.
Very proper was it to bury Beatrice, the mother of Matilda, in
the sarcophagus of a Pagan hero. Mausolea no more than
palaces should remain untenanted. Let them be turned into
orts and castles, an you will, like Hadrian’s Tomb into Sant’
Angelo, or into circuses, like the Mausoleum of Augustus—sweet
are the uses of Magnificence—but to keep them standing
idle when there must be so many Magnificences in quest of a
family sepulchre is a crime against America. The tomb of
Theodoric is, I fear, too secluded for American taste, but the
Exarch Isaac’s in such cheerful contiguity with town and
church may arride the millionaire more. For a consideration
the Exarch’s own sarcophagus might be had from the Museum,
and the Exarch scrapped. Or there is Galla Placidia’s
Mausoleum, with its Byzantine mosaics thrown in. Come!
Who bids for these rare curios, one of the few links between
Antiquity and the Renaissance, with their grotesque mediæval
sincerity. Remark, Signori, that prefiguration of the Index
Expurgatorius, that bearded Christ or S. Lorenzo (you pay
your money and you take the choice) who is casting into a
crate of serpentine flames one of those Pagan volumes for which
the Cinquecento will go hunting madly. No, that cabinet does
not contain cigar-boxes—what did the saints know of cigars?—nor
are Marcus, Lucas, Matteus, Joannes, the names of brands.
Those apparent cigar-boxes, as you might have seen from the
strings, are holy manuscripts triumphant over the Pagan volume.
This naïve draughtsmanship, Signora, is just what makes them
so precious and your petty bids so amazing. What is that you
say, Signorina? Galla Placidia is still in possession? And
two Roman Emperors with her? Nay, nay, a nine hundred
and ninety-nine years’ lease is all that a reasonable ghost may
desire; after that, every tomb must be esteemed a cenotaph;
unless indeed the heirs will pay the unearned increment. Choose
your sarcophagus, Signori, an Emperor’s sarcophagus is not in
the market every day.
But I do not think that even the vulgarest millionaire would
desire his ashes to dispossess the Doges of Venice, or at least not
Giovanni Pesaro. The most romantic auctioneer might despair
of disposing of that portal wall of the Frari which is sacred to
the Gargantuan grotesquerie of his colossal memorial. Does the
whole world hold a more baroque monument? Going, going—and
how I wish I could say gone!—that portal upheld by bowed
negro giants on gargoyled pedestals, with patches of black flesh
gleaming through holes in their trousers. Item, one black
skeleton surmounted by other unique curios, including two
giraffes. Item, His Sublimity, the Doge himself, sitting up on
his sarcophagus, holding up his hands as if in expostulation,
gentlemen, against your inadequate bids. Item, a wealth of
heroic figures, and an array of virtues and vices, all life-size.
(Could be sold separately as absolutely incongruous with the
negro portions of the monument.) Also, in the same lot if
desired, two hovering angelets, holding a wreath, suitable for
any Christian celebrity.
Alas, Barnum is no more and bidding languishes. And yet
I do not see why the lot should not be knocked down. Who
was this Pesaro that he should have the right to impose this
horror on posterity? Why should generations of worshippers at
the Frari be obsessed by this nightmare? There can be no
sacredness in such demented mural testaments. And Time, who
preserved this, while he has destroyed so many precious things,
who shattered Leonardo’s horse and melted Michelangelo’s
bronze Pope, is hereby shown of taste most abominable. History
must get a better curator.
The black skeleton—I had not thought before that skeletons
could be negro—flourishes a scroll which ascribes to the Doge
the wisdom of Solomon and an implacable hostility against the
foes of Christ, while a tablet held by one of the giant negroes
announces
“Aureum inter optimos principes vides.”
Aureum indeed! Doubtless only some faint sense that sheen
and death are discrepant held back the Doges from being buried
in golden caskets. The Doge lives again in this monument, boasts
the Latin, and one can only reflect that if the dogal taste
reached this depravity by the middle of the seventeenth century,
actum est de republicâ might have been written long before
Napoleon. Fortunately for the memory of the Pesaro family
it finds a nobler, if no less bombastic expression, in the great
Titian altar-piece, the Madonna di Casa Pesaro, in which the
Queen of Heaven bends from her throne to beam at its episcopal
representative, and St. Francis and St. Anthony grace by their
presence the symbols of its victory over the Turk, while
St. Peter pauses in his pious lection.
But the dead Doges lie mostly in S. S. Giovanni e Paolo,
where their funeral service was performed. It is the very
church for Their Sublimities—floods of light, pillared splendour,
imposing proportions. Their tombs protrude from the
walls, and their sculptured forms lie on their backs, their
heads on pillows, their feet comfortably on cushions. Even
when we are reminded of the finer things for which the Republic
stood, there is an echo of material opulence.
“Steno, olim Dux Venetiorum, amator
 Justitiæ, Pacis, et Ubertatis anima.”
Ubertatis anima! The soul of prodigal splendour! Even
spiritual metaphor must harp on images of Magnificence.
But not every dead Doge consents to be couchant. Horatio
Baleono, who died in 1617, “hostes post innumeros stratos,”
has for monument a cavalier (of course, gilded) riding rough-shod
over writhing forms and a broken-down cannon, and Pietro
Mocenigo, whose mausoleum vaunts itself “ex hostium manubiis,”
stands defiant on the summit of his sarcophagus, which is
upborne by a trinity of figures.
What a family this Casa Mocenigo, with its record of Doges!
Remove their memorials and mausolea from this church and
you would half empty it of monuments. Tintoretto, no less
than Titian, was dragged at their triumphal car. There is an
Adoration of the Saviour at Vicenza, which might just as
well be the adoration of the Doge, Alvise Mocenigo, who is in
the centre of the picture. For though he is kneeling, he has
all the air of sitting, and all the other figures—the worshippers,
the angel flying towards him, and the Christ flying down to
him—converge towards him like a stage-group towards the
limelit hero. Compare all this posthumous self-assertion with
the oblivion fallen on Marino Faliero, the decapitated Doge of
Byron’s drama, whose dubious sarcophagus was shown to the
poet in the outside wall of this church.
Nor could Padua, Venice’s neighbour, fall behind her in
mortuary magnificence.
“Nequidque patavino splendore deesset”
says a monument to Alessandro Contarini in the nave of the
cathedral, a monument supported by six slaves and embracing a
bas-relief of the fleet. Another in the worst dogal style
exhibits Caterino Cornaro, a hero of the Cretan War (who died
in 1674) in a full-bottomed wig and baggy knee-breeches,
holding a scroll as if about to smack the universe with it. Sad
is it to see so many “eternal monuments” of faded fames.
The Scaliger street-tombs in Verona are at least artistically
laudable, however ironically their Christian ostensiveness compares
with the record of the Family of the Ladder, whose rungs
were murdered relatives. But even had Can Signorio lived the
life of a saint, it would have needed a considerable conquest of
his Christian humility before he could have commissioned that
portentous tomb of his from Bonino da Campiglione. Knowing
the Magnificent One, Bonino gave him solidity and superfluity,
a plethora of niched and statued minarets of saints and virtues
armed warriors, and bewildering pinnacles clothed with figures,
all resting on six red marble columns springing from a base which
supports the tomb, and is itself upborne by angels at each
corner and adorned with pious bas-reliefs. And while the dead
man lies in stone above his tomb, guarded by angels at head and
foot, he also bestrides his horse and sports his spear on the
uttermost pinnacle of his ladder-crested memorial, as though
making the best of both worlds; which was indeed the general
habit of the Magnificent, who desired likewise the beatitudes of
the Meek, and often shed tears of sincere repentance when they
could sin no more. Mastino della Scala’s tomb is more gilded
and elegant than Can Signorio’s, though not less assertive and
bi-worldly. And as for the tomb of Can Grande—“Dog the
Great,” as Byron translated him in “The Age of Bronze,”—which
is perched over the church door and soars up into a
turret, it was—on the day I first saw it—provided with a long
and dirty ladder for repairing purposes. So that I say Father
Time—if he be a poor curator—is at least a fellow of infinite
jest. One of his jests is to hound the Magnificent dead from
pillar to post, from church to monastery, from crypt to chapel.
In the grave there is rest? Fiddle-faddle! No body is safe
from these chances of mortality. Stone walls do not a coffin
make, nor iron bars a tomb. Call no body happy until it is
burnt. After five centuries of rest Matilda of Tuscany was
carried off from Mantua in a sort of mortuary elopement by her
great admirer, Pope Urban VIII, and hidden away in the
castle of S. Angelo, till she could be inhumed in St. Peter’s, and
it was only the pride of Spoleto that saved Lippo Lippi from
being sold to Florence. Napoleon, in suppressing churches, disestablished
many an ancient corpse, and the pious families of
Verona hastened to transport their sarcophagi to the church of
S. Zeno on the outskirts. Hither must ride the dead Cavalli
with their equine scutcheons, flying before the World-Conqueror
on his white horse.
Dismemberment, too, befalls tombs at the hands of the merry
jester. The friars of S. Maria delle Grazie who owed so much
to the great Sforza Duke, broke up his monument and offered his
effigy and his wife’s for sale. The more loyal Carthusians snapped
up Cristoforo Solari’s beautiful sculptures for the beggarly price
of thirty-eight ducats, and Lodovico and Beatrice in marble
must leave their dust and make a last journey to Pavia. A last
journey? Chi sa?
“Iterum et iterum translatis,” sighs the monument over the
bones of Cino in Pistoja Cathedral, and who knows that the
“pax tandem ossibus” is more than a sanguine aspiration?
Cino was not the only Italian poet to be thus “translated,”
though neither Petrarch nor Ariosto was “translated” so often.
Petrarch indeed was rather pirated than “translated,” for his
right arm was stolen from his sepulchre at Arquà for the
Florentines, and the rest of him is now supposed to be in Madrid—a
town which also holds that monarch of sanctity, Francesco
di Borja, likewise minus an arm, for the Gesù of Rome kept
back that precious morsel of the Duke who had entered the
kingdom of heaven by the rare gate of abdication.
But stranger than these mutations of mortality is the fact that
Italy holds the ashes of our Shelley and Keats, as it held so
much of the life of Byron and Browning. As if Rome had not
riches and memories to super-satiety! A Protestant cemetery
seems indeed out of key as much with these poets as with Rome,
but that overshadowing Pyramid of Cestius restores the exotic
touch, and violets and daisies blot out all but the religion of
beauty, so that Shelley could write: “It might make me in love
with death to think that one should be buried in so sweet a
place.” It is pleasant to think that only a year later Shelley,
however exiguous his ashes, found in that sweet place the rest
and re-union for which his cor cordium yearned.
“’Tis Adonais calls! oh hasten thither,
 No more let life divide what Death can join together.”
With what a wonderful coast Shelley has mingled his
memory—fig-trees, olives, palms, cactus, hawthorn, pines bent
seaward, all running down the steep cliff. What enchanting
harmonies they make with the glimpses of sea deep below,
the white villages and campaniles, seen through their magic
tangle. As you pass through the sunny dusty village roads, the
girls seem to ripen out of the earth like grapes, both white and
black, for there are golden-haired blondes as well as sun-kissed
brunettes. They walk bare-footed, with water-jars poised on their
heads, sometimes balancing great russet bundles of hay. And
the old peasant women with Dantesque features sit spinning
or lace-making at the doors of their cottages, as they have
sat these three thousand years, without growing a wrinkle the
more, if indeed there was ever room for another wrinkle on their
dear corrugated faces. What earth lore as of aged oaks they
must have sucked in during all these centuries!
It is here that one understands the Paganism of d’Annunzio,
whose soul lies suffused in these sparkling infinities of sun and
sea and sky, whose marmoreal language is woven from the
rhythmic movement and balance of these sculptural bodies.
Viareggio, which holds Shelley’s monument, is a place of
strange twisted plane-trees. The Piazza Shelley is a simple quiet
square of low houses fronting a leafy garden and the sea. It
leads out, curiously enough, from the Via Machiavelli. There
is a bronze bust, which admirers cover with laurel, and an
inscription which represents him as meditating here a final
page to “Prometheus Unbound.” (Baedeker, comically mis-translating
“una pagina postrema,” represents him as meditating
“a posthumous page”!)
Not here, however, but in La Pineta is the place to muse upon
Shelley. It is a thick, sandy pinewood with an avenue of planes.
The pines are staggering about in all directions, drunk with
wind and sun. Very silent was it as I sat here on a spring
evening, watching the rosy clouds over the low hills and the
mottled sunset over the sea. The birds ventured scarcely a
twitter; they knew they could not vie with Shelley’s skylark.
Shelley’s epitaph in the Roman cemetery is like a soft music
at the end of a Shakespeare tragedy.
“Nothing of me that doth fade
 But doth suffer a sea-change
 Into something rich and strange.”
What a curious and pacifying fusion of poetry and wit! It
reconciles us to the passing back of this cosmic spirit into the
elements by way of water. But what a jarring perpetuation of
the world’s noises on the tombstone of Keats!
“This grave contains all that was mortal of a young English
poet, who on his death-bed, in the bitterness of his heart at the
malicious powers of his enemies, desired these words to be
engraven on his tombstone: ‘Here lies one whose name was
written in water.’ ”
Water again! But water as chaos and devourer. How ill
all this turbulence accords with the marble serenity of his fame,
a fame that so far as pure poetry is concerned stands side by
side with Shakespeare’s! We are a good way now from the
twenty-fourth of February, eighteen hundred and twenty-one.
A few years more and Keats will have been silent a hundred
years, and we know that his nightingale will sing for ever.
What profits it, then, to prolong this mortuary bitterness,
to hang this dirty British linen on the Roman grave?
The museum is the place for this tombstone—I could whisk
it thither like the Doge Pesaro’s wall. Will it save the
next great poet from the malice of his enemies? Will they
speak a dagger less? Not a bodkin! The next great poet,
being great and a poet, will appeal in novel and unforeseeable
ways, and be as little read and as harshly reviewed
as the marvellous boy of Hampstead whose death at twenty-five
is the greatest loss English literature has ever sustained.
Were it not fittest, therefore, to celebrate the centenary of this
death by changing his epitaph for a line of “Adonais”?⁠—
“He lives, he wakes; ’tis Death is dead, not he.”
The tragedy of Keats is sufficiently commemorated in Shelley’s
preface and in the pages of literary history and in the doggerel
of Byron.
“ ‘Who killed John Keats?’
 ‘I,’ says the Quarterly,
 So savage and Tartarly
 ’Twas one of my feats.”
And Byron lamented and marvelled
“That the soul, that very fiery particle,
 Should let itself be snuffed out by an article.”
I do not share this discontent. To be snuffed out by an
article is precisely the only dignified ending for a soul. This
dualism of body and spirit which has been foisted upon us
has degradations enough even in health. No union was ever
worse assorted than this marriage of inconvenience by which a
body with boorish tastes and disgusting habits is chained to an
intelligent and fastidious soul. No wonder their relations are
strained. Such cohabitation is scarcely legitimate. Were they
only to keep their places, a reasonable modus vivendi might be
patched up. The things of the spirit could exercise causation
in the sphere of the spirit, and the things of the body would be
restricted to their corporeal circle. But alas! the partners, like
most married couples, interfere with each other and intrude on
each other’s domain. Body and soul transfuse and percolate
each other. Too much philosophising makes the liver sluggish,
and a toothache tampers with philosophy. Despair slackens
the blood and wine runs to eloquence. Body or soul cannot
even die of its own infirmity; the twain must arrange a modus
moriendi, each consenting to collapse of the other’s disease.
Thus a body in going order may be stilled by a stroke of bad
news, and a spiritual essence may pass away through a pox.
Think of the most powerful of the Popes, the head of Christendom,
the excommunicator of the Kings of France and Spain,
having to succumb to a fever; think of the great French writer,
in whose brain the whole modern world mirrored itself, having
to die of a gas from which even his dog recovered; think of the
giant German philosopher, who had announced the starry infinitude
of the moral law, degenerating into the imbecile who must
tie and untie his necktie many times a minute. Surely it were
worthier of man’s estate had Innocent III perished of an argument
in favour of lay investiture, had Zola been snuffed out by
an anti-Dreyfusard pamphlet or a romantic poem, had Kant
succumbed to the scornful epigram of Herder, or even to the
barkings of the priests’ dogs who had been given his name.
And far worthier were it of a poet to die of a review than of a
jaundice, of a criticism than a consumption. Infinitely more
dignified was the death of Keats under the Quarterly than the
death of Byron himself under a fever, which some trace to a
microbe, itself possibly injected by a mosquito. That were an
unpardonable oversight of Dame Nature, who in her democratic
enthusiasm forgets that mosquitos are not men’s equals, and
that these admirable insects should be blooded more economically.
Assuredly the author of “The Vision of Judgment”
would have preferred to die of a stanza or a sting-tailed
epigram.
Dame Nature had the last word; but was Byron, foreseeing
her crushing repartee, so absolutely unjustified in his criticisms
and questionings of a Power that held him as lightly as the
parasite on the hind leg of any of the fifty thousand species of
beetles? For if Fate treads with equal foot on a Byron and a
beetle, the bard may be forgiven if he takes it less christianly
than the coleopteron.
Byron is “cheap” to-day in England, and while Greece celebrates
the centenary of his arrival and Crete calls on his name,
while Italy is full of his glory, his hotels and his piazzas, while
Genoa is proud that he lived in Il Paradiso and the Armenian
Monastery at Venice still cherishes the memory of his sojourn
there to learn Armenian, and every spot he trod is similarly
sacred, the Puritan critic reminds us that
                  “The gods approve
The depth and not the tumult of the soul.”
Yes, we know, but when a poet is disapproving of the gods
their standards matter less. And we are men, not gods, that
their standards should be ours. Humani sumus, and nothing of
Byron’s passion and pain can be alien from us. This tumult of the
soul, who has escaped it? Not Wordsworth, assuredly, who wrote
those lines. Only the fool hath not said in his heart, “There is no
God.” Even Cardinal Manning said it on his death-bed. Not
that death-bed conversions are worth anything. Matthew
Arnold was apt to give us Wordsworth as the reposeful contrast
to the bold, bad Byron. But the calmness of Wordsworth
is only in his style, and if his questionings are cast in bronze,
they were often forged in the same furnace as Byron’s, and fused
through and through with the pain
“Of all this unintelligible world.”
Poets, even the austere, have to learn in suffering what they
teach in song. Only the suffering is always so much clearer than
what it teaches them. And then, as Heine says, comes Death, and
with a clod of earth gags the mouth that sings and cries and
questions.
“Aber ist Das eine Antwort?”
Among these multitudinous Madonnas, and countless Crucifixions,
and Entombments innumerable, who shall dare award
the palm for nobility of conception? But there is a minor
theme of Renaissance Art as to which I do not hesitate. It is
the Pietà theme, but with angels replacing or supplementing the
Madonna who cherishes the dead Christ, and it is significant
that the finest treatment of it I have seen comes from the
greatest craftsman who treated it—to wit, Giovanni Bellini.
His Cristo Sorretto da Angioli you will find painted on wood—a
tavola—in the Palazzo Communale of Rimini. The Christ
lies limp but tranquil, in the peace, not the rigidity, of death,
and four little angels stand by, one of them half hidden by
the dead figure. The exquisite appeal of this picture, the
uniqueness of the conception, lies in the sweet sorrow of the
little angels—a sorrow as of a dog or a child that cannot fathom
the greatness of the tragedy, only knows dumbly that here is
matter for sadness. The little angels regard the wounds with
grave infantile concern. Sacred tragedy is here fused with
idyllic poetry in a manner to which I know no parallel in any
other painter. The sweet perfection of Giovanni Bellini, too
suave for the grim central theme of Christianity, here finds
triumphant and enchanting justification.
It is perhaps worth while tracing how every other painter’s
handling of the theme that I have chanced on fails to reach this
lyric pathos.
Bellini himself did not perhaps quite reach it again, though he
reaches very noble heights in two pictures (one now in London
and the other in Berlin), in which the reduction in the number of
angels to two makes even for enhancement of the restful simplicity,
while in the Berlin picture there is a touching intimacy of
uncomprehending consolation in the pressing of the little angelic
cheeks against the dead face. But the fact that in both pictures
one angel seems to understand more or to be more exercised
than the other contributes a disturbing complicacy. The serene
unity is, indeed, preserved by Bellini in his Pietà in the Museo
Correr of Venice. But here the three young angels supporting
the body are merely at peace—there is nothing of that sweet
wistfulness.
For a contrary reason the woodland flavour is equally absent
from its neighbour, a picture by an unknown painter of the
Paduan school. Here the peace is exchanged, not for poetry
but tragedy. The Christ is erect in his tomb, and the two
haloed baby angels who uphold his arms are the one weeping,
the other horror-struck. The horror is accentuated and the
poetry still further lessened in an anonymous painting in a
chapel of S. Anastasia in Verona, where boy angels are
positively roaring with grief. Nor is the poetry augmented in
that other anonymous painting in the Palazzo Ducale of Venice,
where one angel kisses the dead hand and the other the blood-stained
linen at the foot. In Girolamo da Treviso’s picture in
the Brera one child angel examines the bloody palm and the
other lifts up the drooping left arm with its little frock. Great
round tears run down their faces, which are swollen and ugly
with grief. Still more tragic, even to grotesquerie, is an old
fresco fragment in an underground church in Brescia, where
the little angels are catching the sacred blood in cups—those
cups invented by Perugino and borrowed even by Raphael.
Francesco Bissolo, in the Academy of Venice, preserves the
tranquillity of Bellini, but by making the angels older loses not
only the seductive naïveté but the whole naturalness, for these
angels are old enough to know better, one feels. They have no
right to such callousness. Raphael’s father in his picture in
the cathedral of Urbino escapes this pitfall, for his adult
angels bend solicitously over the Christ and support his arms
from above. But Lorenzo Lotto, though he gives us innocent
child-angels, tumbles into an analogous trap, for he forgets that by
adding a Madonna and a Magdalen in bitter tears he transforms
these untroubled little angels into little devils, who have
not even the curiosity to wonder what in heaven’s name their
mortal elders are weeping over. In Cariani’s so-called Deposizione
at Ravenna one little angel does weep in imitation of the
mortals, leaning his wet cheek on the Christ’s dead hand—“tears
such as angels weep”—but he only repeats the human tragedy,
and might as well be a little boy. Two older angels howl and
grimace in Marco Zoppo’s picture in the Palazzo Almerici of
Pesaro, while the haloed, long-ringleted head of the Christ droops
with slightly open mouth and a strange smile as provoking as
Mona Lisa’s. Francia in the National Gallery gives us a red-eyed
Madonna with one calm and one compassionate angel, and
Zaganelli in the Brera vies with Bellini in the vague, tender
wonderment of the child angels who lift up the arms, but the
picture is second-rate and the angels are little girls with bare
arms and puffed sleeves. Nor is it a happy innovation to show
us the legs of the Christ sprawling across the tomb.
Marco Palmezzano, with inferior beauty, also trenches on
Bellini’s ground; but not only is the Christ sitting up, not quite
dead, but one of the two child angels is calling out as for aid,
so that the restful finality of Bellini is vanished. Still nearer
to the Bellini idea approaches a picture in the Academy of
Venice attributed to Marco Basaiti and an unknown Lombardian.
But if this avoids tragedy, the turn is too much in
the direction of comedy. The child angels are made still more
infantine, so that there is neither horror nor even perturbation,
merely a shade of surprise at so passive a figure. One plays
with the Christ’s hair, the other with his feet—the Blake-like
tenderness is not absent, but the poetry of this utter unconsciousness
is not so penetrating as the wistful yearning of the
Bellini angels before some dim, unsounded ocean of tragedy.
This precise note I did, indeed, once catch in a corner of Domenichino’s
Madonna del Rosario, where a baby surveys the crown
of thorns; but this is just a side-show in a joyous, thickly populated
picture, and the Christ is not dead, but a live bambino,
who showers down roses on the lower world of martyrdom and
sorrow.
He is almost too dead in the fading fresco of the little low-vaulted,
whitewashed, ancient church of S. Maria Infra Portas
in Foligno. A great gash mutilates his side, his head, horribly
fallen back, lies on the Madonna’s lap, his legs and arms droop.
The mother’s long hair hangs down from her halo, she clasps
her hands in agony, and a child angel on either side looks on
commiseratingly. Strange to say, this conserves the poetry,
despite the horror, though the horror removes it out of comparison
with Bellini’s handling.
In Genoa I found three more variations on the theme, two in
the cathedral, the first with four angels, all gravely concerned,
and the second with quite a crowd of little boys and angels,
nearly all weeping. One of the little angels has taken off the
crown of thorns—a good touch in a bad picture. The third
variant is by Luca Cambiaso, and in the Palazzo Rosso, with
a single agitated boy angel. A Pietà in Pistoja takes its main
pathos from its lonely position on the staircase of the fusty
town hall: a last rose of summer, all its companions are faded
and gone, all save one pretty lady saint blooming in a vast
ocean of plaster. Even its own Madonna and Apostles are
half obliterated; but the boy angel remains in a curious posture:
he has got his head betwixt the legs of the Christ, and with his
arms helps to sustain the drooping figure. Still more original
touches appear in Andrea Utili’s picture in Faenza. Here the
Christ has his arms crossed, and his halo, tilted back over his
crown of thorns, gleams weirdly in red and gold, and on his
tomb rest pincers and a hammer. The two youthful angels
are deeply moved; one holds a cross and the other three
nails.
If any painter could vie in enchantment with Giovanni
Bellini it is Crivelli, and, indeed, there are fascinating things in
his Pietà in the Brera, idyllic sweetness in the angels, original
decorative touches in the book and burning taper, and masterly
imagination in the ghastly lack of vitality with which each dead
hand of the Christ droops on the tender living hand of an
angel. Had only the angels been a little younger, this would
have been as sweetly lyrical as Bellini. From Michelangelo we
have only a sketch of the subject, with his wingless child angels,
over whom stands the Mater Dolorosa with useless outspread
arms, that should have been helping the poor little things to
support their burden. In Guido Reni’s Pietà at Bologna her
hands droop in folded resignation, while one angel weeps and
one adores and pities. I fear the presence of the Madonna and
other mortals destroys the peculiar celestial poetry, though of
course the conjunction of mortals and angels brings a poetry of
its own.
Tura’s treatment of the theme in Vienna I have not seen.
But Vivarini breaks out in a new direction. His two angels
fly from right and left towards the tomb, under full canvas, so
to speak. But it is a pattern et præterea nihil. More poetic in
its originality is a picture of the Veronese school in the Brera,
showing us two baby angels, half curious, half apprehensive,
unfolding the Christ’s winding-sheet. But it is a dark, poorly
painted picture. Another new invention is Garofalo’s in the
same gallery. He gives us a crowd of commonplace weeping
figures in a picturesque landscape, and his angel is a sweet little
cherub aloft on a pillar over the heads of the mourning mob.
But the angel might be a mere architectural decoration, for all
his effect upon the picture.
Thus have we seen almost every possible variation tried—adult
angels and young angels and baby angels, calm angels
and callous angels, lachrymose angels and vociferous angels,
helpless angels and hospital angels, boy angels and girl
angels, and only one artist has seen the sole permutation
which extracts the quintessential poetry of the theme—the
high celestial tragedy unadulterated by human grief, and
sweetened yet deepened by angels too young to understand
and too old to be unperturbed, too troubled for play and too
tranquil for tears.
And it is to that incarnation of evil, Sigismondo Malatesta,
that we owe this masterpiece of lyric simplicity, for ’twas the
Magnificent Monster himself that commissioned it—His rolling
and reverberating Magnificence, Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta
di Pandolfo—whose polyphonous, orotund name and the black
and white elephants of whose crest pervade the splendid
temple which he remodelled at Rimini for the glory of God.
And lest the world should forget ’twas he to whom heaven
owed the delicious Pagan reliefs by the pillars, or the now-faded
ultramarine and starry gold of the chapels, each first pilaster
bears in Greek the due inscription:
 
TO THE IMMORTAL GOD
SIGISMONDO PANDOLFO MALATESTA DI PANDOLFO
 
(Pray do not pause here—epigraphs, like telegrams, are not
punctuated)
 
PRESERVED FROM MANY OF THE GREATEST PERILS OF THE ITALIAN WAR
ERECTED AND BEQUEATHED MAGNIFICENTLY LAVISH
AS HE HAD VOWED IN THE VERY MIDST OF THE STRUGGLE
AN ILLUSTRIOUS AND HOLY MEMORIAL
 
No less reflexive was his apotheosis of the frail Isotta, of whom
he first made an honest woman and then a goddess. What
wonder if his critics carped at the “Disottæ,” the “divine
Isotta,” he wrote over her tomb, in lieu of the conventional
“Dominæ Isottæ Bonæ Memoriæ”! But one must do the
bold, bad condottiere the justice to say that while two angels
bear this inscription over her in gold, his own tomb is comparatively
modest. It is Isotta whose tomb is supported by shield-bearing
elephants and culminates in flourishes as of elephants’
trunks, Isotta who stands over her altar in the guise of a gold-winged
angel. Malatesta’s patronage of Giovanni Bellini was
not his only contribution to the arts, for a cluster of poets
found hospitality at his court and burial at his temple—with
a careful inscription that it was Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta
di Pandolfo who buried them—though these seem to have plied
the trade of Laureate, if I may judge from the volume published
at Paris, “L’Isotteo.” I cannot pretend to be read in Porcellio
de’ Pandone or Tommaso Seneca or Basinio of Parma. But
Bellini’s tavola suffices to make me say with riddling Samson,
“Out of the strong cometh forth sweetness.”
For this is perhaps the teleological purpose of the Magnificent
Ones, to play the Mæcenas to some starveling artist or penurious
poet. There is in the santuario of the Malatesta temple a
fresco of this Sigismondo. He is seen in the flush of youth,
gay in a brocaded mantle and red hose, but somewhat disconcertingly
on his knees before a crowned figure—his patron saint
according to some, the Emperor Sigismondo more probably.
Let us call it that sovereign fate to which even megaphonious
Magnificence must bow. Almost divine in his lifetime, within
a few years the Magnificent One’s character commences to
decay, as if that too could not resist the corruption of death.
Happy the prince of whom some not malodorous shred of reputation
remains a century after his death. The evil that men
do lives after them, the good they have not done is oft interred
with their bones.
Yes, there is a pathos in the Magnificent Ones. When I
consider how their autocosm ensnared them with a sense of their
own perdurability, lured them into engaging painters and
architects and statuaries to express their triumphant sense of
timeless energising, and then ebbed away from them, leaving
them putrid carbonates, phosphates, and silicates, while the work
of Beauty lived on and lives, having used these momentarily
swollen creatures as its channel and tool, then I find it in me
to pity these frog-bulls of egotism, so cruelly bemocked and
deluded.
Before parting with the Pietà theme I would remark that in
the Italian galleries the name Pietà is often—with apparent
inaccuracy—given to pictures of the dead Christ alone in his
tomb. One of the most curious pictures of this sort I came
upon in the gallery of Faenza, where Christ stands in his tomb,
yet still nailed on the Cross, from either end of which depends
a scourge. I found the same design in the centre of a little
stone shield over a building marked as the “Mons Pietatis” of
Faenza. And this set me speculating whether such an image as a
symbol of the Monte di Pietà was due to the mere suggestiveness
of the word Pietà, or whether there was a more mystical connection
implied between the Crucifixion and the loan-offices
instituted in Italy by Bernardino da Feltre to frustrate the usury
of the Jews. It is the Monte di Pietà of Treviso that shelters
the Entombment ascribed to Giorgione. It seems a long way
from Golgotha to the pawn-shop, yet we still talk of pledges
being redeemed.
                               “Pictures
Of this Italian master and that Dutchman.”
James Shirley: The Lady of Pleasure.
To come in the Uffizi upon a Dutch collection, to see the
boors of Jan Steen, the tavern peasants of Heemskerck, the
pancake-seller of Gerard Dou, the mushrooms and butterflies
of Marcellis Ottone, is to have, first a shock of discord and then
a breath of fresh air and to grow suddenly conscious of the
artificial atmosphere of all this Renaissance art. Where it does
not reek of the mould of crypts or the incense of cathedrals or
the pot-pourri of the cloister, it is redolent of marmoreal salons,
it is the art of the Magnificent Ones. Moroni’s Tailor
marks almost the social nadir of its lay subjects, and our
sartor was no doubt a prosperous member of his guild. There
are two courtesans in Carpaccio but indistinguishable from
countesses, in a rich setting of pilasters and domestic pets.
Guido Reni painted his foster-mother, but it is the exception
which proves the rule. And the rule is that Demos shall
appear in Art only as the accessory in a sacred picture, like the
old woman with the basket of eggs in Titian’s Presentation in
the Temple, or the servants in the many sacred suppers and
banquetings beloved of Veronese. That the Holy Family itself
was of lowly status is, of course, ignored except here or there by
Tintoretto or Signorelli or Giovanni Bellini, and the wonderful
gowns and jewels worn by the carpenter’s wife, according to Fra
Angelico or Crivelli, would be remarkable even on a Beatrice
d’Este or a Marie de’ Medici. Who would ever think that
Raphael’s Sposalizio of the Virgin was the marriage of a
Bethlehem artisan to a peasant girl? Even the carpenter’s
barefootedness—the one touch of naked truth—seems a mere piece
of hymeneal ritual, in face of that royal company of princesses and
their suites, that functioning High Priest. No; insistence on
the humbleness of the Holy Family hardly tallied with the
Christianity of the Renaissance, or even with the psychology of
the poor believer, who loves to dress up his gods as Magnificent
Ones and for whom to adore is to adorn. Aristocracy is the
note of Italian painting—the Holy Family takes formal
precedence, but the Colonnas and the Medicis rank their
families no less select. The outflowering of Dutch art was like
the change from the airless Latin of the scholars to the blowy
idioms with which real European literature began. Italian art
expressed dignity, beauty, religion; Dutch art went back to life,
to find all these in life itself. It was the efflorescence of
triumphant democracy, of the Dutch Republic surgent from the
waves of Spain and Catholicism as indomitably as she had risen
from the North Sea. Hence this sturdy satisfaction with reality.
Rembrandt painted with equal hand ribs of beef and ribs of
men. The Low Countries invented the fruit and flower piece and
the fish and game piece. That Low Art hails from the nether
lands is not a mere coincidence. Holland was less a country
than a piece of the bed of the sea to which men stuck instead
of limpets. Cowper says, “God made the country and man
made the town,” but the Dutch proverb says, “God made the
sea and we made the shore.” ’Twas no braggart boast. The
Dutchman had made for himself a sort of anchored ship, and
the damps and vapours drove him oft from the deck to the warm
cabin, where, asquat on plump cushions with buxom vrow and
solid food and stout liquor, he met the mists with an answering
cloud from his placid pipe. And the art he engendered reflected
this love for cosy realities, and found a poetry in the very
peeling of potatoes. No voice of croaking save from the frogs
of his marshes. Let your Leopardis croak ’mid their sunny
vineyards, let your Obermanns sulk on their stable mountains
Mynheer is grateful to be here at all, to have outwitted the
waters and dished the Dons. And so never has earthiness
found more joyous expression than in his pictures. What gay
content with the colours of clothes and the shafts of sunshine,
and the ripe forms of women, and the hues of meats and fishes!
O the joy of skating on the frozen canals! O the jolly revels in
village taverns! Hail the ecstasy of the Kermesse! “How good
is man’s life, the mere living.” “It is a pleasant thing to have
beheld the sun.” These are the notes of Dutch art, which is like a
perpetual grace to God for the beauty of common things. And
if the painters are concerned so much with the problems of light,
if Rembrandt was the poet of light, was it not because the
Dutchman had always in his eye varying effects of light,
shifting reflections and scintillations in the ubiquitous canals,
kaleidoscopic struggles of sunlight with mist and fog? The
Venetians too, those Hollanders of Italy, are notable for their
colour, in contrast with the Florentines.
Even in the Dutch and Flemish images of doom I have
thought to detect a note of earth-laughter, almost an
irresponsible gaiety. Pierre Breughel paints the Fall of the
Angels as a descent to lower forms—the loyal angels beat the
rebels down, and they change as they fall into birds, beasts, and
fishes, into frogs and lizards, and even into vegetables. There
are bipedal carrots, and winged artichokes and bird-tailed
pomegranates. ’Tis as if the worthy painter was anxious to
return to the kitchen, to his genre subjects. Or may we sniff
a belated Buddhism or a premature Darwinism? Instead of a
sacred picture we get a pantomimic transformation scene:
metamorphosis caught grotesquely in the act. This Fall of the
Angels seems a favourite Flemish subject—one reads almost an
allegory of Art hurled down from heaven to earth.
The same sportive fantasy frolics it over the Flemish hell.
De Vos gives us a devil playing on the fluted nose of a
metamorphosed sinner. In a triptych of Jerome Bosch, the
Last Judgment is the judgment of a Merry Andrew who
turns the damned into bell-clappers, strings them across harp-strings,
or claps their mouth to the faucets of barrels till they
retch. So far goes the painter’s free fancy that he invents air-ships
and submarines for the lost souls to cower in, unwitting
of the day when these would hold no terrors for the manes of
erring aeronauts and torpedoists.
Italian art even in the childish grotesqueries of its Inferno
never falls so low as this freakish farrago. One cannot help
feeling that the Italians believed in hell and the Netherlanders
made fun of it.
One of these extravaganzas of Bosch has drifted to Venice,
though this Temptation of St. Antony (of which there is a
replica in Brussels) is also attributed to Van Bles. The nude
ladies coming to the saint with gifts are most unprepossessing,
and what temptation there is in the whirl of carnival grotesques
I cannot understand. No doubt some allegory of sin lurks in
these goblin faces, with their greedy mouths full of strange
creatures, and in this great head with black-tailed things
creeping in through eye and mouth, with frogs suspended from
its earrings and a little town growing out of its head. Such
uncouth ugliness has no parallel in Venice, unless it be a German
Inferno with a belled devil. From such puerilities one turns with
relief to the coldest and stateliest conventions of High Art.
And yet Dutch art and Italian are not wholly discrepant
the link, as I have said, comes through the minor figures of
religious scenes, or even occasionally through the major. A
Dutch homeliness lurks shyly in the background of Italian art,
and at times appears boldly in the foreground. From one
point of view nothing could be more Dutch than the innumerable
Madonnas who suckle their Bambini. Nor do their haloes destroy
their homeliness. The peasant girl of Tintoretto’s Annunciation
in S. Rocco wears a halo, but neither that nor the
angel bursting through the crumbling brick of the door can
prevent this scene from being a Dutch interior with a cane
chair. Realism, smuggled in under the cloak of religion, is
none the less realism, and when Moretto shows us the Bambino
about to be bathed by mother and nurse, and paints us a basket
of belly-bands, he has given us a genre picture none the less
because rapt saints and monks look on in defiance of chronology,
and, perched on a bank of cloud over a romantic landscape,
angels sing on high. Even as early as Giotto the nurse who
presides at The Birth of the Virgin is washing the baby’s eyes.
Very curious and realistic is the pastoral study which Luca
Cambiaso styled Adoration of the Shepherds. And in
Veronese, for all his magnificence, and in Carpaccio, for
all his fairy-tale atmosphere, and above all in Bassano, for
all his golden glow, we get well-established half-way houses
between High Art and Low. Under the pretext of The
Supper in Emmaus Bassano anticipates all Dutch art. Here
be cats, dogs, plucked geese, meat in the pan, shining copper
utensils scattered around, the pot over the glow of the fire, the
rows of plates in the kitchen behind. What loving study of the
colour of the wine in the glasses of the guests, and of their robes
and their furs! These things it is that, with the busy figures
behind the bar or stooping on the floor, fill up the picture, while
the Christ on a raised platform in the corner bulks less than the
serving-maid, and the centre of the stage is occupied by a
casual eater, his napkin across his knees. If this sixteenth-century
picture is Venetian in its glowing colour and its comparative
indifference to form, it is Dutch in its minuteness and
homeliness.
The same love of pots and pans and animals glows in The
Departure of Jacob, with his horse and his ass and his sheep
and his goats and his basket of hens, and even beguiles Bassano
into attempting a faint peering camel. But not even the
presence of God in a full white beard can render this a sacred
picture. It is, however, in his favourite theme of The Animals
going into the Ark that Bassano brings the line between the
sacred and secular almost to vanishing point. Although
Savonarola preached on the Ark with such unction, as became
the prophet of a new deluge, the just Noah himself seems the
least religious figure in the Old Testament, perhaps because—after
so much water—he took too much wine. There is even a
tradition recorded by Ibn Yachya that after the Flood he
emigrated to Italy and studied science. At any rate Bassano
always treated him as a mere travelling showman, packing his
animals and properties for the next stage. In a picture at
Padua Noah’s sons and daughters are doing up their luggage—one
almost sees the labels—and Noah, with his few thin white
hairs, remonstrates agitatedly with Shem—or it may be Ham
or Japhet—who is apparently muddling the boxes. A lion and
lioness are treading the plank to the Ark, into which a Miss
Noah is just pushing the leisurely rump of a pig, which even
the lions at its tail fail to accelerate. Countless other pairs of
every description, including poultry, jostle one another amid
a confusion of pots, wash-tubs, sacks, and bundles, the birds
alone finding comfortable perching-room on the trees. Mrs.
Noah wears her hair done up in a knot with pearls just like the
Venetian ladies, and a billy-cock hat lies on one of the bundles.
In his Sheep-shearing (in the Pinacoteca Estense of Modena)
Bassano throws over all pious pretences and becomes unblushingly
Dutch—nay, double-Dutch, for he drags in agricultural operations
and cooking as well as sheep-shearing.
But it is in Turin that Bassano’s Batavianism runs riot. For
his market-place is a revel of fowls, onions, prezels, eggs,
carcases, sheep, rams, mules, dogs gnawing bones, market-women,
chafferers, with a delicious little boy whose shirt hangs
out behind his vivid red trousers. And his Cupid at the Forge
of Vulcan is an extravaganza in copper pots and pans; and yet
another market masterpiece is an inventory of all he loved—butcher’s
meat and rabbits and geese and doves, and lungs and
livers, and gherkins and melons, and cocks and hens, and copper
pans and pewter spoons, and a cow and a horse and an owl and
lambs, all jostling amid booths and stalls on a pleasant rustic
background as in a Tintoretto Paradise of luscious paintabilities.
Gaudenzio Ferrari has the same love of sheep, and these, with
horses and dogs, force their way into his pictures. The Bible is
an encyclopædia of themes, and even had any subject been
wanting, apocrypha and sacred legend would have provided it.
For his pet lambs Ferrari goes to the copious broidery on the
Gospel, and his Angels predicting the Birth of Maria is really
a study in sheep on the background of a domed and towered
Italian city. Giotto too had attempted sheep, though they
are more like pigs, and dogs, though they are elongated and
skinny; his camel with grotesque ears and a sun-bonnet one can
forgive.
The lives of the saints supplied other opportunities for
“Dutch” pictures in the shape of miracles at home. Titian
himself stooped to record the miracle of putting on again the
foot which the man who had kicked his mother cut off in
remorse. And in the same Scuola of the Confraternity of
St. Antony at Padua you may see the neglectful nurse carrying
safely to its parents at table the babe she had allowed to boil.
And yet despite all these manifold opportunities, no Italian
seems quite to get the veracious atmosphere of the Dutch and
to achieve the dignity of Art without departing from the
homeliness of Nature. No Italian has brought Christ into the
street so boldly as Erasmus Quellinus in that picture in the
Museo Vicenza in which a girl with a basket of live hens on her
head stops to watch the fat Dutch baby sleeping in its mother’s
arms. Despite the unreal presence of adoring saints in the
crowd, there is here a true immanence of divinity in everyday
reality. The sixteenth-century Italian Baroccio did indeed
depict a Dutch peasant-feast in his Last Supper in the cathedral
of Urbino, with its bare-legged boy cook stooping for platters
from a basket and its dog drinking at a bronze dish, but its
homeliness is marred by the hovering of angels. Realism
unadorned is essayed by Fogolino in his Holy Family in Vicenza,
with the carpenter’s shop, the rope of yarn, the hammer; with
a boy Christ in a black tunic saying grace before a meal of
boiled eggs, pomegranate, and grapes, washed down by a beaker
of red wine; with the Madonna bending solicitously over him,
her wooden spoon poised over her bowl; but, alas! the whole
effect is of a cheap oleograph.
But then Fogolino was not a great painter, and it would have
been interesting to see a superb craftsman like Paul Veronese try
his hand at homely nature, unadorned by great space-harmonies
and decorative magnificences. As it was, he had the delight of
a Dutchman in dogs and cats, copper pots and jugs, and earthen
pans and groaning tables and glittering glasses, and these it is
which fascinate him, far more than the spiritual aspect of the
Supper in the House of the Pharisee, so that even when he
wishes to paint the soul of the pink-gowned Venetian Magdalen,
he paints it through a little bowl which she overturns in her
emotion at kissing the feet of Christ. This is why meals are the
prime concern of Veronese, obsess him more than even his noble
pillared rhythms and arched perspectives. How eagerly he
grasps at The Marriage of Cana and The Disciples at
Emmaus and The Meal in the House of Levi, with which
that hold-all of the Bible supplied him! Spaces and staircases,
arches and balconies and lordly buildings, all the palatial poetry
of Verona, with its fair women and rich-robed men—these are his
true adoration, and he paints, not Jesus, but the loaves and fishes.
Nay, it may almost be said that unless there be food in the
picture Veronese grows feeble, and must have pillars at least to
prop him up. See, for example, his Susannah and the Elders,
with no trace of food and only a wall to sustain him. When the
Biblical cornucopia was wholly depleted of its food-stuffs, he had
to forage for manna, especially when the need of decorating a
monastic refectory was added to his own passion for provender.
One of his discoveries was The Banquet of Gregory the Great,
which is in the Monastery of the Madonna del Monte outside
Vicenza, and which is based on the legend that Gregory invited
twelve poor men to eat with him and Christ turned up as one of
them. But Christ, who is removing the cover from a fowl, is less
striking than Paul Veronese himself—who stands on the inevitable
balcony with his own little boy—and at best a mere item in the
rhythm of pillars and staircases and sky-effects. Nothing brings
out the defect of Veronese as a religious painter so clearly
as a comparison of his Disciples at Emmaus with Titian’s.
Titian too gives us fine shades of bread and fruit and wine, and
even a little “Dutch” dog under the table; Titian too plays
with pillars and a romantic background. But how his picture is
suffused with the spirit! These things know their place, are
absorbed in the luminous whole. A certain blurred softness in
the modelling, a certain subdued glow in the colouring—as of
St. Mark’s—give mystery and atmosphere. The food is, so to
speak, transubstantiated.
Even Moretto’s Supper at Emmaus (in Brescia) is superior
to Veronese’s, though his Christ in pilgrim’s cockle-hat and
cloak has to the modern eye the look of an officer with a
cocked hat and a gold epaulette.
But Veronese is not the only Italian who would have been
happier as a lay painter. I am convinced that some of the
romanticists of the Renaissance were born with the souls of
Dutchmen, and these, as it happens, the very men who have
not worn well; a proof that they were out of their element
and gave up to romance and religion what was meant for
realism. Take Guido Reni, the very synonym of a fallen star,
the Aurora in Rome, perhaps his one enduring success—though
even here Aurora’s skirt is of too crude a blue, and there is
insufficient feeling of mountain and sea below her. His portrait
by Simone Cantarini da Pesaro shows him with a short
grey beard, a black doublet, a lawn collar, and a rather pained
look—there is nothing of the Aurora in this sedate and
serious figure. And better than either his violent Caravaggio
martyrology or his later mythologic poesy I find his portraits
of his mother and his foster-mother; the mother in black with
a black turn-down collar, a muslin coif, and grey hair thinning at
the temples, and the foster-mother a peasant woman with bare
and brawny arms. The St. Peter Reading in the Brera is
also a strong study of an old man’s head. Moroni had the good
sense or the good fortune to shake himself almost free of religious
subjects and to produce a Tailor who is worth tons of
Madonnas, but even he did not utterly escape the church-market,
and when one examines such a picture as his Madonna and
Son, St. Catherine, St. Francis, and the Donor in the Brera,
one rejoices even more that an overwhelming percentage of his
product is pure portraiture. For the holy women in this picture
are quite bad; St. Francis is rather better, but the real Moroni
appears only in the smug donor who prays, his clasped hands
showing his valuable ring. Here, of course, the painter had
simply to reproduce his sitter. As much can be said of Garofalo
and many another religious painter, whose “Donors” often constitute
the sole success of their pious compositions.
Lorenzo Lotto, too, should perhaps have confined himself to
portraiture, if of a fashionable clientèle. His pretty Adoration
of the Infant might be any mother adoring any infant. Near
it—in the Palazzo Martinengo in Brescia—Girolamo Romanino
has a frightful fresco in the grand manner, and quite a good
portrait of an old gentleman; which suggests that Romanino too
should have avoided the classic. There is an altar-piece of his
in Padua which, although by no means devoid of beauty, confirms
this suggestion, for the Madonna and Child lack character
and originality, and are infinitely inferior to the Dutch painting
of the robes. The whole composition, indeed, glows and has
depth only in its lower and more terrestrial part, including
in that term the little girl angel who plays a tambourine below
the throne.
Bronzino was another victim to his pious epoch, though he
emancipated himself almost as largely as Moroni. His
Madonna in the Brera is remarkable for the secular
modernity of the Virgin’s companions. On her right is an
ultra-realistic old woman; on her left Bernard Shaw looks
down with his sarcastic, sceptical gaze.
Even the Netherlanders who had had the fortune to be born
free would, after their wander-years in Italy, come back as
Italians and paint in the grand manner. Hence the religious
and historic Van Dycks which compare so poorly with the
portraits, hence Rembrandt’s fat vrow as Madonna, hence the
Lenten attempts of Rubens to bant.
Touching is that quaint theological tree in the cell of sainted
Antoninus in San Marco, upon whose red oval leaves grow the
biographies of the brethren. They lived, they prayed, they
died—that is all. One little leaf suffices to tell the tale. This
brother conversed with the greatest humility, and that excelled
in silence. A third was found after his death covered with
a rough hair shirt (aspro cilicio). In the holy shade of
this goodly tree sits St. Dominic, separating—as though
symbolically—the monks on his right from the nuns on his
left.
Naïveté can no further go. And, indeed, if one were to regard
the naïveté and forget the sweet simplicity, there is much in
the mediæval world that one would relegate to the merely
absurd. The masterpieces of Art have been sufficiently
described. What a book remains to be written upon its
grotesques!
The word is said to derive from the arabesques found in
grottoes or excavated Roman tombs; those fantastic combinations
of the vegetable and animal worlds by which the art of
Islam avoided the representation of the real. But by the art
of Christendom the grotesque was achieved with no such conscientious
search after the unreal. Nor have I in mind its first
fumblings, its crudities of the catacombs, its simplicities of the
missal and the music-book, its Byzantine paintings with their
wooden figures and gold embroidery. I am not even thinking
of those early Masters whose defects of draughtsmanship were
balanced by a delicious primitive poetry, which makes a Sienese
Madonna preferable to a Raphael, and the early mosaics of
St. Mark’s more desirable than the sixteenth-century work that
has replaced them. The grotesque lies deeper than unscientific
drawing; it mingles even with the work of the most scholarly
Masters, and springs from the absence of a sense of history or a
sense of humour. That the Gospel incidents should be depicted
in Italian landscape and with Italian costumes was perhaps not
unnatural, since, as I have already pointed out, every nation
remakes the Christ in its own image—psychologically when not
physically. Even the Old Testament was de-Orientalised by
Raphael and his fellow-illustrators. Bonifacio Veronese, for
example, put Italian hills and music-books into The Finding of
Moses, and his Egypt is less Eastern than the Venice he lived in.
But that the fancy-dress Bible should include also Doges and
Cardinals and Magnificent Families, and that a Tintoretto in
everyday clothes should look on at his own Miracle of St. Mark
or a Moretto come to his own Supper at Emmaus, this it is that
lifts the eyebrows of a modern. One can permit Dominican
friars to witness The Incredulity of St. Thomas, or Franciscans
to assist—as in Marco Basaiti’s picture—at The Agony in the
Garden. These holy brethren are at least in the apostolic chain;
and in the latter picture, which is becomingly devotional, the
scene is suggested as a mystic vision to justify the presence of
these anachronistic spectators. But how is it possible to tolerate
proud Venetian senators at The Ascension of Christ, or to stomach
the Medici at the building of the Tower of Babel? It is true
sacred subjects had become a mere background for lay portraits,
but what absence of perspective!
It would be an interesting excursion to trace the steps by
which the objective conception of a picture—true to its own
time and place—was reached, or the evolution by which singleness
of subject was substituted for exuberance of episodes and
ideas, till at last Art could flower in a lovely simplicity like that
of Simone Martini’s Annunciation. You shall see St. Barbara
throned at the centre of her anecdotal biography, or the
Madonna della Misericordia sheltering virtues under her robe,
while her history circles around her. Even when the picture
itself is simple and single, the predella is often a congested
commentary upon the text, if, indeed, it has any relevant relation
to the text at all. What can be more charming than the little
angels round the throne of the Madonna in Benaglio Francesco’s
picture in Verona—angels with golden vases of red and white
roses, angels playing spinets and harps and pipes and lutes and
little drums and strange stringed instruments that have passed
away! But what can be more grotesque than the predella of
this delightful picture, the Entombment and the saints with the
insignia of their martyrdom (hammer and tongs and fiery
braziers), and the cock that crew, and the kiss of Judas!
In a picture by Lorenzo Monaco at Florence the Virgin and
St. John raise Christ out of his tomb, and above are not only a
cross and the instruments of martyrdom, but a bust and floating
hands, while spice vessels figure below.
To a modern the mere treatment of God the Father suffices
to create a category of the grotesque, even though His head has
usually the venerable appearance of the aged Ruskin and He is
kept a discreet kit-kat or a half-length. But Fra Bartolommeo
in Lucca paints Him at full length with His toes on a little
angel and a placard in His hand bearing the letters alpha and
omega. And Lorenzo Veneziano parts His hair neatly in the
middle.
Our catalogue of grotesques is swollen by the explanatory
scrolls and inscriptions of the early pictures; by the crude
religious allegories, in which devils gnash teeth when Virtue
routs Temptation; by the political cartoons at Siena—of
Good and Bad Government (though these are more primitive
than comic); by the literal genealogic trees—like that of Jesse
in St. Mark’s, or on the stone door-posts of the Baptistery of
Parma; by the Tree of the Cross in Florence, which shoots out
branches with round leaves containing scenes from the life of
the central crucified figure, and supports a pyramid of saints
and celestials; by the devices of symbolism for representing
abstract ideas or identifying saints. All haloes are proleptic
even from childhood, and a martyr and his passion can never be
parted. Those poor martyrs, what they suffered at the hands
of painters without a gleam of humour!
’Twas not till I had found out for myself that the overwhelming
preponderance in Art of the Crucifixion, the Descent
from the Cross, the Entombment, and the Pietà were due in no
small measure to the opportunities they afforded of painting the
nude figure, that I discovered why St. Sebastian was the most
popular of all the saints, exploited in every other sacred picture,
and—naked and unashamed—the almost inseparable attendant
of the Madonna when she sits in saintly society. The superiority
of his martyrdom at the hands of a troop of archers to other
paintable forms of death leaps to the eye, for the arrows must
be seen quivering in the target of his naked figure, though I
have seen this pictorially precious nudity marred by such a
plethora of arrows—as in the Opera del Duomo at Florence—that
the saint is become a porcupine. The grim humour of the
situation lies in the fact that St. Sebastian recovered from his
arrows to be subsequently clubbed to death, but this deutero-martyrdom
is hushed up by the Italian painters. To add to
St. Sebastian’s sufferings at their hands, he has been made a
plague-saint and his invaluable nudity haled into plague-pictures
and plague-churches, as by Bartolommeo Montagna, who
turned his arrows into the metaphoric shafts of the Pest. Not
that I can blame the Italian painters. If I had ever been
inclined to underrate the artistic significance of the nude, I
should have been converted by the full-dressed angelets of
Borgognone’s Gesù Moriente in the Pavian Certosa. These
delicious little creatures were once without a fig-leaf, but at
the Father Superior’s protest they were clad in belted tunics
and skirts, thus becoming squat little figures whose wings burst
comically through their clothes. What might have been a
masterpiece is thus a grotesque.
But if St. Sebastian must go sempiternally branded with
arrows, like a British convict, it is St. Lawrence who has the
clumsiest symbol to drag about. He and his gridiron are as
inseparable as Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. Often it stands
on end and seems the iron framework of a bed. Like his halo,
it is with him long before his martyrdom, as it accompanies him
to heaven. Only once in all Florence do I remember seeing it
in its proper place—under the grilling saint—and then he is
turning his other side to the flame in true culinary Christianity
(“Jam versa: assatus est”). The artist has spared us nothing
except the towels with which the angels wiped his face, and
these may be seen at Rome in S. Giovanni in Laterano. St.
Stephen is also heavily burdened with the stones that still keep
falling on his head. In Bernardo Daddi’s frescoes in S. Croce
they stick to him like burrs. St. John, transformed to an angel,
contemplates his own (haloed) head on a platter, as if thinking
two heads are better than one. Lucy keeps her eyes in a dish.
St. Bartholomew holds his skin. St. Nicholas—the patron of
commerce and the pawnbroker—is known by his three golden
balls. Even families had their symbols, and the Colonnas, the
complacent Colonnas, had themselves painted as soaring heavenwards
at the last trump, each with a small column rising from
his shoulder—literal pillars of Church and State.
These symbols, and many others less grotesque, disappear
either with the gradual obscuration of the legends or the
development of purer artistic ideas. There is another kind of
symbolism, which may be called the shorthand of primitive
art, and which may be studied in the archaic mosaics of St.
Mark’s. Egypt dwindles to a gate (as though it and not
Turkey were the Porte). Alexandria is expressed by its Pharos.
Trees stand for the Mount of Olives. There is much of the
rebus in these primitive representations. The Byzantine
symbolism of St. Mark’s reaches its most curious climax in the
representation of the four rivers that watered the Biblical
Garden of Eden by classical river gods. The palm branch as
the shorthand for martyrdom is a more congruous convention.
In the mosaics of S. Vitale in Ravenna, Jerusalem and Bethlehem
are expressed by towers, in Sant’ Appolinare Nuovo a few
Roman buildings stand for Classe. In a Venetian painting
ascribed to Carpaccio, Bethlehem is spelt by palm-trees and a
queer beast tied to one of them, probably meant for a camel.
A more pretentious form of symbolism lies in the allegory
proper, but even when the painting avoids the grotesque, the
meaning is often hopelessly obscure. Such popular pictures as
Botticelli’s Spring, Titian’s Sacred and Profane Love, and Paris
Bordone’s Lovers are still unsolved puzzles, and perhaps only the
more satisfactory for that. But allegories that are enigmatic
without being beautiful are merely bores. Such are the two
pictures of the school of Lazzaro Sebastiani in Venice, in which
a company of figures holding scrolls is perched in the boughs of
a tree, looking at a distance like a full orchestra. Both of these
pictures come from monasteries, and are therefore to be presumed
sacred. And in one of them Adam and Eve are unmistakable
under the tree, with mice and lizards gambolling around
them, so that the tree must be the Tree of Life or of Knowledge;
but who is the youth who stands beneath the other tree in a
strange city of spires and towers and plays on a golden ’cello,
while a maiden offers him an apple? Such intellectually faded
pictures illustrate clearly the limitations of painting as a medium
for intellectual propositions. But the most lucid of allegories
or symbolisms has its own peculiar pitfalls. Luca Mombella
introduces into a Coronation of the Virgin a figure of “Humilitas”
who is magnificently attired and wears pearls in her hair,
while Montagna’s Nestor Victorious over the Vices (in the Louvre)
proves that most of the Vices are at least devoted mothers, for
they burden their flight by snatching up their satyr-like brood.
But these confused or unintelligible allegories are far preferable
to symbolisms which are perfectly decipherable yet perfectly
repellent, like Giovanni da Modena’s fresco in S. Petronio
which shows us Christ on his cross agonising between two female
figures, one bestriding a full-maned lion (the Catholic Church)
and the other riding blindfold on a goat (Heresy). The lion
has four different feet—a pedal man (St. Matthew), a pedal ox
(St. Luke), an eagle’s claw (St. John), and a real foot (St. Mark).
The blood from the side of Christ flows into the chalice held by
the Church, and in the middle of the stream is formed the wafer.
The four ends of the cross turn into hands: the upper hand
opens with a key the gate of Paradise—strangely like a church;
the lower hand opens Hell with a winch; the right hand blesses
the Catholic Church, the left stabs Heresy. Garofalo has a
vast but still poorer fresco of this sort in Ferrara, brought from
a refectory. Each arm of the cross branches into two hands
engaged in much the same occupations as in the Bolognese
fresco save that one hand crowns Wisdom. The foot of the
cross also turns into hands, the right holding a cross towards
Limbo, the function of the left fortunately faded. It is
refreshing to turn from such geometrical symbolisms to the
meaningless flower-patterns of F. dei Libri, in which Crucifixions,
cherubs reading, satyrs blowing brass instruments, and
putti playing citharas or puffing at bagpipes are interwoven
with wriggling snakes, contemporary poets and ecclesiasts,
and shaven monks performing service.
This, of course, is the conscious grotesque, like the borders
which Girolamo dei Libri put round a serious picture of the
Magi—vignettes of other scenes, hands of donors, floral patterns
and scutcheons with strange ramping beasts.
To the deliberate grotesque belong, of course, the stone beasts
that crouch before the old cathedrals, the griffin of Perugia, and
the heraldic beasts of Tura. I should have added Raphael’s
dragons to the same category were it not that though deliberately
drawn and though delightfully grotesque, they are
mere representation of an object that happens to be grotesque
in itself, and this is no more the artistic grotesque than the
portrait of a beautiful woman is necessarily the artistic beautiful.
There is a deal of movement, spirit, and invention in these great
worms of Raphael, and every individual St. George, St. Michael,
or St. Margaret is handsomely provided with an original and
unique dragon, each with an elegant precision of fearsome form.
But Raphael drew with equal hand and the same loving
seriousness a monster or a Madonna.
Equally conscientious is the Medusa’s head once ascribed to
Da Vinci, with its carefully combed snaky locks and its frogs
and bats and toads. Carpaccio’s dragon has far more fun in
him, for all his grisly litter of skulls and skeletons.
And I like Vasari’s dragon in his St. George in Arezzo,
with its spitting double tongue and its half-eaten man, and
the gorgeous dragon on a piece of majolica in Urbino, into
whose mouth St. George is driving his spear, and the fierce-clawed,
winged dragon of the spirited Tintoretto in the
National Gallery, and above all the dragon of Piero di Cosimo’s
Andromeda in Florence, with that delightful curling tail and
that broad back on which Perseus can stand securely while
delivering his stroke.
But the deliberate grotesque without fun—this, I confess, is
a note in Italian art which I find disquieting. For into this
polished and palatial world there intrudes at times a touch of
something sinister, cynical and mocking, as though the artist,
constricted by pompous conventions, sought relief by sticking
out his tongue. Leonardo—whatever Mona Lisa’s smile may
mean—kept his grotesquerie for his caricatures. But other of
the Masters were less discriminating. This something of enigmatic
and perturbing—perhaps it is only the acute Renaissance
consciousness of the skeleton at the feast—I find most of all in
Crivelli—Venetian soldier, as he once signed himself—whose
rich lacquer work has had more attention than this diablerie of
his. Nobody else touches the grotesque so consciously, dares to
give us such quaint, ill-drawn angels as those in his Madonna
and Child in Verona, with that bird-pecked giardinetto of
fruits over the Virgin’s head, and Christ in a gold frock as in
some Byzantine mosaic. The microscopic Crucifixion is perhaps
no more incongruous with the subject of this picture than its
landscapes seen through arches, its chivalry and pomp of horses.
But one cannot help feeling that Crivelli had a grim joy in
perching that vulture on the large gaunt tree. And in his
Brera Madonna, in which St. Peter holds two heavy real keys,
gilded and silvered, he gives the celestial doorkeeper a crafty
ecclesiastical look, while his St. Dominic looks sawny. Even
his baby Christ is cruelly squeezing a little bird. There is a
leer in the whole picture. The accident of juxtaposition has
accentuated the wilfulness of Crivelli’s grimace, for in the Brera
there are two Madonnas, side by side, yet at the extreme poles
of his genius. In the Madonna della Candeletta we have
beauty unalloyed. The tiny candle standing at the foot of the
Madonna’s throne strikes, indeed, a note of bizarrerie, but it is
beautiful bizarrerie, and the Madonna, marvellously robed and
embowered in fruit and leaves, who is offering a great pear to a
charming Child, is less the Mother of God than a crowned
queen of faery with an infant prince in a golden robe and a
golden halo, and less a queen with a prince than a wonderful
decorative pattern, a study in gold and marble and precious
stones and brocaded gowns, broidered, rich-dyed, and fantastic
with arabesques. And beside this poem hangs the other
Crivelli, a gaunt crucifix with ugly, contorted figures of the
Madonna and St. John. And it is sardonic humour, not
naïveté, that has turned his St. Sebastian (in the Museo Poldi
Pezzoli) into a porcupine.
But even Giovanni Bellini, with his sense of restful perfection
and unity of theme, cannot resist putting in microscopic
accessories that only catch the eye from anear, as into his
green-throned Madonna and Child in the Brera he introduces
a horseman, two men talking by a tree, a shepherd, a flock of
sheep, and, strangest of all, a shadowy ape crouching on a tomb
which bears his signature: “Johannes Bellinus.” What is the
significance of this shadowy ape? What mockery of the theme,
or of humanity, or of himself, was here shadowed forth?
And that even more sinister ape in Tura’s Virgin supporting
the Dead Christ—what does he here? The mother, seated on
the tomb, holds the poor bleeding figure as though it were
again her baby. They are alone, they and the thieves and the
cross; other men are moving away, bearing a ladder. The
picture is complete, a grim, solemn, soul-moving unity. Why
then did Tura, that master of the conscious grotesque, throw
in that grinning monkey on that strange fruit-tree? Was he,
who lived to see the Borgian Pope become the Vicar of Christ,
suggesting sardonically what quaint sequels of orgiastic splendour,
what pride and lust of life, were to spring from this
tragic sacrifice?
A less perturbing monkey looks on with other creatures at
The Creation of Man in a Venetian picture now in Ravenna.
A red-girt, blue-mantled Deity floats over a huge recumbent
Adam, whose thigh he touches, while the monkey, eating an
apple, appears to follow with interest the next phase in evolution,
when fruit would be forbidden.
Apes appear again in Fogolino’s Adoration of the Magi in
Vicenza; squatting below the castled rocky ways and mountain-bridges,
over which winds the great procession with its beautifully
caparisoned horses. These apes, like the ape on the elephant’s
back in Raphael’s treatment of the same theme, might be
merely designed to suggest the East, were it not for the disconcerting,
mysterious, lobster-red, sprawling wings? What
further note of discord do we catch here?
But it is in the unconscious grotesque that Italian art is
richest. I have already shown some of the trap-doors that
lead to it, but to enumerate them all is impossible. There are
so many ways in which humour can be absent. Perhaps one
might generalise as a source of the unconscious grotesque the
convention dating from the Byzantine period which expresses
souls as small swaddled dolls. See, for example, Paolo da
Venezia’s Death of Mary, where, by a seeming inversion of rôles,
Christ flies up to heaven with his mother-doll. Perhaps, too,
all pictures connected with stigmata or vernicles are foredoomed
to farce. There may be a noble way of expressing this material
transference, but I have never seen one. St. Veronica receiving
on a handkerchief a head with neatly parted hair is prosaic if
not comic, while St. Francis receiving the stigmata is simply
ludicrous.
In a picture in the Museum of Vicenza the kneeling saint is
apparently flying a kite by red strings passing through holes
in his hands and feet. The seeming kite is really a small
winged nude figure, feathered at head and feet like a cock—the
six-winged seraph of the Legenda Trium Sociorum that bears
the crucified figure,—red strings passing through corresponding
holes in his head and feet. The treatment of the same scene by
Giotto (in the Louvre) gives this kite-like appearance to Jesus
himself.
Even more absurdly geometrical is Gentile da Fabriano’s
handling of the theme at Urbino, five strong red cords passing
to the saint’s breast, hands, and feet from an eight-winged
figure on a cross, naked to its waist. It is a relief to
find these Euclidian lines absent from the representation in
the church of Assisi itself, though it is only in seventeenth-century
painters like Sisto Badalocchio in Parma or Rochetti
in Faenza that the stigmata are transmitted from a celestial
glory or down a broad ray of golden light. Macrino d’Alba at
Turin shows the saint receiving the image of a praying Christ
on a slate with a golden frame, and this image has the
tonsured head of a monk!
And what can be quainter than the six-winged cherubs who
hover round the Madonna in a picture of the Botticelli school
at Parma? Two of their red wings are spread, the second
pair crossed like legs, and the last pair crossed over the head,
making a sort of pointed cap. The faces attached to these
wings are mature, as of elderly, clean-shaven barristers. Another
comical circle of these seraphs, a few with blue wings, tends to
spoil a charming fifteenth-century Coronation of the Virgin in
Florence.
Martyrdoms, too, are a rich mine of the grotesque, as witness
the boiling of St. John in the National Gallery, with its
accessories of the bellows and the blowpipe, and God lifting the
saint bodily up to heaven.
In the exhilarating frescoes of Montagna in the church of
the Eremitani at Padua, St. James’s hair, which is yellowish
throughout, turns black, apparently, under the horror of an
impending mallet, despite that his halo seems like a protective
plate of yellow armour. A very gay and pleasing picture this.
Another source of the grotesque is the angelic aeroplane. In
an Adoration of the Shepherds by Francesco Zaganelli in
Ravenna three wingless angels employ cherubs to bear them
aloft, balancing themselves upon the winged heads. One needs
a cherub for each foot, the second places both feet upon the
same head, the third, expertest gymnast of all, maintains himself
upon one foot. Another primitive aeroplane may be seen
at Ferrara, in The Assumption of St. Mary of Egypt.
St. Mary rises on a platform supported from beneath by a
series of nude and clothed angels, to the amaze of a worthy
signor walking in the field of strange palms amid quaint green
buildings. A rabbit, a pigeon, and a bird continue absolutely
indifferent to the phenomenon.
In a Carpaccio in the same town the cherubs fly, three heads
together, like a celestial molecule. In Zacchia da Vezzano’s
Assumption of the Virgin at Lucca she rides on cherubs.
There is an angelic aeroplane in a painted relief at San Frediano
in Lucca, and in Guido Reni’s Immaculate Conception at
Forli (where the Virgin stands on a leaf on a cherub’s head),
and in Lippo Lippi’s picture at Prato of the Madonna handing
down her girdle to St. Thomas. Zuccari Taddeo in the Pitti
uses the angelic aeroplane to carry up Mary Magdalen, who is
further provided with a number of fussy heralds and avant-coureurs.
Marco Antonio Franceschini in the Palazzo Durazzo-Pallavicini
of Genoa likewise carries up the Magdalen on
the backs of angels, her familiar hair streaming over her
familiar breast. Raphael’s Vision of Ezekiel suggests to the
profane, God the Father holding up His arms as if to start
a flying competition.
But when every generalisation is made, it is the individual
genius for blundering that opens up the most spacious vistas of
humourless humour. Byzantine art affords, of course, the
most naïve illustrations. In the sarcophagi of the Christian
emperors at Ravenna you may see sheep eating dates from
tall palms. In the mosaics of the vestibule of St. Mark’s you
may see humanity unconcernedly drowning in the Deluge.
Some, it is true, are whirled helplessly on their backs, but
others are quite apathetic among the blue, curly waves. Noah
looking out of the little folding doors of the Ark is as quaint
as in the mosaics of Monreale Cathedral in Sicily. In the
ancient church of S. Zeno at Verona there is an eleventh-century
fresco of the Resurrection of Lazarus in which the
bystanders hold their noses—a poetic touch that was repeated
in later treatments of the theme.
In the Scuola of the Confraternity of St. Antony at Padua,
Domenico Campagnola has a fresco, A Hungry She-Ass adores
the Eucharistic Sacrament by a Miracle of the Saint, in order
to convert a Heretic. In vain are heaps of green stuffs and
corn spread and baskets tendered her and piles of beans; the
ass, on her front knees, adores the Eucharist on a priestly table,
so that even the baby lad is wrought up to adoration. One is
irresistibly reminded of Goethe’s landlady at Rome calling him
to see her cat adore God the Father like a Christian, when
it was licking the beard of the bust, probably because of the
grease that had sunk into it. In the same Scuola there is a
representation of the saint’s preaching which liberates his
hearers from an approaching rain-storm. People all around are
flying to get out of the rain, not knowing that the saint’s
sermon is dry. There are charming figures of mothers and
children in the audience which atone for the unconscious
humour.
But when one considers the libraries written on Italy, it is
strange that that book on her grotesques should be as yet merely
an impious aspiration, and that nobody has mocked even at
those horrid little waxworks that represent the plague-stricken.
Meseems the blessèd word “Renaissance” has hypnotised student
and pleasure-pilgrim alike, but some day an irreverent
refugee from the Renaissance will gather up the threads I but
indicate. In that delectable volume of his there will be a
chapter on the camel.
For the advent of the camel marks the faint beginnings of an
historic and geographic sense, and stands for all the fantastic
wonder-world of the East. Strange that the Crusades or
Venice’s Eastern Empire should not have earlier awakened the
comparative consciousness. But the East, with its quaintness
and its barbaric colour, broke very slowly upon the culture of
Europe—Victor Hugo had to rediscover it even for modern
France. Despite Altichiero’s pig-tailed Tartars, it was not till
the Byzantine Empire was destroyed in 1453 and the Turks
were firmly established in Europe that the Christian world
became really aware that the East was a world of its own.
That conquest of Constantinople, from which the blessèd
Renaissance is popularly dated, by sending so many Italians
flying home, must have provided Italy with Oriental information
as well as Greek manuscripts. And the Renaissance (or re-born)
camel represents the quickened sense of local colour. At first,
indeed, there is little improvement on the Giotto breed.
Apparently none of the fugitives rode off on camels. Such fat
creatures as take part in The Reception of the Venetian
Ambassador (a picture of the school of Gentile Bellini) were
never seen on sand or land. The Magian kings should have
come riding on camels with swart servitors, but only a rare
artist like the animal-lover Gaudenzio Ferrari is bold enough
to attempt this local truth. And the result belongs to comedy.
But a people without circuses or zoological gardens, to which
the camel was as remote as the centaur, was not keenly aware
of the anatomical details of this exotic beast, grotesque enough
at its truest. And in the hands of Gentile Bellini himself the
creature became quite possible, if still curious, and in that great
decorative picture St. Mark preaching in the Piazza of
Alexandria there is a real feeling of the turbaned, shrouded
and minareted East, even if the head-shawls of the women do
appear to cover top-hats and the giraffe strolls about the
piazza and the dromedary is led by a string.
Nor is Eusebio di San Giorgio’s camel impossible in his
Adoration of the Magi in San Pietro, Perugia, though immeasurably
inferior to his oxen and his horses. Carpaccio, too, gets
something of Eastern architecture and dress, if more of Venetian,
into his St. Stephen at Jerusalem.
But after all there is more fascination in the primitive artistry
which knew no differences of Space or Time, no colour but
universal—id est, Italian—no place unlike home. The whole
temper of these early painters seems to me summed up in a
picture in the Uffizi by Pietro Lorenzetti, who lived about
1350, Gli Anacoreti nella Tebaide. A green water borders
a white, curving shore, and land and sea are a chaos of trees,
houses, steeples, people, skiffs, sailing-boats, all of the same size
and brightness. A like absence of perspective—geometrical,
spiritual, or humorous—is seen in Benaglio’s fresco in Verona of
Christ Preaching by the Lake of Galilee, or Giotto’s fresco in
Santa Croce depicting the Apocalypse of St. John. In the Lake
of Galilee float two gigantic ducks and a gondola, while the
audience includes mediæval falconers and pipers. Patmos is
a vague turtle-shaped island, and the saint squats in the middle
of it, while above hover the celestial figures. Temporal perspective
is as confounded as spatial. Hence all those anachronisms
which give us pause. Cimabue’s Madonna consorts with the
Doctors of the Church, Fra Angelico’s with Dominicans, Alvise
Vivarini’s with Franciscans. As Dante explains, the imagination
can ignore Time, just as—though his dubious comparison
weakens his explanation—it can conceive two obtuse angles in
one triangle. A truer simile may perhaps be drawn from the
Baptistery of Pisa, where the janitor—humble link in the
“nutritive chain”—chants a note to show the wonderful echo,
and after its long reverberation has been sufficiently demonstrated
he sounds the notes of a simple chord, one after another,
so that the earlier notes remain alive and enter into harmony
with the new ones, and one hears an enchanting quartet—yea,
even a quintet or a sextet. Sometimes he will set an even more
complex chord in vibration, and all the air is full of delicious
harmony. Even so the mediæval thinkers conceived of the
dead and the quick, the pioneers and the successors, all living
in unison, vibrating simultaneously though they had started in
sequence, all harmoniously at one in the echoing halls of Fame.
And so things disparate could be pictured united—anachronism
was merely man putting together what blind Time had put
asunder. Everything happened in the timeless realm of ideas.
And often—as we saw in Sicily—the strictly chronological
aspect of things is, indeed, irrelevant. Space and Time are
shifting illusions that the spirit disregards. Those who are in
harmony are of the same hour and of the same place.
Nor do I know where to look for a better map of the world
as it figured itself in the mediæval mind—for your atlas with
its assumption that man inhabits mere mounds of earth fantastically
patterned is as absurd as your school chronology—than
that naïve Mappamondo which Pietro di Puccio frescoed on
the walls of the Campo Santo of this same white Pisa. The
universe is held in the literal hands of God, whose haloed head
appears dominatingly above, not without a suggestion of a
clerical band. In the centre of the cosmos—note the geocentric
glorification—stands the earth, mapped out into continents by
a couple of single straight lines. (If Asia lies north of Europe
that is a mere turn to express its hyperborean barbarism; in
Fra Mauro’s map in the Doge’s Palace the south has got to the
top, perhaps because Venice was there.) America, of course, is
not. And yet there are compensations even for the absence of
America. For this old world is circumscribed by circle on circle.
On the rim of the third are perched the mere figures of the zodiac,
but the spaces between the remoter extra-terrestrial circles are
a-swarm with cherubs, all heads and wings, and floating robed
saints and endless haloed heads of the beatified. The dim spaces
below the cosmos are solidly garrisoned by bishop with crozier
and monk with breviary, and the predella is full of suggestions
of beauty and sanctity. Thus the whole world lies serenely in
the palms of God, and saints and angels girdle it with circles of
holiness.
This is, indeed, the true way to make a map—for the actual
shape of the world is only one of the factors of our habitation,
just as the actual features of a beloved face do not constitute its
total reality for us. ’Tis not eyes or nose one sees so much as
those mental circles due to loving habit in which the face swims
for us—the dear haloing circles of tender experience. Rivers
and mountains have, indeed, an influence on life, just as the real
eyes and nose, but the world we live in is always more mental
than geographical, and the same rivers and mountains serve the
life of successive races. The Red Man’s America is not different
from the White Man’s on the atlas—save by the black dots
which mark the ephemeral tumuli called cities—yet the America
of the Trust and the America of the Tomahawk are two different
continents. The same thin curve marks the Thames up which
the pirate Vikings sailed and the Thames of Sunday picnics.
More veraciously did the Arab geographers conceive of a
country by its autochthones and not by its configuration. For
our country lives in us much more than we live in our country.
And so, to-day, too, a true map would circumscribe our globe—not
with the equally non-existent circles of the spatial latitude
and longitude, but with those of the spiritual latitude and
longitude in which we float—only, I fear, our modern Mappamondo
would be girdled with dark rings marked “Survival of
the Fittest,” “Necessity for Navies,” “The Need of Expansion,”
“The Divinity of the Dollar”; soldiers and syndicates
would float around in lieu of cherubs, nor would any divine
hands appear upbearing us amid the infinite spaces.
That old Pisan map leads me to suspect that Swift saw only
half a fact when he complained that
“Geographers in Afric maps
 With savage pictures fill their gaps.”
True, many an old map might seem to attest the truth of the
accusation. There is a map of the Dark Continent in the
Museum of Venice, dated 1651, with a camel, a unicorn, a
dromedary, and a lion’s tail—all put in by hand. But in
another map of “Apphrica” in the Arsenal of Venice there
are not only lions and tigers, but tents and veiled figures, and
the turrets and spires of strange buildings, and a gay sprinkling
of flags. Surely the old cartographer was less concerned to fill
his gaps than to express the poetry of geography. Maps were,
in truth, of mediocre use in ancient times when the old Roman
roads took one from town to town. What profited an aeronaut’s
panorama? Maps were only indispensable on the roadless seas.
The first maps in the modern sense were thus pragmatic, not
scientific, for it was from the mariner’s map, or Portolano, that
rigid cartography arose. But even these coast charts refused to be
prosaic. There is one in the Venice Museum—a view of Italy
lying sideways, as if its famous foot were asleep. Never have I
seen a more joyous chart. It is all glorious with the gold and
vermilion of compasses and crests and flying banners, while
mountains stand out in red and gold. It must have belonged
to a jolly mariner. In a complete Portolano of Europe each
country flies its national flag, amid a whirl of crests and compasses.
And the “Portolano del 1561 di Giacomo Maggiolo,”
which may be seen in the Palazzo Bianco of Genoa, is illuminated
in gold and blue and vermilion and green, sprinkled with
compasses, sown with towered cities crowned by golden flags,
and a-flutter with flying angels and banners and the bellying
sails of carracks, with kings seated on their thrones in the middle
of the sea, under glorious canopies crowned with angels, while
over the whole presides the Madonna in her golden chair. Most
taking of the monarchs is the King of Tartary, wearing a large
moustache and surrounded by golden scimitars.
There were no gaps to fill up in these Portolani. No, the
cynical Swift has missed the inwardness of these old maps, in
which Art was called in to give the touch of life and reality and
to eke out, not the barrenness of knowledge in particular, but of
science in general. There is in the Uffizi an old map of Italy
which fills the Mediterranean with boats and compasses, draws
the mountains, sketches the towered cities, and illumines the
names with gold-leaf. There is an old map of Venice which
perches Father Neptune dominatingly in the middle, and
symbolises the winds by the curly locks of children blowing
every way, and fills the canals with sailing-boats and galleys and
gondolas. This is something like a map of Venice. On
another, which is more of a plan of the city with its buildings
named, Venice is alive with heraldic figures, and over the roofs
and domes fly winged lions and Neptune and Venus and angels
and warriors, while a stout-lunged angel blows two trumpets at
once. And the spaces of the sea are full of brave beflagged
vessels with swelling sails, and galleys with many oars. Surely
all this is less false than the dead reticulation which expresses
Venice in your modern map. The map of Genoa, too, shows
the arms of the city floating over a sea crowded with red galleys
and black merchant ships and white sailing-boats.
In these old maps the dull spaces of the world are lit up
by fiery stars, trumpeting angels, and allegorical figures, while
another symbolic group, upholding a titulary tablet, serves,
as it were, to introduce the territory to the spectator. A
wreathed lady and a male student thus combine to present
Arabia. Greece is introduced and presided over by angels.
“Terra nova detecta et Floridae promontorium” are presented
by a man holding a tablet, which records how Henry VII of
England sent out John Cabot and his son Sebastian, while the
dry details are further vivified by a superdominant figure of
a gallant signor in a feathered cap, hand on globe and learnèd
tome at feet. Asia, as a nymph with a camel, presides over a map
of her continent, while a prodigious Latin title—“Quae Asiae
Regna et Provinciae Hac Tabula Continentur a Propontide
usque ad Indos,” &c. &c.—records how its three makers were
sent to Russia in the fifteenth-century and how they ripped up
(dissuerunt) much in the published itineraries. One of the trio,
Ambrosius Contaremus, remained long in Russia to study the
less-known portions; another, Josaphat Barbarus, devoted himself
for sixteen years to the provinces round the Euxine and the
Mæotian marsh. “Perlustrata commentariolo exponunt.”
That old map of Frau Mauro which I have already mentioned
belongs to this same century, being dated 1459; a
circular map this, in a gilded frame, with little ships floating
around and America away from home, perhaps enjoying itself
in Paris. Here our familiar world shows upside down, which
is, of course, as scientific as being downside up. It is notable
how Anglia and Caledonia (or Anglia Barbara, as she is styled
in Church Latin) are disguised by this simple shifting of the
point of view, and how much like herself Hibernia looks, even
topsy-turvy. Another pre-American map in the University of
Ferrara pictures the winds personified, blowing from every
quarter.
The Stones of Venice also assume the forms of maps, as in
those stone reliefs on the rococo façade of S. Maria Zobenigo
opposite the Traghetto of the Lily. These are town-maps—Candia,
its name upborne by a flying boy angel; Roma with its
twin brethren at the wolf’s breast; Corfu, characterised by its
castle and its beflagged galleys. The symbolic shorthand, which
I have already noted in pictures, spread also to map-decoration
as in a map at the Arsenal, wherein Ægyptus is figured by an
elephant, Libia by giraffes, Judea by the crescent and minarets,
Germany by a winged sage, and “Holy Russia” by churches.
If these old maps erred in the courses of rivers and the lines
of mountains and in ratios of space, they are not so misleading
as your modern atlas with its all too accurate earth-measurements.
For even your most primitive map, your mediæval
figment, with Paradise on the East, a gigantic Jerusalem in the
centre, great spaces for Gryphons and Cynocephali, Sciapodes
and Anthropophagi, and St. Brendan’s Isles of the Blest marked
clearly west of the Canaries, gave in its way a less distortive
impression than that which we obtain from the most scientific
chart on Mercator’s projection. Your modern cartographer would
persuade you that Canada is fifty times as large as Italy, and
Canada, contemplating herself on a school globe, already
pouts her breast with the illusion. In a true map, as distinguished
from a geographical, dead Space would shrink to its
spiritual nullity, and for its contribution to the human spirit,
for its amplitude of history and poesy, Sicily—Italy’s mere
foot-note—would loom larger than all the provinces of the
Canadian Confederation.
And this misleading potency of the map scientific engenders
political as well as spiritual dangers. Tariff Reform in Britain
rests on the notion of exchanging products preferentially with
these great British colonies which bulk on the map like continents,
but which, as yet in their infancy, only represent in all some
poor ten million souls against the homeland’s forty millions.
Australia, beholding her unified contours from the Gulf of
Carpentaria to Bass Strait, persists in the heroic delusion that,
despite the torridity and drought of her Northern Territory, she
is a single country, and that country a white man’s—nay, a
Briton’s exclusively. For it is from the surplus population of
the little island in the Northern Sea that all these continents
into which Britain has blundered are to be filled up: a notion
which lives in the same brains that fever with alarm over the
exodus from her shores. And all save the spherical maps foster
an infinity of fallacies of dimension: drawn to fill the like-sized
page in the atlas, South America seems a twin of India; Ireland
and Madagascar (which contains seven Erins) look much of a
muchness; and Brazil, which is almost another Europe, bulges
in the imagination less than the Balkan Peninsula. What
wonder if statesmen have misguided the destinies of nations and
misdirected wars by false impressions derived from atlases, with
their deceptive distances and their obscurations of the real
character of territories, rivers, or harbours. Seoul, the capital
of Corea, Lord Curzon tells us, seems on the river, yet it is
three or four miles away, and approachable only by a canal at
times shallow. “Get large maps,” advised the late Lord
Salisbury; but I would say, beware of maps altogether. For
your school map would foist upon you the delusion that
Morocco is not the East at all, but actually ten degrees more
westerly than London! Whereas every schoolboy knows that
it is in the middle of the “Arabian Nights.” With the Orient
thus thrown south-west of Europe, we are as befogged by the
atlas of to-day as by the old maps which put the Orient on
the top. In truth, the Orient, like heaven, is not a place, but
a state of mind.
To the deuce with your parallels of longitude! Fez in the
West, forsooth!
In that volume on the grotesque a chapter—nay, a section—would
deal with the attempts of Art to give form and colour to
that after-world “from whence no traveller returns.” The
grotesquerie belongs more to the thought than to the picture,
for in eschatological æsthetics the horrible can be reconciled to
the decorative, as it is in Giotto’s Last Judgment at Padua,
which I suppose is the earliest treatment of the theme that
counts, and which, as Giotto and Dante were in Padua together,
was probably painted under the personal influence of that great
authority and explorer. There is no justification in Dante’s
own work, however, for the Father’s supersession by the Son,
who—while Il Padre Eterno is relegated to the choir-arch—occupies,
as so often, the judicial bench, and looms dominant
in a large polychromatic oval like an incomplete spectrum,
with saints at either hand on golden chairs, and golden
companies of hovering angels, the Cross beneath his feet
making a decorative division of Heaven from Hell, and its arms
providing clinging-points for floating angels. Among the
beatific company on the celestial side of the Cross are monks
presenting their monastery to lady saints, and fussy nude corpses
of all ages and both sexes bobbing up out of their coffins, some
looking round in surprise, some instinctively begging for grace,
and one looking back into his coffin, as into a cab for something
forgotten. The Hell is a chaos of tortures, overdusked by the
Personal Hell, the fee-fi-fo-fum ogre (with whom I came to
grow very familiar) who gulps down sinners like oysters. You
see their legs protruding, and others ready for his maw clutched
in his greedy hands. Still other sinners stand on their heads
or hang by their hair or quiver under the tortures of gorilla-like
devils and strange serpentine beasts, or whirl like Paolo and
Francesca. And over all the agony, with beautiful serene face,
floats the angel, clinging to the Cross, and the saints sit placid
on their golden chairs, perhaps, as in that ecstatic prevision of
Tertullian, finding their bliss enhanced by these wails of woe,
as one’s enjoyment of one’s warm hearth is spiced by the
howling of the winds about.
The mere ardour of life was immoral to the mediæval mind,
as we may see from the celebrated anonymous frescoes of Il
Trionfo della Morte in the Campo Santo of Pisa—as if a
cemetery needed any enforcement of Death’s triumph! But
the opportunity is seized of besmirching “The Triumph of
Life,” and by way of prelude to the tomb and its terrors a gay
cavalcade of hunters rides to the chase, with hound and horn,
winding through a lovely landscape. Their horses are arrested
by three open coffins on the roadside, precisely of the shape of
horse-troughs, but containing corpses, apparently a king’s, a
priest’s, and a layman’s. The last is a mere skeleton; the
others are fully robed and serpents curl spitefully about them.
A stag, a rabbit, and a partridge rest serenely upon a little
plateau, as if conscious there will be no danger to-day from
these disconcerted sportsmen. A cowled monk holds out a
long scroll to the leader of the chase, like an official presenting
an address. Other holy hermits read ostentatiously beneath
the trees outside their humble cottage, and one milks a quaint
goat. As if the hermit were more immune from death than the
hunter! Overhead hover fearful fire-breathing demons bearing
beautiful women head downwards to their doom. Towards the
centre of the entire picture, of which this forms but a half,
sweeps Death, a sombre flying figure with a great scythe, whom
cripples and the sorrowful invoke in vain; underneath are his
slain, upon whose bodies swoop demons with long pitchforks
and angels with long crosses, fighting furiously for the spoil, in
a game of pull devil, pull angel. In one case the angel has
gripped the arms, the devil the feet, and they tug and lug with
wings distended to their fullest, every muscle a-strain; even
if the angel succeeds, the racked ghost will have known the
Inferno. Let us pray the poor soul may recover breath in the
Hesperian garden, where sit the meek sainted playing on lutes
and lyres or nursing pet doves and spaniels.
A companion fresco devotes itself to The Last Judgment.
To the sound of angel-trumpets the dead rise from their coffins,
to be marched right or left by stern sworded archangels, as the
great arbiter—again in a surmounting oval—may determine.
Haloed saints occupy a safe platform on high and watch the
suppliant, panic-stricken sinners in the dock. Hell in many
compartments takes half the picture, Satan throned at centre,
a grisly Colossus, horned and fanged, and each compartment a
chamber of horrors unspeakable, or a caldron of stewing
sinners, most noteworthy of whom are the three arch-heretics of
the fourteenth century, Mohammed, Anti-Christ, and Averroes
(the last grown much less respectable since Dante put him with
Plato). This composition—the heretics apart—is obviously on
the general lines of Giotto’s, which may be considered the
archetype of all the Judgment pictures, and the crudity of
the conception is apparent. It is a mere parody of earthly
tribunals. In the hands of a Signorelli—as at Orvieto—the
vigour of the technique dominates and sweeps away the naïveté.
It is the sublimity of terror—
“Where the bright Seraphim in burning row
 Their loud uplifted angel trumpets blow.”
But this conventional and crowded rendering has always
impressed me far less than Maso di Bianco’s in S. Croce, where
a solitary soul appears for judgment in a wild gorge under the
throne of Christ, while two down-sweeping angels, blowing their
trumpets perpendicularly, assist the awesomeness of the design.
What a pity Michelangelo did not handle the theme with this
massive simplicity, and give us one naked, shivering soul with
the fierce light of judgment beating upon him, instead of the
stereotyped arrangement of the Judge on high, the blessed on
his right, the damned on his left, the rising dead at his feet,
with Hell opening underneath! His colossal fresco, with its
huddle of naked saints—to which the clothes provided by later
Popes lent the last touch of gloom—is, with the possible
exception of Tintoretto’s Paradise, the dismallest picture in the
world, and it is even worse placed than Tintoretto’s stupendous
canvas.
The angel Michael, whose scales weigh souls, must have been
hard at work ere he could find enough good people to fill this
Paradise. When I last peeped into it in the Palace of the
Doges, it was conveniently on the floor, having been removed
from its wall for repair, and, standing thus propped up in the
centre of the Sala del Maggior Consiglio, it loomed even more
gigantic than my recollection of it, filling half the vast hall and
extending to the ceiling. Its precise dimensions, according to
a buzzing attendant, were twenty-two metres broad by seven
metres high. Here surely is the prize of prizes for the
American millionaire. The largest picture in the world!
Think of it! But, alas! a pauperised Government arrogantly
clings to its treasures, forbids exportation. How
smuggle it out? What railway carriage could hold it?
How get it even across the Grand Canal to the station?
What gondola, what barca, what vapore even could carry it?
Perhaps a bridge of boats might be built, as for the passing of
an army. And an army indeed it holds.
Tintoretto’s Heaven is, in fact, congested beyond any hygienic
standard. ’Tis a restless, jostling place, unpleasing and muddy
in colour, where you are doomed to carry for ever the emblems
of your life, where Moses must eternally uphold his Tables of
the Law and St. George sport his armour, and martyrs shiver
in perpetual undress. As usual, God the Father is an absentee
Lord, and Christ and the Madonna—in equal authority, not
with the woman subordinate, as in a Veronese in the same Sala—dominate
the chaos of figures, flying, whirling, praying, playing,
or reading. To see this Heaven is to be reconciled with Earth.
Some parts of it are already destroyed, and I look forward to
the day when it shall pass away with a great noise. Smaller
but far more select is Tintoretto’s impressionist Paradiso in
the Louvre, with its rainbow swirls or celestial vortices, its
curving sweeps of figures flying on clouds, only prosaic by its
platform where Christ, the Madonna, and the greater saints
sit like the distinguished persons at a public meeting. His
Purgatorio in Parma is equally imaginative, a whirl of
figures and wild cliffs and rugged, lurid, serpent-haunted chasms,
down which angels plunge to bring up souls to the Madonna,
who sits alone in her gloriole. Bartolommeo Spranger’s Heaven—which
may be seen in Turin—is a place where saintly
companies link hands as in a child’s game, while grimacing
demons or snakes tear at sinners.
Palma Giovane tried to cover the entrance wall of the Sala
dello Scrutinio of the Doge’s Palace with an emulation of
Tintoretto, but the main renown of his Last Judgment seems
to rest on his humorous idea of putting his wife both into
Heaven and Hell. The use of Hell to pay off private scores is
not unique with Palma, and of course everybody can plead the
precedent of Dante.
In another Venetian Paradise—that of Jacobello del Fiore—the
symmetrical groups of haloed saints in blue and red and gold
recall exactly the groups in the La Scala ballet. The Paradise
in Botticelli’s Assumption of the Virgin in the National
Gallery is also somewhat geometric, though the empty lilied
court below gives beautiful relief. Fra Bartolommeo’s large
faded fresco of The Last Judgment, in Florence, with its
sworded archangel to greet the poor souls as they rise from
their graves, is inspired by the Pisan fresco, and is less interesting
than that of Fra Angelico, his fellow Dominican at San Marco,
in whom we breathe a serener, clearer air, though his sweetness
and finish accentuate again the intellectual naïveté. His series
of little panels in the Accademia of Florence has a quaint
originality, the Judge sitting over a mystic red and green
wheel, with the blessed on either hand. Angels welcome
newcomers or lament over the rejected, while demons poke
spears into the damned. More conventional in composition is
his large easel-picture in the same room—a miracle of detailed
loveliness, except for the Hell, which is botched, as though
unsuited to his artistic temperament. Indeed we know he made
his devil hideous out of sheer dislike of the theme. The sheep are
divided from the goats by a curious row of open graves resembling
sky-lights. The Judge is superdominant, angels and babes
hovering round him, the trumpeting angels at his feet. In
the Paradise of flowers walk the saints in couples and companies;
the sinners—in crowns, mitres, or mere caps—are driven Hellward
at the points of a pitchfork into their respective circles,
where some are eaten of the horrible horned Satan, some are eating
one another, and others are gnawing their own bloody hands.
There are sinners seething in pots, sinners starving at a laden
table, sinners hung up, sinners holding their own heads in their
hands. Demons like brown bears gnash white teeth, and in the
north-north-east corner of Hell a capacious big-toothed gullet—horrible
in its suggestion of more behind—is gulping down
two red-headed wretches. In his Christ in Hades the gentle
painter, following an apocryphal gospel, incarnates Hell in a
demon crushed beneath its door.
In the Strozzi Chapel of S. Maria Novella the theme is
repeated by the brothers Orcagna. Andrea took Paradise and
suffused it with tender beauty, fitting it with row upon row of
seraphim and saintly figures, whose serried symmetrical haloes
suggest, however, a marshalling of saints for inspection; while
Bernardo made of Hell a chart of ugliness—a compartmental
chaos of strange fading horrors—fading though the Heaven has
lasted. But it is not easy to get decorative beauty into the
Inferno, especially when broken up into parishes of pain and not
part of a complete Last Judgment such as that by Andrea
single-handed in the same Chapel. In this last, angels carrying
the cross and the thorns make a variant in the composition. In
the Spanish Chapel of the same church The Way to Paradise is
treated as of more concern to mortals than the nature of the
goal, of which we get the merest peep; and perhaps the artist’s
own concern was Beauty, for the central pattern of the picture
is woven by a procession on richly caparisoned horses winding
round and round. Tranquilly beautiful are the figures at
the Passion, even apart from the tender figure of Christ,
whose halo hides the form of the decorative polished cross
he bears.
The Paradise is, however, a Dominican Paradise, for this
noble fresco on examination turns out to be a complicated
allegory in glorification of the order, even including the pictorial
pun or rebus of black-and-white dogs (domini canes), guarding
the faithful sheep and worrying the heretical wolves. The
Dominican Heaven has always a marked preference for
Dominican dogma, as the Dominican Hell is particularly
hospitable to rival forms of teaching. Incidentally this great
anonymous painting is a social Mappamondo of the mediæval,
including every type in Church and State from Pope to pauper;
the vanities and pomps, the penances and renunciations. A
lovely peace broods over this picture, as over all the Chapel.
Hell does not disturb its restful walls, save as the mild Limbo to
which Christ descends to redeem Adam, Noah, and other figures,
proleptically haloed. He hovers majestically over the vague
scene, carrying a red-cross flag over his left shoulder. It is
only the demons who give grotesquerie to the picture, but they
are unsurpassable. One of these baffled imps falls prostrate in
the void, another is tearing his goatee beard, a third stands
scowling, with folded wings, the hair of a fourth stands on end,
a bristle of wires. This last demon is livid in hue; his fellows
are more or less fiery.
Bronzino has dealt less happily, if less grotesquely, with the
same theme, for to his later vision it was a good opportunity
for studying the nude and the half-nude. But to follow out
the theme of Christ in Hades would carry me too far. I
must, however, refer to the touching conception of Christ rushing
to the rescue: as in the picture by Andrea Previtali in which
Christ is seen in a whirl of drapery with a streaming flag, pulling
up an old woman and a girl. A large cross occupies the centre
of this Limbo, to which cling or pray rescued nude figures, while
St. John stands by with a smaller cross.
The after-world was rendered not only in painting, but in
other art-media. In his famous pulpit in the Baptistery of Pisa
Niccolò Pisano carved it in relief, imaginatively rendering the
faces of the damned almost animal with sin. Byzantine art
treated it in mosaic and enamel, in stone and bronze, while on
the rich-jewelled Pala d’Oro of St. Mark’s, Christ in Hades
has called forth the craft of the goldsmith. An exhaustive
study of eschatological æsthetics would include also the
innumerable apotheoses and receptions in Heaven, would
involve a comparison with Teutonic and other pictorial conceptions,
and would range from the pious sincerities of the
primitives to the decorative compositions of the decadents.
I do not know if any scholar has yet thus treated the genesis
and evolution of these pictorial images. They certainly did not
derive from Dante, for Dante’s poem itself contains an allusion
to a Florentine calamity, which we know to have been the
collapse in 1304 of a wooden bridge over the Arno, holding
spectators of a popular representation of the horrors of the
Inferno.
Moreover—apart from the demons and chimæras dire on the
old Etruscan tombs—fumblings at the theme exist in art prior
to Dante, as, for instance, those rude bronze reliefs in the
Byzantine manner on the doors of S. Zeno in Verona, which
mark, as it were, the Bronze Age of the concept. These, I was
assured, were ninth-century, but even dating them at the
eleventh or twelfth—and the church contains frescoes as early—they
were in time for Dante to have seen them when enjoying
Can Grande’s hospitality in Verona. His denunciation of
Alberto della Scala for appointing his bastard as abbot of the
monastery shows his interest in S. Zeno. In these rude
bronzes Dante beheld the bare elements of that Hell which he
furnished so handsomely. Here is already the giant fee-fi-fo-fum
figure holding—O primeval irony!—a quaking monk. Here is
the sinner upside down whose legs are disappearing within a
caldron. Here also, in another bronze relief, is Christ in
Limbo, haling figures out. Christ’s halo is novel, consisting of
three tufts, one sticking out on either side of his head, the other
on top. It may interest the decadent to learn that there is
also a relief of Salome dancing, in which she anticipates all the
modern contortionists.
To pass back from the Bronze Age of the Last Judgment to the
Stone Age, that fine old Lombardic cathedral of Ferrara, whose
lateral façades date from 1135, shows in a lunette over one of
them a stone relief of The Day of Judgment. Flanked by saints,
“God’s in his Heaven,” holding the saved souls in his lap in a
sort of sheet, while the devil in his Hell pokes up his busy fire
and an acolyte shoves a sinner down a dragon’s mouth. The
Baptistery of Parma, a structure less ancient, but still antecedent
to Dante, shows on its left portal three dead men coming out
of their tombs, to be received by the angels or the executioner,
according to the dictum of the Judge on high, who is nursing
a saved soul. The guilty lean anxiously out of curious stone
buildings, apparently awaiting their turn to be decapitated.
With such compositions existing in Italy, it seems supererogatory
of M. Didron to have counted more than fifty French
illustrations of the “Divine Comedy,” before Dante, painted on
church windows or sculptured on church portals, or for M.
Lafitte to seek for Dante’s inspiration in the western portal
of Notre-Dame, which he must have seen during his stay in
Paris.
Giotto, then, did not altogether originate his conception of the
Judgment scene. Indeed, already in the alleged discourse of
Josephus to the Greeks concerning Hades, we have a word-picture
of the Hebrew Day of Judgment in which the souls of
the just are marshalled to the right and the souls of the sinners
to the left.
Dante may equally be exonerated from the crime of having
originated these grotesque notions of the after-world, if he
cannot be exonerated from the crime of corroborating them.
These infantile images were made in the brains of fasting monks
and terror-stricken sinners—for brains make day-dreams as well
as nightmares—on a confused basis of the classic Hades and
Tartarus and Elysium and the Egyptian after-world and the
Hebrew Gehennah, supplemented by misapplied texts and misunderstood
metaphors. They drew their appeal from that
conflict ’twixt good and evil which every man felt raging in
his own soul, and which made plausible the externalisation
of these forces as angels and demons fighting for its possession.
But though the first sketch of the Christian Hell appears in
literature as early as the apocryphal “Acts of St. Thomas,”
Dante may be said to have systematised these chaotic conceptions,
drawn the chart of the Hereafter, and determined the scientific
frontiers between Hell and Limbo, Purgatory and Paradise.
His are the nine concentric circles of the Inferno, though
Acheron and Minos, Charon and Cerberus, are borrowed from
his guide and master; he is the sole discoverer and surveyor of
the island-mountain of Purgatory, so precisely antipodal to
Jerusalem, with its seven parishes corresponding to the seven
deadly sins; his are the nine Heavens, ascending to the Beatific
Vision, that is circumscribed by the thrice three orders of the
angelic hierarchies. Nevertheless, marvellous as is the sustained
imaginativeness of the achievement, his contribution to the
stock of eschatological ideas is comparatively small. The
vulgar imagination is quite capable of bodying forth these
grimacing, horned demons, these imps with prongs and lashes,
those swooping fiends, that heavy head-gear,—not unlike the
English high hat in August—those fiery floods, those gibbering,
wailing ghosts, those wretches immersed in ordure, those ghastly
sinners munching each other, those disgustful stenches and itchings.
Dante would not be remembered for such nursery horrors.
Happily, he enriched the theme with finer imaginings. They
meet us at the very threshold of the dolorous city in those
neutral souls good enough neither for Heaven nor Hell; like
the abdicating Pope Celestine V, neither rebels against God
nor true to Him. Yet Dante almost spoilt his own conception
by adding the material pains inflicted by wasps and hornets to
their eternal nullity. Kipling, in his probably unconscious
approximation to the idea in “Tomlinson,” had a sounder
instinct, though perhaps Ibsen’s idea of returning Peer Gynt to
the Button-Moulder hits the truer penology. Dante’s touch is
more satisfying when he pictures the doom of those who were
sad in sunny air, and must now continue sad in the more
appropriate surroundings of slime. Yet there is here a touch
of the Gilbertian grotesque; a foreshadowing of the Mikado,
whose “object all sublime” was “to make the punishment fit the
crime.” This suggestion is even stronger in the twenty-seventh
canto, where Mohammed and the arch-heretics who provoked
schisms are ripped and cleft from chin to forelock. Savagery,
too, is met by savage punishment, as in the Ugolino episode.
There are a few inventions, indeed, beyond the vulgar imagination:
the six-footed serpent that transmutes the sinner to its
own form, a passage palpitating with Æschylean genius; the
monstrous-paunched coiner, consumed with a terrible hate; the
shore “turreted with giants”; the tears that cannot be shed.
Nor could the vulgar—pre-occupied with fire—have conceived a
Hell of ice, though Dante’s Arctic circle is bettered in the
Gospel of Barnabas preserved in an Italian MS., which compounds
a Hell of fire and ice united by the Justice of God, “so
that neither tempers the other, but each gives its separate
torment to the infidel,” and in Vondel’s “Lucifer” the archfiend
is condemned to
                                “The eternal fire
Unquenchable, with chilling frosts commingled.”
But neither the Dutch poet nor his contemporary, Milton,
condescended to the fee-fi-fo-fum infantility of Dante’s three-headed
King of Hell, that fantastic fiend who holds in each of
his mouths one of the three archetypal traitors, Judas, Brutus,
and Cassius. And that Dante’s “Judgment” was not considered
“The Last” is shown by the popularity of Brutus—as a tyrannicide—in
the Florence of the Medici. The beauty of the verse and
the imaginative intensity alone render Dante’s “Inferno” bearable.
Translated into the images of Signorelli or Michelangelo—and
these more truly than Botticelli were Dante’s illustrators—the
grossness of his “Inferno” leaps to the eye, while his finer
imaginings are not capable of interpretation by brush or pencil.
The paradox of the “Divina Commedia,” indeed, is that it
lives less by its supernatural visionings, sombre and splendid as
these occasionally are, than by its passages of the earth, earthy,
when the world the poet has left behind breaks in upon the
starless gloom of Hell or upon the too ardent radiancy of
Paradise. Nor need I prove my case by the familiar episodes of
Paolo and Francesca, and of Ugolino, though Dante’s fame rests
so largely upon them. Never was poem more terrestrial, more
surcharged with the beauty and grossness of earth-life. The
delicious touches of natural beauty, the splendid descriptions of
sunrise and moonlight, the keen observation of animal and
insect life, of starlings and doves, of storks and frogs, of falcons
and goshawks, the pictures of the jousts at Arezzo, or of the
busy arsenal of Venice, the homely similes painting indirectly
the labours of ploughmen and shepherds, warriors and sailors,
even the demeanour of dicers—this last Dante’s sole approach
to humour—it is by these that Dante will live when his Heaven
and Hell are rolled up like a scroll. The sound of the vesper
bell that touches the earthly pilgrim moves us more than all the
celestial music of the Purgatory; the vision of beatific goodness,
beside the lovely picture of the ancient virtue of Florence in the
homely ages, is an airy nothing—one is more interested even to
hear the ladies of the day rebuked for their low-necked dresses.
The dazzling circles of Paradise leave us lethargic compared
with the irrelevant intrusion therein of the lark’s rapture of
song or the earthly pain of exile.
“Tu proverai sì come sa di sale
 Lo pane altrui, e com’è duro calle
 Lo scendere e’l salir per l’altrui scale.”
To prove how salt is others’ bread, how hard the passage up and
down others’ stairs! How impotent all the laboured strivings
to shadow forth the vision celestial compared with this touch of
the terrestrial concrete! In truth Dante did not go “out of his
senses,” even in his most transcendental moments of inspiration.
His five senses were all he had wherewith to obtain the raw
material of his imaginings, and out of his sensations of touch and
sight, of smell and taste and hearing, he wove both his Hell and
his Heaven. The stored repugnances of mankind, the shudders
and horrors at beasts and serpents, at bites and wounds and
loathsome diseases, the dread of fire—he himself was condemned
to be burnt alive—the chill of ice, the nausea of stinks and
dizzying motions—these are the factors of his Hell, as the odour
of flowers and incense, the shimmer of jewels, the sound of
music, and the pains and pleasures of anticipation are the
factors of his Purgatory. As for his Paradise, it is merely the
sublimation of the philosophic Elysium Aristotle and Cicero
had conceived before Christianity; his very ecstasy of Light is
anticipated by Seneca.
Restlessness is a recurring image of doom with Dante—and
perhaps his own wander-years of exile lent vividness to the
onward drifting of the neutral spirits, the unrepose of the
learned sinners, the eternal whirl of Paolo and Francesca. Yet
there are moments in which Dante rises beyond his gross scale of
punishments to a more spiritual plane.
“Thou art more punished in that this thy pride
 Lives yet unquenched; no torrent, save thy rage,
 Were to thy fiery pain proportioned full.”
In addressing this observation to Capaneus, Virgil, says
Dante, spoke in a higher-raised accent than ever before. In a
less literal sense, it is indeed a higher accent: it is even the note
of modern thinking, from Spinoza onwards. The wages of sin
is—sin! It is probably even the note of an earlier and still
more misunderstood Master. But this note is only heard once
and faintly. The wages of sin is physical torture. But surely
such a Hell is unjustly balanced by such a Heaven—all Platonic
intellection, Plotinian ecstasy, and ethereal Light. If the wages
of sin is physical torture, then the wages of virtue should be
physical rapture. Dante’s Hell requires Mohammed’s Heaven,
just as Christ’s Heaven requires an immaterial Hell. For if
the Kingdom of God is within you, the Kingdom of the Devil
cannot be without. This thought broke dimly on Milton
when, despite his material Hell, he wrote of Satan:
“But the hot Hell that always in him burns,
 Though in mid-heaven. . . .”
Dante’s Purgatory possesses, indeed, some of the material
attractions a logical Heaven needs: it has all the makings of an
Earthly Paradise not inferior to Addison’s in his “Vision of
Mirza.” There are even great set pieces of painting, and much
that might well tempt the soul to linger on its upward way.
The soul of the present critic is also tempted to seek
superiority by preferring the Paradise to the Inferno. Alas!
a law of psychology has ordained that pleasures shall be less
exciting than tortures, and hence the Purgatory is far duller
than the Inferno, while the Paradise is hopelessly swamped in
sweetness and light. The splendid vision of the snow-white
Rose—wonderful as poetry—retains little spiritual value under
analysis, though the majestic passion of the close of the great
poem almost carries up the spirit with closed eyes to this dazzling
infinitude of Light and Love.
Read as a poem of earth, the “Divine” Comedy has for
us a value quite other than Dante—in his political and
prophetic passion—designed. What we see in it is the complete
Mappamondo of the mediæval, a complete vision of the world,
with its ethics, its philosophy and its science, as it reflected
itself in the shining if storm-tossed soul of the poet, whose epic
was alike the climax and the conclusion of the Middle Ages.
No wonder the Italian quotes it with the finality of a Gospel
text. For this epic is less of a people than of humanity.
Though the Florentine background is of the pettiest—including
even Dante’s apologia for breaking a font in the church of St.
John—it is really world-history with which the poem is concerned;
not world-history as the modern conceives it, for Dante’s
Mappamondo held neither America nor China, neither Russia
nor Japan, but that selected conceptual world—that autocosm—in
which the cultured of his day lived and had their being: a
world in which classic and chivalric legend had their equal part—as
they have in the poetry of Milton—so that the very
“Paradiso” could open with an invocation to Apollo! And this
world-history is unified by being strung together on a moral
plan, precisely as in the Hebrew Bible, Judas and Brutus finding
themselves equally in Lucifer’s avenging fangs. The flames of
righteous indignation redeem the crude brimstone, and if we
bleed for the sinners, the sins under chastisement are mainly
those we would wish purged from the universe in the white
flame of righteousness. Indeed, this great sensuous, sinful
Tuscan, who went unscathed through the dolorous city, is a
soul on fire. He is taken up to Heaven, like Elijah, but in the
fiery chariot of his own ardour. His passion is the stars,
visible symbol of beauty and infinity. Each of his three great
sections ends with the very words. “The stars” shine again in
that noble letter refusing the Republic’s terms of pardon.
“What!” cries the exile, “shall I not everywhere enjoy the
sight of the sun and the stars?” “The love that moves the
sun and the other stars” is, indeed, the great doctrine of the
poem—its literal last word. How this love, “this goodness
celestial, whose signature is writ large on the universe,”
is to be reconciled with the spirit that moves the flame
and the other dooms, he does not explain. Though ever
and anon his own tears of pity flow, the doctrine of eternal
hopeless torture does not appal him; not even though,
at the Day of Judgment, worse is in store, for the sufferers
shall by then have subtilised their practised nerves for
the final damnation. It does not disconcert him—any more
than it disconcerts his great admirer, Michelangelo—that unbaptised
infants and heathens whose only crime was chronological
should sigh in Limbo, and that Adam and Noah,
Abraham and Moses themselves, should need for their salvation
the special descent of Christ. For all his sublimity, his passionate
metaphysic insight into the Godhead, he falls below the homely
Rabbis of the Talmud, who taught eight or ten centuries
earlier, “The righteous of all nations have a share in the
World-to-Come.” Yet there are broken lights of this truth
here and there.
                                    “But lo! of those
Who call, ‘Christ, Christ,’ there shall be many found
In judgment, further off from Him by far
Than such to whom His name was never known.”
And the fine temper of the man is shown in his struggle against
the pitiful obsessions of a provincial theology; in his gratitude
towards the great Teachers of Antiquity, his reverence for whom
anticipated the Renaissance, albeit the Greeks among them were
probably known to him only in Latin translations. A Dante
of the Renaissance—if such were possible—might have placed
Aristotle and Plato in Paradise by interposition of a Christ
loving his Gospel tongue. Bernardo Pulci did, indeed, place
Cicero and sundry Roman heroes in Heaven. But even during
the Renaissance Savonarola proclaimed that Plato and Aristotle
were in Hell, and the best that Dante in his rigider century
could do for them was to put them in a painless Limbo, which
they perambulate “with slow majestic port,” acquiring from
their continuous earthly reputation grace which holds them
thus far advanced, and which it seems not beyond all hoping
may ultimately exalt them to bliss. And with Aristotle, the
“maestro di color che sanno,” walk not only Homer and
Euclid, but his Mohammedan commentator, Averroes, and even
mythical figures like Orpheus and Hector. A Christendom
that had never altogether lost touch with the classical world—were
it only by way of Virgil, mediæval saint and sorcerer—a
Christendom whose philosophers found ingenious inspiration in
Aristotle, could not easily relegate to the flames either the
classical writers or their works. Classic literature and mythology
made a second Bible, as the lore of chivalry and general history a
third; indeed, these were the three great circles in which swam the
world of the mediæval Mappamondo, the Biblical circle outermost
and nearest to Heaven. Yet it was a bold stroke of tolerance on
Dante’s part to make Virgil his guide, chronology giving him
no chance, as it gave with Statius, of a legendary conversion to
Christianity. And this penchant for the great Pagans accentuates
his intolerance to the great Christian heretics. But if
Virgil himself was excluded from Heaven “for no sin save lack
of faith”—Virgil who could not possibly have believed—if even
the merits of those who lived before the Gospel, could not profit
them because they had missed baptism, it is not surprising to
find the Christian heretics collected in the ninth canto in burning
sepulchres of carefully graduated temperatures. One wishes
that they, rather than Farinata degli Uberti, had held their
heads high, with a fine disdain foreshadowing Milton’s Satan.
How Socrates would have smiled over the perverted morality of
the Christian poet, as we smile over the constricted foot of a
Chinese lady! Despite the attempt of a recent writer to moralise
his scheme of salvation, the best that can be said for Dante
is that he probably followed Aquinas in holding that there is
no positive pain in that absence of the divine vision which St.
Chrysostom made the severest part of the punishment of the
damned. But in tolerance as well as humour he falls far below
the Ha-Tofet weha-Eden (“Hell and Paradise”) of his Jewish
friend and imitator, Immanuel. It is in vain that Émile Gebhart
(in “L’Italie Mystique”) points to his revolutionary liberalism
in placing Ripheus the Pagan and Trajan, the Roman Emperor,
in Paradise. These apparent exceptions only bring out his lack
of tolerance and humour more vividly. For, though the Æneid
describes the fallen hero, Ripheus, as “justissimus unus” among
the Trojans and “the most observant of right,” yet it is not by the
simple force of his own goodness but by some complex operation
of grace under which he believes in the Christ that has not yet
been born, and even turns missionary, that he penetrates among
the “luci sante.” As for the Emperor Trajan, complexity is
still worse confounded, for he—despite the title he had won of
Optimus—must serve his time in hell, and is only popped into
Paradise after being resuscitated, converted and baptized by
St. Gregory four hundred years after his first decease. Thus
both Ripheus and Trajan died Christians, Dante assures us
gravely, not Gentiles as the world imagines; one believing in the
Crucifixion that was to be, and the other in the Crucifixion that
had been.
                “Cristiani, in ferma fede
Quel de’ passuri, e quel de’ passi piedi.”
With all Dante’s stippling and geometric chart-drawing, his
conception of the after-world is not really clear. The sinners
are able to deliver long monologues, amid all their agony; they
foreknow things terrestrial, exactly like the Manes of Paganism;
they quarrel with one another; there are even high jinks in Hell,
which according to Burckhardt show an Aristophanic humour.
(But then Burckhardt is a German.) Moreover, a certain free
will reigns. The undefined powers of the demons import into
Dante’s excursion through their dominions a deal of breathlessness
and terror from which one should be exempt who travels
with a “safe-conduct” acquired by the interposition of powerful
personages in Paradise.
Such are the nebulous rings hovering round Dante’s Mappamondo
Infernale. But the circles of his Mappamondo Terrestre
are clear and resplendent. ’Twas within the illumination of
these circles—unnecessarily narrowing though they were—that
the Middle Ages, and even Ages later, built their sublime cathedrals,
painted their lovely Madonnas, and wrote their great
poems. For though doubtless much sacred art is merely splendid
sensuous decoration, and some even of that which is indubitably
spiritual may have been the work of free-thinking and free-living
artists, it remains true that the Dark Ages had a light
which electricity cannot replace.
But is our modern Mappamondo as scientific as we think it?
Can we girdle it with no circles amid which to sail securely
again through the infinities?
Vastly strange are the wanderings of saints and pictures.
When a Magnificent One ordered for his gilded sala a
Madonna—even with himself and his consort superadded—he
was, for aught he knew, helping to decorate Hampton Court
in Inghilterra, or the mansion of a master-butcher in undiscovered
and unchristened Pennsylvania. And when a saint
was born, an equal veil hid the place of his death or of his
ultimate patronage. The fate of St. Francis, to live and die
and be canonised in his birthplace, was of the rarest. His
pendant, St. Dominic, came from Old Castile, and was buried
in Bologna.
It is no surprise, therefore, to find St. Giulia, of Carthage,
in possession of Brescia, though I must confess that until I
stumbled upon the frescoes consecrated to her in the church of
S. Maria del Solario her name and fame were unknown to
me. Luini painted these frescoes, the sacristan said, though
the connoisseurs omit to chronicle them and will doubtless
repudiate the attribution. The date of 1520 appended to
the somewhat free and easy Latin epigraph beneath does
indeed bring them well within Luini’s working period, but
their authenticity interests me less than the story they tell.
St. Giulia, it would appear, was born in the seventh century
of a noble Carthaginian family, and was endowed with holy
learning and every spiritual grace.
“Stemate præsignis Carthagine nata libellos
 Docta sacros, anima, corpus gestuque pudica,
 Curatu patiens, humilis, jejuniaque pollens.”
Such a maiden could only become an apostle to the heathen.
Accordingly, we see her arrive at Corsica in a boat with neither
oar nor sail, and start praying to the true God. A good-natured
citizen warns her of the risks of such heresy, and the
kindly ruler of Corsica himself adjures her to discretion,
his monitions being emphasised by a man with an axe who
stands behind him. But holding her prayer-book, and already
crowned with her halo, she prays on. The next fresco shows
the inevitable sequel. She is hanging by her hair to the bough
of a pretty tree, while an executioner prods at her bleeding
breasts with a three-pronged fork, though his head is turned
away, as if he were not over-proud of his job. The kindly ruler,
however, continues his remonstrances. In the distance a small,
dim angel wings his way to her. Finally, she is stretched on a
cross, and two ruffians batter her with massive clubs, but angels
hold the palm and wreath over her head, and the Dove flies
towards her. These celestial visions are a true interpretation
and externalisation of the psychology of the martyr: these alone
could support her. In our own day the visions of our martyrs
are less concrete; they die for some far-seen ideal of Justice or
Freedom, and this suffices to sustain them in Spanish prisons or
under the Russian knout.
But what is peculiarly noteworthy in the story of Giulia is
the status of woman in the Dark Ages and under the Catholic
Church. St. Giulia appears to enjoy as great a roving licence as
St. Augustine, her fellow-citizen in Carthage and “The City of
God.” She is not considered unsexed, nor does her teaching rank
below man’s, and she is canonised equally with the male. In
fact, in leaving the home-nest to preach to the heathen, she is
only following the model of Thekla in the Apocryphal “Acts of
St. Paul,” whose story, though it was forged by a pious elder, is
none the less proof of woman’s position in that highest of all
ancient spheres, Religion. “I recommend unto you Phœbe,
our sister,” says the misogynous St. Paul himself (Romans xvi),
“for she hath been a succourer of many and of myself also.
Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my helpers in Christ Jesus; who
have for my life laid down their own necks.”
It is, indeed, doubtful whether Christianity would ever have
been established but for the courage and companionship of
women. I feel sure they tidied up the catacombs and gave a
feeling of home to the crypts and caves. “It was the women
who spread Christianity in the family,” says Harnack. St.
Augustine’s father was a heathen; it was his mother, Monica,
who taught him to pray. The Virgin Martyr, like Santa
Reparata of Florence, or St. Catherine of Alexandria, is a stock
figure of the Roman calendar. As in all great movements,
differences of station were forgotten, and Blandine, the servant-girl
of Lyons, played as majestic a part as the royal-blooded
St. Catherine, whose wheel of martyrdom finds such quaint
perpetuation as a firework.
Popular imagination added the Madonna to the Trinity as
a sort of female representative. In Tintoretto’s Paradise, as I
have already noted, she figures as authoritatively as the Christ,
and in a picture at Vicenza, attributed to Tiepolo, she stands
on the world, crushing the snake with her foot.
Her companions were usually divided in sex and united in
glory. Luca della Robbia, in his charming relief in the
cathedral of Arezzo, scrupulously places one male and one female
saint on her either hand, and even one male and female angel:
doubtless had cherubs possessed sex possibilities, his cherubs
too would have been impartially distributed. In the Accademia
of Florence, Cimabue’s Madonna is entirely surrounded by
female saints, though a few males loom below her throne;
Giotto’s shows a female surplus; Bernardo Daddi’s redresses
the balance. Fra Angelico gives us Jesus carried to the Tomb
by nine women to four men.
Italian art is full of symmetrical paradises of sex-equality, and
if a church was decorated with male saints down one aisle, they
would be scrupulously balanced by female saints along the other.
An old Byzantine Basilica of Ravenna, which displays twenty-two
virgins arrayed against thirty saints of the dominant sex,
first set me wondering whether, since the Dark Ages, woman has
not gone back in Christendom instead of forward. Here at
least was the atmosphere for the legend, if not for the reality,
of a Pope Joan, whereas at the period in which I first opened
my eyes upon the world and woman, she appears to have become
reduced to an absolute industrial dependence upon her lord like
the fifteenth-century chicken in Giambattista della Porta’s
“Book of Natural Magic.” For according to the delightful
recipe (cited by Corvo) for inducing affection towards you in a
chicken, you must—before it has its feathers—“break off its
lower beak even to the jaw. Then, having not the wherewithal
to peck up food, it must come to its master to be fed.”
I might cite in proof of woman’s retrogression since the Dark
Ages the glorification of womanhood through “The Divine
Comedy,” but the Italian poet’s translation of life into literature
is, I fear, no more legal evidence of the real status of woman in
the Middle Ages than her chivalrous deification at the hands of
the Germanic or Provençal poets is a proof that she was treated
even as an equal of her worshippers. Dante’s unknown Beatrice
sounds like a woman who was snubbed by her husband and
brothers. But Matilda, who plays second fiddle to her, and
who is equally drawn by Dante as a mild flower-culling “bella
Donna” was in reality the warrior Countess of Tuscany, and
the fact that Dante feminises and floralises her shows that he
had no real respect for feminine dominance in the actual shapes
it took in life, and that he was only prepared to idealise woman
on condition of her conforming to his ideal.
The scholars and commentators who have always been so
puzzled at the metamorphosis of Matilda have forgotten man’s
tendency to break off woman’s beak, whether in reality or in
imagination. But even if Preger be correct in identifying
Dante’s Matilda, not with the armoured Amazon of Tuscany,
but with Mechtilde, the nun, whose mystic visions are the
flowers she culls, it remains true that Dante’s ideal was never
the “Virago,” a title of honour which was inscribed on her tomb,
and which even at the epoch of the Renaissance implied nothing
but praise. The word may serve to remind us that there is no
sharp bisection of qualities between the sexes.
Matilda was, in fact, a sufficient refutation in herself of the
notion that there is a rigid division between the qualities of men
and women. Such a difference as is implied does, indeed, exist,
but it is between men and men, and between women and women,
as well as between men and women, and the popular nomenclature,
which calls certain women mannish and certain men
effeminate, recognises the possibility of deviation from the
normal. Indeed, considering that both parents affect their child,
the attempt to breed a special feminine psychology, immune
from politics and fighting, must be perpetually thwarted by the
criss-cross action of heredity, as upon the daughters of warriors
and statesmen. Matilda—sired by the Magnificent Monster,
Boniface—was a man in ten thousand. She led her own
armies. She patronised learning and founded the law schools
of Bologna. If she kept her husbands in subjection, casting off
one after the other, she had none of the vices of the male
despot; indeed, her second marriage-contract stipulated only a
sexless union. There was nothing, indeed, except these vices
in which she ranks below the Magnificent Monsters who preceded
her in the lordship of Lucca or Lombardy. I must admit
that the Countess of Tuscany fell under the influence of her
spiritual director (as the Male Magnificent falls under the
influence of his unspiritual directress), and that she used her
power, and her treasure, as it is feared women will, to bolster
up the Church; in fact, she, with her mother Beatrice, attended
the Council of Rome in 1074, at which investiture by lay hands
was declared illegal, and hers was the Castle of Canossa, to
which Henry IV came to abase himself before the Pope. And
that dubious temporal power of the Pope’s might not have come
into such solid being had she not left her possessions to the See
of Rome, and thus practically founded the States of the Church.
This, of course, is the secret of her high position in the earthly
paradise of the Purgatory. But, after all, religious zeal is not
a female monopoly, and even Bloody Mary could not hold a
candle to Torquemada.
Catherine of Siena exercised an equally critical influence upon
the fortunes of the Papacy and upon European history when
she persuaded Gregory XI to move the Papal seat back from
Avignon to Rome; a mission in which Rienzi had failed a
generation earlier. Catherine, for all her ecstasies and self-scourgings,
had far more common sense than the male mystics.
It was in allowing for such divergences from the normal that
the Dark Ages surpassed our electric-lit era, whose logic confounds
the optional with the compulsory, and the individual
with the general. It was not pretended that every woman can
or must be a warrior, but she who had military genius was not
debarred from developing it. It was not claimed that every
woman can or must be a saint, but St. Clara stood equal with
St. Francis, and St. Catherine of Siena with St. Dominic. And
at the Renaissance Boccaccio devotes a book to celebrated
females, and Michelangelo writes most humble love-sonnets to
the poetess, Vittoria Colonna (whose Rime still sell, and who
unlike Matilda stood for religious reform). Vittoria’s noble
classic head, especially as seen helmeted in Michelangelo’s
design, suggests a very Minerva, and from various quarters we
hear of the political woman, the learned woman, the patroness
of the arts, and the female physician, while at the foot of the
staircase of Padua University stands a statue of a lady Professor,
a happier Hypatia. I forget if this is Lucrezia Cornaro,
who was made a Doctor of this University and a member of so
many learned societies throughout Europe, but no enumeration
of Italian heroines should omit her brilliant ancestress, Caterina
Cornaro, Queen of Cyprus, whose court at Asolo was one of the
centres of the Renaissance.
“The education given to women in the upper classes,” says
Burckhardt, the learned historian of “The Renaissance in
Italy,” “was essentially the same as that given to men. . . .
There was no question of ‘women’s rights’ or female emancipation,
because the thing in itself was a matter of course. The
educated woman no less than the man strove naturally after a
characteristic and complete individuality.”
When one remembers the struggle in nineteenth century
England for the higher education of women, and particularly
the desperate resistance to their studying and practising
medicine, one realises the fallacy of expecting melioration from
the mere movement of time. There is no automatic progress.
What is automatic is retrogression, so that the price even of
stability is perpetual vigilance.
But what has St. Giulia, born at Carthage and crucified in
Corsica, to do with Brescia? I have already pointed out the
free trade in saints, by which they were liable to posthumous
export. St. Giulia’s body was transported from Corsica by
Desiderio, a noble Brescian, who ascended the Longobardian
throne in 735. She was placed in the church dedicated to
St. Michael, the patron saint of the Longobardi, whom she
ousted in 915, from which date the Church was known as
St. Giulia’s. A Nunnery of S. Giulia had existed from about
750, and remained in being for over a thousand years, till its
suppression in 1797 by the inevitable Napoleon. Coryat, who
visited it in 1608, describes it as having been in time past “a
receptacle of many royall Ladies.” It is now a Museum of
Christian Art, and there I saw St. Giulia depicted in sculpture
by Giovanni Carra, her figure nude to the waist and stretched
on a real wooden cross with real nails in her hands and feet.
Alas for Christian Art!
To-day our St. Giulias, in revolt against a social order
founded on prostitution and sex-inequality, demand political
rights as leverage for a nobler society, and, despite the advice
of kindly Rulers, they are as ready as in the seventh century to
be martyred for their faith, though they have replaced the
passivity of St. Giulia by measures of aggression. Guariento
foresaw the modern militant type when he drew those charming
female angels with red and gold shields and long lances, and
wings of green and gold, who stand on clouds—“suffragette”
seraphs, they seem to me. You may see a battalion of them in
the Museo Civico of Padua, filling a whole corridor, like a procession
in the lobby at Westminster. One of these fair warriors
trails by a cord a black demon with two quills like white horns,
doubtless some literary Cabinet Minister. Another weighs two
souls on scales, and Female Suffrage does indeed weigh men’s
souls in the balance, to find them mostly wanting. For of all
forms of modern vulgarity, I deem nothing more dreadful than
the scoffing callousness towards the sufferings of the “Suffragettes.”
They are only self-inflicted, we are told, as if this
was not their supreme virtue. That in this age of blatant
materialism women should still show that they possess souls is
wondrous comforting to the idealist, tempted to believe that
the fount of living waters had run dry, and that Giulia’s only
travels were now made by motor-car to smart country houses.
There is nothing which at first sight seems more puzzling
than the wickedness of good people. For it has often been
said that the truly devout and respectable Christians are the
very ones who would crucify Christ afresh if he appeared again,
as indeed Arnold of Brescia, who had a touch of his spirit,
was crucified by Emperor, Pope, and Church. And St. Bernard,
the inspirer of the Second Crusade to recover the dead bones of
Christ, played a leading part in hounding him down, as the
Franciscans played a leading part in hounding down Savonarola.
Now why was St. Bernard—that santo sene who was chosen
by Dante to induct him into the last splendours of the Paradise,
and whose noble hymns to Jesus still edify the faithful—so
blind to the divine aspects of his victim? And why is it that
the citizens of Ferrara, whose excellent statue and eloquent
tribute to their illustrious townsman Savonarola faced my hotel
window, could not be trusted not to stone their next prophet
in a cruder sense of the words?
A converse question will conduct us to the answer. Why is
the hooligan in the gallery of the theatre ever the chief friend
of virtue? Why is the wife-bruiser the most fervid applauder
of the domestic sentiment? Because the man in the gallery
looks down on the tangle of life like the god his name implies:
he sees it in as clear perspective as the aeronaut sees the network
of alleys through which the pedestrian blunders; the plot
is straightened out for him, the villain duly coloured, virtue
in distress plainly marked by beauty and white muslin, and
through no mists of prejudice or interest or passion he beholds
the great outlines of right and wrong. ’Tis to the credit of
human nature that, confronted with the bare elementals of
ethics, and freed from egoistic bias, the human conscience, even
the conscience most distorted in life, reacts accurately and
returns a correct verdict with the unfailingness of a machine.
This it is that preserves the self-respect of the blackest of us,
this capacity of ours for seeing our neighbours’ sins, which is
the chief bulwark of public virtue. Wherefore, could St.
Bernard have seen Arnold of Brescia as history sees him, or as
a dramatist of insight would have drawn him, St. Bernard
would have been the first to be horrified at St. Bernard’s
behaviour. But a Saint, no more than a hooligan, is free from
passions, interests, and prejudices of his own, especially an
ecclesiast and a theologian and a founder of monasteries.
Wilful and obstinate as are all the saints of my acquaintance,
the most domineering are the clerical. For all St. Bernard’s
genius and holiness, he could not endure a rival point of view.
By him, and not by this interloping Italian monk, this pupil of
the critical Abélard, must the world be turned to righteousness;
nay the heresies of Abélard himself—“who raves not reasons”—must
be condemned by the Council of Sens.
St. Bernard, if he lived to-day, would write the life of Arnold
of Brescia with holy horror at his tragic fate, and to-morrow,
when the passions and mists of to-day are cleared away, some
future Asquith will find a fresh stimulus to rebellion against the
Peers in the noble sufferings of some St. Giulia of the Suffrage.
Peccavi. I have painted Italy, as others use, in sun-colour
solely. My pen has been heliographic. That were worthy of
the tourist who knows Italy only in her halcyon season. ’Tis
the obsession of the alliterative image of the Sunny South, overriding
one’s historic memories—stories of the Po frozen over from
November to April, of penitents standing barefoot in the snow,
bitter adventures of mediæval brides brought tediously to their
lords across icy, wind-swept ways in a sort of Irish honeymoon in
the days before trains de luxe; nay, this Platonic concept swamps
even the Aristotelian experience. For I have seen Florence
in a London fog and Venice in a Siberian snowfall. I have seen
St. Mark’s Square turned into a steppe, without pigeons, without
pleasure-pilgrims, snow-muffled, immaculate, bleak, given over
to raw-knuckled scrapers and shovellers, knee-deep in crumbling
hummocks, or pushing snow-heaped wheelbarrows towards the
providential water-ways, the snow-crusted Campanile towering
over the desolate glacial plain like the North Pole of childish
fancy. Yea, and on the water-ways floated—O horror of desecration—white
gondolas! Nature, like some vulgar millionaire,
had defied the sumptuary edict consecrated by immemorial
tradition, and, amazed as the Australian pioneer who first
beheld black swans, I watched these white gondolas gliding
along the swollen canals. And I recall Bologna in a blizzard—a
snowfall so persistent that it closed the Pinacoteca by the
curious method of solidly overlaying the skylight of the main
Gallery and rendering the pictures invisible. It was a festa
for the janitors, a holiday fallen from heaven. In the Piazza
Nettuno the big fountain was snowed over, and the cab-drivers sat
under great hoary umbrellas that had hitherto been green,
their cabs looking like frosted cakes. A white hearse passed still
whiter. The snow slashed its way even under the colonnades,
and formed a slippery coating of ice on their pavements. Bran,
scattered copiously in these arcades and at all the street-crossings,
maintained a feeble colour-fight against the all-pervading white.
There is an icy Italy more boreal than Britain, inasmuch as
less equipped against winter. For the native, too, partakes of
the Platonic fallacy, and because his cold season is briefer than
his warm, and oft infused with a quickening radiance, he shrugs
it out of existence, especially when Carnival invites to al fresco
conviviality. The beggar, indeed, recognises the winter, as
becomes a practical professional man, and squats at the church-porch
with his private pan of burning charcoal; but the more
irresponsible burgher, with his stone floors, and his stoveless,
chimneyless rooms, treats winter as an annual exception, calling
for improvised measures. He is an æstival animal that builds
for the summer, though his brigand-cloak, whose left fold is so
sardonically thrown over his right shoulder, betrays to the
scientific observer its prosaic origin as the throat-protector of an
Arctic creature. Of late, under the pressure of foreign finance,
the better hotels have veined themselves with steam-pipes.
But the steam rises late, and the pipes are only hot when the
guest has departed.
Never have I seen the pretence of perpetual summer carried
further than at Rimini, where in a blinding snowstorm, when
every narrow archaic street was bordered with four-foot mounds
of dirty snow, and the traffic was limited to donkey-carts dragging
snow through the Porta Aurea to pitch it into the river,
the congealing cabmen sat all day on their powdered boxes
cheerfully crying in competitive chorus—every time they caught
a glimpse of me—“To San Marino? To San Marino?” That
little Republic—one of the last political curios left, like a fly in
amber, in modern Europe—is a drive of many hours, even when
“the white road to Rimini” is a shimmering sun-path, yet
there was no suspicion of pleasantry in the cabmen’s eagerness
to crawl through the niveous morass. They seriously expected
me to set forth on this summer expedition, with at most the
carriage closed against the driving flakes. It sorted better with
my humour to plough afoot over the muffled Boulevard to the
new Rimini which has grown out of the old rotting Rimini of
Cæsar and the Malatestas.
For there is a sham Rimini as well as a real Rimini—one of
those toadstools of cities which flourish so rankly in our century
of comfort. This is the Lido—an Italian Ostend, sacred
to modern villas, mammoth hotels, bathing establishments,
restaurants, the surgy shore tamed into a Parade for parasols.
There is a staring, many-windowed, many-balconied Grand
Hotel, crowned by two baroque domes, with busts on its façade
and vases at its corners tapering up into rods. There is a little
Lawn-Tennis Club-Bar and a big Casino, with a restaurant terrace
back and front. There are pretentious Palazzini. There is a
huddle of flaring houses, recalling the grotesque “new architecture”
of Madrid, and a large uncouth hydropathic establishment
in terra-cotta, and a long row of green bathing-huts.
Perhaps the profoundest observation of Dickens in Italy was
that the marvellous quartette of buildings outside the life of
Pisa—the Cathedral, the Campo Santo, the Baptistery, and the
leaning Tower—is like the architectural essence of a rich old
city, filtered from its prosaic necessities. Of the Lido of Rimini
(and of its likes) it may be said that they are the architectural
essence of a rich new city, filtered of all spiritual and poetical
values.
But the Lido I saw was purged of all this vulgarity, buried
under stainless snow, which lay deep and virgin over every
street and grassy space, and shrouded every flaunting structure
in primeval purity. The Parade was blotted out, restored to
Nature, and deep drifts of snow defended it from re-invasion.
The Casino lay forsaken, wrapped in the same soft spotless
mantle, the dual stone steps leading to its twin drinking-terraces
transformed into frozen cascades, its central gates uselessly
guarded by blanched barbed wire. Desolate was even the great
garage, with its cheap fresco of our modern goddess in the car,
her flamboyant robe turned ermine. Beyond the buried Parade,
the Adriatic rolled in sullenly, scarce visible save by a gleaming
line of surf that lit up a narrow riband of its foreground; all
but the breaking wave was hidden by a wild whirl of flakes that
misted sea and sky into a grey nullity. Throughout the whole
pleasure-city not a dog prowled nor a cat slunk nor a bird
fluttered; not a footstep profaned the splendour of its snow.
Its myriad casement-eyes were closed in heavy sleep; not a
shutter open, not a blind raised. It was a city hibernating like
some monstrous Polar animal. Not a few pleasure-cities thus
abate their vitality in the winter, but so absolute a dormitation
I have never witnessed. It seemed incredible that with the
Spring it would stir in its sleep, it would shake the snow off its
lubberly limbs, loose its gay swarm of butterfly-parasols. How
could that frost-bound terrace ever ring again with the clink of
glasses and the tinkle of laughter? How could bathers ever again
lie basking on that frigid strand? No, it was a dead city I saw,
a city overwhelmed by a new ice-age. And the seas and lands
that radiated from this snowy centre were freezing too, as science
had foretold; swiftly the deadly chill was spreading through
every vein and artery of the nipped earth, curdling its springs
and coagulating its vast oceans and crusting over even its petty
oases of continents with thick-ribbed ice in which a rare microscopic
rotifer alone preserved a germ of vitality. The Arctic
and Antarctic zones expanded towards each other, like two blind
walls closing in on life, and with a clash of giant icebergs in a
biting equatorial blast, the last rift of green earth and blue
water was blotted out. And now the globe was spinning
again in a glacial void, as unconscious of the absence of
its skin-parasites as it had been of their presence. Fated
for fresh adventures and new cosmic combinations, the planet
rolled its impassive whiteness through the dumb heavens.
But mortals had put on mortality, and of all the haughty
hopes and splendid dreams of man there remained zero. Earth,
his cradle and his pasture, was become his frigidarium and
his cemetery, and the snow fell silently over the few faint
traces of his passing. His million, million tears had been
frozen into a few icicles.
And there is an ugly Italy, an Italy veiled by the blue
heaven, but revealing itself under sullen sunless skies in all its
naked hideousness.
Nothing could be more unlike the popular conception of
Italy than the environs of the Carthusian Monastery of Pavia
in mid-February. Slushy roads about two yards wide, here and
there encumbered with fragments of brick and stone, and everywhere
bordered by heaps of snow. By one side of the road
runs a narrow ice-bound irrigation canal, geometrically straight,
across which rises the high, bare, dreary endless wall of blank
brick surrounding the monastery. On the other hand stretch
the vast fields with leafless thin trees. It was of this region
that Jehan d’Auton wrote when Pavia was taken by the French:
“Truly this is Paradise upon earth.” Even allowing for the
flowery meadows and running springs of the end of the
fifteenth century, the worthy Benedictine could have found
fairer Paradises nearer Paris. Much of Northern Italy is still
monotonous marshland. Over the bald brick wall of Mantua,
nine feet thick, that backs the Piazza sacred to Virgil, I gazed
one morning at a dismal swampy lake, a couple of barges, a
factory chimney, and spectral, leafless stumps of trees, the
brownish soil of the lake showing through the dead sullen
water, a ghost of sun hovering over rows of pollarded planes.
Here, methought, had Virgil found a suggestion for his Stygian
marsh. I would not say a word against Mantua itself, which is
most lovable, with side-canals that might be Venetian, and ever-flowing
taps and old arches, arcades and buildings. But from
Mantua to Modena I saw naught but ugly brown grass over
flat lands, with pollarded elms and vines stretched from tree to
tree. Here and there a little canal relieved the dismal plain.
Near Modena a few poplars appeared. A team of lovely oxen
drawing a cart gave the landscape its one touch of beauty.
Rimini proper is picturesque enough, with its Porto Canale
full of small barques with tall masts. But between it and
Ravenna, what desolation! Outside the town the gaunt
ruins of the Malatesta Castle—a bare wall and a bare squarish
rock—were the prelude to the same bare snowy plains, the same
little pollarded elms, varied by tall skeleton poplars. Once a
copse of firs, bowed down by snow, broke the white flatness.
Near Classe, famous for Sant’ Appolinare, the waste became
even marshier, sparse twigs of desolate shrubs alone peeping
through the white blanket. Nearer Ravenna a few signs of life
appeared, a dead cottage, or a living hovel, or a few spectral
trees, or a brick bridge over an ice-laden river. On such a
light brown marsh specked with stagnant pools the modern
Italians have put up hoardings with advertisements of cognac.
A little further East their remote progenitors put up Venice!
Never was there so apparently hopeless a site as those islands
of the lagoons, preserved from malaria only by a faint pulse of
the “tideless, dolorous midland sea.” How so marvellous a city
rose on the wooden piles of the refugees, how out of so dire a
necessity they made so rare a beauty and so mighty a force,
was always a puzzle to me till I read that these fugitives before
the Lombard Conquerors were Romans! Then it all leapt into
clearness. Venice is Rome in the key of water! The same indomitable
racial energy that had built up Rome and the Roman
Empire built up Venice and the Venetian Empire. Hunted
from Padua, the Romans are able to express themselves in water
as powerfully as in earth—to create a new empire in Italy and
the East, and build a mighty fleet, and crush the Turks, and hold
the carrying trade of the world, and for six centuries keep the
Adriatic as a private lake. And in this new Empire they are
touched by the shimmering spell of water to new creations of
joyous colour on canvas, to fairy convolutions in marble, and a
church that rises as lightly as a sea-flower. For here all that is
sternly Roman
“Doth suffer a sea-change
 Into something rich and strange.”
But let us not forget that despite her seven hills Rome also
began as a pile-village, and that the Campagna is of the same
marshy character as the soil around Venice. I have more
faith in Goethe’s intuition that Rome was built up by
herdsmen and a rabble than in the thesis, expounded by
Guglielmo Ferrero at Rome’s last birthday celebration, that it
was the carefully chosen site of a colony from Alba, with
Romulus and Remus in their traditional rôles. For though
her seven hills enabled Rome to keep her head above water,
they did not enable her to keep her feet dry. The Forum
Augusti was anciently swamp and became a swamp again in the
Middle Ages, and once some earlier form of gondola plied
between the Capitol and the Palatine Hill. Thus the races
who hailed from Rome had water in their blood, and the instinct
to build on piles. It is a strange instinct which races have
preserved and obeyed—in the foolish human fashion—even on
land that was high and dry. What wonder if it survived in
latency in these ex-Romans! Yes, Venice was Rome in the
key of water, as Rome was Venice in the key of earth. And
the Roman Church—is she not Rome in the key of heaven? Is
it not always the same racial mastery that confronts us, the
same instinct for dominance? Does the Church not hold the
after-world as Rome held the ancient world, does she not own
the lake of fire as the Doges owned the Adriatic? Drive Rome
from her throne on the hills and she builds up her pedestal
again on sea-soaked piles: hound her from the lagoons, and of
a few acres around the piazza of St. Peter she makes the seat of
a sovereignty even more boundless and majestic.
Hardly had I written this when I opened by hazard my first
edition of Byron’s “The Two Foscari” (1821), and was startled
to read in his appendix as follows: “In Lady Morgan’s fearless
and excellent work upon ‘Italy’ I perceive the expression of
‘Rome of the Ocean’ applied to Venice. The same phrase occurs
in ‘The Two Foscari.’ My publisher can vouch for me that
the tragedy was written and sent to England some time before I
had seen Lady Morgan’s work, which I only received on the 16th
of August. I hasten, however, to notice the coincidence and
to yield the originality of the phrase to her who first placed it
before the public.” Byron goes on to explain that he is the
more anxious to do this because the Grub Street hacks accuse
him of plagiarism. But turning to the tragedy itself, I find
that Byron has rather plagiarised me than the admirable
“Gloriana,” for her phrase might be a mere metaphor, whereas
Marina observes explicitly:
“And yet you see how from their banishment
 Before the Tartar into these salt isles,
 Their antique energy of mind, all that
 Remain’d of Rome for their inheritance,
 Created by degrees an ocean-Rome.”
But Byron’s over-anxiety to disavow originality was due to the
morbid state of mind induced by the aforesaid hacks, one of
whom had even accused him of having “received five hundred
pounds for writing advertisements for Day and Martin’s patent
blacking.”
“That accusation,” says Byron, “is the highest compliment
to my literary powers which I ever received.” I can only say
the same of Byron’s plagiarism from myself.
But Byron need not have been so apologetic to Lady Morgan,
for ’twas the very boast of Venice to be “the legitimate heir of
Rome,” whose Empire Doge Dandolo re-established in that
Nova Roma of Constantinople with whose art and architecture
her own is so delectably crossed.
Carnival! What a whirling word! What a vision of masks
and gaiety, militant flowers and confetti! Not farewell to
meat, but hail to merriment! Never, in sooth, does Italy show
so earthly as when, bidding adieu to the flesh and the world,
she enters into the contemplation of the tragic mystery of the
self-sacrifice of God. And yet in this grossness of popular
rejoicing lies more faith than in the frigid pieties of
the established English Church. Even the brutalities and
Jew-baitings that marked the old Roman carnival, even the
profane parodies of the Mass, sprang from a naïve vividness of
belief. Parody is merely the obverse side of reverence, and ’tis
only when you do not believe in your God that you dare not
make fun of Him or with Him. The gargoyled gutter is
as characteristic of the cathedral as the mystic rose-window.
Our revivals of miracle plays are performed in an atmosphere
of glacial awe, which was by no means the atmosphere of their
birth. This sort of reverence is too often faith fallen to freezing-point.
We remove our sense of humour as we take off our
slippers at alien mosques.
It was when faith was at its full—near the year 1000—and in
connection with the Christmas season, that the Patriarch of
Constantinople instituted the Feast of Fools and the Feast of
the Ass, travestying the most sacred persons and offices. The
Lord of Misrule is no heathen deity, but a most Christian
majesty; and King Carnival is the spiritual successor of the
old King of Saturnalia, whether Frazer be correct or not in
attributing to him the direct succession. For the truly
religious the carnival is necessary to the sanity of things. It
is an expression of the breadth and complexity of the Cosmos,
which would otherwise be missing from the Easter ritual. The
God of the grotesque is as real as the God of Gethsemane and the
Cosmos cannot be stretched on a crucifix. It bulges too oddly
for that. And it is this grotesque side of life that finds quasi-religious
expression in the Carnival processions, with their monsters
known and unknown to Nature, with their fanciful hybrids
and quaint permutations of the elements of reality. Humanity
herein records its joyous satisfaction and sympathy with that
freakish mood of Nature which produced the ornithorhynchus
and the elephant, and shaped to uncouthness, instead of to
symmetry and beauty. Alas! I fear humanity is only too
acquiescent in these deviations of the great mother into the
grotesque; the folk-spirit runs more fluently to gross pleasantry
and comic tawdriness than to the Beautiful, and many a Carnival
procession is a nightmare of concentrated ugliness.
The suspicion takes me that our St. Valentine’s Day, so
dominatingly devoted to grotesque caricature, and so coincident
with the Carnival period, is really the Catholic Carnival in
another guise and that prudish Protestantism has entertained
the devil unawares.
But the Carnival—like St. Valentine’s Day—is dying. It is
more alive in the ex-Italian Riviera than in Italy proper. I
have a memory of a Carnival at Siena which consisted mainly
of one imperturbable merry-maker stumping with giant wooden
boots through the stony alleys. A Carnival at Modena has left
even less trace—some dim sense of more crowded streets with
a rare mask. At Mantua, too, there was no set procession—children
in fancy dress, with a few adult masqueraders, alone
paid fealty to the season. At Bologna the last night of
Carnival was almost vivacious, and in the sleety colonnades
branching off from the Via Ugo Bassi there was quite a dense
crowd of promenaders defying the bitter wind, while muffled
groups, with their coat-collars up, sat drinking at the little
tables. There were some children, fantastically pranked,
attended by prosaic mothers, there was a small percentage of
masked faces, while a truly gallant cavalier (escorting a dame in
a domino) paraded his white stockings, that looked icy, across
the snowy roads. No confetti, and only an infrequent scream
of hilarity. That the old plaster missiles, with other crudities,
have disappeared, is indeed no cause for lamentation, but a
Carnival without confetti is like an omelette without eggs.
Well might a writer in the local paper, Il Resto del Carlino,
lament the brave days of old when a vast array of carriages and
masks coursed through the Via S. Mamolo, and the last days of
the Carnival were marked by jousts and tourneys, and tiltings
at the quintain, with a queen of beauty in white satin and
magnificent masqueraders showering flowers, fruits, and perfumes,
and nymphs carrying Cupid tied hand and foot.
In Cremona I made trial of a Veglione whose allurements had
been placarded for days. A Trionfo di Diana, heralded in
large letters, peculiarly suggested pomp and revelry. And
indeed I found a theatre almost as large as La Scala, illumined
by a dazzling chandelier, with four tiers of boxes resplendent
with the shoulders of women and the shirt fronts of men—tiaras,
uniforms, orders, all the spectacular social sublime. I had
not imagined that obscure Cremona—no longer famous, even
for violins—held these glittering possibilities, and it set me to
the analysis that Italian theatres—above the platea—are all
shop-front, making a brave show of a shallow audience, for the
encouragement of the actors and its own gratification, instead of
obscuring and dissipating it over back benches.
The stage and the platea had been united by an isthmus of steps
and in an enclosure sat a full orchestra. Around the musicians
danced men in evening-dress and a few ladies in masks, most of
whom, notwithstanding the superabundance of males, preferred
to dance with their own sex. This was largely what the
spectators had come out for to see, and the disproportion of the
dancers to the wilderness of onlookers was the only comic
feature of this Carnival Ball. True, a few clownish figures
clothed in green and wearing little basket hats improvised mild
romps on the stage, and occasionally from the unexpected
vantage of a box shouted down some facetious remark, but
there was no unction in them, nay not even when they capped
the joke by clapping large baskets on their heads. However,
the Trionfo di Diana still remained to account for the vast
audience, and there came a moment when an electric thrill ran
through the packed theatre, the dancing ceased, and the dancers
ranged themselves, looking eagerly towards the doors. After a
period of tense expectation, there came slowly up the platea a
few huntsmen with live dogs and stuffed hawks, and one
melancholy horn that gave a few spasmodic single toots, whereupon
appeared Diana in a scanty white robe, recumbent on a
floral car of foliage and roses, drawn by six hounds, one of
which alone rose to the humour of the occasion, and by his
inability to remain on his own side of the shaft achieved a rare
ripple of laughter, while the applause that followed his adjustment
brought quite a wave of warmth. But the chill fell
afresh, as the procession, after a cheerless turn or two on the
stage, made its exit as tamely as a spent squib. A paltrier
spectacle was never seen in a penny show.
A runner, accompanied by a cyclist, who pumped him up
with his pump, made a fresh onslaught upon our sense of fun,
but when he too trailed off equally into nothingness, I quitted
the dazzling midnight scene, leaving the beauty and fashion of
Cremona to its Carnival dissipations.
Yes, the Italian Carnival is dying. Unregretted, adds the
Anglo-French paper that serves the select circles of Rome. For
it is only the Carnival of the streets that is passing, this genteel
authority tells us reassuringly. “A far more glorious Carnival
is replacing it. In the grand cosmopolitan hotels fête succeeds
fête.”
Alas, so even the Carnival has passed over to the Magnificent
Ones, who not content with annexing the best things in their
own lands sail under their pirate flag in quest of the spoils of
every other, moving from Rome to Switzerland, from Ascot to
Cairo, with the movement of Sport or the Sun. What a change
from the days of the Roman Fathers, when religion circled round
one’s own hearth, and exile was practically excommunication!
The mother-land is no longer a mother but a mistress, to be
visited only for pleasure, and every other land is only another
odalisque, devoid of sanctities, ministress to appetites. The
Magnificent Ones of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance
at least stayed at home and minded their serfs and their
business: our modern Magnificent Ones go abroad, make new
serfs everywhere, and mind only their pleasures. And hence it
is that the festa of the Carnival whose only raison d’être was
religious, whose only justification was its spontaneity, is to be
annexed by the Magnificent Mob, ever in search of new pretexts
for new clothes and new vulgarities. The froth of pleasure is
to be skimmed off, and the cup of seriousness thrown away.
The joyousness that ushers in Lent is to be torn from its context
as the fine feathers are torn from a bird, to flutter on the
hat of a demi-mondaine. The grand cosmopolitan hotels with
the grand cosmopolitan rabble will usher in with grand cosmopolitan
dances the period of prayer and fasting, and the dying
Carnival will achieve resurrection.
As I creep humbly through this proud and prodigious Italy,
peeping into palaces and passing yearningly before masterpieces,
to the maddening chatter of concierges and sacristans, I am
constantly stumbling upon the footsteps of him who made the
grand tour in the high sense of the words. Not the British
heir of bygone centuries with his mentor and his letters of
introduction, not even his noble father with the family coach.
No, these were pigmies little taller than myself. Your sublime
tourist was Napoleon, who strode over the holy land of Beauty
like a Brobdingnagian over Lilliput. He came, he saw, he
commanded. He looked at a picture, a pillar, a statue—and
despatched it to France. He gazed at Lombard’s iron crown—and
put it on. He beheld Milan Cathedral—and it became the
scene of his coronation, with blessing of clergy and the old
feudal homage. He perceived an ornate ducal bed—and slept
in it, the poor duke a-cold. He rode through the ancient
streets, not Baedeker but cocked hat in hand, graciously
acknowledging the loyal cheers of the ancient stock. He
examined the Sacro Catino in Genoa Cathedral and bore it off
with its precious blood; he espied the rich treasure of Loreto, and
lo! it was his; he saw Lucca that it was fair, and it became his
sister Elisa’s. He visited Venice—and wound up the Republic.
He admired St. Mark’s—and haled its bronze horses to Paris,
transferring to it the Patriarchate as in compensation. The
Patriarchal Palace itself he turned into barracks; superfluous
monasteries and churches were shut up and their lands confiscated.
He even destroyed, doubtless in the same righteous
indignation, the lion’s head over “the lion’s mouth” in the
Palace of the Doges, while the Bucentaur, their gorgeous galley,
he burnt to extract the gold.
But he was not merely destructive and rapacious. The
founder of the Code Napoléon repaired the amphitheatre of
Verona, and resumed the neglected building of the façade of
Milan Cathedral, and opened up the Simplon route to Italy,
and marked its terminus by the Triumphal Arch of Milan. He
surveyed the harbour of Spezia for a war-harbour and projected
to drain Lake Trasimeno away—conceptions which to-day are
realities. And all this and a hundred other feats of construction
in the breathing-spaces of his Titanic single-handed fight
against embattled Europe. Not seldom, as I passed my wood-shop
in Venice, with its caligraphic placard All’ Ingrosso e al
Minuto, did I think of the Corsican superman, with his wholesale
and retail dealings with the little breed of mankind.
Perhaps to establish “the Kingdom of Italy,” with twenty-four
departments and his step-son as viceroy, and to turn the little
district of Bassano into a duchy for his secretary were, to
Napoleon, feats of the same apparent calibre. Even so we
stride as carelessly over a brooklet as over a puddle. Surely
there is a fascinating book to be written on Napoleon in Italy,
as a change from the countless Napoleons in St. Helena or the
flood of foolish volumes upon his mistresses.
And a final appraisement of Napoleon still remains to seek.
The little fat man who had “the genius to be loved”—except by
Joséphine and Marie Louise—and who provided for his family
by distributing thrones, has long since ceased to be the ogre
with whom British babes were frighted, though he has not yet
become Heine’s divine being done to death by British Philistinism.
Carlyle classed him among his “Heroes” and credited
him with insight because, when those around him proved there
was no God, he looked up at the stars and asked, “Who made
all that?” But this was surely no index of profundity—merely a
theism of Pure Reason and an illustration of Napoleon’s peculiar
interest in action. “Who made all that?” Making, doing, that
was his essential secret—unresting activity, rapid striking, utilisation
of every moment. He was as alert the moment after
victory as others after defeat. Was one combination destroyed,
his nimble and exhaustless energy instantly fashioned an alternative.
Mobility of brain and immobility of soul—these were
his gifts in a crisis. When all was lost and himself a captive,
“What is the use of grumbling?” he asked his attendants.
“Nothing can be done.” The tragedy of Napoleon was thus
the obverse of the tragedy of Hamlet, whose burden lay precisely
in there being something to be done. Imagine the great
demiurge at work in these days of telegraphy and steam, motor-cars
and aeroplanes. What might he not have achieved! As
it was, he just missed creating the United States of Europe.
Anatole France accuses him of having taken soldiers too
seriously. As well accuse an engineer of taking cranes and
levers too seriously. Soldiers were the indispensable instruments
by which Napoleon raised himself to the level of those more
commonplace rulers of Europe who had found their cradles
suspended on the heights. It is the German Emperor who
takes soldiers too seriously, who marshals them with the
solemnity of a child playing with his wooden regiments. And
the Kaiser, already in the purple, has not Napoleon’s excuse.
His is simply a false and reactionary view of life, as of a house-maid
who adores uniforms. But Napoleon would have played
his Machiavellian game equally with grocers; and, indeed, his
lifelong ambition to sap British commerce was conceived in the
spirit of a Titanic tradesman, who knows better than to count
corpses. He was the fifteenth-century condottiere magnified
many diameters, playing with countries and nations instead of
with towns and tribes, and sweeping in his winnings across the
green table of earth as in some game of the gods. As a Messiah
of Pure Reason, an Apostle of the People, he was able, like
Mohammed, to back the Word with the Sword, and, less
veracious than the prophet of the desert, to combine for the
making of History its two great factors of Force and Fraud.
Through him, accordingly, History made a leap, proceeding by
earthquake and catastrophe instead of by patient cumulation
and attrition. He was a cosmic force—a force of Nature, as he
truthfully claimed—a terremoto that tumbled the stagnant old
order about the ears of Courts and Churches.
True, after the earthquake the old slow, stubborn forces
reassert themselves; but the configuration of the land has been
irrevocably changed. The Maya, the illusion of Royalty, comes
slowly back, for it is a world of unreason, and even Bismarck
believed in the divine right of the princes he despised. But the
feudal order throughout Europe will never wholly recover from
the shock of Napoleon. Unfortunately, from a Messiah he
glided into a Magnificent One, and the marriage with Marie
Louise, at first perhaps a mere cold-blooded chess-move to
establish his dynasty, subtly reduced him into accepting Royalty
at its own and the popular valuation. He had married beneath
him, and Nemesis followed. The dyer’s hand was subdued to
that it worked in, and Napoleon sank into a snob. His true
Waterloo was spiritual. The actual Waterloo was a moral
victory.
Had he remained representative of the Republican or any
other principle, exile would have had no power over him; on
the contrary, it would have aggrandised his influence. But his
exile represented nothing but the moping of a banished Magnificent,
so that a generous spirit like Byron could find in his
“Ode to Napoleon,” no words too excoriating for this fallen
meanness.
And while Napoleon pined in St. Helena, Marie Louise found
promotion as Duchess of Parma, becoming her own mistress
instead of the world’s, and finding husbands nearer down to her
own level than the Corsican ex-corporal. Quite happy she must
have been, sitting on her throne under a great red baldachino, giving
audience, surrounded by her suite and her soldiers—as Antonio
Pock painted her—or smothered in diamonds at neck, waist,
earrings and hair, smirking in a low-necked dress at her crimson
and jewelled crown, as in the picture of Gian Battisti Borghesi.
Parma preserves both these portraits, but they are not so quaint
a deposit of the great Napoleonic wave as Canova’s bust of
Marie Louise as Concord!
There is in Milan a queer museum called “The Gallery of
Knowledge and Study,” the collection of which was begun by
a “Noble Milanese,” and the first catalogue of which was
published in Latin in 1666. Here, amid sea-shells, miniatures,
old maps, pottery, bronzes, silkworm analyses, and old round
mirrors in great square frames, may now be seen a pair of yellow
gloves which once covered the iron hands, together with the
cobbler’s measure of that foot which once stamped on the world.
There is an air of coquetry about the pointed toe. A captain’s
brevet, signed by the “First Consul” and headed “French
Republic,” serves as a reminder of the earlier phase. The humour
of museums has placed these relics in a case with those of
other “illustrious men”—to wit, two Popes and St. Carlo, the
dominant saint of the district (who is just celebrating his
tercentenary).
But the Triumphal Arch remains Napoleon’s chief monument
at Milan, though it is become a sort of Vicar of Bray in stone.
For when Napoleon fell, the Austrian Emperor replaced the
chronicle of French victories by bas-reliefs of defeats, and
re-christened it an Arch of Peace. And when in turn Lombardy
was liberated by Victor Emmanuel, new inscriptions converted
it into an Arch of Freedom. One can imagine the stone
singing, like the Temple of Memnon at sunrise:
“But whatsoever king shall reign,
 Still I’ll be the Arch of Triumph.”
And in Ferrara there is a Triumphal Column no less inconstant.
Designed to support the statue of Duke Ercole I, it was annexed
by Pope Alexander VII, who was deposed by Napoleon, whose
statue has now been replaced by Ariosto’s. Whether the ducal-papal-military-poetic
pillar supports its ultimate statue, we may
doubt, though a poet seems less obnoxious to political passion
than the other sorts of hero.
Such mutations in the significance of monuments, however
they deface and blur history, are not unnatural amid the vicissitudes
of Italy: and, after all, an arch or a pillar is but an arch
or a pillar.
But even a statue that keeps its place is not safe from
supersession. In Rimini in 1614 the Commune, grateful to the
Pope (Paolo V), commemorated him in bronze in the beautiful
Piazza of the Fountain, the Fountain whose harmonious fall
pleased the ear of Leonardo da Vinci. The monument is elaborate
and handsome, with bas-reliefs in the seat and in the Papal
mantle, showing in one place the city in perspective. But during
the Cisalpine Republic, thanks again to Napoleon, no Pope
could keep his place in Rimini, and as the simplest way of
preserving him on this favoured site, the municipality erased his
epitaph and re-christened him Saint Gaudenzo. Gaudenzo was
the martyr Bishop of Rimini, the Protector of the City. This
unearned increment was not the Saint’s first, for the Church of
S. Gaudenzo had been erected on the basis of a Temple of Jove.
To annex the glories of both Jove and Pope is indeed a singular
fortune, even in the ironic changes and chances we call history.
But Napoleon, in the days when he ordered the Temple of
Malatesta to be the Cathedral of Rimini, was annexing even the
functions of both Pope and Jove. For he was also rearranging
Europe after Austerlitz and giving the quietus to the Holy
Roman Empire.
Only second to the impact of Napoleon on Europe was the
impact of Byron. ’Tis Cæsar and Hamlet in contemporary
antithesis, for Professor Minto has well said that Byron played
Hamlet with the world for his stage. While Byron was
soliloquising with his pen, Napoleon was energising with his
sword, and whether the pen was really the mightier of the twain
is a nice thesis for debating societies. But in Italy, and by the
greatest modern Italian poet, Byron has been acclaimed as a
man of action. In my hotel in Bologna the landlord had
piously—or with an eye to custom—suspended a tablet, commissioned
from Carducci, whereof a translation would run as
follows:
 
“Here
In August and September 1819
Lodged
And Conspired for Liberty
George Gordon, Lord Byron,
Who Gave to Greece His Life,
To Italy His Heart and Talent,
Than Who
None Arose Among The Moderns More Potent
To Accompany Poetry With Action,
None More Piously Inclined
To Sing The Glories and Adventures
Of our People.”
 
An epigraph, I fear, involving some poetic licence. True, of
course, that no modern poet’s life or work, save Browning’s, is
so interpenetrated with Italy. But Byron’s amateur relation
with the futile Italian conspirators of the generation before
Garibaldi was a somewhat shadowy contact with action, however
generous his impatient ardour for Italy’s resurrection.
Vaporous, too, was the conspiracy of “The Liberal” to pour
new wine into the old British beer-bottle. But even his
membership of the Greek committee or the equipment of a
bellicose brig against Turkey, or his abortive appointment as
Commander-in-Chief in an expedition against Lepanto, scarcely
brings Byron into the category of men of action. He had never
the chance of sloughing Hamlet for Cæsar or even for the
Corsair. It was not even given him to die in battle, as he so
ardently desired in the last verse of his last poem. And
though his Hellenic fervour redeemed his closing days from
despair and degradation, still the fever which slew him at
Missolonghi hardly warrants the claim that he gave his life for
Greece. Had his microbe met him in marshy Ravenna instead
of marshy Missolonghi, would it have been said that he died
for Italy? For aught we know his sea voyage from Genoa to
Greece may have lengthened his life.
Moreover it was as an ideologue that Byron plunged into affairs.
For the Greeks whom he set out to deliver figured in his mind
as direct, if degenerate, descendants of the great free spirits of
old, the creators of Hellenic culture: the reality was a priest-ridden
population debased by Slav stocks.
Byron had indeed an opulence of temperament which naturally
spilt over into action. Like Sir Walter Scott, he was larger
than a writing man, and he brought the Scott sanity rather
than the Byronic ebullience into his three months’ work at
Missolonghi, holding himself aloof from factions and thus
reconciling them in him, throwing his weight on the side of
humanity, and even rising beyond his disappointment in the
Greeks to perceive that their very failings made their regeneration
only the more necessary. There was certainly in him the
making of a leader of men. Nevertheless cerebral ferment and
not conspiring for liberty was his essential form of activity.
That cerebral ferment was never more ebullient and continuous
than in those years of Italy and the Countess Guiccioli.
Ravenna was his favourite town, and action is not precisely the
note of Ravenna at whose town-gate I read with my own eyes a
fabulous prohibition against vehicular traffic in the streets.
But did we concede Carducci’s claim to the full, and even
supplement it by Byron’s passing eagerness to mould British
politics, the Italian poet’s characterisation of him as the most
striking modern instance of the union of poetry and action, is
a startling reminder of the poverty and vacuousness of the
chronicle of singing men of affairs. If Byron be indeed Eclipse,
truly the rest are nowhere. And the question arises, why the
modern man should be so artificially bifurcated. Æschylus
was both soldier and poet. Cæsar not only made history but
wrote it. Dante was Prior of Florence.
“In rebus publicis administrans,” says the inscription on the
absurd tomb of Ariosto, and we know that Duke Alfonso sent
him to suppress bands of robbers in lawless Garfagnana as well
as on that even more formidable expedition to the Terrible
Pontiff who had excommunicated the ruler of Ferrara. Chaucer
was a diplomatist and Government Official. The ethereal singer
of “The Faerie Queene” shared in the bloody attempt at the
Pacification of Ireland. Milton, that virulent pamphleteer,
barely escaped the block. Goethe administered Weimar.
Victor Hugo, like Dante, achieved exile. Björnson contributed
to the independence of Norway. The notion of a poet
as aloof from life seems to be largely modern and peculiarly
British. Shelley is probably responsible for this conception of
the “beautiful and ineffectual angel,” and in our own day
Swinburne has helped to carry on the legend. But Swinburne’s
fellow-poet, the self-styled “Singer of an empty day,” was
precisely the poet who had the largest relations with life, and
whose wall-papers have spread to circles where his poetry is
unknown or unread.
You may say that Virgil, who was neither modern nor British,
practised the same attitude of detachment, the same exclusive
self-consecration to letters as Wordsworth or Tennyson. But
Virgil had a people to express, and Wordsworth and Tennyson
were passionate politicians, if they made no incursions into
action proper. You may urge that the bards, skalds, minstrels,
troubadours, ballad-mongers, jongleurs, have always been a
class apart from action, but these were at least lauders of action,
laureates of lords, while even the Minnesingers celebrated less their
own mistresses than those of the heroes. ’Tis a parasitism upon
action, to which indeed the meek and prostrate Kipling would
confine the rôle of letters.
But why should the power to feel and express the finer
flavours of life and language paralyse the capacity for action?
In the sanest souls both functions would co-exist in almost
equal proportions. Sword in one hand and trowel in the other,
Ezra’s Jews rebuilt the Temple, and the new Jerusalem will not
rise till we can hold both trowel and tablet. In that Platonic
millennium poets must be kings and kings poets.
That fantastic, mutilated, myopic, and inefficient being, known
as “the practical man,” sniffs suspiciously at all movements that
have thought or imagination, or an ideal for their inspiration.
It may be conceded to this crippled soul that action can never
take the rigid lines of theory, and that the forces of deflection
must modify, if not indeed prevail over, the à priori pattern.
But he is not truly a thinker whose thought cannot allow for
these deviations in practice, which are as foreseeable (if not as
exactly computable) as the retardation, acceleration or aberration
of a planet by the pull of every other within whose attraction
it rolls. Action is not pure thought but applied thinking—a
species of engineering over, through, or around mountains, and
opposing private domains. “Life caricatures our concepts,” a
dreamer complained to me, after he had stepped down into
politics. Is it not perhaps that our concepts caricature life?
Life is too fluid and asymmetric to bear these fixed forms of
constructive polity, and Lord Acton tells us that in the whole
course of history no such rounded scheme has ever found
fulfilment. I do not wonder.
But the poet who has never acted on the stage of affairs is
moving in a padded world of words, and the hero who has never
sung, or at least thrilled with the music in him, is only sub-human.
The divorce of life and letters tends to sterilise letters
and to brutalise life. The British mistrust of poetry in affairs
has a solid basis—of stupidity. Imagination, which is the
essential factor in all science, is esteemed a Jack o’ Lantern to
lure astray. And to tap one’s way along, inch by inch, without
any light at all, is held the surest method of progression.
But Italy, which has known Mazzini, is, I trust, for ever saved
from this Anglo-Saxon shallowness.
“A Revolution is the passing of an idea from theory into
practice,” said Mazzini. And again, “Those who sunder
Thought and Action dismember God and deny the eternal
Unity of things.” Pensiero e Azione was the significant title
of the journal he founded to bring about the redemption of
Italy. Garibaldi too was a dreamer, who even wrote poetry.
Cavour, the most worldly of the trio of Italian saviours, owes
his greatness precisely to the imagination which could use all
means and all men to educe the foreseen end.
A sharp distinction should be drawn between those who dream
with their eyes open, and those who dream with their eyes shut.
What Cavour saw was in congruity with fact and possibility.
Prevision is not perversion. As our modern watcher of the
skies received the photograph of Halley’s Comet upon his plate
half a year before it became visible to the eye, and months before
it revealed itself to the farthest-piercing telescope, so upon the
sensitised soul coming events cast their configurations before.
This foresight of insight has naught in common with the nightmares
and chimæras of sleep. “The prophetic soul of the wide
world dreaming on things to come” admits the elect to glimpses
of its dream. These be the prophets, conduits through which
the universe arrives at self-consciousness, as the heroes are the
conduits through which it arrives at self-amelioration.
In a room leading to the Senate in the Ducal Palace of Venice
I was looking at a picture by Contarini of the conquest of
Verona by the Venetians in 1405.
’Twas a farrago of fine confused painting, horses asprawl over
the dead and wounded, men in armour driving their daggers
home in the prostrate huddled forms, galloping chargers
viciously spurred by helmeted knights with swirling swords, in
brief an orgie of wild and whirling devilry. The pity of it, I
thought, Verona and Venice, those two fairy sisters, each
magically enthroned on beauty, members of the same Venetia,
peopled with the same stock, speaking almost the same dialect,
why must they be at each other’s throat? And this revelry
of devilry might, I knew, equally serve for Venice’s conquest
of any other of her neighbours in that wonderful fighting
fifteenth century of hers, when she must needs set up her
winged lion in every market place.
And these rivalries of Venice and her neighbour-towns, I
recalled, were only part of the universal urban warfare—Genoa
against Pisa, Siena against Florence, Gubbio against Perugia;
these again breaking into smaller circles of contention, or intersected
with larger, party against party, faction against faction,
guild against guild, Guelph against Ghibelline, Montague
against Capulet, Oddi against Baglioni, popolani against grandi,
provinces against invaders, blood-feuds horrific, innumerable,
the Guelph-Ghibelline contest alone involving 7200 revolutions
and 700 massacres in its three centuries! And yet there is a
reverse to the shield, and a iewelled scabbard to the sword.
I stood later in the Palazzo Malaspina of Pavia where,
tradition says, the imprisoned Boëthius composed “The Consolations
of Philosophy,” and here in a vestibule my eye was
caught by a fragment of gilded gate hung aloft, and running
to read the explanatory inscription, I found it—in translation—as
follows:
 
“These Remnants of the Old Gates of Pavia
Thrice Trophies in Civil Wars
By a Magnanimous Thought Restored by Ravenna
Are To-day an Occasion for Rejoicing
Betwixt the Two Cities Desirous
Of Changing the Vestiges of the Old Discords
Into Pledges of Union & Patriotic Love
The XIII day of September MDCCCLXXVIII”
 
Un magnanimo pensiero, indeed! And—like the chains of Pisa’s
ancient harbour restored by Genoa—a pleasant sequel to the
noble common struggle for Italian independence. And yet—the
advocatus diaboli whispered me, or was it the shade of
Boëthius in quest of “The Consolations of Phlebotomy”?—“What
has become of Pavia, what of Ravenna, since they
ceased to let each other’s blood? Where is the Pavia of a
hundred towers, where is the Castello reared and enriched by
generations of Visconti Dukes, and its University, once the
finest in Italy, at which Petrarch held a chair; where is the
opulence of life that flowed over into the Certosa, now arid in
its mausolean magnificence? Where is the Ravenna whose
lawyers were as proverbial in the eleventh century as Philadelphia’s
are to-day, where is that hotbed of heresy which
nourished the great anti-Pope Guibert? Where is even the
Ravenna of Guido da Polenta, protector of Dante? Apt
indeed to hold only Dante’s tomb. And its young men who bawl
out choruses of a Sunday night till the small hours—do they
even deserve the shrine of the poet of Christendom? And
Venice? And Verona? And the Rimini of the sixty galleys?
What have they gained from their colourless absorption into a
United Italy, compared with what they have lost—had indeed
already lost—of peculiar and passionate existence? Are there
two gentlemen of Verona now in whom we take a scintilla of
interest? Is there a merchant of Venice whose ventures concern
us a jot? Is there a single Antonio with argosies bound for
Tripolis and the Indies?” “Your Ben Jonson,” and by his
wide posthumous reading I knew ’twas Boëthius speaking now,
“said ‘in short measures life may perfect be.’ He should have
said ‘in small circles’ and, perhaps, ‘only in small circles.’ All
America—with its vasty breadths—stands to-day without a
single man of the first order.”
“’Tis not even”—put in the advocatus diaboli, betrayed by his
unphilosophic chuckle—“as if the destruction of small patriotisms
meant the destruction of war. Pavia and Ravenna,” he
pointed out mischievously, “must continue to fight—as part of
the totality, Italy. And behold,” quoth he, drawing my eyes
towards the Piazza Castello, “the significance of that old
castle’s metamorphosis into a barrack—the poetry of war
turned to prose, the frescoes of the old Pavian and Cremonese
painters faded, perhaps even whitewashed over, and rough
Government soldiers drilling where the Dukes played pall-mall.
Gone is that rich concreteness of local strife, attenuated by its
expansion into a national animosity; not insubstantial indeed
under stress of invasion, but shadowy and unreal when the
casus belli is remote, and by the manœuvres of my friends, the
international diplomatists, the Pavian or Ravennese finds himself
fighting on behalf of peoples with whom alliance is transitory
and artificial.”
“But he will not find himself fighting so often,” I rejoined.
“Countries do not join battle as recklessly as cities. The larger
the bulk the slower the turning to bite.” “And meantime,”
interposed the philosophic shade, “the war-tax in peace is
heavier than anciently in war. And neither in war nor in peace
can there be the joy of fighting that comes from personal keenness
in the issue. The wars of town with town, of sect with
sect, of neighbour with neighbour, so far from being fratricidal
and unnatural, are the only human forms of war. ’Tis only
neighbours that can feel what they are fighting for, ’tis only
brothers that can fight with unction. The very likeness of
brothers, their intimate acquaintance with the points of community,
gives them an acute sense of the points of difference,
and provides their combat with a solid standing-ground at the
bar of reason. Least irrational of all internecion were the
fratricide of twins. Save the war of self-defence, civil war is
the only legitimate form of war. Military war—how monstrous
the sound, what a clanking of mailed battalions! Your Bacon
betrays but a shallow and conventional sense of ‘The True
Greatness of Kingdoms,’ when he compares civil war to the
heat of a fever, and foreign war to the heat of exercise which
serves to keep the body in health. For what is foreign war but
an arrogance of evil life, an inhuman sport, a fiendish trial of
skill? Why should a home-born Briton ever fight a Russian?
His boundaries are nowhere contiguous with the Russian’s, his
very notion of a Russ is mythical. ’Tis a cold-blooded war-game
into which he is thrust from above. What’s Hecuba to
him or he to Hecuba? Other is it with warfare that is personal,
profoundly felt. Civil war—how sacred, how close to
men’s bosoms! When Greek meets Greek, then comes the tug
of war.”
“In religious wars, too,” eagerly interrupted the advocatus
diaboli, “’tis nearness that is the justification—Homoousian
versus Homoiousian. Why in heaven’s name,” he added with a
spice of malice, “should a Mussulman cry haro against a Parsee,
or a Shintoist against a Mormon? Here, too, the boundaries
are not contiguous; ’twere the duel of whale and elephant. ’Tis
the Christian sects that must naturally torture and murder one
another,” he wound up triumphantly.
“Ay indeed,” serenely assented the shade of Boëthius. “If
fighting is to be done at all, let it be between brothers and not
between strangers. Where ‘a hair perhaps divides the False and
True’ ’tis of paramount importance to determine on which side
of the hair we should stand. This rigid accuracy is the glory
of Science—why should not our decimal be correct to nine
places even in Religion? Why wave aside these sharp differences
for which the men of my day were willing to pay with their
lives? When your Alfred the Great translated my magnum
opus, or even as late as when your Chaucer honoured me with
a modern version, these questions could vie in holy intensity,
almost with your latter-day questions of Free Trade and Tariff
Reform.”
“Ah, the palmy days of martyrdom,” sighed the advocatus
diaboli, “when men were literally aflame for filioque or
Immaculate Conception. O for the fiery Arians, Gnostics,
Marcionites, Valentinians, Socinians, Montanists, Donatists,
Iconoclasts, Arnoldites, Pelagians, Monophysites, Calixtines,
Paulicians, Hussites, Cathari, Albigenses, Waldenses, Bogomilians,
Calvinists, Mennonites, Baptists, Anabaptists——”
“Surely you would not call Baptists fiery?” I interjected
feebly. He had apparently no sense of humour, this advocatus,
for he went on coldly: “How tame and disappointing these
latter-day sectarians: these Methodists, Plymouth Brethren,
Christian Scientists, Irvingites, Christadelphians, ‘et hoc genus
omne.’ I did have a flash of hope when your Methodists
began to split up into Wesleyans, Protestant Methodists,
Reformers, Primitives, Bryanites and the like, whose bitter
brotherly differences seemed to show the old sacrosanct concern
for the minutiæ of Truth and Practice. But no! no one
believes nowadays, for nobody burns his fellow-Christian. Even
the burning words of your King’s Declaration——!”
“August shade,” I interrupted, pointedly addressing myself
to the last of the Roman philosophers, “I concede that when
Christianity founded itself on texts, an infinite perspective of
homicidal homiletics lay open to the ingenuous and the
ingenious. And so long as Heaven and Hell turned on dogma
and ritual, an infinite significance attached to the difference
between the theological tweedledum and the theological
tweedledee, so that it is just dimly conceivable one might
murder one’s neighbour for his own good or the greater glory
of God. But do not tell me that to-day, too, the test of belief
is bloodshed.”
“Immo vero,” cried the Roman shade emphatically. “Was I
not clubbed to death because I believed in Justice and combated
the extortions of the Goths? A belief for which we would not
die or kill, what is it?”
“A bloodless belief,” chuckled the advocatus diaboli, who, I
suddenly remembered, was more legitimately entitled the
defensor fidei.
“Il Calavrese abate Giovacchino
 Di spirito profetico dotato.”
Dante: Paradiso, Canto xii.
“Pater imposuit laborem legis, qui timor est; filius
imposuit laborem disciplinæ, qui sapientia est; spiritus
sanctus exhibet libertatem, quæ amor est.”
Joachim of Flora: Liber Concordiæ, ii.
“Italy is too long,” said the Italian. We were coming into
Turin in the dawn, amid burning mountains of rosy snow, and
the train was moving slowly, in hesitation, with pauses for
reflection. “The line is single in places,” he explained. “Italy
is too narrow, too cramped by mountain-chains, and above all
too long. It is the trouble behind all our politics. There are
three Italies, three horizontal strata, that do not interfuse—the
industrial and intelligent North, the stagnant and superstitious
South, and the centre with Rome which is betwixt and
between.”
“But there is far more clericalism in the North than the
South,” I said. “The Church party is a political force.”
“Precisely what proves my case. In the North everything
is more efficient, even to the forces of reaction. The clericals
are better organised, and are, moreover, supported by the
propertied atheists in the interests of order. But the North is
Europe—Germany, if you will—the South is already Africa.”
The train stopped again. He groaned. “No unity possible.”
“No unity?” I exclaimed. “And what about Garibaldi and
Mazzini and United Italy?”
“It is a phrase. Italy is too long.”
I pondered over his words, and in imagination I saw again
all the Risorgimento museums, all the tablets in all the loggias
and town halls recording those who had died for the Union of
Italy, all the statues of all the heroes, all the streets and piazzas
dedicated to them, while in my ears resounded all the artillery
of applause booming at that very moment throughout the length
and narrowness of Italy in celebration of the Jubilee of the
Departure of the Thousand from Quarto.
Any one who goes to Italy for the Renaissance will find the
Risorgimento a discordant obsession; flaunting itself as it does
in brand new statues and monuments whose incongruity of colour
or form destroys the mellow unity of old Cathedral-Piazzas or
Castello-courtyards. Florence has managed to hush up the
Risorgimento in back streets or unobtrusive tablets, and Venice
with her abundance of Campi has stowed it out of sight, though
Victor Emmanuel ramps on horseback not far from the Bridge
of Sighs, and “three youths who died for their country” intrude
among the tombs of the Doges. The essence of Pisa is preserved
by its isolation from life, leaving Mazzini to dominate the city of
his death. But the majority of the old towns are devastated by
the new national heroes—admirable and vigorous as the sculpture
sometimes is—even as the old historic landmarks are
obliterated by the new street names. And in addition to the
pervasive quartette—Garibaldi, Cavour, Victor Emmanuel,
Mazzini—local heroes aggravate the ruin of antiquity. Daniele
Manin thrones in Venice over a winged lion sprawling beneath
a triton; Ricasoli, “the iron Baron,” rules in Tuscany; Pavia is
sacred to the Cairoli; Minghetti runs through the Romagna;
Crispi through the South; Genoa devotes a street, a square, and
a bronze statue to Bixio, the Boanerges of the epic; Viareggio
has just put up a tablet to Rosolino Pilo and Giovanni Corrao,
the daring precursors of the Thousand; even Rubattino—patriot
in his own despite—has his statue in Genoa harbour,
on the false ground that he put his shipping line at
Garibaldi’s disposal. ’Tis a very shower of stones, falling on
the just and the unjust alike. And sometimes—as at Asti—all
the Heroes are United beneath a riot of granite monoliths
and marble lions.
And even the ubiquitous heroes have peculiar glory in their
peculiar haunts. Cavour is gigantic at Ancona (probably
because the town was freed by Piedmontese troops); he stands
in the castle of Verona, over-brooded by snow mountains: at
Turin, his birthplace, Fame wildly clasps him to her breast in
a mammoth monument, crying, “Audace, prudente, libero
Italia.”
A Vanity Fair without a hero I have never chanced on.
Little Chiavari has its grandiose angel-strewn monument to
Victor Emmanuel, whom Parma likewise exhibits flourishing his
sword; Pesaro breaks out in tablets to those who died fighting
“the hirelings of the Theocracy”; Rimini has a Piazza Cavour;
priest-ridden Vicenza shelters a statue of Mazzini; Assisi itself,
waking from its saintly slumber, consecrates a Piazzetta to
Garibaldi, and a street to the Twentieth of September on which
Italian troops broke into Rome!
Ah, Garibaldi, Garibaldi, how thou didst weigh on my
wanderings! From Mantua to Ferrara, from Spoleto to
Perugia, Garibaldi, always Garibaldi. I fled to dead Ravenna,
lo! thou didst tower in the very Piazza of Byron; to Parma, and
rugged, imposing, in thy legendary cap, leaning on thy sword,
thou didst obsess the Piazza Garibaldi; to Rome itself, and
twenty feet high, thou impendedst in bronze, with battle pieces
and allegories around thee; I retreated to the extremest point
of the Peninsula, and found myself in the Corso Garibaldi of
Reggio; I crossed to Sicily, only to stumble against thy great
horse in Palermo and the monument to thy valour in Calatafimi.
For of the statesman, the monarch, the prophet and the soldier
who combined to redeem Italy, it is naturally the soldier that
is stamped most vividly on the popular imagination, the noble
freelance whom the mob deemed divine even before his death,
whose memory the people has rescued from the anti-climax of
his end, selecting away his follies and mistakes and idealising his
virtues, under the artistic law of mythopoiesis, till, shaped and
perfected for eternal service, the national hero shines immaculate
in his sacred niche.
And yet, as the streets show, even the popular imagination
has realised that the soldier would not have sufficed. Thrice
blessed, indeed, was Italy to possess Cavour and Mazzini at the
same hour as Garibaldi. It is a fallacy to suppose that the
hour always finds the man, or the man the hour, or that “il n’y a
pas d’homme indispensable.” Many an hour passes away without
its man, as many a man without his hour. Great men perish,
wasted, because there are no forces for them to synthetise:
great forces remain inarticulate, unorganised and ineffective,
because they have found no leader to be their conduit. All the
more marvellous that Italy should have produced simultaneously
three indispensable men, Mazzini, Cavour, and Garibaldi, each
of whom had something of the other two, yet something unique
of his own. None of the three quite understood the others, and
Mazzini, who was much like Ibsen’s Brand, was even more
intolerant than Garibaldi of the Machiavellian policies of
Cavour, and had to be swept aside as a visionary. For one
heroic, impossible moment, indeed, the spirit triumphed, the
Republic of Rome was born, and idealism enjoyed perhaps its
sole run of power in human history. But with the disappearance
of the Republic, Mazzini might have disappeared too, for
all his influence upon the political Risorgimento; did indeed
practically disappear by acquiescing in the battle-flag of
Monarchy. Garibaldi and Cavour sufficed to create the combination
of Force and Fraud by which political history is
made. For though, if any sword might ever bear the words
I saw on a sword graven by Donatello—“Valore e Giustitia”—that
sword was Garibaldi’s, and if ever passion was patriotic
it was Cavour’s, nevertheless the liberation of Italy did
not escape being achieved by the usual factors of Force and
Fraud.
And, in addition to all these busts, statues, allegories, tablets,
pillars, cairns, lions, bas-reliefs, wreaths, lists of heroes, records
of plébiscites anent annexations, loggias whence Garibaldi orated;
in addition to all the Piazze Garibaldi and Victor Emmanuel,
all the Corsi Cavour and Mazzini, all the streets of the Twentieth
of September and other heroic dates, there is the specific Museum
of the Risorgimento from which no tiniest town is immune.
To see one is practically to see all. With the same piety with
which their ancestors collected the relics of the saints, the
modern Italians have collected the relics of their heroes and the
war—swords, sticks, photographs, crude paintings and engravings,
old hats, letters, tricolour scarves, medals, pictures, patriotic
money, helmets, epaulettes, broken bombs, cannon-balls, cartoons,
caricatures, faded wreaths, autographs, sculptures, crosses,
proclamations, prayer-books, pictures of steamers conveying
insurgents! And Garibaldi! What town has not some shred
of the “Genius of Liberty,” as the tablet in the old castle of
Ferrara styles him—his flask, his sword, his shirt, his
gun, his letters, his telegrams! Peculiarly sacred is the red
shirt which he wore at Aspromonte, though it recalls the ironic
fact that when the charmed, invincible hero was at last wounded
and captured, it was by soldiers of the king he had created and
of the Italy whose triumph he was seeking to consummate.
Something Miltonic seems to emanate from that red shirt:
“That flaming shirt which Garibaldi wore
 At Aspromonte.”
But for the rest, all these relics are as ugly as the relics of the
saints. Beautiful and exalting as are the Museums in reality,
with their record of sacrifice and patriotism in one of the most
wonderful chapters of history, infinitely touching as is every
yellow letter or worn glove, when imagination has transfused
it, these glass cases are outwardly depressing to the last
degree—a warning to the Realist, and a proof that Art in
expressing the soul of a phenomenon is infinitely truer in its
beauty than Nature unselected and unadorned. The wooden-legged
curator of Bologna, who lost his leg at Solferino, is a
mere stumping old bore; the little photograph of twenty-four
Garibaldians minus arms or with crutches is simply discomforting.
Even the story of the modern mother of the
Gracchi, Adelaide Cairoli, who gave four sons to her country,
exhales but tepidly from the picture at Pavia of a middle-aged
lady in a bonnet surrounded by young soldiers in variegated
costumes.
“Leonessa d’Italia,” cried Carducci to Brescia, and the one
word of the poet wipes out all the crude photographs and
grandiose inscriptions by which that seemingly prosaic town
asserts its heroism; one ceases even to smile at the tablet at
the foot of the castle hill, veiling a defeat in the guise of
ferocious Austrian charges, “frequently” repulsed. From a
mock passport of Radetsky in the Vicenza Museum I got a
more vivid sense of the racial hatred than from all the relics
and tablets: “Birth: Bastard of the seven deadly sins. Age:
Eighty-two, sixty-five of which have been passed in robbing
Austria of the money she stole. Eyes: Of a bird of prey.
Nose: Of a Jew. Mouth: Open for the swallowing of divorce!
Beard: Nothing. Hair: Enough. Visage: Not human.
Occupation: Projector of Conquests. On the field of battle
always at the tail; in the destruction of unarmed cities always
at the head. Country: No country will own him. Signature:
The last five days of his stay in Milan have paralysed him and
he cannot sign. Visé: Good for nowhere.” And my most
lively realisation of the transformation wrought in Europe
since 1820 came, not from a Risorgimento museum nor from an
official history, but from a black-and-white engraving of
Raphael’s Sposalizio “dedicated humbly” by Giuseppe Longhi
in 1820 “to the Imperial Royal Apostolical Majesty of
Francesco I, Emperor of Austria, King of Jerusalem, Hungary,
Bohemia, Lombardy, Venice, Dalmatia, Sclavonia, Galicia,
Laodomiria, Illyria, &c. &c.”
Even those streets or buildings that are free from the Risorgimento
are pitted with records or statues. Padua records
with equal pride how Dante had his exile sweetened by the
hospitality of Carrara da Giotto, and how Giovanni Prati,
the singer of to-day, lived in the Via del Santo. Verona celebrates
impartially Catullus and some minor poet whose name I
forget, if I ever knew it, “who by making sweet verses obtained
a fame more than Italian.” Ferrara has a positive leprosy of
white plaques. Bassano is not a great city, but “there is
enough celebrity in Bassano,” writes Mr. Howells, “to supply
the whole world.” Things were apparently not always thus;
for when Childe Harold went on his pilgrimage he demanded to
know where Dante, Petrarch, and Boccaccio were buried.
                “Are they resolved to dust,
And have their country’s marbles naught to say?
Could not her quarries furnish forth one bust?”
Could her quarries possibly furnish forth one more bust, was the
question that came to me on my later pilgrimage. Too much
to say have their country’s marbles. No poet could lodge a
night at a house but for all time his visit must be graven;
every local lawyer or engineer is become a world-wonder; it is
recorded where “the inventor of the perpetual electric motor”
died; even an assassination must be eternalised in a tablet. As
for a room in which conspirators met to smoke and plot, it is for
ever glorified and sanctified.
I was relieved, when I did go to Carrara,
“Nei monti di Luni, dove ronca
 Lo Carrarese,”
to find the supply of marble from its fabular mountains still held
out, but the chief occupation of the town seemed to consist in cutting
it into slabs with great many-bladed machines. Slowly the
grim knives descended, slicing the stone, while a spray moved to
and fro to prevent its overheating by friction. And as I watched
these plaques gradually grinding into separate existence, I heard
them beginning to babble their lapidary language, bursting into
eloquent inscriptions to unknown celebrities—chemists, town
councillors, hydrographers, economists—nay, commemorating the
Risorgimento itself in some village yet ungrown. “Rome or
Death,” they cried stonily, and “Italy to her Sons,”and “Ci siamo
e ci resteremo.” And the knives sank lower and lower, and the
glories rose higher and higher, and the spray, hissing, continued
to throw cold water on the enthusiasm, like some cynic observing
it was easier to celebrate the old heroism than under its continuous
inspiration to create the new. Carrara itself—though one would
think it took marbles as a confectioner takes tarts—has its memorials
of Garibaldi and Mazzini, besides that more ancient monument
to Maria Beatrice overbrooded by the magic mountains.
To what cause shall we ascribe this hypertrophy of self-consciousness
since Childe Harold’s day? Is it due to the
Risorgimento, or the pleasure-pilgrims, or is some of it inspired
by William Walton, canny British Guglielmo, to whom the
municipality of Carrara has erected one of his own tablets for
his services in stimulating the industry? Is it William Walton
who forces all this glory upon Italy? Is it he who creates all
this hero-worship? Perugino is no new discovery, yet not till
1865—341 years after his death—did the Commune of Perugia
put up a tablet on that steep street which leads to his modest
one-storied house, while Carducci, though not even a native,
already looks out from the Carducci Gardens towards the rolling
snow-mountains on the horizon. To this same 1865 belongs
the imposing Dante Monument in the Piazza Santa Croce of
Florence. But the six-hundredth anniversary of a poet is a
trifle late for his appearance in his native city. True, it had
taken him only two hundred years to force his way into
Florence Cathedral, but that was merely as a painting on wood.
The statue of Correggio in Parma (of course in the Piazza
Garibaldi) was not erected till 1870. Tasso has been “the
great unhappy poet” for three centuries. Yet not till 1895
did Urbino think it necessary to record his visit to the city as
the guest of Federigo Bonaventura. As for Raphael, Urbino’s
own wonder-child, that thirty-six foot monument to him dates
only from 1897! All these testimonials to Art would be a little
more convincing if the straight iron bridges with which Venice
and Verona have insulted their fairy waters, did not prove—like
the flamboyant technique of the modern Italian painter—that
Italy has left her art period irrevocably behind.
And the great knives of Carrara go grinding on, “ohne Hast,
ohne Rast,” inexorably supplying celebrity. Like the Greece
of the decadence, Italy has reached its stone age, an age which
seems the symptom of spent vigour, the petrifaction of what
once was vital. Nor is it easy to recognise Mazzini’s soldiers of
humanity in a nation whose prophet is d’Annunzio, whose
“smart set” repeats the morals of the Renaissance without its
genius, whose masses appear to spend their lives in lounging
about the streets smoking long black slow-lighting cigars, or
patronising the innumerable pastrycooks. It seems a slight
return for all the heroic agony of the Risorgimento that Europe
should be supplied with an efficient type of restaurant, and a
vividly gesturing waiter, who dissects himself in discussing the
carving of the joint.
“Scuola di magnanimi Sensi,
 Auspicata promessa dell’ Avvenire”
cries a memorial tablet at Brescia, but the ennoblement and
the promise of the future are less obvious than the orgy of
nationalistic sentiment. And when I read how at the recent
meeting in North Italy between their King and the Czar,
Italian citizens submitted to being treated like Russians during
a royal progress; herded outside the town while within it every
door was bolted and every blind drawn, as though ’twas indeed
the funeral of freedom, I felt how justified was Mazzini’s
unwillingness to resurrect under a monarchy. And when I
think of the great equestrian monument to Victor Emmanuel II
which is to commemorate in 1911 the jubilee of the dynasty’s
sovereignty over United Italy—the monument that will cost a
hundred million lire, and in the belly of whose horse a lunch
d’onore was recently offered by the proprietor of the foundry to
the engineers and artisans, “twenty-six persons in all”—I see
how wise was Mazzini’s protest against the narrowing down of
a great spiritual movement to the acquisition of more territory
by a reigning house. It was a commercial traveller who
proudly directed my attention to this equine lunch, and this
standard of greatness just suits a commercial nation. In this
Gargantuan horse the whole millennial dream of Mazzini may
end, and those young heroes of freedom, whose deaths lay so
heavy on his conscience in his black moments, may have died
but to add another to the family party of monarchs who regard
the rest of humanity as a subject-race, transferable from one to
the other by conquest or treaty.
However valuable a King may be to Italy as a symbol of
Unity, Mazzini was historically accurate when he pointed out
that the conception of kingship has no roots in Italy, the one
epoch of imperial sway being a mere degeneration of the Roman
Republic. It was a fine stroke of tactics to celebrate Mazzini’s
centenary in 1905 as a national festival, in which the King
himself took part. But these centennial tablets and statues
were Italy’s way of stoning its prophet; this festival was
Mazzini’s real funeral, burying his aspirations out of sight so
effectively that the man in the street has forgotten that for
Mazzini the goal of Garibaldi and Cavour was only a starting-point;
and a popular British Encyclopædia assures us that
Mazzini “lived to see all his dreams realised.”
Not that there is a word to be said against the charming and
intelligent young man who presides over Italy, and who has
signalised himself among his peers by founding an International
Agricultural Institute. But what a climax to the long struggle
against tyranny, this meeting of King and Czar! To be sure
Italy had already made friends with Austria in the very
year after Garibaldi’s death—“in the interests of the peace of
Europe.”
Poor Europe. They make a spiritual desert and call it
peace.
“Songs before Sunrise”—yes, but where is the sun?
More instinct with vitality than the most eloquent tablets to
the Risorgimento are the mural inscriptions of hatred to Austria
rudely chalked up by anonymous hands, especially on the
Adriatic side. “Down with Austria!” “Death to Austria!”
“Death to Trent and Trieste!” is the general tenor, varied by
the name of Francis Joseph scrawled between skulls and crossbones.
’Tis a strange comment on the Triple Alliance, and the
authorities do not seem hurried to remove this glaring contradiction.
Even “Death to the Czar” survives the royal
meeting.
But the Irredenta is not to be taken seriously. Not along
political lines does the Risorgimento proceed, any more than
along the moral lines for which Mazzini worked. The second
phase, the second Risorgimento it may indeed be called, is the
Industrial Resurrection. Resurrection—because Italy, whose
Merchant of Venice reminds us that the Italian nobleman was
always a trader, and whose leading Florentines were Magnificent
Moneylenders, can hardly be regarded as an Arcadia transformed
by the cult of the dollar. Even Mazzini demanded revival of
“the old commercial greatness”; perhaps he might have been
content to wait patiently through this materialistic epoch, if
he were sure it would lead to a third Risorgimento.
Hygiene has yet to penetrate and suffuse the new prosperity.
But if even Perugia still stinks in places and Foligno everywhere,
the country is getting perceptibly cleaner, and perhaps godliness
is next to cleanliness. But the severest moralist cannot grudge
Italy her rise in wealth and happiness: the poverty of the
peasantry, accentuated by the extravagant ambition of Italy to
be a Great Power in the smallest of senses, has been terrible.
At what a cost has Italy achieved her first Dreadnought, so
perversely christened Dante Alighieri!
Beggars abound—blind, crippled, or with hideous growths—especially
in the South. Doubtless the influx of the pleasure-pilgrim
has increased the deformity of the population, and the
Italian beggar pushes forward his monstrosity as though it were
for sale, but there is real physical degeneration all the same.
The discovery of New York and South America by the Italian
has fortunately co-operated with the discovery of Italy by the
pleasure-pilgrim and the foreign investor, and some 600,000
Italians in the South of Brazil provide the makings of a Trans-atlantic
Italy. Even the semi-savage villages of Sicily are sown
with steamer advertisements, and batches going and returning
for jobs or harvests make an ever-weaving shuttle across the
Atlantic.
And if the monuments of the First Risorgimento clash with
the old historic background of Italy, still more is the Second
Risorgimento in discord with it. One almost sees a new Italy,
infinitely less beautiful but not devoid of backbone, struggling
out of the old architectural shell which does not in the least
express it. The old ducal and seignorial cities, the old republics,
are developing suburbs, sometimes prosperous if prosaic, like the
new quarters of Florence and Parma; sometimes grotesque, like
Pesaro’s sea-side resort, with its “new” architecture—lobster-red
and mustard-green lattices, and sham golden doors, carved with
busts; sometimes hideous, like the outskirts of Verona, where
under the blue, brooding mountains rises a quarter of electrical
workshops and chemical factories. Ancient towered Asti grows
sparkling with its new brick Banca d’Italia, and its blued and
gilded capitals in the Church of S. Secondo Martire. Look
down on Genoa, with its fantasia of spires, campaniles, roof-gardens,
green lattices, marble balconies, chimneys decorated with
figures of doges and opening out like flowers, and see how the
old narrow alleys are almost roofed with telegraph and telephone
wires. Go down to the widened harbour and see the warehouses,
the American sky-scrapers, the smoking chimneys, the great
steamers sailing out for Buenos Ayres and New York, the
emigrants with their bundles. The blue bird sings here no more;
you hear only the bang of the hammer, which Young Italy
declares is the voice of the century.
I look out of my window at Forli (in the Via Garibaldi!) and
see a white minaret and a white campanile gleaming fantastically
in the moonlight over a panorama of russet roofs. There
is a stone floor in my bedroom and no chimney. In the Piazza
all is heavy and mediæval: dull stone colonnades and a rough
cobbled road. In a church a grotesque griffin ramps over a
pavement tomb. Yet through these cumbersome stone forms I
feel the new Italy struggling. The Ginnasio Communale of the
town shelters with equal pomp and spaciousness the picture-gallery
and the chemical laboratory. These colonnades and
cobbles have no more congruity with the new spirit than the old
seignorial and episcopal Palazzi with the poor “tenement
families” whom they house to-day. Presently life will slough
off these forms altogether. Where an old castle like that of
Ferrara or an old palace like that of Lucca or Pistoja can be
tamed to civic uses, it becomes a town-hall; where no old building
is available, an adequate modern form is created, as in the
handsome post-offices with their almost military sense of the
dignity of the common life.
At Pesaro I lodged in a Bishop’s Palace with “steam-heat,
telephone, electric light in all the chambers, garage for automobiles,
motor omnibus to all the trains!” Palatial was it
indeed, so absurdly spacious that the dining-room was only
accessible through vast, empty, domed and frescoed halls, and I
could have held a political meeting in my bedroom, where I
slept with a sense of camping out under the infinities. I had no
notion that provincial churchmen were thus magnificent, and I
do not wonder that the Lord Cardinal of Ostia, when he saw
how the Franciscans of the Portiuncula slept on ragged
mattresses and straw, without pillows or bedsteads, burst into
tears, exclaiming: “We wretches use so many unnecessary
things!” And yet the Cardinal did not use a single thing
advertised by the ex-Palace of Pesaro.
Nowhere do new and old clash or combine more disagreeably
than in Modena, where crumbling marble-pillared colonnades
are painted red, and meet continuations in new brick. The
Cathedral, begun in 1099, guarded and flanked by quaint stone
lions, bears on its ancient campanile a tablet to Victor
Emmanuel. In the great Piazza, church, picture-gallery and
war-monument swear at one another. The Ducal Palace is a
military school, the moat round the old rampart—where once
resounded that archaic song of the war-sentinels—is a public
laundry.
And the statues, tablets, monuments, of the Second Risorgimento
begin to vie with those of the first. Pro Nervi, painted
on the benches on that desolate cactus-grown shore, among the
Leonardesque sea-sprayed rocks by the old Gropallo tower,
attests the activity of a society created to boom the summer
resort, while a tablet celebrates the Marchese who, foreseeing
the future of Nervi, put up the first hotel and died with the
name of the municipality on his lips. I do not think the
Marchese himself foresaw how far Nervi would go. I know I
walked miles along its tramway amid monotonous streets, with
no sign of an end. Indeed the tram-line reaches Genoa.
Nor is the Marchese the only hero of the Second Risorgimento.
Trust Carrara for that—Carrara and Guglielmo
Walton!
And the creations of this Risorgimento rival those of the
Renaissance in costliness. Where in all Europe will you find a
street as luxurious as Genoa’s Via XX Settembre—the long
colonnade, the granite pillars, the gilded and frescoed roof, the
mosaic pavement where the poorest may tread more magnificently
than Agamemnon.
And the great Gallery of Victor Emmanuel in Milan, what
is it but a secular parody of the Cathedral it faces—nave,
transept, dome, complete even to the invisible frescoes, a
Cathédrale de luxe? Very sad and solemn looked the old
Cathedral at night, for all its fairy fretwork, as Life passed it
by for its glittering counterpart.
I went to San Marino to get away from Garibaldi. For here—I
said to myself—is the one spot in Italy that is not Italy,
that has kept its pristine Republicanism. Here on the Titan
Mount is the one spot that cannot possibly acclaim the Union.
At most I may encounter a memorial to Mazzini.
I left Rimini by the Gate of the Via Garibaldi which leads
straight to San Marino, and trudging for the better part of a
day I saw it impending horribly some two thousand five hundred
feet above me, and after dragging myself through the Borgo or
lower suburb, I toiled in the darkness up a narrow, steep, slippery,
jagged path, on the brink of a sheer precipice, into—the Via
Garibaldi! And in a bedroom looking down on it—for the
only hotel is in a Piazzetta abutting on it—I passed the night.
In the morning I found a Garibaldi garden and a Caffè
Garibaldi and a Piazza Garibaldi and a Garibaldi bust and a
Garibaldi bas-relief and two Garibaldi tablets; item, a tablet to
Victor Emmanuel and a centennial tablet and street to Mazzini,
even a Via of Giosuè Carducci, the laureate of the Risorgimento.
Part of the explanation is that Garibaldi sought refuge here
in 1849, escaping from “the Roman Republic” to the Ravenna
pine-wood where poor Anita died, and his order for the day—“Soldiers,
we are on a Soil of Refuge,” and his letter of thanks
from Caprera—“I go away proud to be a citizen of so virtuous
a Republic”—are reproduced on the tablets. But the deeper
cause of this sympathy is that San Marino is Italian through and
through, and its hoary independence, real enough in the days of
the city states, is become a farce solemnly played with separate
postage stamps and currency, Regents, Councils, militia, peers,
commons, Home and Foreign Secretaries, ribbons, orders,
treaties, extradition treaties and a diplomatic corps in England,
Austria-Hungary, Spain, France and Italy, all to cover its budget
of £11,000 and its population of 10,422 souls, enumerated from
week to week in the toy press and decreasing by dozens. ’Tis a
game into which all Europe has entered in high good humour, the
grand farçeur, Napoleon, even proposing to extend the Republic’s
boundaries, which comprise only thirty-three square miles. But
the Sammarinese had sense enough to see that a greater realm
would be treated more seriously. Mount Titan, as the seat not
of a toy capital but of something answering less humorously to
its name, would cease to be a joke, whereas a State less than one-fourth
of the Isle of Wight might remain for Europe a blessed
land of diversion from the eternal earnestness of the sword,
might even save Europe’s self-respect as a region of civilisation,
regardful of treaties and ancient rights. So serious in fact did
the Sammarinese consider the danger of being taken seriously,
that Antonio Onofri who advised against this Napoleonic
inflation stands immortalised as Pater Patriæ.
No doubt the inaccessibility of Mount Titan must have been
the origin of San Marino’s existence in those dim days of the
Diocletian persecution, when the Roman Matron, Felicita,
whom the stone-cutter Marinus had converted to Christianity,
“made him a present of the mountain.” And the same
inaccessibility which suited it for a Christian colony contributed
later to the success of its traditional policy of balancing
between the Rimini Malatestas and the Dukes of Urbino. But
what prevented Austria from following Garibaldi into San
Marino? What but its enjoyment of the game, or its desperate
clinging to that shred of self-respect? To-day when the
cycle of history has brought us round again to the period of
Ezzelino, when the intellectual or religious concepts, which
anciently veiled usurpations, are contemptuously thrown aside,
and the iron hand crushes in mockery of the combined Jurists
of Europe, what stands between San Marino and extinction?
Only the environing Italy. And Italy plays with the tiny
Republic as a father plays with a child. San Marino has two
mortars in the fortress of La Rocca—for what is a State without
artillery to fire on solemn occasions?—and these mortars were
presented by Victor Emmanuel III. Italy also receives the
more desperate criminals, who are boarded out in its prisons, as
it supplies the police from its reserve soldiers, and the Judge
from its lawyers. Italy has provided its only distinguished
citizens—they are honorary,—its national hymn was taken from
Guido of Arezzo, the inventor of the musical scale, and when
the beautiful if mimetic Palazzo Pubblico for the Regents and
the Council was opened in 1894, it was with a speech of
Carducci.
Yet “Liberty,” I found, was the keynote of San Marino.
Liberty was the motto of its arms, with their three mountains
and plumed towers. Liberty waved in the white and blue flag
and was painted on the shields of the palace corridors. S.
Marino, the author of Liberty, was commemorated in the
cathedral façade with its flourish of Sen. P. Q., and Liberty
cried from the scroll his statue flourished. “In tuenda Libertate
vigilis” warned the inscription over the court room; “animus
in consulendo Liber” counselled the medallion near the tribune,
and in choice Latin epigraphs the transient tyrant, Cæsar
Borgia, impugner of Liberty, was denounced and derided.
Sublime it was to stand before the Gothic Palace of the
Regents, on this dizzy Piazza della Libertà with its gigantic
statue of Liberty (her hand on her bannered spear), and to
behold the sheer abyss below, and as from an aeroplane the
marvellous panorama of sea and mountain around, Liberty
written in every rugged convolution and glacial peak, and
shimmering in every masterless wave. And yet my imagination
refused to play the game; refused to take with becoming
reverence the crowned and gilded pew of the Regents, the
historic frescoes and friezes, the blue and orange of the “Guarda
Nobile,” the képis and bayonets of the militia, the red facings
of the police. All this parade of “Libertas” was in inverse
proportion to the substance, or even to the power of securing
it. The Republic appeared like a banknote without gold
behind it, and an Italian banknote at that; never so essentially
Italian as in the lapidary literature asserting its separateness.
This grand Palace, this costly Cathedral, both built only within
the last few years simultaneously with the motor road that has
destroyed the last semblance of isolation, seemed like that
spasm of self-assertiveness which so often precedes extinction.
And I thought that conquering nations might well mark how
easily love can melt what hate would only harden. Imagine if
Italy had brought her mortars against San Marino instead of
presenting them to it, or if she had made a road for her mortars
instead of for her motors!
But as an antique curio San Marino is delightful. I love to
muse on the pomp of its Regents who are elected—like the
Doges of Venice—by a mixture of choice and chance, and go in
state to celebrate mass, clothed in satin breeches and velvet
mantle, in doublet and sword and ermined cap, accompanied by
the Noble Guard and the high officers of State, and then from
the Cathedral, still to the clashing of church bells and the
strains of military music, to their semestral thrones in the
Palazzo Pubblico; there to hear a speech from the Government
Orator—whose fee is four shillings—and to take the Latin oath
not to tamper with the Libertas of the Constitution, and to
receive the State seals and keys and the insignia of Grand
Masters of the Order of San Marino, perhaps even the first
instalment of the royal budget of a pound a month.
No autocrats are these Regents, despite their regal salary.
They are mere constitutional monarchs, official headpieces to
the Arringo or sovereign Council in which the real power resides.
But though Republican, San Marino is not Democratic, for the
Arringo fills up its vacancies by option. Liberty is not flouted
however, for may not every head of a family—after the half-yearly
elections—give the Arringo a piece of his mind? Time
was when the citizen could stroll into its sittings and tender it
the benefit of his advice, but this form of Liberty seems to have
been found too excessive and cumbersome even for the land of
Libertas.
Happy are the nations that have no history, and San Marino
seems to have escaped almost without an anecdote. In 1461
Pope Pius II invited it to make war with the Magnificent
Monster, Sigismondo Malatesta of Rimini, and rewarded its aid
with four castles. Cæsar Borgia came and went in 1503, a
nocturnal attack by Fabiano del Monte was repulsed in 1543,
and after that nothing appears to have happened till 1739, when
the Cardinal Legate, Giulio Alberoni, occupied the Republic.
But the Republic having appealed to the Pope was left free
again, Clement XII thus becoming a national hero with his
bust in the Palazzo. But national heroes of its own it has none.
It has adopted the cult of Garibaldi, though he preaches Italian
Unity, and made honorary citizens of Canova, Rossini and Verdi,
and it has almost appropriated the famous numismatist, Bartolommeo
Borghesi, who did at least live here, if he omitted to be
born here, and who dominates one of the wonderful mountain-terraces,
holding a book and gazing carefully at the only point
where there is no view. But as to the “Viri Clarissimi et
Illustres Castri Sancti Marini” blazoned on the Palazzo staircase,
between shields of “Libertas,” I fear their celebrity had not
reached me. Doctors, artists, counts, dignitaries of the Church—I
was impartially ignorant of them all.
What is to account for this paucity of personalities? Had a
great saint or a great poet arisen here, we should have explained
it glibly by the pious isolation among the eternal mountains,
looking down upon the eternal sea, under the everlasting stars.
Had a new Acropolis or a new Parthenon risen on this hill of
the Titan, we should not have lacked proofs of the inevitability
of the new Athens. But nothing has arisen. Giambittisti
Belluzzi, the military architect of its walls and of the Imperial
Castle at Pesaro, is San Marino’s highest name in art, while in
literature its chroniclers point to Canon Ignazio Belzoppi, “letterato
di molta fama,” born in 1762, author of the heroi-comic
poem, “Il Bertuccino” (The Little Monkey)—unpublished!
For life to be perfect then, small circles are not enough, pace
my friend Boëthius. They must tingle with life, perhaps even
with death. Can it be that the advocatus diaboli was right,
and that the snug security of a diplomatic mountain-fastness
has bred mediocrity? I tell him angrily that the place is a
Paradise and he answers calmly that it is only a Parish. Can it
be that the only Paradise possible is a Fools’ Paradise?
But a serpent has entered Eden, crawling probably by the
motor-car road. He has insinuated doubt of holy authority
and the Sammarinese begin to eat of the Tree of Knowledge.
Il Titano is the organ of the Socialists—a Titan in revolt—and
the Somarino serves the Clericals—with the accent on the Santo.
“Preti!!!” is the ejaculatory title of an article in the number
of Il Titano that came into my hands (April 24, 1910). “We
might say impostors, falsifiers, canaille,” it begins pleasantly,
“but we say instead ‘Priests,’ which is a substantive that
comprises all the others.”
And thus across its precipices San Marino joins hands with
“Young Italy,” whose programme according to the organ of
that name embraces the exiling of the Vatican beyond the
frontiers of Italy, the sweeping away of the bankrupt remains
of Christianity, and the abandonment of Imperialism and the
African adventure. I will engage there are even Futurists in
San Marino.
I must confess to a smiling sympathy with this “Youngest
Italy” party—if the little half-baked literary and artistic clique
of Futurists can be called a party. I can understand the oppression
of all the glorious Italian past, all those massive buildings
and masterpieces, and stereotyped forms of thought. Like the
son of a genius, modern Italy is cramped and overshadowed.
Hence the rabid yearning for some new form of energising,
this glorification of the moment and perpetual change. In a
fantastic fury of iconoclasm the Futurists demand even the
destruction of the creations of ancient genius that overhang
their lives—they would make an art-pyre as fervently as
Savonarola. Climbing the Clock Tower of St. Mark’s Square,
they threw down coloured handbills repudiating the vulgar
voluptuous Venice of the tourist. “Hasten to fill its fetid little
canals with the ruins of its tumbling and leprous palaces. Burn
the gondolas, those see-saws for fools!” So far so good.
But mark the beatific vision that is to replace this putrefying
beauty. “Raise to the sky the rigid geometry of large metallic
bridges, and manufactories with waving hair of smoke. Abolish
everywhere the languishing curves of the old architectures.”
How characteristic of the Second Risorgimento! It must
be by an oversight that the smoke is still permitted to
be “waving.” I imagine that the resurrection of the old
Campanile of Venice must have been the last straw. For ten
hundred and fourteen years this gloomy old tower had
impended, and when it did at last fall of its own sheer
decrepitude, lo! it must be stood up again, exact to the last
massy inch, and even with the same inscription—Verbum caro
factum est—on its bells. As if a bell could have no new
message after a millennium! Let the historian, at any rate,
mark that the Futurists did not rise till the Campanile was not
allowed to fall. The police, taking the Futurists seriously,
prohibit their meetings, which will end in making them take
themselves seriously. But they are a useful counteractive to
the Zealots of the Zona Monumentale, who, in their passion for
the ruins of Rome, forget the claims of life. When the Present
says, “I must live,” the artist and the archæologist too often
reply: “Je n’en vois pas la nécessité.” Carducci even called on
Fever to guard the Appian Way. But cities exist for citizens,
not for spectators, and when the telephone bell of the Present
rings, we should reply like the Italian waiter: “Pronto!
Desidera?” We cannot do in Rome as the Romans do, for
they have to live, not look at Ruins. And let us not expect
the Romans to do in Rome as we do. If tramways must run
along the Via Appia, at least Fever will retire before them. How
long is it our duty to guard the ruins of the Past? Suppose
the tombs and temples of the Appian Way should threaten to
collapse altogether, have we to keep them in a state of artificial
ruin? Augustus boasted that he found Rome brick and made
it marble. If the industrial Risorgimento found Rome marble
and made it brick, I suppose there are compensations for
Augustus. Imperial Rome never thought of dedicating a slab
of that marble to the nameless pauper dead, worn out in the
obscure service of their country, as Industrial Rome has done in
a touching inscription. And should Rome extend the tale of
its bricks to house the homeless troglodytes who pig in the
remains of that ancient marble, I will throw up my cap with
the Futurists.
Pisa is to me a dream-city, but to the Pisans it is a
centre of the glass industry and the cloth industry, with
municipalised gas. They have done handsomely in leaving me
my dream-city outside the town life. If topographical obstacles