# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	NA
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Gutenberg Project, English
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57810/57810-h/57810-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

—Fleay, Macmillan’s Magazine, Dec., 1874.
1
“Study of Shakespere,” by Swinburne, p. 52.
2
Thomas Beard’s, the Puritan, Account of Marlowe’s
Death in Bullen’s Marlowe, p. 63.
3
The performance commenced at 3 o’clock.—Dyce’s
Shakespere, vol. 1, p. 45.
4
A nest of alleys near the bottom of St. Martin’s Lane,
so called by Jonson.—Knight’s London, vol. 1, p. 369.
5
Stow’s Survey, Ed. 1633, p. 470.
6
Dyce’s Shakespere, vol. 1, p. 40.
7
Taine’s History of English Literature, Book II, chap. 2.
8
Induction to Cynthia’s Revels. Ben Jonson.
9
Dyce’s Shakespere, vol. 1, p. 40.
10
See note 15.
11
See note 15.
12
Swinburne’s Study of Shakespere, p. 24.
13
“He trod the stage with applause.”—Langbaine.
14
See notes 18 to 24.
15
Hallam and Lamb.
16
See note 35.
17
Dyce’s Marlowe, Bullen’s Marlowe.
18
“Doubtless Bame was backed by some person or persons
of power and position.”—Bullen’s Marlowe, Introduction,
lxix.
19
“The Atheist’s Tragedie,” vol. iii.—Bullen’s Marlowe.
20
Jew of Malta, Act. I.
21
Halliwell-Phillipp’s Outlines, 105.
22
Bullen’s Marlowe, Introduction, 58.
23
14 Eliz. c. 5 (1572).
24
Id.
25
“The earliest legitimate theater south of the Thames;
opened early in 1592”—Halliwell-Phillipp’s Outlines, p. 79.
26
So held in the case of the Dean of Asaph as the law;
but the doctrine was vigorously attacked by Erskine in
his great speech on the “Rights on Juries.” See British
Eloquence by Goodrich, pp. 655-683.
27
Chamber’s Enc. Eng. Lit., vol 1, 176.
28
29
 
Obvious printer errors corrected silently.
Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.
 
 
***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IT WAS MARLOWE***
******* This file should be named 57810-h.htm or 57810-h.zip *******
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/5/7/8/1/57810

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United
 States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost
 no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use
 it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with
 this eBook or online
 at www.gutenberg.org. If you
 are not located in the United States, you'll have to check the laws
 of the country where you are located before using this
 ebook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause. 
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org.
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
For additional contact information:
 Dr. Gregory B. Newby
 Chief Executive and Director
 gbnewby@pglaf.org
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

Title: It Was Marlowe
 A Story of the Secret of Three Centuries
Author: William Gleason Zeigler
Release Date: August 29, 2018 [eBook #57810]
Language: English
Character set encoding: UTF-8
***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IT WAS MARLOWE***
 
 
 
 
“It is not for any man to measure, above all it is not for any workman
in the field of tragic poetry lightly to take on himself the responsibility
or the authority to pronounce what it is that Christopher Marlowe could not
have done.”—Algernon Charles Swinburne.
Chicago
Donohue, Henneberry & Co.
407-429 Dearborn St.

“She had turned her face for a last look at the
Combatants.” P. 78.

COPYRIGHT, 1895, BY
WILBUR GLEASON ZEIGLER.
All rights reserved.
i
TO MY WIFE,
WHOSE PRAISE IS AMPLE MEED
FOR MY WORK;
AND
TO THE MEMORY OF MY MOTHER,
THE ONE WHOSE ENCOURAGEMENT WAS THE
KEENEST SPUR FOR BEST EFFORT,
THIS BOOK IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED.



Wilbur Gleason Zeigler

June 8, 1898.
ii
iii
iv
v
A number of years ago I read the plays of Christopher
Marlowe; and as evidence of the impression
they made upon me, there is still among my recent
notes gathered for this romance, the extracts I
then wrote down from his Tamburlaine and Faustus.
There was something in them to excite more
than the passing interest of a boy; and for a long
time I mourned over the accepted account of the
untimely, and disgraceful ending of that unfortunate
poet—“our elder Shelley,” as Swinburne has
termed him. Later the Bacon-Shakespere controversy
attracted my attention; and while I became
skeptical concerning the authorship by William
Shakespere of the dramas that bear his name, I
could not attribute them to the pen of Francis
Bacon.
There are many reasons for my disbelief, in the
solution of the mystery as presented by the Baconians,
but it has not arisen from my failure to study
the proofs and argument. One reason, however,
must be mentioned. A man, so solicitous of his
vi
fame as to leave it in his will “to foreign nations
and the next ages,” would not, if he had written
the plays, have departed this life without some
mention of them. Whoever wrote them was not
blind to their merits; and of his knowledge of
their enduring quality we have the author’s own
opinion in the lines:
Shakespere also left a will, as mean and petty
in its details of “gilt boles,” “wearing apparrell”
and money to “buy them ringes,” as though conceived
by a tiller of the soil whose eyes had never
been raised above his plow-handles. It had been
carefully prepared three months before his death,
and subscribed while his “mind was yet unclouded;”
but, as in the case of Bacon, we listen vainly
for one word from the testator concerning the
grandest productions of all time. Ye who have
sweat in striking “the second heat upon the Muse’s
anvil,” think of the utter indifference of both these
men concerning the “living lines” of Hamlet and
of Richard!
With the fame of Shakespere thus rudely shaken,
and that of Bacon firmly set upon the enduring
monument of law and philosophy which he alone
had raised for himself, I began groping for a solution
of these mysterious questions. Who wrote
the plays? Why was their authorship concealed?
As to the first inquiry, my belief that Christopher
Marlowe could have written the plays, had
vii
his life been sufficiently prolonged, was supported
by the opinions of Phillips, Collier, Dowden,
Malone, Swinburne and Dyce [notes 1-6.]
This belief was founded upon the striking similarity
of the strongest portions of his acknowledged
works to passages of the Shakespere plays;
the tendency of each to degenerate into pomposity
and bombast in passages of tragic pathos [note
7]; the similar treatment of characters, and the
like spirit that pervades them. (The Shakespere
plays, free as they are from any trace of a hand
during the period when it was moved by an immature
mind, seem like a continuation of the works
of the earlier master, and evolved when the author
was at the meridian of his power.)
It has been said that “Marlowe could not don alternately
the buskin and the sock,” and that he
“never attempted to write a comic scene,” and thus
it would have been impossible for him to have written
the light and witty portions of the plays. The
conclusion of Bullen, above quoted, is not well
founded. There are comic scenes in Faustus, and
originally there were like scenes for “vain, conceited
fondlings” in the “stately history” of Tamburlaine.
Against the theory of the authorship of Marlowe,
was the record of his death in June, 1593,
when at the age of 29 years, a period of life all too
short to have enabled him to have produced much,
if any, more than the work which is known, beyond
reasonable doubt, to be his. The accredited account
viii
is that he was slain with his own sword in a
tavern brawl. Upon a careful examination of all
the reports, I found them loose and contradictory.
In September, 1593, Harvey wrote that his death
was from the plague [note 8]; in 1597, Beard, the
Puritan, wrote that he was killed in the streets of
London [note 9]; in 1598, Meres referred to
Beard’s account without correcting it [note 10];
in 1600, Vaughn wrote that he was killed by “one
named Ingram” [note 11]; in 1600, Rowland attributed
the death to drinking [note 12]; about
1680, Aubrey wrote that he was the victim of the
famous duel of 1598, when Ben Jonson killed his
adversary [note 13]; and the burial register of
the parish church of St. Nicholas, in Deptford,
contains the entry that he was slain by Francis
Frazer [note 14].
But no investigation brought to light what became
of his slayer. There is no record yet discovered
of his escape or trial. Although Ben
Jonson was thrown into prison and “brought near
the gallows” for his duel on Bunhill, the alleged
slayer of “kynd Kit Marloe” appears to have vanished
so utterly that it was not until within the
last quarter of this nineteenth century that even
his name written in the burial register became correctly
known to the world.
It might be said that this obscurity concerning
the death of Marlowe was occasioned by the dearth
of facilities for the conveyance of news, but we can
not close our eyes to the fact that it was not an
ix
ignorant age, but one of criticism, violent controversial
correspondence, and pamphleteering.
And then it was not the case of an obscure person
suddenly removed from the walks of life. Although
violently attacked a few years previously
by contemporaries [note 15], for his allusion to
“the jigging veins of rhyming mother-wits” [note
16], and for the innovations that his genius
brought about upon the English stage [note 17],
the height of his fame and the reverence in which
he was held by the English intellectual world was
shown by Petowe, Chapman, Peele, Blunt, Harvey,
Chettle, and Drayton [notes 18-24]. It was
praise that emanated from the lips of these poets
and writers before the close of the year 1600. To
them he was “the famous gracer of tragedians,”
“the highest mind that ever haunted Paul’s,” the
“king of poets,” “the muses’ darling,” that


“Free soul whose living subject stood
Up to the chin in the Pierian flood.”

How striking appears this praise when contrasted
with the meager contemporary notices of
Shakespere by obscure writers [note 25]!
Among this crowd of admirers we catch no
glimpse of the man from Stratford-on-Avon, whom
the most devout of his followers recognize, in the
earliest of the plays, as merely a “pupil” of “the
earlier master.” If it were his voice that was
then uttering the “parrot-like note of plagery,”1
x
how unpardonable seems his silence, standing, as
he did, in the presence of the mighty dead!
These tributes to the memory of Marlowe, all
with the omission of the exact nature of his death;
and on the other side, the full but contradictory
reports by rancorous Puritan scribblers, of the
killing of “this barking dogge,”2 led me irresistibly
to an answer to the second question. Why was
the authorship of the plays concealed?
The most plausible answer was that that master
spirit labored until his death under some tremendous
fear. What else but the fear of arrest
and capital punishment for some crime could have
kept him silent until, unwarned and unprepared,
he entered “the undiscovered country?”
Was it not possible that this crime was committed
in 1593? If so, would it not have kept this
“king of poets” hidden in just such condition of
darkened vision, isolation and solitude as Frederic
Schlegel [note 26] deemed imperative for the production
of these austere tragedies? Suppose this
condition had existed for five years; that is, from
1593 to 1598; all of the stronger plays which it is
possible to attribute to the pen of one man could
have been written. And what occurred during
those five years? Several of Marlowe’s acknowledged
dramas were published under his name
[note 27], and at least Titus Andronicus, Romeo
and Juliet, Richard II, and Richard III appeared
without the name of any author on their title
xi
pages [note 28]. In 1598 the name of “W. Shakespere”
made its first appearance [note 29] on some
of the editions. Did Marlowe die in 1598, instead
of 1593? Was Aubrey right?
Upon these conjectural answers to the questions
of who was the author, and why did he conceal
his identity, I have built the story of “It Was
Marlowe,” and I trust that in its narration I have
made my theory plausible. But whether or not
such has been the result, if through this effort
I have awakened, or increased the reader’s interest
in a being as grandly illumined with the flame of
pure intellect as any who have, since his consecration,
knelt at the shrine of ideal beauty, or
aspired to ideal power, my work has not been
entirely futile.

THE AUTHOR.
xii
13
At the point where the path from the Theater
penetrated the brick wall on the eastern boundary
of Finbury Fields, late in the afternoon of June
the first, 1593, a man had paused, apparently to
prevent overtaking a crowd that was preceding
him in the direction of the Shore-ditch Highway.
A fog of varying density, that had already enveloped
the streets of London, was drifting across
the fields, and hid not only the Theater and Curtain
from view, but also the buildings, nearer at
hand, of the dissolved Priory of Holywell. In
spite of the obscuring mist, if one had stood at
one end of the broken wall while the man, just
spoken of, had paused in the center of the opening,
the form and features of the latter could have
been seen to advantage. His face would first have
14
attracted attention. Both energy and sensibility
could have been traced upon it even in repose when
the dark and glowing eyes were closed. The first
characteristic was displayed in a close-shaven chin
which was almost pugnacious in its squareness,
and in a nose which, while too fine for that of a
Cæsar, had all the lordly outline of the latter. Intelligence
and sensitiveness were written on the
full and finely curved lips, and the glow upon his
cheeks pronounced the extreme of temperance in
habit, or an inexhaustible power of recuperation.
In the eyes and broad and compact forehead evidences
of genius were disclosed, but it could not
be determined whether it was in the fiery glance
of the former, or in the serenity of the latter, that
such proof was written. The letters were of a
type intelligible to all readers. The lines of
thought, between his brows and on his cheeks,
were indicative of age, but his laugh was from the
heart of youth alone. Between the two one would
have guessed his years correctly as close to thirty.
He was slender in stature and slightly above
medium height. His dress was of the extreme
style of the period; but although rich in texture,
was worn with much use, and stained from evident
dissipation. The black cloak, with buff silk
lining, was torn across one shoulder. The scarlet
doublet, because of missing buttons, was open
more than its maker intended, to show the vest
of same color, and gayly embroidered shirt front.
The belt around the doublet was enriched with
15
silver cord, and held a long rapier, whose bejeweled
hilt was enough to excite the cupidity of vagrants
or rufflers. The trunk hose of black fabric, reaching
half way down his upper leg, was slashed so as
to admit the protruding of purple silk, while tights
of the latter color extended from the bottoms of
the trunks down into the low shoes. He wore a flat
cap with single white feather, and under it a mass
of black hair hung to his shoulders.
The crowd before him was one dispersing after
a short afternoon performance3 at both theaters.
It was smaller than usual and was the last of the
season. The Plague had firmly engrafted itself in
the city, and was gathering new life with increase
of deaths.
Even in the suburbs the red crosses were being
marked upon the doors of infected houses. A
week previously, the Lord Mayor had issued a
proclamation prohibiting the holding open of
places of amusement during the prevalence of the
epidemic. This order, aimed at the gathering of
multitudes where germs of disease might be readily
propagated, was nugatory outside the city walls, but
it had had its effect upon the theater-going public.
It was a warning of greater force than those thundered
from the pulpits. The hegira of the wealthier
class of people to the country had begun, and
the poorer classes were closing their doors and venturing
out only as necessity compelled.
16
It was this condition of affairs that had caused
the managers of the play-houses in Finbury Fields
to announce a closing of their doors, and the prospect
of a reopening before the fall, or possibly the
winter season, was not encouraging.
Such a cessation of occupation assured discomfort
and perhaps misery to the man described; for
his livelihood depended upon the prosperity of the
theaters; but if he had at any time seriously considered
the matter, the consideration had in no
wise affected his perennial good humor. He
laughed at the unsuccessful attempts of several
crows at lighting upon one of the wings of a near
windmill that turned slightly one way and then
another in the shifting breeze. And then again
he was amused at the actions of an apparently intoxicated
man, who, having stumbled from the
path, had in the fog encountered the wall near by,
and with one hand against it was repeating in loud
voice the lines he had lately heard from the lips of
a ranting actor:


“Swing back the gates, thou triple-headed fiend,
Or by the gods this hand will draw a blade
To make thy shoulders strangers to thy head.”

The laugh which these words and gestures
awakened on the part of the quiet observer just
described was joined in by another man who was
approaching by the same path. The latter had
been whistling with all the ardor and enthusiasm
of tender years and an undisturbed mind, until the
17
loud voice of the drunkard provoked him to
laughter.
He was a beardless youth of apparently twenty
years of age. As he laughed his little blue eyes
were almost closed beneath his red eyebrows, so
that their expression alone was enough to excite
the merriment of an observer. His wide open
mouth revealed two rows of white teeth, separated
by at least two inches of space at the moment that
the loudest peal of laughter came forth. His round
cheeks were red with superabundance of health,
and proclaimed contact with country air. It was
not an overshrewd face nor one showing resolution;
but it was so open, so frank and good natured,
that even a person injured by carelessness on
the part of its owner would have paused in expressing
a natural remonstrance.
One would have expected to have seen a rough
doublet of Kendal green, or of homespun russet,
with patched trousers and low cockers upon the
slender figure beneath this face; but, on the contrary,
he was attired in a neat-fitting garb appropriate
for the page of a lord or rich country squire.
His blue coat, with velvet facing, had even an
Italian ruff with a hundred double turnings upon
it. A short sword was belted at his waist, and his
trunks, of strong material, disappeared into top
boots. The latter, however, were patched, of crude
manufacture, and looked to have been worn
through plowed fields at some recent period.
Neither was his hat in keeping with his new body
18
apparel, but was one evidently picked, for wearing
on this particular expedition, out of some pile of
discarded garments of the man whom he served.
As he saw the man first described a gleam of
recognition showed in his face.
“Ho!” he exclaimed, joyfully, “Is that you?”
“None else,” returned the other, carelessly, as
though the discovery of himself by the stranger
was of the least concern.
“Sir Kit?” queried the youth, taking off a hat,
still adorned with a broken feather, and bowing
with a grace which was evidently a recent acquirement,
for it savored of a contact with people far removed
from a service in which he must have acquired
his rough field boots.
“‘Sir,’ if so you will have it, but ‘Kit’ without
doubt,” answered the man addressed, smiling at the
youth’s appearance, and at the same time taking an
interest in the jolly face of its owner. The latter
feeling caused him to inquire:
“Hast thou any matter of concern to communicate
to me?”
“You do not recognize me,” returned the stranger,
as though the matter of his identity was first
necessary to be established.
The gentleman studied the other for a moment,
and then said:
“I have seen thy face before, but can not place
thee. Where was it and who are you?”
“You saw me in Deptford, and my name is Tabbard.
I come now from Sayes Court, where I have
19
lately entered into better service than that of an attendant
upon gentle folk in a wayside inn. The
duke took a fancy to me.”
“And gave you a new doublet, and his old hat,
eh?”
“True,” said Tabbard, “and the promise of long
service, good wages and promotion.”
“Your star is in the ascendant,” laughed the
other, and then added, “but what do you want to
tell me?”
“It is this. The Duke of Sussex is at Sayes
Court now, and many more who have left London
with him. You are to attend there a masque with
the remainder of the Earl’s actors.”
“Well,” interrupted the other, impatiently.
“But I am not here to tell you that alone. When
I last saw you, you were at the Golden Hind, Dodsman’s
tavern, in Deptford. They called me Tabbard
there, and so did you when I waited upon you,
and you gave me an angel for my attendance.”
“I do not remember the gold. When I give gold
my memory is gone as well,” said the other, while
an expressive smile played upon his lips.
“Well,” again began Tabbard, hurriedly, “at the
same time that you were there, a gentleman named
Manuel Crossford, from Canterbury, was there also
with his daughter.”
“Yes, yes,” the man addressed as Kit exclaimed,
and with it all the reserve that he had maintained
vanished.
“Let details go,” he continued, grasping Tabbard’s
20
arm, “I remember it all and you too. What
of her?”
“The father did not look favorably upon your
suit.”
“You evidently learned more than was proper
for one in your position,” again interrupted the
other, “but you are certainly not here to badger
words with me. What else have you to say?”
The two men had moved close to one end of the
brick wall, so as to avoid being brushed against by
the occasional stragglers, who were still issuing
from the mist in one direction and vanishing in the
other. These stragglers came singly, in pairs, and
in groups. Here would ride by a mounted cavalier
in Spanish hat, loose velvet cloak that covered him
to his knees, and high boots rattling with clumsy
silver spurs. Then close in the latter’s wake would
follow a ragged, sneaking vagrant of the Straits,4
who having caught a glimpse of the spurs and the
gold cord on the rider’s hat, was now intent on
dogging him, until upon the latter’s dismounting
at some ordinary or ale-house within the city,
a groat might be earned by holding the horse.
After these, a line of truant apprentices would stagger
by with locked arms and swaying black-capped
heads, endeavoring, by blocking the path, to keep
a group of gayly dressed women from hurrying toward
the tenements in the Garden Alleys.5
The sight of these trailing members of the great
21
body of people which had disappeared did not
seem to disturb the attention of the gentleman
or his inferior; and pausing but for a moment the
latter continued:
“Well, she is there at the Golden Hind to-day.
I saw her face at one of the windows as I was riding
by and then I remembered your words to never fail
to inform you if I ever saw her again. I dismounted
and went in.”
“Was she there alone?” asked Kit, without endeavoring
to conceal his interest.
“I do not know, except——”
“And what do you know?”
“Let me proceed. Thou art too impatient. A
line of horses was before the place and a crowd inside.
I went through the tap-room and up the
staircase without having made up my mind how to
announce myself as coming from thee—coming
from thee, mind—or for what purpose; and marry
sir, she was at the head of the stairs and I simply
blurted out: ‘Kit will be here to-night, and would
see thee.’”
“And what answer made she, thou fool?”
“‘At nine,’ she said sir, ‘and tell him not to fail,’
and at that moment a man who had followed me
into the hall set his foot on the lower stair and
stumbled. This must have startled her, for she
stopped speaking.”
“And didst thou not ask the number of the
room?”
“Wait. I heard the step and looked below, and
22
when I turned again her finger was on her lips and
she drew back.”
“Canst thou never learn expedition?” exclaimed
the other, biting his lip.
“She was behind the balustrade,” resumed Tabbard,
unmindful of the interruption, “and where
the light from the skylight fell upon her. He
could not see her, nor she him, but she heard him
hit the stairs. I say he could not see——”
“Go on, you stumble in your speech.”
“——not see her, but I could. She was dressed
like a lady; her cheeks pink, her eyes as dark as
thine own; her hair golden.”
“The same,” uttered the other, nodding his
head.
“She went into the room with carved panels on
the door.”
“Are they not all carved?”
“May be so; but I think not. No, ’twas the first
guest’s room; the second door on the right from
the head of the stairs. The man passed me as
I went down.”
“Who was he?”
“I never saw him before.”
“Was he not her father?”
“Oh, no. He was a young man dressed in grand
style. In face he was so like thee that I almost
stopped him as I have thee now.”
“And did you make no inquiry at the bar?”
“The tapster was busy; the serving men were
strangers to me, and Dodsman was not in sight.”
23
“And you learned nothing more?”
“No; I mounted and came on.”
“Marry, and why didst thou not wait, and why
didst thou not find me before?” questioned the
other, in tones of reproof. “It is now near six
o’clock and three miles lie between here and London
bridge and then another three miles or more
to Deptford.”
“Is that not time enough?”
“And how much can one spare from it for a full
meal and a glass of Canary at the Red Bull or the
Mermaid? I would not chance more than a mug
of sack and a square of black bread at the ale-house
next to the London wall. And how can one push
his horse faster than a walk through such a fog
as this? But let us press on.”
Through the fields they proceeded along a wide
path unfenced and bordered with stretches of grass
and rushes.
“You ask me why I did not wait for knowledge
about the lady,” at length said Tabbard, thinking
that some explanation was still due. “It was then
late, and besides the message I had for the Earl’s
actors, I wished to see Gabriel Spencer as the king
in ‘Edward the Second,’ at the Theater. I could
not miss that, Sir Kit.”
“And nearly missed seeing me,” said Kit, absently.
“I expected to see thee there, too. For admission
I paid my last penny, or at not seeing thee on
the stage I should have gone to the other playhouse.
24
I tried to go into the galleries, but an upstart
youth in bare head and with sword at his side,
like one of the Queen’s men, forced me back, demanding
another penny. Before me went a crowd
of women, and the galleries were filled with them.
Unlike those in the open pit, they sat under roof
and without fear of rain.6 So into the pit I went,
and must needs have paid another penny for a seat
had not Dudden, a countryman of mine from near
Maidstone, in Kent, whom I had not seen for four
years, touched me on the shoulder and bade me
squeeze in between him and a friend. They had
brought bottles of sack in with them,7 and not a
drink would they take without my joining them.”
“And did that require much urging?”
“Little at first,” answered Tabbard, “but when
once the play was well on, I could not drink for
fear of taking my eyes from the stage; not that the
devil heads on the tops of the posts on each side interested
me, or the dandies on the stools and dried
rushes on the stage-floor8 under these heads, but
the actors! Ah, but the actors, Sir Kit! Were
there ever such crimson doublets and cloaks with
copper lacings worn? And the rich dresses that
the men wore, who played the parts of the Queen
and ladies, made me think that they had broken
into the wardrobe at Whitehall. And do ladies
never play such parts, Sir Kit?”
25
“Never,”9 answered the other, shaking his head.
“But Dudden swore they were ladies, and when
one of the spectators on the stage hissed the Queen
for forgetting a line he threw one of the empty
bottles of sack at him. It was all so grand, so fierce,
so bloody. And Dudden went into a drunken fit
when the head of Mortimer was brought in. But
that was at the end. My own heart was in my
throat at the sight of the mowers, with their Welch
hooks, taking the king captive.”
“Art thou so easily disturbed, fellow?” asked
Kit, with a twinkle in his eye.
“Prut!” exclaimed Tabbard, “Thou couldst
never have seen the play, if you say that. What
man could sit still when the king moaned; ‘Lay
me on a litter and to the gates of hell——’”
“Hold,” interrupted the other, “not quite so.
These are the words:


‘A litter hast thou? Lay me in a hearse,
And to the gates of hell convey me hence:
Let Pluto’s bells ring out my fatal knell,
And hags howl for my death at Charon’s shore.’”

“Then he throws off his disguise,” continued
Tabbard, excitedly. “Why those sound like the
very words. Didst thou ever play the part of Edward?”
“Nay,” said Kit, shaking his head.
“Or Gaveston or Mortimer?”
“Nay, neither.”
26
Tabbard looked at his companion with open
mouth, and then asked:
“And what says the king when he hands the
Bishop his crown?”
“Now, sweet God of Heaven, make me despise
this transitory pomp,” answered the other without
hesitation.
“Well, and dost thou know all the play?” asked
Tabbard in amazement.
“Much of it,” came the answer.
“And never was in it as an actor?”
“Never.”
“And how comes it that you know it all?”
“I wrote it,” quietly answered the other.
“Wrote it!” exclaimed Tabbard, “and then thou
art——”
“Christopher Marlowe,” continued the gentleman,
“commonly called Kit.”
The effect on the excited youth was something
magical. He stopped talking but gave vent to a
prolonged “Oh,” that died into a whisper. He was
in the presence of genius; this was the man who
had written the lines which for three hours under
a hot sun, he had listened to in silent awe and
tremblings of terror. He could scarcely believe his
eyes; and Marlowe noticing Tabbard’s stupid
amazement said:
“How much sack did you punish, Tabbard?”
The question was designed to bring the latter-mentioned
person out of his stupefaction, and it
had this effect; but in his recovery Tabbard’s wonder
27
ran along the mental line of inquiry concerning
how it was that genius could be interested in such
common matters.
“Enough to have lost my way and the place
where I tied my horse,” at length answered Tabbard,
recovering his voice, and looking about him.
“Tied him? Witless, you should have had a
boy hold him,” said Marlowe, exhibiting some interest
in the welfare of the man who had brought
him the message of all others the most pleasing to
his ear.
“Then I needst must have cheated the boy, for I
have not an old Harry Groat in my pocket,” answered
Tabbard, spreading his hands open before
him, with palms turned up.
“It is not safe to trust one’s animal with rope
and post in these fields nor in this lane,” said Marlowe
in the tone of an adviser.
“Well a boy held two horses near where I tied
mine to a tree not a great way from this opening.
But for the fog I could see him. And I said ‘keep
an eye on him. He can not be held.’”
“Which was false, undoubtedly,” nodded Marlowe,
smiling.
“Ay, for the brute needs spurs for walking
smooth roads. But the watching required no
labor.”
“And I suppose that your horse is a pleasing
sight to look upon,” said the other.
“True, Sir Kit, and so the score will be even.”
“Was one horse gray that the boy held, and one
28
black, and did the boy wear a cap and stand under
an apple tree next to the Priory wall?”
“That is all true,” responded Tabbard.
“Well, the gray horse is mine,” said Marlowe.
“And why did you leave him so far from the
entrance to the play-houses?” asked Tabbard.
“A man who has creditors must appear to be a
beggar on foot. I limped to the theater and have
now let the crowd precede me as you see,” explained
the other, and then noticing a group emerging
from the fog, he exclaimed: “Ah! here the boy is
now, and there is your horse where you tied him.”
The pair had been following the path for some
distance, and now mounting their horses, rode
down the lane between brick walls, over which
great orchard trees extended their branches, and
again on between low houses with green blinds
where the miserable outcasts of the city had located
themselves. Before them ran the Shore-ditch
highway, and entering this they rode on
toward the invisible city wall.
In this vacancy of event, there is space for an
epitome of the period, in so far as it affected the
condition of the principal character of this romance.
The somberness of the natural scenery,
and the obscurity of the sky were in keeping with
his social surroundings and the uncertainty of his
existence. The fog might rise disclosing a sky
conducive of joyous spirits, or it might gather so
dense that naught but the austere form of Melancholy,
with her trailing robes of black, could walk
29
with firm and unfaltering strides within it. It
was the latter condition that was to follow. At
that moment, in the mind of Marlowe, the rosiest
dreams of life pursued one another as though conceived
by an Ovid, and impelled by the spirit of a
Homer; but they were to be buried in the blackness
of what seemed eternal night.
Fired with the ambition of a god, he had issued
from the studious walks of Cambridge in 1587.
Finding dramatic art confined to a close circle,
wherein only rhyming productions were considered
fit for presentation on the stage, and the public
clamorous for aught that possessed the fire of action
and the thunder of bombastic declamation, he
cast from his shoulders the splendid cloak of
rhyme, in which for a moment he had adorned himself,
and with the plain but majestic front of a warrior,
with feet in the buskins of an actor, he presented
himself before the public. It fell in adoration
at his feet. The thunder of his tread shook
all the gods of rhyme from their immemorial
thrones, and from amid the ruins Greene, Nashe
and others lifted their protesting voices. Recognizing
him as the son of the clerk of the parish
church of St. Mary, Greene insisted that he could
not “write true English without the help of clerks
of parish churches,”10 and Nashe, like Gervinus in
his analysis of the “Shakespere” plays, saw in the
productions of this late graduate of Cambridge
and dramatic innovator, the lines of Seneca read
30
under the light of the English candle.11 But all
in vain was the outcry.
In the production of Tamburlaine he had with one
bound reached an eminence from which it was impossible
to dislodge him,12 and, in quick succession,
followed the dramas of Faustus, The Jew of Malta,
Edward the Second, and the Massacre at Paris.
These plays had been produced during a term of
six years, wherein he had alternated his afternoon
occupation as an actor at the Curtaine,13
with nights as a dramatic writer. These productions,
teeming with majestic lines, and filled with
a spirit from “translunary” sources, required not
the critical minds of a later school of commentators
to establish their worth.14 Some passages
are still recognized as having “no parallel in all the
range of tragedy.”15 Thus it was that at this
period he was throned in a school where all his
fellows were his servile imitators. Among them
were Nashe, Peele, and Lilly; but poor Greene,
with one more outburst against the “upstart crow,”
with “his tygres heart,”16 who could have been none
else than the writer whom he had attacked in 1587,
had finished his unfortunate career. And his
career was the one being pursued by all these fiery
and impatient souls. It was Marlowe, especially,
who had plunged into all the mad excesses of an
31
unbridled life,17 the temporary drift of a youth
with convictions unsettled by draughts from Greek
philosophers, senses inflamed by the voluptuousness
of Ovid, and an existence checkered by frequent
shadows of poverty and flitting gleams of
plenty. It was the unsettled state of vigorous
youth, augmented by the peculiar social conditions
then existing.
Upon the continent the civil wars of Henry IV.
had approached their close. In England the Starchamber
held its secret sessions; the block of the
executioner was kept warm with the blood of the
insecure nobility; while the torch for the fires
of heretics was never allowed to smolder. Elizabeth
had been on the throne 35 years; Francis
Bacon, with mind bent on pre-eminence as a
philosophic writer, was her counsel learned extraordinary,
and William Shakespere, six years
previously arrived from the obscure village of
Stratford-on-Avon, was a member of Lord Pembroke’s
Company of actors. There were no theaters
at that time within the walls of the city; histrionic
exhibitions being presented on the boards of the
“gorgeous playing houses erected in the fields.”
The edict against strolling players was rigorously
enforced; freedom of expression in matters of religious
belief was the subject of penal laws, and
any animadversions concerning the policy of the
government were declared treasonable.
As an evidence of the barbarity of the times,
32
the Southwark end of the London bridge was decorated
with the heads of thirty traitors, all of which
had fallen beneath the axe of the executioner after
the hanging and disemboweling of the bodies.
The tower held many martyrs of religion; and
Fleet Street prison, with its foul quarters, was the
abiding place of hopeless prisoners for debt. If
the pinch of poverty of itself was spur enough to
have produced the poems of Goldsmith, the wonder
at the immortal dramas and poems of the
Elizabethan era must vanish upon consideration
of what poverty and debt then meant, and the insecurity
of the beggar who gave expression to his
coin-producing thoughts.
It was during a time, thus out of joint, that
Hamlet and Richard the III. walked, as embodied
entities, from the brain of their author. Besides
the barbarity of the period, the intolerant spirit,
and the harsh laws, did any other factor add its
motive power toward these productions? Had
some crisis been reached in the life of the author
greater than that evolved through poverty and the
prospect of imprisonment alone?
33
Under the newly-cast sign of an iron dolphin
suspended before the ale-house of that name, the
two horsemen, who had ridden abreast from Finbury
Fields, dismounted for hasty refreshment.
While Tabbard was securing the horses near the
end of the long stone trough, at the front of the
building, his waiting companion was idly surveying
the suroundings.
Directly across the unpaved highway, he could
see the bulky steeple of the parish church of Saint
Botolph lifting itself into the misty air, and just
beyond the brick walls of the structure, the miserable
churchyard of Petty France. The few straggling
headstones of the graves of a multitude of
buried foreigners could be faintly discerned under
scrubby trees inclosed with a fence of crumbling
masonry. Its southern edge was bordered by the
town ditch, once broad enough for the defense of
the city, but now showing only a narrow black
34
mouth under the shadow of the old Roman wall.
The latter was near enough to be visible, and, coming
out of the fog from east and west, terminated
in stone bulwarks against which the ancient gates
of Bishopsgate were hung. These were swung
back, revealing a black expanse below which ran
the unseen road into the metropolis.
The scene was desolate in the extreme, but the
spirits of the silent observer had reached too high
a pitch of exaltation to be affected by any aspect
of Nature. The news brought him by the present
henchman of the Duke of Sussex and past servant
of the Golden Hind, had lifted his mind above
the plane where even thoughts of approaching
financial distress or fears of the plague could
arise, much less any sober-colored clouds be created
by what passed before the eye.
The bearer of the message, menial though he
was, had rendered too valuable a service to be
treated in any other manner than as a good fellow
of equal rank with himself. Hence, he had thrown
off the superiority he generally assumed amid the
common rabble, and after listening affably to the
remarks of Tabbard, had held him for a meal at
the Dolphin.
“How long will those gates be open?” asked Tabbard,
looking in the direction of the wall.
“Until ten o’clock, and even after that hour
you can pass through if you pound upon their fronts
loudly enough to wake the keeper, who sleeps within
the little black house close to the wall on the
35
southern side. But in pounding, mind thee, Tabbard,”
continued the speaker, with a smile, “see
to it that you do not mar the stone features of
the full length figure of King Richard the Second,
which with broken scepter in his hand, stands out
from the northern front of one of the rotting
gates.”
“He must have his face now against the wall,
for they are swung outward,” remarked Tabbard.
“Yes, for the nonce, as closely hidden as the
manner of his violent death.”
“Ah,” said Tabbard, his mind crowded with the
thoughts of the existing religious persecutions,
“did he espouse the cause of the Papists?”
“Nay, my good fellow, that was two hundred
years ago, when the fury of the church, then in
power, expended itself mainly in bulls of excommunication.
The violence of these days did not
exist; but still conflicting doctrines entertained
by the clergy disturbed the serenity of Rome,
and the chief heretic was Wycliffe, whom the
young king protected. That priest sowed the most
fruitful seeds of the Reformation; but none of the
Brownists or Puritans appear to recognize, amid
the tenets of their beliefs, the handwriting of that
master husbandman.”
“And I suppose that he was burnt, was he not?”
“After death.”
“In hell’s everlasting fire, eh?”
“Nay, I do not mean that. He died a natural
36
death; but many years after, his body was taken
from its grave and publicly burned.”
“Little it disturbed him, I wot,” remarked Tabbard.
“So it seems that fanaticism rests not even with
the death of the person on whom it would wreak
its fury, and it burns even in the breasts of men
as mild looking as yonder group of Puritans.”
He pointed to the middle of the road close before
them where several men were slowly walking toward
Houndsditch. The plainness of their dress,
of the same color from head to foot, and of exactly
similar cut, was in striking contrast with
the apparel of the two men whom they were passing.
Their broad brimmed hats were high-crowned and
flat at the top, and pulled down so low that only
four inches of face were visible above the deep collars
of their gray coats. The latter were hung
with heavy capes, and fronted with pin-head buttons
to the lowest point below their waists. Loose
breeches disappeared at their knees into rough
looking high-boots with great rolling tops.
Their appearance excited Tabbard to laughter.
Although still regarded as objects of ridicule by the
irreligious populace and the body of the established
church, the more thoughtful of those of adverse
belief were beginning to recognize in the Puritans’
open and covert attacks upon the follies and vices
of the times, the growth of a moral and political
power which likewise demanded forcible suppression.
37
Their railing libels against the clergy of the
established church had at length formed a pretext
for Parliament to pass an act that year making
Puritanism an indictable offense. Their assembling
had already been prohibited by the Black
Act of 1584.
Despite their persecution, the zeal of the dissenters
continued in their attacks upon what they
considered crying evils. They stood ready to apprehend
all offenders against such ecclesiastical
laws as upheld the truth and sacredness of religion
and the divinity of Christ. So far as Romanism
might be by them considered destructive of true
religion, they were ready to wield the sword forged
by the Episcopalian Parliament for the dismemberment
of the Papists. Many a non-conformist discovered
in the person of the prosecuting witness
swearing against him a member of the sect of
Brownists. But particularly in the case of apostates
and blasphemers the Puritans and Brownists
directed their efforts toward having meted out to
the offender the effective punishment provided by
law.
As the two men turned and approached the door
of the tavern, a man with deep-set eyes, sunken
nose and red-bearded face, and dressed in the garb
of a Puritan, hurriedly withdrew his face from a
window adjoining the entrance. The sinister expression
of his face had grown more pronounced
during the last moment of his survey of the newcomers;
for it was at them that his gaze had been
38
directed. It was evident that their approach had
disturbed him greatly; but the disturbance was
rather that of joy than of alarm. Still, whatever
the sight created or revived in the mind of Richard
Bame, the fanatic, his movements elicited the fact
that he was either not desirous of the impending
meeting, or that he considered that his presence
in another quarter would be more to his advantage.
He had seen the gentleman in the black cloak before,
but not to the knowledge of the latter, so
it was not the dread of an encounter that made
Bame turn and hasten toward the side-door of the
dimly lighted tap-room. It was the second step
which he had taken in what he considered a holy
cause; of most evil effect it might be to the man
approaching. As the former passed the big chair
in which the fat hostess of the Dolphin sat knitting
he muttered not too softly to be kept from ears already
aroused at the note of his departure:
“My chance to serve the church is ripe.”
He passed into the side alley leading to the high
road when the two men entered the room. The
leader spoke without giving the woman chance for
words of greeting:
“Good hostess, a hasty snack is what we want.”
“Of what shall it be?” she asked.
“Sack, cheese, bread and two pieces of meat as
big as your hand. Drop yourself there, Tabbard?”
The speaker had tossed his cloak over the back
of a chair as he spoke and as hastily filled another.
In impatience he drummed a tattoo with one of his
feet on the smooth oaken floor; and, apparently
39
without noting the freshness of the bare walls and
the chimney in which no fire had ever burned, his
eyes roamed around the room.
“Just built,” remarked Tabbard.
“Yes,” returned the hostess, setting the dishes
called for before the two strangers and smiling as
though she felt flattered over the knowledge that
her house was the subject of observation and comment.
“Where went the old building?” asked Tabbard.
The hostess turned her hand with thumb pointing
upwards and said, “In smoke.”
“Yes,” said Marlowe, whose scarlet doublet and
silver-corded belt had awakened the hostess’ admiration
and almost hushed her into respectful
awe, “I saw its blaze from as far south as the
Standard in Cheap. The old tavern was twice as
large as this, and being just outside the wall was
greatly frequented by travelers approaching London
late at night.”
“Do many stop here now?” inquired Tabbard.
“Not many at this season,” answered the hostess.
“The last one before you, kind sir,” she continued,
now turning her attention to Marlowe and
bowing so that her eyes caught only the sparkle
of his rapier’s hilt, “left just as you entered. He
acted strangely as he caught sight of you.”
“So, who was he?”
“He gave me no name, but as he went out I
heard him say: ‘My chance to serve the church is
ripe.’”
40
“How was he dressed?” asked Marlowe, suddenly
setting down his half-raised mug, and fixing his
eyes upon the hostess.
“Like a Puritan,” she answered.
“And what business have honest Puritans hanging
around the bars of ordinaries and taverns?”
exclaimed Marlowe, while Tabbard sneered audibly,
and asked:
“And of what appearance was this man who was
lounging here for the service of God?”
“His long red beard was all I noted,” she replied.
“I know him not,” said Marlowe, shaking his
head, and then he asked:
“Do you know his name?”
“Methinks that a man who was with him earlier
called him Bame at times, and again Richard.”
“Richard Bame!” exclaimed Marlowe, lifting his
eyebrows and gazing fixedly at the woman. “And
he said that his chance to serve the church was
ripe?”
“True,” nodded the hostess, with her fists against
her waist and continuing to look at her interlocutor
as though in expectation that he would explain
what interest he had in the man who had departed.
“Draw us two more cups, Mistress Bunbay,” he
said, noticing the inquisitive expression on the
woman’s face and desirous to get her out of earshot.
As the woman went towards the bar, he whispered
41
to Tabbard, “Good fellow, for the turn thou
hast done me in bringing news of the lady at
Deptford I would knight thee had I the power, or
enrich thee had I gold, but I have neither the one
nor the other, except a brace of angels of which
one is thine. Here put it in thy pocket and when
occasion offers drink to the health of thy friend
and to the confusion of all such fellows as just left
here. But now I would ask another service of
thee.”
“Speak, I am ready,” said Tabbard, picking up
the ten-shilling piece, and holding it as though he
would have it grow into his palm.
“The man who left here,” continued the other,
“is Richard Bame, who has sworn to secure my
arrest.”
“And for what?” exclaimed Tabbard. “Hast
thou committed a crime?”
“Nay, listen. He is a whining, canting hypocrite,
who has filed an accusation against me for
blasphemy. He hath no cause of grievance, and
his charges, if like what I have heard, are false.
Word of this was brought me but yesterday, and
friendly warning given that as soon as my whereabouts
were known, my arrest would follow. I said
as we journeyed across the fields, a short time
since, that I hung behind the crowd to avoid my
creditors, and that was partly true; but besides, I
was apprehensive of encountering a constable with
the writ issued upon the accusation. This Bame
42
hath been watching for me and is now going for
the officer, if I mistake not.”
“And what can I do for thee?” asked Tabbard,
excitedly. “The sword point is all too good for
him. How is it that Barrowe was burnt, and such
as he live?”
“He is either carried away by religious fervor
or is acting at the instance of some writer whom I
have grievously offended, but it matters not what
gives the spur to his actions,”18 continued Marlowe;
“I would not incite thee to do him violence.
As soon as I reach the County of Surrey, the writ
issued by the justice will be inoperative; but they
may stay me before I cross London Bridge. Nothing
must prevent my reaching the Golden Hind,
in Deptford, to-night.”
“And why not mount in haste and ride on now
down Bishopsgate Street to the Bridge?”
“The constable may be close at hand, and the
pair even now awaiting my departure. Then, again,
I must stop at my quarters in Coward Lane before
I leave the city.”
“Well, well,” exclaimed Tabbard, “give me the
word of action. I am ready.”
“Mount horse at once, and press after him. Did
you hear her description of him? A red-bearded
man with broad-brimmed hat and long gray coat.
If he encounters an officer and turns, haste thee
here before them with the warning. If he goes to
43
his journey’s end, you will find it at the office of
the justice at the corner of the Old Jewry and
Poultry Street. It was there that the charge
against me was sworn to. Ride down Bishopsgate
Street to Threadneedle and then into Poultry.
You will know the justice’s office by the red crown
in the stone wall above the doorway. Watch the
actions of the man. If a constable starts from the
office upon Bame’s arrival, see to it that such
officer is interrupted by hook or crook, until thou
hast reason to believe that London Bridge lies between
us.”
Tabbard had risen before the last word was
spoken, and saying, “You can trust me to keep
your way clear,” he disappeared.
The man Bame paused not a moment on reaching
the road, but hastily crossed the bridge over
the moat, passed through the wide gate and strode
on toward the south. Although he walked with
alacrity, a galloping rider coming in his wake had
overtaken him before he entered the street now
known as Threadneedle. Crowds of people were
moving in all directions, but the broad-brimmed
hat of the man on foot and his long coat could be
easily distinguished, and the rider, slackening his
horse’s pace, rode only fast enough to keep this
figure in view.
Contrary to the expectation of the rider, Bame,
instead of going into and through Poultry Street,
turned northerly and passed into Lothbury, by the
residences of rich merchants, by the Lothbury entrance
44
of the Windmill tavern, which was once a
Jewish synagogue, by the low-built stone shops of
coppersmiths and founders of candlesticks, lamps
and dishes, and around the corner of the Old
Jewry. Here before an arched entrance of the
long stone building, known as the Old or Prince’s
Wardrobe, he encountered a broad-shouldered man
in leather doublet and jerkin, and, as the two
halted for a moment, Tabbard dismounted and
tied his horse at the corner of the parish church
of St. Olave.
Tabbard could not overhear the conversation between
the two men; but as they moved, he followed
to a building with quaint gables projecting over
the broad windows of two upper stories and a wide
stone entrance, above which was a great crown
made of iron, set in the grimy wall, and painted
red. It was the house in which Thomas à Becket
first saw the light of day. Bame and his companion
entered this building, and Tabbard, leaning
against a thick window frame near the door, and on
a level with his breast, looked through one of the
small squares of glass.
Several candles had already been lighted in the
room, for the high walls of the structures facing
on the street, aided by the fog, made the interior
as obscure as the hold of a vessel with closed
hatches. He saw a man with periwig clapped on
his gray head, beard trimmed like an ace of spades
with sharp end down, and a loose taffeta gown,
girt at his gross waist by a buff leather belt. He
45
filled a chair large enough for two men as slender
as Tabbard, and had his eyes been less confused
by waking suddenly from a comfortable nap, or
wide open instead of blinking, he might have
seen the curious outsider.
Even Bame’s self-possession was disturbed in
the presence of the awakening conservator of the
peace, and as noiseless as a drummer in retreat
from battle, he bowed most humbly.
“Well,” thundered the dazed justice, “who now,
Gyves? Is this thy last catch? And is it bail or
the jail? What——”
“Nothing of that sort, your honor,” interrupted
the constable, for such he was.
“No,” began Bame, gaining confidence in himself
from the knowledge that the justice required
some information which he could advance, “I am
Richard Bame, who swore to the accusation of
blasphemy against——”
“Tut, tut, I know thee,” exclaimed the justice,
cutting him short and reaching across the table
for a folded paper, “here, Gyves, this is the warrant,”
he continued. “It hath lain here to await
information of the whereabouts of the rogue.
And where is he?”
“At the Dolphin tavern, in Bishopsgate, without
the wall,” answered Bame.
“I know not the place. Is it within the ward?”
“’Tis next outside the gate.”
“Then the arrest can be made there by this
constable.”
46
“True, your honor,” murmured the latter, “it is
the new ale-house this side of Fisher’s Folly where
the bowling alleys are.”
“Get you off, rascal, and bring him in.”
“He is a young man and wears a black cloak,
scarlet doublet, and cap with white feather. His
horse is gray and perchance you may meet him
on the road,” said Bame impressively and repeated
the description, while the constable kept nodding
his head in token of the reception and retention
of the words.
As the constable came from the justice’s office
into the street he ran into Tabbard who had
purposely placed himself in his way. The latter
gave utterance to a groan and limped as Gyves
stammered an apology for his apparent clumsiness.
“My leg,” whined Tabbard, “is badly knocked.
You must help me to the wine room of the Windmill
across the way.”
“I can do that much for you,” returned the constable,
taking his arm, and across the uneven street,
not yet lighted by the watchmen’s lanterns, nor
disturbed by the bellman’s drowsy tinkling, the
scheming Tabbard proceeded with his prospective
comrade for an evening’s carousal. Meanwhile the
man left at the Dolphin tavern, settled his bill,
mounted his horse and was riding down Bishopsgate
Street toward London Bridge.
47
The plague, which thinned the population of
London in 1593, was not wholly confined to the
city and its suburbs. Several of the villages lying
adjacent had been unable to bar its visitation.
Travelers on foot, on horse, or by boat upon the
Thames, had aided in spreading the germs. At
the village of Deptford, situate three and a half
miles from London Bridge, cases had increased so
that a quarantine had, as early as June the first,
been established against all boats approaching the
city side. It was not so easy to delay travel along
the public roads, and as yet the town lay open
for another visitation should the cases already within
its limits be suppressed.
Two wayfarers had been struck down before the
Golden Hind that day. Dodsman, the landlord
48
of this Deptford tavern, had allowed them to be
carried around to the stables, and left there to die,
which they did before night; and then, because of
fear of infection, he had discharged his two servants
who had attended them. It was a duty that
he owed to the traveling public, so he asserted,
and there seemed weight in the assertion. It is to
be supposed that any case within the tavern walls
would also have vitally affected his interests; for
he knew not whether the legal obligation to mark
a red cross on the outer door, with the text under
it of “Lord have mercy upon us” was strictly confined
to the limits of London. As it was, this
double death-stroke had carried consternation into
the crowd of refugees who, fleeing this far, had
complacently halted for the epidemic to die out.
If they did not depart on the morrow, it would be
because they trusted more to tavern walls than to
the open road.
On this particular night, being the night of the
day on which our narrative begins, the tavern
doors were closed. Only storms had heretofore
kept them from being open until midnight at least.
There was no reason to believe that death might
not just as easily enter through the keyholes as
through open portals, and throttle one at the
fireside; but closed quarters seemed to assure
safety. Dodsman, at least, felt no fear when thus
shut within his tap-room; and his constant rule
was to interpret other people’s feelings by the state
of his own when in like situations.
49
With his fat hands resting on the thick sill of a
window, he stood looking out into the uninviting
night. The diamond-shaped panes of variegated
colors were not the clearest material to look
through, but they were transparent enough for
him to see that the lantern hanging from the arm
of the high sign post at the tavern’s front was
lighted. The rays of this signal light had sufficient
penetration to reveal the wooden figure of a gilded
deer, of life size, mounted upon the sign post, and
any belated traveler upon the fog-wrapped road
could by these rays alone have seen the red-painted
facade of the building, its bulging upper windows
and the pedimented entrance.
The tavern had been erected early in the reign
of Henry the Eighth, so that the sunshine and tempests
of eighty years had fallen upon it. It was of
two stories, the second with bay windows; and its
rambling front, plastered and painted red, rose
close to the edge of the highway. A few straggling
dwellings of Deptford lay on the north and
west side of it, but the town proper lay so far to the
south and east that the tavern itself might almost
be termed a wayside inn. There was another house
for travelers, at Redriffe, but this was much meaner
in pretensions, and interfered little, if at all, with
the business of the Golden Hind. The pretensions
of the latter were considerable, if from the
gleams of art and the occasional display of extravagance
in the interior decorations, were to be drawn
an opinion in regard to want, or excess, of show.
50
There was stucco work in the ceiling of the tap-room,
not plain, but bearing raised arms, which
better befitted the walls of the dining room of
some castle. In each corner, close to the ceiling,
were medallion figures of satyrs, while full-length
images of these sylvan demi-gods danced on raised
panels in the center of each side of the room,
painted there with apparent reckless abandonment.
One smaller than the others was over the door,
another was between two square windows at the
north, another repainted so that the original lower
goat legs and hoofs of the figure were surmounted
by a like body and head and horns, shone, in
broken colors, from above the bar, while the last
of the four, recently retouched but not altered,
stood out on the wide chimney above the black
fireplace.
This satyr was not the only decoration of the
chimney-piece, for above it a great bat extended
its dusky wings, and under it hung a long bow
such as were even then used at the practice of
archery in Finbury Fields, and other commons in
the vicinity of London.
There were other paintings in the rooms besides
those in the panels. From the cracked appearance
of their canvas, and dingy hues, they gave evidence
of greater age than the cruder work of the former;
but of the collection of the portraits of two kings,
one landlord and an oxhead, not one would have
been attributed to an Italian master. Which were
51
of the kings and which was of the ox could be still
distinguished upon careful observation.
The bar ranged on one side, and seemed of different
growth from the room, for there was nothing
ornate about it except the decanters and bottles
on the shelf behind it. It appeared to have been
dragged in after some predecessor of Dodsman had
planned to adapt the room to uses other than those
of dining, for which it had been originally designed.
Hence, tap-room it was, with its sanded
floor, round tables, uncomfortable wooden chairs,
wherein the unrest of occupants could only be
drowned in sack or ale, despite the inharmonious
garnishments of walls and ceilings.
At the moment the landlord was staring through
the window, the short hand on the copper face of
the old clock behind the bar was pointing to the
figure eight. Several candles in bronze holders at
the angles of the chimney, and at both ends of the
bar, were blazing; and above the room’s center, the
immense brass chandelier hung with every one of
its big lamps lighted. Directly under it stood a
round table bearing on its top several silver mugs.
At the table were three men. They were all
young in years, without trace of past cares, and undisturbed
with apprehensions of the future. Two
of the trio were attired in black doublets and hose,
and to judge by their dress or faces were little
likely to attract attention in any place. Their
dark cloaks were hung against the wall at the back
52
of their chairs, and their hats were on the floor beside
them.
The other member of the group was of more
distinguished appearance. His age was apparently
thirty years. Although smooth-shaven and of
British cast of countenance there was something
about him that bespoke the foreign extraction
of the man. It was not in his speech, for his
English accent was perfect; neither was it in his
dress, for that, although rich and elaborate, was
clearly of the style peculiar to the better class of
London residents. His coat of buff color, with
loose sleeves, was edged with ruffles at collar and
wrists, and was the most striking feature of his
dress. He appeared a gentleman of quality, and
as though he recognized his superiority over his
companions, he kept his head covered with a broad-brimmed
felt hat. It was thrown back on his head
so that the long black plumes touched his shoulder.
The two men first described were members of the
Earl of Sussex’s company of actors; their companion
was one known as Francis Frazer, nicknamed
the Count by those who had heard of his
asserted claims to an estate on the continent, or had
known him before his imprisonment in the Tower,
from which place he had issued under his present
name. He claimed to be a member of the scattered
family of La Marche, of royal lineage, but driven
by the fury of the civil wars of France to remain
an exile from that country.
His recitals of the wrongs suffered by his father,
53
and the obstacles that impeded his own return to
the land of his nativity, were confused when, at
times, he became communicative over his cups.
In sober moments a veil, impenetrable as steel,
concealed from chance companions even the events
of the yesterday of the man; and chance companions
were all that he associated with. He had no
followers, no local habitation, and was looked upon
as an adventurer.
His constant disappearances from one haunt for
months, and then reappearances, without word of
departure, notice of expected return, or disclosure
of the place and purpose of his absence, naturally
made him an object of suspicion. Once he had
been thrown into the Tower, and, after languishing
for two years under a charge that fell to pieces
when the attention of the body in authority was
turned to it he was liberated, but not without a
warning for him to keep himself in retirement. It
was because of this warning that he had adopted
the name of Frazer.
On this evening the two actors and Frazer had
been thrown together in the tap-room. One of the
former and Frazer had met before, so that, from
their first calls for ale, there was enough of good-fellowship
between them to keep the cup circling.
Besides the mugs upon the table, was another article
that seemed strangely out of place. It was the
naked sword of the so-called Count, with its basket
hilt close in front of the owner. It lay there glistening
under the light of the lamps like a menace
54
to good cheer and humor. The handle of the
sword and the handle of the mug were constantly
encountering each other, as the owner, at intervals,
reached for, quaffed from, and reset the latter.
Its presence had raised no comment, until the
red-headed tapster, in placing a re-filled mug upon
the table, spilt some of the contents upon the glistening
steel. In doing this he had reached across
Frazer’s knees and before he could withdraw his
arm and fully recover his balance, a strong hand
caught him by the shoulder and flung him backwards
upon the floor.
Dodsman turned from the window, as he heard
the fall, and the clatter of an empty mug. He
circled around the sprawling man and approached
the group, which was laughing boisterously at the
tapster’s mishap. Mine host, concealing his anger
with the policy of one who knew that the dents in
his silverware could only be offset by the fund
which must follow from the carousal, simply said:
“How now, fellow? Curses upon thy clumsiness,”
to his man, and then looked inquiringly at
the Count.
“He’s wet the blade which only blood should
stain,” said its owner, drawing it across his knee.
Again they laughed.
“And why is it drawn except in defense of
honor, or the Queen?” asked Dodsman.
Frazer scowled, but the host with his white
beard, red cheeks and pleasant eyes was no mean
55
appearing person, and the former felt called upon
to say:
“When death stalks so close to one as he has for
the past two weeks in London streets, it is well
to have thy weapon drawn at all times.”
“A ready reply,” returned Dodsman, “but of no
great weight.”
“Well,” said the other, “if straight answer you
must have, I had drawn it to exhibit it. It is
seldom that a blade of this character falls into
the hands of any one save a peer of the realm.
Look at it closely, mine host,” he exclaimed, holding
it aloft in the direction of Dodsman, and wielding
it with the ease and grace of one accustomed
to its use.
“Dost see its variegated watered appearance?”
he continued, “like those of Damascus make.
Such it might be deemed to be, but here it bears
the stamp of Andrea de Ferrara. How many two-edged
blades of Toledo didst thou ever see drawn?”
“Few, good Count, but the less the better. This
is a quiet house. I aim for the entertainment of
those, whom, whilst they here talk war and duels,
go elsewhere to engage in them.”
Several loud knocks at the outer door now resounded
through the room. The tapster, who meanwhile
had raised himself from the floor, shot back a
bolt and drew in one wing of the two massy doors.
The darkness of the night could not conceal the
mud-set stones of the pavement, for the lights of the
room streamed upon them. A man stood there,
56
with cloak wrapped close to his form and as high
as his eyes, apparently to keep from his face the
increasing fog of the night. He held the bridle of
a horse in one hand and handing this to the serving
man, he strode into the room. As he swung
back his cloak, the face was disclosed of the man
who had ridden with Tabbard from Finbury
Fields.
One of the two actors recognized him at once
and cried out:
“Welcome, Kit. Thy tankard is ready.”
He turned from noticing that the time by the
clock was only a few minutes past eight, and with
a remark to Dodsman to see to it that his horse
was properly fed and bedded, went over to the
party of three men.
“Already lodged near Sayes Court?” He spoke
interrogatively.
“Yes,” rejoined one of the others. “You know
the Count?”
“Most assuredly,” he answered.
Frazer nodded his head with the remark: “I remember
the one occasion.”
“In the tireing room at the Curtain, last winter,
when between the acts in Tamburlaine, you showed
me the counter parades in quarte and tierce. I
have since put the lesson to good use, and have
brought the house down by its exhibition. Didst
thou ever see him fence, Bartol?” he inquired of
the actor who was seated opposite himself.
“Not I,” answered Bartol.
57
“It would do your heart good unless the encounter
were in real earnest and thyself an actor in it.
And then thy life would not be worth a tuppence.
How ready lies thy blade for an occasion of that
kind,” he added, noticing the sword still laid
across the table.
“Your praise is high,” said Frazer. “As for the
sword, the hilt, when in its place, interferes with
my elbow when I drink.”
“Three reasons now for its drawing,” murmured
the landlord to himself, as, near at hand, he
had been quietly listening to the conversation.
“The fourth reason will undoubtedly be the true
one.”
“And when did you leave the city?” asked
Bartol.
“Nearer seven than six by the clock in the tower
at the Southwark end of the London Bridge,” answered
the late comer.
“Did you pass the morris-dancers?”
“Will Kemp and his company?”
“Yes, they left here late in the day. His taborer
and two pretty dancers were with him,” said
Bartol.
“They were performing on the bridge as I rode
across it. I reined in my horse near the center
of the bridge before the chapel of St. Thomas.
There they danced in the narrow way, with nearly
every inhabitant of the bridge either standing
crowded in a circle around them or looking out of
58
the windows of their darksome shops. It delayed
me long.”
“But not against thy will, I am sure,” remarked
Frazer, looking searchingly at the speaker, over
his raised cup.
“And why so?”
“Were the fair dancers no attraction? If they
were not, there must have been something pulling
thee strongly in this direction. Perhaps it is
a fairer lady.”
He seemed to speak advisedly.
“True,” chuckled the landlord to himself, “and
I wonder does he know that she who was once the
sweet maid of Canterbury lieth here?”
“If so,” returned Marlowe with some irritation
caused by the tones of Frazer, “it is not a matter
either for mention or discussion.”
“We will drink to her,” interrupted Bartol,
“be she fair or plain, maid or spouse, young or
old. Here is to thy loadstone, Kit.”
“Not without mention of her name,” said Frazer,
coldly.
“You will drink to her unknown or not at all,”
responded Marlowe, with considerable animation.
“Then not at all,” returned Frazer.
The two men stared at each other as though the
breath of a coming quarrel had touched their
faces.
“Come,” exclaimed the actor, who thus far had
remained silent. “This is a raw gust that bloweth.
If the gentleman knoweth a lady, I warrant she is
59
sweet enough for all glasses to be emptied in her
praise and honor. But he has not said that he
knoweth any. And, on the other hand, if the
other gentleman hath some one in mind, whom
he would not pledge in reckless sort, is that not
good reason to let his lips go dry? Come, Dodsman,
hast thou a box and dice?”
“Tug, the box,” said the landlord to the tapster.
“Is it to be at hazard?” asked Bartol.
“What you will,” answered the other.
“Set down thy mug,” he thundered to Marlowe,
who seemed wrapped in other thoughts.
“And Count,” said the landlord, “I will set thy
sword here against the wall.”
“Well, enough,” smoothly remarked the one
addressed, who, adventurer as he was, at mention of
the dice let all his thoughts of quarrel slip.
“You three play,” said Marlowe, “I will look
on.”
“As usual——” began Bartol.
“With only the dregs of a once full bottle,” muttered
Marlowe, finishing his friend’s remark.
60
The excitement of watching the game of hazard,
in which Frazer and the two actors had become engaged,
was not sufficient to absorb the thoughts
of the man who was simply an observer. At each
lucky throw of the dice, he longed to become a participator
in the game; and at length, smothering his
early fears of being left penniless, he placed a sum
of money upon the table, and was soon rising and
sinking with the vicissitudes of chance.
His one angel rapidly grew into a brace of gold
pieces, and with the increase of his success the
stakes were raised in proportion. Still sweet fortune
breathed her hot breath upon his cheeks and
the other players muttered morosely and swore
savagely at each rattle of the cup and roll of the
cubes.
The business of the tapster had not been stayed
61
by reason of the excitement of the play, but on
the contrary it led him back and forth from the
bar, to the round table under the lit lamps, with
movements which were scarcely interrupted by an
interval of rest. All of this was quietly observed
by Dodsman, who, having lighted a pipe of long-leaf
and ensconced himself, with almost closed eyes,
in a tilted chair near at hand, kept repeating to
himself the lines:
Bartol had at length offered to pledge his long
cloak, and after a haggle about the sum to be
raised, in which the repetition of the drinking
lines was interrupted, Dodsman had advanced the
owner ten shillings upon the article. Again the
play went on, and the copper clock had struck
the hour of nine. Its strokes had been unnoted
even by the man who upon his late arrival had
marked that hour as one of joyful summons.
There were hot heads, at that time, at the table,
and no sounds except those arising upon its upper
surface and close around its edges were noticed.
The door opposite to the outer entrance opened
and a serving man entered. He looked sharply at
the four men at the table, and then, limping across
the floor, touched the man in scarlet doublet on the
shoulder. The latter turned his head and the
menial said:
62
“A word with you, sir.”
It required no words for Marlowe to understand
the nature of the proposed communication; for the
interruption had brought him to the realization of
matters outside of the circle he had just broken.
But in order to learn the exact import of the words
tendered him, he withdrew with the man to one
side.
“I come to tell you,” said the servant, in a whisper,
“that you are expected.”
“Now?”
“At once.”
“At the door——”
“With the carved panels,” muttered the serving
man, as Marlowe placed a silver piece in his hand.
The rattle of the dice still continued.
“Take my place at the table,” said Marlowe, approaching
the landlord, and then he added to the
players, “I will return immediately.”
He had no reason to believe that he would make
a prompt return, but as most of the money which
had been wagered lay in his own pockets, he felt it
incumbent upon him to avoid any remonstrance
by making this statement. If he had noticed the
changing color of the Count’s face, and the determined
expression that gathered upon it at this
moment, it might have caused him to have paused
at some point along the line of his proposed
venture to ascertain the reason of this apparent
solicitude; but it had escaped his observation.
A moment after his departure from the tap-room
63
he was hurriedly ascending the stairway in
the Golden Hind. His haste, although like that
of one pursued, was occasioned wholly by the force
of attraction. He had no cause to believe his time
limited, nor that any one might be enough interested
in, or disturbed by, his presence there to attempt
to thwart him.
It was true that Tabbard had spoken of some
one, who that day had caused the lady to cut short
her message for him; but such person may have
been merely a friend whom she did not desire to
know of her converse with the serving-man.
In his haste he had not stopped to make any inquiry
of Dodsman concerning the lady’s friend or
friends at the tavern. If he had considered for a
moment, he would have remembered that both
Manuel Crossford and his daughter had been well
known to the landlord, and the occasion of her
presence here could have been easily ascertained.
He had thought of making such inquiry prior to
his entrance, but the three men, and later the game
of hazard, had diverted his mind. Besides these
diversions, the many cups of ale which he had
drained were not conducive to quick wit or sober
thought. However, his failure to learn more of his
surroundings occurred to him as he climbed the
stairs, but no lover at the last step to the tryst
ever yet turned back for an answer which in any
case could not have swerved him from his course.
“I suppose I shall run into the arms of her
64
morose and irascible sire, before I catch a glimpse
of her face,” he thought.
He reached the second story, passed along the
hall a short distance and then halted. The door
that stood before him was emblazoned with a shield
lying flat against two spears. They were carved
on the center panel, which occupied nearly the
whole space between the posts. There was no
other portal displaying elaborate decoration. The
walls and ceiling of the passage were timbered
with chestnut, without finish and in striking contrast
to the door. This was undoubtedly the entrance
to the room into which, as told by Tabbard,
the woman had so hurriedly disappeared. It stood
ajar, as though speaking an invitation to enter
without knocking. Without hesitation he pushed
it open.
The room revealed was at one end of the tavern
and its two latticed windows overlooked a side
street. The walls were unrelieved except for a
red arras hanging against the center of one, a
black chimney-mouth breaking the dead surface
of another, and the two windows setting deep in the
wall furthest from the door. The few pieces of
furniture were of antique manufacture, and a carpet—an
unusual article for houses at that period,
except city inns and private mansions—lay upon
the floor. A table stood near the chimney, and on
it was a candelabrum. All of its lights were burning.
If the fact of the existence of these general outlines
65
of the room and its intimate belongings, were
conveyed to the brain of the intruder, he was unconscious
of the same, for their projection upon
his retina was destroyed by the sight of one sole
object. At the creak of the hinges, a woman,
seated on a chair beside the table, raised her eyes.
It was this living figure that rushed into his vision
with a violence productive of slight symptoms of
syncope.
The eyes which caught and returned the glance
of his own would have glorified a face of even
the meanest features, so wonderfully brilliant were
they, so tender in their expression; but the countenance
that they illumined was perfect in outline,
and not dependent upon the eyes to win the admiration
of the dullest observer. The curve of her
dark and finely-pointed eyebrows could have successfully
eluded the imitation of a painter, and
their color was in striking contrast with the
wealth of golden hair which crowned her low and
broad forehead. If the chin and nose gave evidence
of determination and ability to control, they
did not detract one iota from the beauty of the
whole. But the mouth was as much the mirror
of the soul as were the eyes. The pink lips bespoke
the keenest sensibilities, and their delicate
contour proclaimed even in repose that they were
ready torches to convey the fiercest blaze of passion.
While she remained seated, it could not be determined
whether her figure was in keeping with
the beauty of her face. But that such was the case
66
could be assumed from the queenly poise of her
head, supported on a neck, which, if in marble,
would have been attributed to the execution of a
Greek chisel. The latter was exposed, for the high
ruff, invariably worn at that period by ladies, had
been removed for the sake of comfort. This assumption
of grace of proportion was confirmed into
absolute knowledge, when upon seeing the figure
of a man in full view upon the threshold, she rose
from her chair.
It was her movements, perhaps, more than her
figure that would have drawn the concentrated
gaze of a crowded drawing-room upon her. The
perfect symmetry of her form and rich eastern
look, however, would have held attention long
after the magnetism created by the grace of her
carriage had lost its spell. If her movements, entirely
aimless so far as concerned an ordinary observer,
could have exerted such influence upon the
latter, it would be difficult to imagine, much less
describe, the effect upon the one who unconsciously
was the magnet that attracted this veritable
Cleopatra.
He may have trembled with emotion; a mist may
have gathered in his eyes; his dreams of eternal
fame now assuming a definite mould may have been
shaken into mere figments of the brain in the presence
of this, to him, the only reality of life, of time,
of eternity. But whatever were his sensations, or
their outward expressions, they were drowned and
67
hidden in the tumult of his passion as the woman
threw herself into his arms.
No words needed to be spoken in this sacred
communion of minds. Even a whisper would have
jarred the perfect communication of thought and
feeling. Amid more auspicious surroundings, no
disturbing element could have intruded; but even
in the faintness produced in the woman by his impetuous
assault upon her lips, she shook with apprehension
of coming evil.
“Cease, cease,” she gasped, endeavoring to disengage
herself from his arms. “Ah, you know not
our unsteadfast footing.”
He did not release her, but the sound of her voice
broke down the floodgates of his long voiceless
thoughts. They came in a torrent.
“Why are you here? Why have you been silent?
Didst thou not love me? What is the meaning of
thy splendid dress, thy demeanor that showeth
contact with more luxurious modes of life than
those to which you were late accustomed?”
“O, Marlowe, Marlowe!” she exclaimed in answer,
“my life has been cast amid rapids upon
whose surface I have been as helpless as the drift.
Through all, thy image has been before me; but
apparently with face unresponsive to my silent appeals.
The reconciliation for which I prayed
has come at length, but, ah, too late.”
“How? I do not understand. Why do you so
speak? Too late? How is thy situation changed?
My love for thee is still the same as of old. And
68
I were dull of comprehension not to interpret this
exhibition of feeling on thy part as a symbol that
the old love, which you once bore toward me, remains.”
“Yes,” she answered, “but hopeless.”
“Why hopeless? Speak, speak!” he demanded.
“There is no safety,” she protested. “Danger
lurks about us. Even now we may be trifling with
death. Frazer departed only an hour since to see a
friend on a vessel that lies at the wharf in the town.
He contemplates a voyage to Italy.”
“Frazer?” questioned Kit, still embracing her,
not yet realizing the real condition of affairs.
“Yes, the Count,” she answered.
And at that moment, as though in answer to his
name so faintly spoken, the Count appeared at the
open doorway.
While sudden had been the passage of Marlowe
from the lower room to the one in which he now
stood; while his pausing at the door and his greeting
of the woman had consumed but an additional
moment, enough time had passed for the so-called
Count also to withdraw from the tap-room,
and make the same passage. It had taken longer,
for he had attempted to make it noiseless. His
following of Marlowe had not been occasioned by
groundless suspicions of the latter’s purpose in
withdrawing from the tap-room. Although he had
never had cause to suspect his wife of infidelity, he
was convinced when he noticed the departure of
the actor that a meeting was about to take place in
69
which he, himself, had a vital interest. This conviction
was the result of his having accidentally
heard the words which his wife had spoken at
noon that day to Tabbard. This request of hers
for a meeting with some one, coming close, as it
had, on the heels of a quarrel, concerning the contemplated
voyage to the continent, made him suspect
an elopement. With whom it was to be attempted
he had obtained no knowledge. Soon
after their marriage, Anne had realized the intensely
jealous nature of the Count, and this had kept
her from any mention of her old lover. At the
meeting between husband and wife, immediately
after his overhearing her words to Tabbard, the
Count had kept his own counsel. As night came
on he had lulled all fears of discovery which she
might hate entertained, by departing with the announcement
that he was going aboard the “Petrel”
and would return near midnight. He went
no further than the tap-room, where, awaiting developments,
with the calmness of one who knowingly
holds a winning hand, he had met and
watched the three actors. It was not until Marlowe
arose at the summons of the serving-man
that the Count’s suspicions became centered, and
as the lower door closed on the former’s withdrawal,
the latter with hasty remarks of disinclination to
continue the game, also strode from the room. He
had not even paused to sheathe his sword, and with
it held in tense grasp pointing before him, with one,
foot advanced into the apartment and the other
70
on the threshold, he stood a spectator of the ardent
meeting of the lovers.
It might be thought that the vitality of the
mind’s picture of a scene from human life depends
upon the peculiarity or vigor in action of the original.
But that the duration and strength of
existence of such a picture is not to be measured by
this criterion is shown in our evanescent remembrance
of even the most thrilling plays. Upon
what principle is it that a scene is perpetually held
in unfading colors in the shifting gallery of the
mind? How is it that one particular spectacle in
the vast panorama of daily vision is alone singled
out, and swept into our dreams forever? It is
never our voluntary selection, for it is frequently
a scene of direst woe, or horror almost indescribable,
all of which we would willingly forget.
In determining these questions we turn our
thoughts from the object to the recipient, and we
find that the secret lies in the condition of sensitiveness
of the latter at the moment of impression.
Thus, if at that moment, the soul is at the
point of supreme exaltation, or in the lowest depths
of despair, the object that brings about a sudden
and absolute change of feeling becomes one of the
undying pictures of the mind.
This explains why it was that Anne’s view of
the Count in the doorway, at the moment of her
surrender to Marlowe, shot every feature, every
line, every shade of the face of the former, as he
then appeared to her, into the chambers of her
71
brain and fastened them there forever. Even at
her dying hour, obscuring the visions of the then
wished-for countenances of those she loved, was
that face with its gleaming eyes, its air of desperation
and insolent command, its cheeks on which
the flush of wine and the pallor of suppressed rage
contended for exhibition, its nostrils expanded
into a sneer, and its lips expressive of determined
violence. It was the picture of an avenger gloating
over the assured prospect of the near fulfillment
of a murderous vow.
The woman in her fright had disengaged herself
from the embrace, and with the apprehension of
coming disaster written plainly on her face, stood
at one side gazing at the two men. As she did so,
she could not restrain an exclamation of wonder
at the striking resemblance between them. They
were of much the same height and figure; both
faces were devoid of beard; their features seemed
to have been cast in the same mold; their flashing
eyes of somewhat similar color, and the dark hair
of each hung heavy and luxuriantly. She had
thought of this resemblance before, and it was the
first attraction she had discovered in Frazer, and
the last that had continued to bind her to him.
But at no time had she considered this resemblance
so pronounced as this meeting proved it to be.
They seemed like two brothers in appearance, and
the impending combat was like a horrible travesty
of life furnished solely to excite her commiseration.
72
Marlowe had turned and half drawn his rapier,
while his cloak, hurriedly unclasped at his throat,
had fallen to the floor. It was the Count who first
broke the oppressive silence.
“My suspicions were right,” he said, looking at
the woman. “And thou,” he hissed, glaring at the
man, “draw thy sword. I could kill thee like a
rat, but the boldness of thy entry here entitles
thee to more consideration. Thou art not a coward
in every sense of the word.”
He deliberately turned like one who had a grave,
but not a dangerous task on hand, shut the door
and bolted it. As he turned he calmly rolled back
the ruff from his sword hand, and threw his hat
whirling from his head.
Marlowe, in the meantime, with his eyes glancing
from one to the other of the two persons thus
confined with himself, had drawn his weapon. Not
yet did he understand the cause of the woman’s
alarm, nor why this man with rude intrusion and
with an air of injured dignity and violence, faced
and threatened him at the sword’s point. His face
was blanched, his hand trembled and he involuntarily
retreated for a step or two. He knew the
expertness of the man before him in handling a
foil, and he could not prevent the knowledge of his
critical situation from displaying itself by outward
symbols.
Frazer smiled at his evident distress.
“You fear me,” he said.
The other did not respond, but he made a
73
further effort to conceal his anxiety, and more attentively
observed every movement of the man
who was thus forcing him to mortal combat. From
what he had previously seen of Frazer he had not
been impressed with the idea that he was possessed
of a superabundance of courage, and he
could not but entertain the opinion that the confidence
and bravery now displayed arose from the
fact that his own inexpertness was thoroughly
known. He is probably a coward at heart, he
thought, and with this he regained confidence in
himself.
“I did not know,” again said the Count, “which
one of the three was expected here. The exhibition
of my trusty sword was no warning, it seems.”
“You must hold the characters of those with
whom you come into contact in light consideration,
if you think that merely the showing of a sword
would keep one in awe,” retorted Marlowe, ruffled
by the remark.
“What! I thought you had swallowed your
tongue in your fright!” exclaimed the other, with
a sneer.
“Look to it that yours is not wagging its last,”
returned Marlowe, sternly.
The lights of the candelabrum on the table
burned as steadily as those of a death-chamber.
They threw the shadow of the Count against the
red arras, behind which, in the alcove, stood the
bed for the apartment; and more darkly projected
the figure of his antagonist upon the white wall between
74
the latticed windows. They showed the
colorless face of the woman which, with its sad
expression, was of such striking beauty, that in
the momentary glimpse afforded at the point of
non-action, one would have scarcely noted the
grace of her carriage or the elegance of her attire.
“By what pretended infringement of any rights
of thine do you force this duel?” asked Marlowe.
“Pretended!” sneered Frazer. “Is not your presence
here a violation of all the sacred rights of a
home?”
“What, are you this lady’s husband?” asked Marlowe,
and with amazement he looked at the woman,
who did not endeavor to return an answer.
“Your question is ill-timed,” exclaimed Frazer,
advancing. “Defend yourself!”
He lunged forward, but Marlowe had thrown
himself on guard, and the thrust was skillfully
parried. The blades rang sharply, and it seemed
that the candles blazed upward with a fiercer light.
The Count assumed the aggressive from the first;
but if his demeanor indicated his real feelings, it
was that of an executioner rather than an avenger.
He was cool and deliberate, showing neither passion
nor fury. As contrasted with this, his opponent
fought with the strength of despair.
Whether it was that the woman read these expressions,
or that the moves of the combatants interpreted
to her the situation and its probable final
issue, she felt that nothing but a miracle could
avert the impending calamity. She saw, as in a
75
glass darkly, the bleeding body of her lover, and
with a cry she fell forward on her knees at Frazer’s
feet.
“Spare him, Count,” she moaned.
She had clasped his knee; but never taking his
eyes from those of the man before him, he rudely
shook her off.
“So, it is I you would see slain,” he muttered,
savagely.
His opponent was showing greater skill than he
had anticipated, and his face grew graver in its
expression. Clash, clash, clash, rang the blades,
and the stamp of feet upon the checkered carpet
grew quicker and heavier. Still the actor retreated
in curves around the room, and still the Count
pressed him.
Suddenly the unforeseen happened. The Count
found his foot entangled in the folds of the cloak
which Marlowe had let fall upon the floor. He endeavored
to kick it aside but lost his equilibrium.
The other became the aggressor, and with a desperate
lunge, as the Count stumbled, he thrust his
rapier blade deep into the eye and brain of the
latter. The stricken swordsman gave utterance to
a savage but suppressed cry of pain. The temporary
check to his fall only increased its impetus
when the rapier was wrenched from its lodgment,
and with a crash he descended to the floor.
All sounds lay hushed with the fall. The living
man looked speechlessly at his antagonist outstretched
with face downward on the carpet, and
76
still retaining a dying clutch upon the hilt of his
sword. The end had come so unexpectedly that
for a moment the survivor did not grasp the full
extent of his victory nor the consequences of the
deed. He leaned over the unfortunate man and
turned him on his back. He saw that he was beyond
the aid of earthly power. He heard him
breathe in gasps, and then, trembling like an aspen,
he dropped his own rapier upon the floor and
leaned back against the wall.
77
The termination of the combat awakened feelings
in the woman varied in their character and following
one another with the speed of successive
thoughts. She was stunned with the suddenness of
the close; horror-stricken with the violence of the
catastrophe; elated with the escape of Marlowe,
find tremulous with sympathy for the unfortunate
slain. In her silent prayer for the deliverance of
Marlowe, she had only thought of it through deliberate
truce, or interference from without. No
idea of his escape through the death of his antagonist
had occurred to her. She could not have
prayed for such catastrophe, and even the wish
was foreign to her mind. All the confidence that
Fraser had displayed had been impressed upon her,
and there had been nothing in the prolonged,
though skillful, resistance of Marlowe that had
raised a doubt over the dreaded outcome.
Faint with her loss of hope for mercy on the
part of Frazer, she had crept to the door with the
78
idea of throwing it open and alarming the house.
With one hand on the bolt and the other on the
knob she had turned her face for a last look at the
combatants. It was at this moment that the coup
de grace was given. She turned about and started
forward with a low cry, partly of relief, partly of
anguish, partly of horror.
There was something in the agonized face of the
wounded man, that, while it awakened her pity, repelled
her. He was still clutching his sword as
though to thrust it at his unseen adversary, and
the point of the trembling blade danced on the carpet.
Her impulse had been to afford him succor,
but the sight of his dying struggles, and the weakness
of her limbs prevented. She sank on a couch
before one of the walls, and, as though fascinated
by the scene that had rendered her momentarily
powerless, she continued to gaze upon it.
The morbid curiosity that controls an observer
of the strongest agonies appears to give the lie to
the belief that man is naturally humane; or why
does resistance against impending death attract
more than beauty or the peacefully sublime? Our
resistance against observation availeth not, until
the issue is no longer in doubt. Is it not because
the glow and fire of intense action is communicated
from the actor to the spectator? for even frailty
of physical body, or purity of mind can not close the
eyes at that point where in the supreme struggle
neither life nor death appears to have complete
mastery? But when the horror has reached its
79
climax, interest fails with the cessation of action,
and if death hath prevailed, then at length we hide
our faces.
Thus it was that the woman was controlled; thus
it was that, speechless and with straining vision,
she caught every move of the man before her.
His struggles grew less; his gaspings more prolonged
and choked, until with a last effort he partly
raised himself and then fell back motionless. The
death-rattle escaped from his lips, and from the
ensuing silence, the woman knew that the body
upon the floor was lifeless; but she saw it not.
She had long desired a separation from this man,
but not at such sacrifice. She thought not of it
then, even with the old love returned and every
obstacle apparently swept aside. It was the
thought of murder done that surged in and out,
and in and out, of her mind.
And Marlowe, still against the wall, seemed reeling
with the burden of his thoughts. He saw not
the woman with terror-stricken face before him; he
saw not the flaring candles, the fallen chairs, the
naked swords upon the floor, the bleeding body
near his feet. All these objects were before his
open eyes, but the horror of the scene had bred
new and shifting phantoms. The spirit which in
quiet meditation had bodied forth the good and
evil angels of Faustus, the harnessed emperors of
Tamburlaine and the dying Edward, now saw itself
in body hounded by the officers of the law; saw
80
the impassive judge, the dull jury, and the shadow
of the gallows.
He saw the honors of Cambridge blotted with
stains indelible; the averted face of Walsingham,
his patron; the sad countenance of Manwood,
under whose flattering praise and financial aid he
had pursued his studies. And, closer still, he saw
the troubled and pallid face of that one woman,
who, with steadfast faith in his genius and undying
hope in his ultimately glorious career,
prayed ever for him under the home-roof in Canterbury.
Was she—his mother—to hear of his
trial, and death under sentence of the law? And
Marlowe, what of thyself?
In the train of these dark presentiments of what
the material life promised, came now the heavy
clouds wrought through consideration of the
aspect of his ideal world. The treble darkness of
night was about him. The dreams with which he
had nursed his ambition vanished. And that ambition
how deplorably annihilated. He who had
written:


“Virtue solely is the sum of glory,
And fashions men with true nobility,”


required no posthumous lines to point his place
among the immortals. What dramas stood on the
same eminence with Faustus and Edward the Second?
Were not the gates of the inner temple
opening wide before him? Were not his fancy’s
wings gathering strength for greater flights? The
flush of youth at nine-and-twenty was upon him;
81
the fate of a murderer awaited him. Of reasoning
faculty sublime, he shuddered at the thought
of his name being eternally linked with crime.
In this agony, all thoughts of the original purpose
of his presence in the room, all consideration
of the woman, were buried as though beneath ice.
It was the contrasted thoughts of the height from
which he had fallen with the depth that he had
reached that pervaded his mind. He blinded his
eyes with his hand and staggered like a drunken
man across the room toward the windows at the
front, where he stood looking out through the
lattice, back from which the heavy shutters had
been swung. No objects met his gaze; no sounds
arose. The woman heard his steps and aroused
herself. It was Kit whom she saw, and the calmness
resulting from her knowledge of freedom from
hated ties came to her like fresh air through windows
lately pent. The dead man escaped her eyes;
she saw no one but the living, and raising herself
from the couch she followed him across the room.
Misapprehending the nature of his distress, she
whispered encouragingly:
“There is chance for escape.”
He did not answer her, and this utter disregard
of her presence and of her voice provoked an involuntary
tremor.
“Kit, Kit, Kit,” she said, prolonging the name
with each utterance, “do you not hear me? No
alarm has been given. We can escape.”
But still he gave no sign of hearing, and she
82
shook his shoulder desperately and turned his face
so that his eyes could not but dwell upon her face.
Again she spoke sympathizingly:
“At worst, ’twas done in self-defense. The combat
was forced upon you. And was not the fatal
stroke an accident? Come, come, we can not remain
here.”
“Self-defense?” he repeated, questioningly, as
though the idea was a new one generated wholly
through his own deliberations. “’Twas a duel,
and a death in such event is murder,” he added,
observing her apparently for the first time.
“Thou couldst not avoid the deed,” she said in
remonstrance.
“True, but what of that? Did not Hopton,
Renow, and Dalton seek refuge under such a plea
without avail? The outcome of a tavern brawl
will not be handled by a judge with gloves on.
The jury, it is true, can speak but only under the
direction of the court.” He seemed talking to
himself, but aloud so that she heard him. “The
killing of another in a duel is murder on the part
of the survivor. And then the infamy of such a
trial!”
“But,” she exclaimed, “you may avoid arrest.
And as for infamy, the disgrace would be mine.
My husband killed by thee and in my apartments.”
At these latter thoughts the look of distress
deepened on her face, and the weakness exhibited
was in striking contrast with the strength she had
displayed in her endeavor to afford him solace.
83
His apparent coldness had also chilled and repelled
her, and not understanding the nature of a
despair in which he could not give some faint expression
of love for her, she sank helpless at his
feet.
This movement shook him from his brooding
over the far-reaching and distant effect of the
fatal stroke, to a consideration of the living reality.
The tide of his feelings rose in its proper channel;
he bent over her compassionately and raised
her from the floor.
“Anne, Anne,” he said with returning fervor,
“forgive me for my selfishness. I have been so
blinded by the darkness that I thought I walked
alone. And what is my misery compared with
thine?”
He held her closely in his arms. It was not
strange that a relaxation of mind should follow
with the knowledge that she was not standing
wholly alone. With her realisation that his past
indifference had been but a temporary condition,
her emotions became too strong to control, and the
flood of tears that welled from her eyes gave evidence
of the recent strain to which her feelings
had been subjected. He did not attempt to subdue
this exhibition of sensitiveness except with
words of hope and assurance of his love, while he
continued to hold her to him. The emotion had
at length spent its force, and a calmness that
seemed unnatural in the presence of the dead pervaded
her. Releasing herself from his embrace
84
she went over and kneeled down beside the body
of Frazer. She touched the face compassionately,
at the same time shocked with the sense that life
was wholly extinct. The face was turned back
so that the wound was on the side toward the
floor. Half of the horribleness of the object was
thus hidden, and viewing the profile she was
again struck with its likeness to Marlowe’s.
“Look,” she said to her companion, who stood
near her, “how like he is to thee.”
“So?” he asked, quickly.
“Yes, do you not see? Is there not a striking
similarity in form? Is not the nose the same as
thine? The face clean shaven; the hair of like
color?”
“But his dress.”
He spoke as though to change her opinion, and
then added, “Dost thou mean that there is enough
resemblance for the one to be taken for the other?”
This time his anxiety for an affirmative answer
could have been read by the veriest tyro.
“Like? Yes, much like, and when you met here
I was startled by the resemblance,” she answered
decidedly; and in a strain like that of one whose
mind has dwelt long and intensely upon the subject,
she continued, “I could not fail to comment
on it when I met him shortly after I last saw you
and when I believed we were done with each other
for ever. It was this that drew my attention to
him, and prevailed upon by his apparently sincere
professions of love, I became his wife.”
85
“When was this marriage, Anne?” he interrupted.
“Had you not heard of it?”
“No,” he answered, “nor even entertained a suspicion
that you had so soon forgotten me.”
“Nay, do not say that,” she remonstrated, “it
was seven months since, but——”
“Why was this? Did I not love thee?” he interposed.
“Yes, yes; will you listen to the whole story?
Ah——”
He interrupted her. “This is no place for such
confession. Later, Anne; I cannot listen now.”
“Ah, see how he bleeds, Kit, and so cold.”
She had touched the hand of the dead man, and
then as she noticed the glittering and unstained
brand she shuddered at the thought of how much
more deplorable would have been her situation had
the sword reached the mark for which she had
lately seen it wielded.
While Anne was thus momentarily occupied, her
companion was possessed with new and entirely different
thoughts than those which had lately disturbed
him. In his late reflections concerning his
future the question of escape had cut no prominent
figure, for even though he might forever successfully
baffle the officers of the law, none the less
this dark chapter of his life would sully his fame.
But the woman’s words of his resemblance to the
dead man had lifted the heaviest of the clouds of
darkness; and in the succeeding mental illumination,
86
he felt a transport that urged him to immediate
action. His mind, fertile in plot, had developed
a cover for his fame. He saw the passing
away of his old life, and, in the transition, read
the promise of a new one; it might be in obscurity,
but without obloquy.
There was no time to be spent in aught but
the furtherance of his design, but first he felt the
need of his companion’s assurance of absolute
secrecy concerning the tragedy. His own future
might now be subjected to so many vicissitudes,
that a separation between himself and Anne might
be inevitable. Who could tell what influences
might be brought to bear upon her years hence?
The seal of secrecy must never be broken.
“Anne,” he said, abruptly, “this deed may bring
trouble to both of us. Can I rely upon thee absolutely
and forever, in whatever situation thou art
placed, whether apart from me or with me, to let
no whisper of my name come from thy lips so far
as the events of this night are concerned? I know
it is asking much, but I have more than my personal
safety at heart. I can not explain to thee.
I can only implore——”
“Stop,” she exclaimed, passionately, as though
the doubt in her implied by the question had cut
her to the quick. “Why should you ask?”
“But we know not,” he resumed, “to what test
thy love, thy constancy may be put. I do not
doubt thee nor thy strength.”
“Say no more,” she again interrupted. “No persuasion,
87
no promises, no threats, no torture shall
ever prevail upon me to lisp one syllable of thy
name as connected with this death. You can trust
me in that.”
“Even though I should die to-morrow?” he
asked.
“Yes,” she answered.
“And such answer might be of advantage to
thee?”
“Yes,” again came the firm reply.
Her assurance was of a character calculated to
press him forward in his hastily formulated scheme
of concealment.
“I trust you implicitly,” he said, “and now you
must lose no time in flight.”
“And then?” came the quick inquiry.
“I shall go, too, but it must be by a different
way. You know the exits from this tavern even
better than I do.”
“Yes, yes,” she returned, “the stairway, hall and
every outer door.”
“And the inn-yard?”
“Yes, and the stall where my horse is standing.”
She hurried into the alcove and returned with a
cape thrown over her shoulders, in the hood of
which she was hastily arranging her hair.
“See,” she said, pointing towards the arras, “the
filled saddle bags are there. You must bring them
with thee. And where am I to meet thee?”
“At the gnarled oak,” he answered, “a half mile
from here at the point where the road turns downward
88
to the little bridge. You will wait for me
there.”
“But why do you not go with me?”
“I wish to hide the crime,” he whispered, and as
she looked inquiringly at him, he added, “Nay,
do not ask how.”
And with these words he cautiously unbolted
and opened the door wide enough to admit of her
exit. The hall lamps had been extinguished.
“It is very dark,” he whispered as though hesitating
at the thought of her departure alone.
“I only fear for thy safety,” she said, bravely.
“Have no fears of that,” he returned, “hasten,
we have no time to spare.”
No further words were spoken, but hurriedly
embracing each other as though years instead of
minutes was to be their term of separation, she
disappeared into the darkness.
He closed the door and bolted it again. Then
he knelt beside the dead. His hands trembled in
spite of the determination with which he set himself
to accomplish his project. The excitement, apprehension
of discovery, and the horror of the
scene, almost unnerved him; but he covered his
eyes with one of his hands for a moment, shook
off the feeling of weakness, and then moved the
body to one side, to clear it of the pool of blood.
He unbuttoned the buff doublet of the corpse, and
drew it off. Next he stripped it of the jerkin,
belt and scabbard, then the shoes, hose and trunks
and shirt. A naked body lay before him under the
89
flickering light of the candles. Heavy footsteps in
an adjoining room startled him, and he glanced
at one of the corners beside the great chimney as
though expecting a form to come forth. But immediately
the source of the noise became apparent,
and the chorus of a bacchanal song jarred him with
its unfitness:
This song of John Lilly, one which he had sung
many times with riotous companions, could not
but cause him to add, in the momentary relaxation
afforded:
They were lines provoked half in jest half in
earnest; and again as quietness prevailed, he relapsed
into his previous condition of profound
melancholy. His task was but half completed; he
unbuckled his own sword belt, and his fingers,
which had again begun to tremble, let the scabbard
fall clattering at his feet. He shook himself
as though his body were the unruly instrument of
a prompting and immovable mind. If this action
had any result whatever it did not prevent his
hands from wrenching several buttons from the
front of his scarlet doublet, as he stripped it off.
Still he proceeded in his task.
One by one his rich but rough-used vestments
90
were thrown off, until the living was as the dead.
The work was now bringing the calm which afforded
speed to his movements, so that in an interval
he had dressed the corpse in his garments, leaving
it just as it had fallen on the floor. He next retreated
to the alcove and washed himself clear of
blood.
The buff coat was stained and spotted by the
life-current of the dead man. He cast it to one
side. The rest of the garments were free of any
traces of the catastrophe. In these he dressed
himself; buckled the belt around his waist; picked
up the long murderous-looking blade of Ferrera
and sheathed the same in its scabbard against his
puffed upper hose. From a hook upon the wall,
in the alcove, he took a long dark cloak with white
silk lining and silver buckle at the collar. This he
threw over his shoulders so that the absence of a
coat or doublet was not perceptible.
The papers from his own pockets, with his name
written upon several of them, he had dropped
near one of the out-stretched hands upon the carpet.
There seemed no possibility for the body to
be buried under any name but that of Christopher
Marlowe. He readjusted the misfitting hat, extinguished
the candles, opened the door, and closing
it after him, stepped into the hall.
The old life had closed. So far as the world
should know the first adventurous pilot upon the
ocean of English blank verse [note 17], the mighty
Marlowe, was among the immortal dead.
91
Eighteen years before the date fixed for the beginning
of this narrative, a daughter of Manuel
Crossford, alderman and mercer, was born in
the town of Canterbury. This child was christened
Anne, and, as the sole offspring of the house
and only companion of the father, whose wife had
soon after joined the silent majority, her welfare
became his chief concern. At sixteen years of age
she had developed into a girl of such beauty that
Christopher Marlowe, son of the clerk of “St.
Maries” of Canterbury, a graduate of Cambridge,
and resident of London, had fallen desperately in
love with her. It was during a temporary visit to
his native town that this occurred.
Well authenticated stories of Marlowe’s five
years of dissipation in London, after the termination
of his scholarship at Cambridge, caused Manuel
Crossford to look with disfavor upon his attentions.
There was the chapter in which he figured as a
92
common player of interludes, or, in other words,
as a vagrant actor, forming part of the unwritten
biography of the suitor; and the father of the
maiden could not forget the account of Marlowe’s
having broken “his leg in one lewd scene, when
in his early age,” as was expressed some time later
by a malignant rhymster.19
This latter report had been clearly disproved,
but it had raised a prejudice which could not be
overturned. Then again, Crossford was a devout
Brownist, and it was too well known to admit
of doubt that Marlowe was an avowed freethinker.
Had he not written in one of his plays:
If a man did not entertain such opinions himself
he would not allow them to be mouthed by any
speaker before an assemblage, thought Crossford.
It was true that he had written passages that
glowed with the fervor of his worship of the All-creating
Soul of the Universe, but this did not
prevent him from abjuring the Trinity. There
were suspicions that he had committed this ecclesiastical
crime.
Crossford was not familiar with Marlowe’s
works, but he had heard the clerk of “St. Maries”
enthusiastically repeat the lines written by his
distinguished son:
93
And at their recital he, Crossford, had nodded
approval, and then shook his head as he thought
of the eternal fires already prepared for the irreverent
young man. The predicted fame of the latter
had no weight in the other side of the scales held
by the non-compromising Brownist [note 30].
At length matters reached such a crisis that in
1592, the alderman determined that his daughter
should be placed under more strict surveillance
than he was capable of maintaining. In considering
the matter his thoughts had turned in the
direction of his sister’s house in London. The
chances were fair for the close confinement there
of the maiden until time should have worn away
the image of her lover. For the moment, the
Protestant actually wished for the restoration of
the dissolved nunneries. Like the Jew of Malta,
who had placed his daughter within the walls of
a priory, the stiff-necked Brownist could have
smothered his religious prejudices when the interests
lying next to his heart were at stake. But
half a century had elapsed since the sisters of the
convents, with only their clothes upon their backs,
had been rudely forced into secular life, and their
abodes confiscated by the crown.
The sister of Crossford was the wife of Richard
94
Bame. Living childless, she had long since pleaded
for the adoption of her niece, but Crossford had
turned a deaf ear toward all such entreaties. Her
home was a “faire dwelling” amid spacious and
walled grounds, the bequest of her father. As
she was a woman of advanced education for the
times, and a strict disciplinarian, it was no wonder
that Manuel Crossford turned toward her in what
he deemed was his extremity. Without notice
given his daughter of their destination or his intentions,
the alderman started with her on the
journey toward the great metropolis.
They traveled by the way of Deptford, and
knowing Dodsman intimately from an early day,
they stayed for several days at the Golden Hind.
Before their sojourn at the latter place had ended,
Marlowe had heard of their presence there and
forthwith appeared at the tavern. A stormy interview
took place between the father and the suitor;
a misunderstanding arose, and a bitter quarrel followed
between the lovers, and apparently the
meeting was but an episode in the journey.
Anne was soon afterward received into the house
of Mistress Bame, where studies were begun and
assiduously maintained. Any tears which she
might have shed over what she supposed was the
termination of the affair with Marlowe, were soon
followed by a condition of mind giving evidence
of its freedom from regret and melancholy, by
clarity of countenance. But this peaceful condition
of mind was more in the nature of a reflection
95
of the new, and, at first, pleasant surroundings.
The extent to which her affection had become
involved was not at that time known to herself.
It required another revolution of the kaleidoscope
of her life to show the contrasting pictures of
light and gloom, traced by her first love in ineffaceable
colors. This revolution was not to be long
delayed. It required another’s devotion; the paling
of the fire of attraction and the second advent
of Marlowe.
Anne had not been wholly restricted to the
grounds within the walls of the residence of Bame;
but upon all her departures therefrom she was
accompanied by the watchful mistress. Upon one
of these occasions they became separated from each
other by the waves of a great crowd rushing
through Fenchurch Street. It was an insurrection
raised by the apprentices of the city against
the alien workingmen; and although neither riotous
nor destructive at the point where the younger
woman became lost from the older, it was sufficiently
threatening to cause the closing and barricading
of all shops and houses along that ancient
thoroughfare. Anne became extricated from the
mob through the efforts of a young man, who
proved to be Francis Frazer. He had noticed her
upon a previous occasion. He had the grace of a
courtier and his apparel was in keeping with his
apparent rank.
Her beauty had flashed upon him and fixed his
attention. On his part, it was love at first sight.
96
Upon her part, she was attracted by his distinguished
appearance, and visibly affected by his immediate
protestations of affection. Unfortunately
for both, as the sequel proved, he escorted her to
her home.
Frequent occasions for meetings between the two
followed, despite the vigilance of the aunt, and
gradually the restraints of home life became irksome
beyond the limit of endurance. The interest
of the girl in her admirer increased in like proportion,
and he, at an early period of their acquaintance,
discovered that his feelings toward
her were founded upon something more than temporary
passion. With all the ardor of his impetuous
nature he prevailed upon her to accept his
hand in marriage; and the safeguards which
Manuel Crossford had erected to keep his daughter
fancy free, until he might arrange a suitable marriage,
trembled at the assault and then fell to
pieces. In confidence that the Count would fulfill
his promise of marriage, the girl fled from the
home of Bame leaving no clue from which to ascertain
the cause of her flight or the place of her concealment.
She was married to Francis Frazer at
St. Peter’s Church on Cornhill.
Suspicions were by Crossford directed against
Marlowe, for he knew nothing of the new suitor,
and although he was quietly shadowed on several
occasions, the fruitless result had not yet been sufficient
to satisfy the father that Marlowe was not
holding the girl in some secure hiding-place. At
97
Canterbury and elsewhere Marlowe had been unable
to learn anything concerning the girl since her departure
from her father’s house. Not even a rumor
of her marriage had reached his ears, and more
than a year had passed since their last meeting
when, beside the dead body of the Count, she told
him of it.
This marriage had proved to be an unhappy one,
partially due to the excessive and unwarranted
jealousy of her husband. During the few months
of their married life, they had wandered through
various quarters of London and its vicinity, and
at length had reached the Golden Hind a few days
prior to the eventful night of June the first, 1593.
Here Frazer sojourned while making arrangements
for leaving with his wife for the continent.
A vessel then lay at the wharf of Deptford upon
which he designed to make the voyage. Against
this contemplated move the wife had remonstrated
with such vigor and persistency that despite her
protestations to the effect that her objections arose
from a dread of entering an unknown world, and a
desire to become reconciled with her father, the
Count became suspicious that she had plotted to
desert him or at least to thwart his plans.
It was shortly after one of the most violent
scenes between them that Anne saw Tabbard in
the hall, as related, and heard his welcome announcement
that the one whom she believed had
passed forever out of her life was not only
anxious to see her, but was within call. Upon
98
that sudden and unexpected communication, if she
had had time to consider she might have formulated
a different answer, but with the remembrances
which the mention of Marlowe’s name awakened,
her heart rushed to her lips, and at the instant
she caught a glimpse of Frazer, she gave expression
to her longing. It was like an outcry of
one in distress, but founded upon no idea that
through her old lover lay deliverance.
As already stated Frazer had accidentally heard
the few words she had uttered, and it was his actions
resulting from his suspicions of a contemplated
elopement that brought about the tragedy at the
tavern. With this digression, explanatory of the
events leading up to the tragedy of that night, we
will now return to the point where the door was
closed upon the retreat of Anne.
The hall into which the woman entered, lighted,
as it was momentarily, by the rays from the room
faced by the carved panels, became black as night
as she heard the door shut behind her. She found
the balustrade, pushed her hand along its smooth
top and at length reached the head of the stairs.
Even then, as her eyes stared into the lower
depths, no amelioration of the darkness appeared.
Step by step she descended, crossing the middle
landing, still holding to the balustrade. She had
reached the foot and stood there for the moment
trembling over thoughts of the scene from which
she had just fled and apprehensive of present evil.
The way was known to her as clearly as a father’s
99
house to children. Straight ahead led the hall
without a turn to the narrow door into the inn-yard.
Her hand fell from the balustrade, but as
it did so it was caught by another hand, and she
felt bungling fingers run across her face. In
vain she attempted to control her terror, but the
brain, already overtaxed, went to pieces like a glass
let fall on marble pavements. She uttered one
scream and fainted.
A quiet, like that of a country church at high
noon on week days had been for some time pervading
the tap-room of the Golden Hind. The
party at the center table had scattered; the landlord
rubbing his eyes, had disappeared through
the door above which hung the cracked painting
of the host in red coat and face betokening welcome;
the line of decanters and bezzling glasses
on the shelf, under the long mirror behind the
bar, appeared ready for the dust of at least one
quiet half-night to settle upon it; while outstretched
on two chairs, with his drowsy head
leaning on the arm of one of them, lay the tapster,
the only human occupant of the room. The cat
had crawled under his arm, and, in his half sleep,
he was mechanically stroking her. Out of this
condition he was aroused by startling sounds in
the hall.
He quickly rose to his feet and rushed to the
door. The light fell full upon two persons, a woman
lying unconscious at the base of the stairs, and
a drunken actor leaning over her. The latter exhibited
100
a stupefied countenance, either as the result
of a light being flashed so suddenly upon him, or
from the discovery of what lay at his feet. He had
hardly realized that he had clasped a hand or
fumbled a face, or at least nothing more than that
of some serving woman of the place, and when he
saw a woman with features of almost transcendent
beauty, and of attire fit for a lady of rank, lying
at his feet, he cowered in the light as one might
when apprehended in the commission of a heinous
crime.
“Zounds,” exclaimed the tapster, “what’s this
snarling about?”
“Good God, man, is she killed?” exclaimed the
other leaning over and attempting to raise the
recumbent body at his feet.
Blood was flowing from a gash cut in the woman’s
head by the sharp edge of the stair. The
two men picked her up and carried her into the
tap-room, where they placed her in one of the
widest chairs. The tapster recognized her as the
lady who had arrived there a few days previously
with the Count, and looked suspiciously at the
actor; but, without asking any questions of the
latter, he began bathing her face in cold water
and binding a cloth around her head to stop the
flow of blood. Its current darkly streaked the mass
of golden hair which, having been liberated from
the confinement of the hood, fell disheveled
around the high white ruff, in which the lower part
of her face was concealed, and upon the puffed
101
shoulders terminating the tight, slashed sleeves
of vari-colored silk. Her hooded cape of showy
fabric lay upon the floor. Her full gown of blue
silk with front embroidered from the collar down
the long pointed doublet and dress front, comfortably
filled the chair. The lamps directly overhead
had been extinguished, and it was the light
from the still blazing candles at the angle of the
chimney that flared upon her pallid face.
Several minutes had passed and all attempts at
her restoration had been unavailing. A serious
expression had gathered on the face of the tapster,
and the actor looked to have been shaken into
sobriety. Suddenly the two men heard light footsteps
in the hallway. The door had been left open.
They looked toward it, and at that moment the
figure of a man passed across the seam of light and
was immediately swallowed by the darkness that
lay on the further edge. As the light struck him
he had looked towards its source, but if he recognized
any member of the group or realized the
character of the scene which he had momentarily
disturbed, it did not cause him to pause. The
sound of the closing of the door into the inn-yard
immediately afterwards echoed through the hall.
“That was her husband, the Count,” whispered
the actor, looking with amazement at his companion.
“You are wrong. It was Marlowe,” remarked
the tapster.
“Nay,” said the actor, “Marlowe was not so attired.
102
It is her husband. You had better follow
him with word of her condition.”
“If I thought you were right,” returned the
tapster with considerable feeling, “I would not
stir a step, for I am not anxious to serve the
ruffian. The blow he felled me with was none to
my liking. I would do anything for the lady, but
what she needs is what he is now doing. We will
stop him, whoever he is, as he returns.”
103
On the night of the murder in the old Deptford
tavern the man who was to profit most from the
false shadows thrown by the crime and its concealment
was at the Boar’s Head in London. This
man was William Shakespere. Without his volition
and unknown to himself the crown of immortality
was being set upon his brows. Just as unconsciously
moved the hands that placed it there.
Had the placing of it been designed; had the
person who has worn it all these centuries felt its
presence and coveted it, possibly all cloud that has
since obscured his title might have been removed;
but the actors were only puppets in the hands of
the blind goddess of Mischance. The vital flaws
remain, and have been pointed out by the searchers.
Their genuineness has been demonstrated, but
the source of title has been misapprehended. The
falsifying of the record of the crime at Deptford
being discovered, the tracing of the title through
a deep channel to its true fountain head is a task
104
easy of accomplishment. It leads to Christopher
Marlowe.
With Shakespere were two others, whose lives
were inseparably interwoven with that of his own
and with Marlowe’s. One was George Peele, the
dramatist, the other was Christopher Tamworth,
the lawyer of Gray’s Inn.
The Eastcheap tavern, while frequently the
gathering place for roysterers, was also a known
resort for strolling players, pamphleteers,
dramatists and other men of genius and
ambition, who were looked upon with suspicion
by a government that imagined greater
danger from a middle class with intellect
and ability of expression than from a powerful nobility,
or an ignorant multitude of serfs.
At times, crowds in bacchanalian riot burnt out
the hours of the night; again the peace of a cloister
pervaded there, and from the lower bay, and
higher dormer windows the lights of workers’
candles gleamed. Eastcheap Street might rattle
with tumbrils, carts and horses’ hoofs, and the air
be shattered by the cries of costard mongers, tooting
of hautboys, or the ringing of bellmen, still
the thick walls of the Boar’s Head enticed within
them those who worked out their deliverance in
solitary effort and meditation.
The three men were in a spacious room at the
rear corner of one of the upper stories of the
famous tavern. One window opening through the
thick stone wall, faced the church-yard of St.
105
Michaels with its drooping trees, its tenants of
near three hundred years of burial, and its stately
edifice wherein the fishmongers and butchers from
near shops and stalls congregated. Clambering
vines rooted in rich soil, framed this deep and narrow
window in green; and in breezy hours sent to
the ears of indwellers a rustle sweetly suggestive
of the far distant woods of Kent or Surrey. In
the wall facing Crooked Lane another window
overlooked a traveled way so narrow that hands
outstretched from facing windows on either side
could clasp each other. On the pavement below,
a foot passer might squeeze by a costard monger’s
cart, but two carts abreast could not pass. Projecting
platforms, under fronting doors with narrow
stairs descending to the street, and boards thrust
out from windows whereon hung linen drying, or
boxed plants, assisted in obscuring the light.
The room was the living apartment of George
Peele, and for several years during his separation
from his wife, had been the retreat of that genius,
where in intervals between mad dissipations he
had written “The Famous Chronicle History of
King Edward the First.” The innate taste of this
individual, as displayed in the richness of the imagery
that characterized his plays, could not but
reveal itself in the external surroundings over
which he had control. His purse had never been
sufficiently distended for him to contract for
luxurious apartments, or at least distended long
enough for him to pause in the wild revel which always
106
followed close on the heels of the receipt of
money for a play, to consider any question of comfort
in the near future, consequently both in
seasons of poverty and moments of affluence this
one room at the Boar’s Head was his permanent
headquarters.
The blackened ceiling remained as he had found
it; the ground work of dingy wall on all sides had
not been changed except by the articles hung
against it, and these were as varied as a prodigal
hand could gather. A magnificent piece of tapestry
from the looms of Flanders, bearing upon its
blue groundwork the red figure of a horse and
crowned rider, covered one entire side of the room.
It was said to have been the gift of Queen Elizabeth,
for whom, in 1584, Peele had written the
comedy of “The Arraignment of Paris,” and had
been bestowed after her hearing of the poet’s fancy
for the hanging as he had first seen it in the
banqueting house of the royal palace at Whitehall.
On low stands before it were two black
Greek vases of great value.
Against another wall were two long halbards,
crossed just below their heads, whose bright steel
flashed back the light of the lamp. The ends of
their poles touched the floor, and between them
was a long Norman hauberk of trellised plate and
a kite-shaped shield as rusty as six centuries could
make them. The chimney place was narrow, deep
and black. Great brass firedogs was all that it
contained at that season. Above it the shelf,
107
formed by the receding of the chimney, was crowded
with bronze and white marble statuettes, among
which, one of the queen overtopped the others of
more ancient sculpture.
The low iron bedstead of rude manufacture, almost
concealed in the recess formed by the projecting
chimney, was evidently a fixture. Of the
same category were the chairs and the table. Over
the latter a lamp designed to aid a scholar in his
lucubrations, burned steadily from a bracket in the
wall.
Books and papers were scattered on this table
with inkhorn and quills, and a score of volumes on
the uncarpeted floor. A copy of Homer’s Iliad lay
open, with printed pages touching the wooden surface
of the table, and its embossed cover displayed.
Besides this were two volumes of Cicero, an English
translation of the tragedies of Seneca, and of
Jocaste of Euripides, of the edition of 1577.
Half a dozen other Greek and Latin classics, in
the costly bindings of John Reynes, were heaped
so that the light of the lamp displayed them to advantage.
In meaner bindings, Holinshed’s Chronicles
lay open on the floor with the Mirror of
Magistrates piled upon it, and in the same heap
were several other volumes of cotemporary dramatists.
Bundles of manuscript dramas were on one
end of the table, and scattered papers bore on
their faces the work of the master of the den.
It was late at night, and the three friends, for
such they were, had been together in the room for
108
several hours. The play upon which Peele was
then engaged, was designed by the writer for performance
by Lord Pembroke’s actors of which
Shakespere was then a member.21 He had been
reading it for their appreciation and suggestion,
and now, having finished, they were conversing
upon other topics. Tobacco smoke from the pipe
of Tamworth rose in clouds, and in a wide arm-chair
against the tapestry, Shakespere, also smoking,
was listening to the lawyer’s remarks.
“The crime,” said he, “is blasphemy and not
apostasy.”
“How do you distinguish them?” inquired Peele.
“The last is renouncing one’s religion after
having professed it; the other is reviling the Father,
Son, or Holy Ghost.”
“Aye, and the crime of blasphemy he has committed.”
“No question of that.”
“Have you a copy of the paper?” asked Shakespere,
addressing Peele.
“Yes, the same that was sent to the Queen.”
[Note 31.]
He drew from his inner pocket a folded paper,
and holding it so that the light struck full upon
it he read: “The first beginnynge of religion was
only to keep men in awe.”
“There may be some truth in that,” interrupted
Tamworth.
“But wait,” continued Peele, “here is the sentence
109
that sticks and perhaps gives ground for the
charge, ‘if the Jews among whom he was born did
crucify him they best knew him and whence he
came.’”
“Truly that is blasphemous,” remarked Tamworth,
“but I do not believe that he wrote it. Doth
it profess on its face to be his?”
“No, they are simply charges made against him
by Richard Bame, and he is an obscure person; but
the Queen hath considered it seriously and a warrant
hath been issued by one of the justices for
his arrest.”
“Whose, Bame’s?”
“No, Marlowe’s.”
“What is the punishment upon conviction?”
asked Shakespere.
“You need not add the words ‘upon conviction,’
for that followeth an arrest as surely as night followeth
day. It is declared by law to be fine and
imprisonment, and other infamous corporal punishment,”
answered Tamworth.
“Of what nature is such punishment?”
“Slitting the nose; cutting off an ear; a seat in
the pillory, and the like,” answered Peele before
the lawyer could speak.
“Thou knoweth the law, too, Peele, like a solicitor.
Hast thou ever been a student and lodged at
Clement’s Inn?” asked Tamworth with a smile.
“Nay, but in one play I had put blasphemous
words in the mouth of a dissolute character, and,
before its presentation, the same was pointed out
110
to me by the actor whose part it was to read it,
and forthwith we went to the Temple and there
learned the definition of the offense and the penalty.”
“And on this opinion of one who has read no
better lines than those to be found in Justinian or
Littleton, and made no professions of ability to
criticise, thou expurgated what to me seemed the
most stirring passages of the play. Wilt thou
let the light of thy torch be blanketed so that
only black smoke can roll forth? Fie upon thee,
man!” said Shakespere with animation.
“You know not of what you speak,” exclaimed
Tamworth. “The corporal punishment may be
more severe than as defined by Peele. His definition
is correct, but the judges have often stretched
the words to a greater extent. What if they saw
fit to apply such infamous punishment that death
would necessarily result?”
“Could they do that?”
“Aye, and they have. Death for blasphemy
maketh one smile at the laws of Draco, but such
hath been and only four years since.”
“You speak of Kett,” remarked Peele.
“Yes, Francis Kett.”
“And what of him?” asked Shakespere.
“He was burnt,” said Tamworth, solemnly.
“At the stake?”
“True, at Norwich in February, 1589, for questioning
the Divinity of Christ, and giving utterance
to other unorthodox views.”22
111
“O Diabole!” muttered Peele.
“Is there any safety in any occupation?” inquired
Shakespere.
“Well, there is certainly little in your profession,
my good fellow, unless you are licensed, or
enrolled.23 The penalty of being apprehended
as a strolling player, or as a common actor of interludes,
is probably known to thee, and to thee,
too, Peele.”
“Yes; whipping, and burning with a hot iron
through the gristle of the right ear,”24 interrupted
Peele, “for I saw the like punishment administered
to Endermon, who is now with Henslowe at the
Rose.”25
“And,” continued Tamworth, “it is because of
this act of Elizabeth that you, Shakespere, are enrolled
as a servant of Lord Pembroke.”
“A sorry wretch you are,” laughed Peele, looking
at Shakespere, “so miserably considered that
in order to gain the plaudits of the pit you must
attach yourself to a licensed company.”
“And in what better condition are you?” asked
Tamworth, with a smile. ou not know
that in the law a dramatist is classed with vagrants?
That any line of what you, Peele, write, may be
interpreted as blasphemy or treason; and that as
the judge before whom you may be dragged
passes upon the meaning, force or effect of the
112
questionable writing,26 you are virtually deprived
of a trial by jury? And upon what slender thread
your liberty would hang! Aye, e’en your life.
Moreover, the judge pompously declares that he
looks into the spirit instead of the letter, and thus
between the lines he reads an avowal of popery
and pronounces you a Papist.”
“Aye, then the sentence comes ‘To the Tower,’”
exclaimed Shakespere.
“The rats’ dungeon!” he said, solemnly.
“And is not the pious poet, Robert Southwell,
there now on the same charge, popery?”27 asked
Peele.
“True,” said Shakespere.
“And hath he not,” continued Peele, “in cankering
languishment written:
“Is anything more wanting to restrain one in
the flourish of one’s pen?”
“Next we shall hear of prizes for stupidity,”
ejaculated Shakespere, replacing his pipe between
his lips, from where it had been withdrawn
during the interval of legal discussion. “My wonder
113
is,” he continued, “that you ever write a line
beyond God save the Queen and damn the Pope.
Praise God, that my temporary calling is licensed,
and that not yet have I been tempted into fields
where pitfalls lie concealed, and all else is open to
the blazing sky.” [Note 29.]
“Well said, friend Will, but let once the honied
praise for children of thy brain melt into thy
being, and no threat or dread of bodily ill can
keep thee wholly from the permanent expression of
thy thoughts. And now it is my livelihood,” returned
Peele.
“For one of thy calling it would be safer to live
in obscurity,” remarked Tamworth.
“Yes, as though dead,” the dramatist answered
in a whisper, as though there were others who
might overhear his words.
A knock sounded at the door. The two visitors
looked at Peele inquiringly. He said “Come in,”
but the door did not open, and again the knock
sounded.
“The fellow is like a beggar for coin who refuses
a purse without looking into it,” remarked
Peele, arising and going to the door.
“More like a lady who wishes to know who is
within before venturing,” said Shakespere significantly.
Peele had opened the door. A man stood there
in the passage and raised his finger warningly.
Peele paused in the greeting he was about to utter,
and then, moving his head slightly backward in
114
gesture, said in a low voice: “Shakespere and
Tamworth.”
“And none other?” asked the man.
“None.”
He stepped within, but did not seem to notice
Peele’s extended hand.
“Lock the door,” he said.
“Right,” said Peele, “the warrant is already
out.”
“What, so soon?” exclaimed the other, throwing
his hand to his face, which grew ghastly as he
stared at his friend.
“Marlowe,” exclaimed Shakespere in greeting,
“even now we were talking about you.”
The man addressed continued, gazing speechlessly
at Peele, who said, “Well ’twas no more than
we were apprehensive of when last we met.”
“You talk in riddles,” gasped the other, “’Tis
only two hours since his death. A warrant already
issued: You know it? My God! do I
dream?”
Peele now displayed a questioning face; “Riddles;
two hours since his death?” he asked, and
then after a short pause, continued: “I mean the
charge of blasphemy. That warrant is out. Of
what do you speak?”
Marlowe’s visage cleared to some extent.
“Ah! I understand,” he murmured.
He removed his hat, and sank as though in exhaustion
into a cushioned chair close before the
115
chimney. Tamworth and Shakespere were already
up, and the three had gathered before him.
Shakespere spoke sympathizingly: “They are
not likely to search in this quarter. To-morrow I
will intercede with the Queen, for she has already
given me recognition—”
“And the offense is only of an ecclesiastical nature,”
continued Tamworth.
“In the eyes of the law it is considered murder,”
said Marlowe.
The three looked questioningly at each other,
while Marlowe, throwing off the last trace of
qualm, continued:
“I have just fled from the place of its commission,
and thy first utterance, Peele, unnerved me.
I killed the man and he lies dead at the Golden
Hind in Deptford. It was in duel forced upon me.
Francis Frazer, the Count, they call him. I say
that he lies dead, but others will say that it is I.
You look at me as though there were more riddles
and there are. You see the clothes I wear? Well,
they are none of mine. Mine are at the Golden
Hind and on the dead. You see it was this way.
He came upon me when I was with the woman,
his wife, it seems. He demanded that I draw and
defend myself. I did, and well, and then thrust
home. He fell. Here I have come. What way
is clear?”
“A duel,” exclaimed Shakespere, admiringly,
“and you killed him? Bravo!”
“Wherein lies the offense?” interrupted Peele.
116
“You do not understand; the combat was in his
apartments where I had intruded. There were no
witnesses save his wife. She sides with me, but
what a cloud would be cast upon me before the
Court, with the woman swearing in my favor as
against the dead husband? I say that death would
be the penalty.”
“But you say that you stripped the dead,” said
Tamworth, “and whether it was a vindictive murder,
a duel, or done in self defense, such fact must
weigh heavily against thee. Art thou crazy, Kit?
Why this garb? I do not understand it.”
He had finished his questions with visible excitement,
and with it Marlowe arose.
“You are my friends,” he said, “the occasion
calls for staunch ones. Come, I need the aid of
all.”
Instinctively they drew about the table as
though closeness begat confidence and strength.
The light shown upon a true brotherhood of souls
united by common interests both for advancement
and preservation. Peele with clear and thoughtful
eyes, and face still displaying wonderment;
Shakespere with the smooth-shaven visage of an
actor, and open, generous countenance; Tamworth
with clear-cut features, cold eyes and bearded chin
and lip—all sat silent as their companion vividly
narrated the events of the night at the Deptford
tavern. At its close he paused, and then in the ensuing
silence resumed:
“The past hath ended in a grave. You all see
117
that. No broad road of the life of yesterday is
open to me. Henceforth darkness and obscurity
is my sole store. And wherein lies solace for such
continuance of life? Aye,” and his voice rang
with the intensity of his feelings, “even a livelihood
is debarred me unless a mask conceals my
workings.”
Again for an interval no words were spoken.
Outside the fog had lifted and a midnight rain was
falling on the roof and beating against the windows.
Its patter pervaded the room. The Greek
vases seemed waiting to be filled; the red king on
the arras appeared listening expectantly for words
of deliverance; the halberds glittered defiantly, as
though raised by hands ready in defense.
118
The Gloom that pervaded the great city during
the prevalence of the plague was a figure of changing
size that at times came with a rush, and again
grew into place beside the hearth-stone, slowly
and almost imperceptibly, and then at length assumed
such dreadful proportions that the affrighted
watchers buried their sad faces in trembling
hands, as if to drown the vision. A pall
covered him from head to foot, and his face was unseen;
but there was a suspicion that it was fleshless,
and whether he came to the open stall or
closed shop, before or after, the visit there of the
plague, his presence numbed the hands of toil, and
then either folded them in prayer, or dropped
them in stolid apathy. He pervaded almost every
dwelling; he was where the morning orisons arose
in churches and cathedrals; he walked the open
streets even in the sunlight; he sat with the judge
upon the bench; he knelt with the bride at the
119
altar, and even where full cups were lifted high,
with nods indicative of good health and peace, he
came and went like a restless spirit.
As Tabbard and Gyves slowly crossed the street
from the office of the Justice, a cart delayed their
steps for a moment. Their breasts were almost
against its heavy wheels as it passed, and their
eyes were on a level with the top of its box, which
was filled above its edges. The jolting of the stones
shook the contents so that the man in black beside
the driver, through fear of losing part of the load,
kept his eyes fixed upon the rear end-board of the
cart.
“Ugh!” exclaimed Gyves, drawing back with a
shudder, “’Tis the death cart. See, they have
piled them in like dead mutton.”
“Look at that stiff beggar with fallen chops
hanging over the wheel,” remarked Tabbard, with
face wrinkling in his disgust.
“They are in too great haste to keep them properly
covered. And this is the earliest load I have
seen hurried through the streets.”
“Don’t they carry at all times?” inquired Tabbard.
“Nay, only after sundown and just before sunup.”
“The plague must be growing worse,” remarked
Tabbard, for the moment longing for the fresh,
sweet air of Kent, and heartily wishing that he was
out of that foggy street, which had suddenly grown
as melancholy as a church-yard of new-made
120
graves. He almost forgot to limp, or lean heavily
on the constable as they reached the opposite walk.
“God save you, sir. It is breathing in every
ward both north and south of Holborn, Cheapside
and Fenchurch, and as far west as Gray’s Inn and
Temple Bar. Red paint has gone up in price, I
hear, for nearly every house owner has had to buy
some to daub the cross on his door. I saw one
man fall on Coleman street to-day, and in less than
an hour he was dead in the alley where they had
moved him. Oh, man! it would be well for you,
if you had never ventured in from the fields; for
I see that you have the healthful looking face and
air of a countryman.”
“Does one die quickly?” asked Tabbard, with a
quaver in his voice.
“Too quickly to send either for doctor, or priest,
in some cases,” replied Gyves.
“And is there no help?”
“Little before and none after the black spots
appear.”
“And do many die?”
“Thousands.”
“Near here?” inquired Tabbard, shuddering as
he looked at the gloomy buildings around him.
“Nay, mostly in the dwellings and tenements.
With one death in the family, you can count that
every member will follow. Ah! here is the Windmill.”
They turned from the sidewalk to mount the
steps leading to the tavern. The building was a
121
quaint structure built by the Jews at least three
hundred years before. Once a synagogue, next a
dwelling and then a tavern, it had, despite all these
changes in its use, maintained some of the characteristics
of each. Like a minister, who had become
a soldier and then deserted for some safer
but less honorable calling, it had retained an outward
expression of sanctity in the narrow, pointed
lancet-windows in its front and its six-columned
portico; while, as evidence of its passage through
an intermediate period, oriel windows jutted out
from what might be second and third stories. The
painting of a windmill, hanging between the two
middle columns of the portico, published the present
purposes of the place with as loud a flourish as
trumpets might announce.
Into what was once the inner narthex of the synagogue,
they passed. A stone floor was under foot,
while a low vaulted ceiling rose overhead, its base
being supported by attached columns with decorated
capitals and elaborately carved corbels.
Here, where devout Hebrews had once paused to
arrange their gabardines, or stamp thoughts of
usury for one short session from their minds before
entering the body of the church, the sacrilegious
Gentile had set his snares of destruction.
It had become the tap-room of the tavern.
Near the foot of the rood-stair, which once led
to the gallery, stood a brilliantly lighted bar, with
a range of butts of Malmsey, kegs of beer and sack,
deep in the recess behind it; and on the near
122
shelves, against a bastard wall, was a glittering line
of decanters, mugs and tankards.
The heavy round tables were encircled by many
persons drinking under suspended lamps, and several
groups of men were standing here and there
on the sanded floor. A quietness, except for the
low buzz of conversation and an occasional laugh,
pervaded the room, thus speaking well for the sobriety
of the inmates and the respectability of the
tavern; still the crowd was as mixed as could be
found anywhere except in the middle aisle of St.
Paul’s. There, in the nave of that famous cathedral,
dedicated to pious uses, in the aisles, before
the ambries, and beside the font, during intervals
between divine service, horsemen, usurers, cut-throats,
beggars, bargainers of all kinds, doctors,
lawyers and noblemen, plied their avocations, held
their meetings, hatched their conspiracies and settled
accounts.
Here there were no beggars, such being barred
entrance; but their tatters could be seen on the
portico whenever the door swung open. But men,
in apparel fit for noblemen, walked in and out;
others, with the hardened visages of men who
dreamt continually of the gallows and shuddered
at every flash of light across their paths, drank at
the bar, or gathered under some of the isolated
columns.
At one table was a country squire in dun-colored
serge coat, with full bearded face, bending over a
trencher filled with a half devoured pheasant. Before
123
him was his city cousin, in velvet cap, with a
lovelock suspended from under the green rim down
across his ruffled collar. Decorated with pointed
mustachios and framed in powdered periwig and
high ruff, he was typical of the dandy of the period.
If the raw-boned, ungainly young man, with repellant
features, who monopolized the conversation
at another table, was not Ben Jonson [note 33],
then Gyves, who pointed him out to Tabbard, had
selected some one who looked enough like that
genius, just rising to eminence, to be confounded
with him.
“He is an actor,” said Gyves, “who lately returned
from the Low Countries with the company
of soldiers of which he was a volunteer, a most
companionable man: can drink deeper and swear
louder than any one around him.”
“Doth he make no choice of companions?” questioned
Tabbard, noticing that some of the group
looked misplaced anywhere but dangling from a
gibbet’s arm.
“Not he,” said Gyves, “according to his stories,
he has messed with the worst of the cut-throats of
the Straits, kept by the side of clapperdoggers on
their rounds, learned all the slang of the purlieus
of Cheapside, and would as lief hobnob with a
ruffler as with a nobleman or parish priest.”
“Hath he good sense?”
“The very best, I think, for I heard the Justice
say that he wrote plays of the people, and must
mingle with them to learn their ways.”
124
By this time they had approached a vacant table,
and as Tabbard seated himself with pretended difficulty,
he said, “Now sit you there; my friend, and
have one cup with me before you venture out.”
Gyves required no second invitation.
“’Tis a bad night to hunt the highways for
clapperdoggers,” said he, as he dropped into a
chair, and pulling his whiskers glanced around the
room with an air of familiarity as great as that of a
chained mastiff in his own kennel.
“Is it a beggar you are after?” asked Tabbard
with a forced air of unconcern.
“Not exactly, and I correct my expression,” returned
Gyves, “but one even less harmful.”
“Some poor devil who has failed to attend
church for a Sunday or two, eh?” [note 34.]
“Nay, I took in two on such complaints this
morning, but to-night I shall hail in a blasphemer.”
“Hardly to-night,” thought Tabbard, and then
he added aloud, “Doth not thy conscience prick
thee at times for dragging such men to jail?”
“I am but an instrument of the law,” replied the
constable in deep tones, at the same time striking
his chest with his fingers evidently in imitation of
the voice and action of the Lord High Sheriff.
“The man who should have cold sweats is the accuser,
the public informer.”
“Are there many of such curs?”
“Enough to keep us busy,” answered Gyves.
“And who has held thy nose to the hot scent?”
125
“Out cow-herd! I like not thy terms of address,”
exclaimed Gyves, bringing his fist down
with a ring upon the table, “A hot scent with a
nose upon it raises the figure of a dog. It takes
no keen wit to see that. And as thou hast called
it my nose, then forsooth, I am the dog.”
“Nay, nay!” exclaimed Tabbard, “I meant no
offense. Here, I clink glasses with thee as evidence
of good-fellowship.”
They raised the glasses of wine which the drawer
had set before them.
“Who was the accuser of the man you bear a
warrant for?”
“Bame,” said the constable, lowering his voice.
“He is one of the prime movers against Papists and
scoffers of religion.”
“Of the established church, eh?”
“Nay, a sour, morose Brownist, who strikes at
all but his own sect.”
“A gad fly,” said Tabbard.
“An asp, more like; a carrion-eating swine!” exclaimed
Gyves, as though the words were the froth
of bitter recollections.
“Is his rope long?”
“As long as the laws under which he acts.”
“And who is the accused in this case?”
“Chris—”
He checked himself and then continued:
“’Sdeath! When I get the reviler where liberty
is a sweet memory only, I will if I choose call aloud
his name in every quarter but St. Paul’s.”
126
“And why not there?”
“He hath attacked the church, ’tis said.”
“Canst thou not recollect his name, over this second
glass?” inquired Tabbard, smoothly.
“I said nothing of my recollection being faulty.”
“Hast thou the warrant? If thou hast let me
see it,” said Tabbard, with the air and tone of one
in command. “Here, some more of that best
Rheinish wine,” he thundered to the drawer.
Gyves had never encountered so reckless a
spendthrift. His admiration was rising as every
glass was lowered. He was in no hurry to go on
his quest. The foggy night, and the dark miles
between the Windmill and the Roman Wall caused
him to embrace the glittering present. The tap-room
of the Windmill never appeared so enchanting.
Tabbard, despite his rusticity, was growing
into a prince. The cultivated caution of the constable
oozed away, and he placed the warrant in
Tabbard’s hands. Just at that moment Bame
walked into the tap-room and came hurriedly toward
the table. Tabbard had caught sight of him
out of the corner of his eye. He thrust the warrant
in his pocket, at the same time giving a significant
glance at Gyves, who, with at first a motion
that he would retake the paper, subsided on
noticing Bame. The latter said, as he reached the
table, “How now, Gyves, has the arrest been
made?”
“Shortly, sir, shortly,” exclaimed Gyves, scarcely
able to conceal his surprise at seeing the sanctimonious-looking
127
Brownist beside him in the tap-room.
“Good faith, man! Get thee out quick, or the
fellow will be fled. Thou hast already squandered
an hour here. Come, stir thyself!”
The tones were peremptory and husky with suppressed
anger. Gyves knew Bame’s power. He
felt that temporary action was necessary to preserve
his office. True, he could not act without
the warrant, and he dared not expose to Bame his
folly by demanding its return. So, hoping that
he could see Tabbard later, and, having procured
the warrant, make the arrest, he arose.
“I am off at once—” he said.
“Odds end!” exclaimed Bame savagely, “Don’t
stop to mouth words. Push along.”
“And where will you lodge?” asked the constable
of Tabbard, who, rejoicing over the complete relief
he had secured for his friend Kit, sat there apparently
unconcerned.
“Here,” answered Tabbard.
Gyves turned and walked away from them. In
going, Bame’s back was toward him, but he saw
the smiling face of Tabbard, and striking his own
breast, he made a motion with his hand as though
to say, “The warrant you have in your pocket deliver
to me a little later.”
Tabbard nodded his head understandingly, and
the troubled arm of the law passed out of the old
Jewry entrance.
Bame scrutinized the late companion of the constable
128
for an interval without changing his position.
Tabbard stared back at him with an expression
of contempt and hatred, which changed to
a smile of triumph as he thought with what exultation
he could tear the warrant into shreds before
Bame’s eyes. He itched to do it on the instant;
but the other man wheeled round and sought a
table in a retired corner, from where he continued
his scrutiny of Tabbard. There was something
about the latter man which jarred a chord in
Bame’s memory, and suddenly he recognized him
as the person who had been with Marlowe at the
Dolphin. This recognition, connected with the
fact of the lately interrupted meeting between
Gyves and Tabbard, raised his suspicions, and his
watching became like that of a hawk.
Tabbard took out the warrant. He opened it
curiously and examined the seal. It was the only
portion of the paper that assured him of the legal
character of the writ. Words in Greek could have
conveyed as much meaning as those printed and
written on the paper. If he had been convicted of
felony, Tabbard would have suffered the severe
penalty; for the benefit of clergy would not have
availed him. He could not read the Lord’s
Prayer in English print.
He folded the paper and then began tearing it
into small bits. These he scattered around him,
feeling like a life convict taking the first breath
of air outside the broken wall of the prison. As
he ground the last pieces into the sand under his
129
feet, he lifted his glass of Rheinish wine and threw
his head back to drain the contents. The thought
of “Sir Kit” was in his mind, a smile played upon
his lips.
Could death strike us at the moment of accomplishing
good for a friend or for the human race,
we might not parley but pass with glorified faces
into a peace assuredly in keeping with the joy
kindled by the generous act. With few the end
comes so gloriously. To the soldier, the martyr,
the mother, such passing of the spirit is oft vouchsafed;
the first, falling at the head of the victorious
forces on the captured battlements; the second,
amid flames at the stake; the last, with the first
breath of her infant upon her lips already damp
with the dew of dissolution.
In the position assumed by Tabbard for his last
draught, the bright flame of a suspended lamp
flared in his eyes. To him it appeared to swing
in a circle, although in fact it was stationary; and
the vaulted ceiling seemed rising in air higher and
higher, until he looked into the darkness of absolute
night. It was his head that swayed instead of
the lamp; it was the gradual failure of his eye-sight
that raised the phenomenon of the fading
ceiling. A violent nausea seized him, so that every
fiber of his body shook and his glass fell shivered
upon the floor. He groaned so loudly that every
one in the room turned his face in his direction.
And thus, before staring and startled faces, the
quivering man rolled from his chair to the sanded
130
floor. A whisper rose from every lip, except from
the pair which grew white in distress. The words
were the same from all:
“The plague!”
The stricken man may have heard the two
words, but it could have conveyed no new tidings
to his mind. Even the shiver of his frame from
a draught of cold air would have sprung the belief
that the first symptom of the Black Death had
appeared. But there was no mistaking the pang
that shot through him, like an arrow from a
long bow. Could he have seen his face a few
moments afterward as Bame saw it, turned upward
on the floor, he would have died more suddenly
from fright; hæmorrhagic spots discolored
it—the unmistakable symbol of internal
dissolution. They looked like the black imprints
of the fingers of a hand that had been thrust with
violence against it.
“Tell him he is safe,” came the broken words
from lips moved by a wandering mind.
“Who?” asked Bame, leaning over him.
The dying man did not answer, but the words
“Deptford” and the “Earl’s actors” were uttered
in his rambling speech.
131
The silence in Peele’s chamber at the Boar’s
Head had continued many minutes. The three
hearers of Marlowe’s vivid recital looked at each
other expectantly; but as all had quaffed his cup
of misery, silence was alone the fit expression of
their depth of feeling and interest. The intense
personality of the man had aroused in them sentiments
like those he entertained. They recognized
his genius [note 18 to 24], the height from
which he had fallen, the deplorableness of his situation.
It was as though his intellect had unseated
theirs and mounted on the thrones thus vacated.
Thus the boon companion of their riotous follies,
the good fellow, the well-beloved and revel-loving
Kit, had in a thrice vanished in thin air, and a
veritable king of men assumed his place.
He had simply summoned the power that he
knew was lodged within him, deep in the inexhaustible
fountain from which he had drawn his
lines of fire and figures of immortal mold.
132
“Let us calmly consider your situation,” at
length said Tamworth, looking feelingly at Marlowe,
“Against thyself lieth now an accusation of
blasphemy upon which a warrant hath been issued.
Even now, undoubtedly, with this in
hand, the officers shadow thy customary haunts.
During their search, news will soon come of thy
death at Deptford; for, from what thou sayeth
of the unfortunate Frazer’s resemblance to thee,
he will be buried under thy name. The warrant
will be returned; the information pigeonholed,
and thou wilt have little to fear from that
source.”
“Unless he goes abroad among those who know
him,” ejaculated Peele.
“That can not be,” whispered Marlowe.
“Then we will take it, that, as Marlowe, thou
art like one dead beyond all resurrection,” continued
the lawyer with emphasis.
“It can not be otherwise,” rejoined the subject
of these comments, “unless in some retreat of assured
safety, and at some future time, I reveal
myself.”
“As the slayer of the Count?” was asked.
“There’s the rub,” whispered Marlowe, shaking
his head.
“Well that is for later consideration,” said
Tamworth calmly. “Let me continue. On the
morrow a hue and cry will be raised for the arrest
of Francis Frazer. The character which you have
assumed for the last few hours cannot avail thee
133
further. It has answered its purpose. Thou hast
kept thy name from being sullied with the crime
of murder. But as the Count, or Francis Frazer,
thou canst not walk forth.”
“Assuredly not,” said Peele.
“An arrest before noon would follow,” interrupted
Shakespere, “and then, thy trial, in which,
perchance, the true situation of affairs would
come to light.”
“Wherein lieth safety?” asked Marlowe, raising
his eyes and glancing from one face to the other
of his friends.
“A life of obscurity,” answered Tamworth, “is
all I can see for thee, unless thine efforts at concealment
are undone; you deliver yourself up and
stand trial. I cannot guarantee an acquittal, but
it is not going too far to place firm hope in one.”
“No,” exclaimed Marlowe, “rather the concealment
and obscurity than such course. The die
has been cast; so far it worketh well, and even
with an acquittal, this untried charge of blasphemy
would stick in the burr. What is it?
How far doth it reach? Hast thou a copy of the
accusation?”
“I have,” said Peele, again producing the paper
and handing it to Marlowe.
“The severity and falsity of the charges appall
me,” exclaimed Marlowe, “nothing could be
blacker. Are there no means to vindicate my
name?”
“Your memory,” suggested Shakespere.
134
“True, that is all the world hath of me, but in
all seriousness can not this false swearer, Bame,
be punished?”
“He can, if you desire it,” answered Tamworth.
“Desire it? What man would not demand it?”
“I know of none.”
“Much of it is too vile for utterance, and that
I knew one Poole in Newgate, and intended coining
English shillings is as false as Hell. When
shall his prosecution be pushed?”
“At once,” answered Tamworth.
“On what charge?”
“Perjury.”
“The penalty is what?”
“He can be tried either under the statute or
the common law. Under the latter, the punishment
is death.”
“Let it be the latter,” said Peele and Shakespere
before Marlowe could answer.
“But to return to the suggestion of your concealment,”
said Peele, “How can you remain concealed
for any length of time?”
“No one will look for me. All who know me
will hear the account of my death at Deptford.”
“But someone besides us and the wife of Frazer
will doubtless encounter thee.”
“Can I not lie safely housed until passage can
be secured for the continent?”
“But in what quarter?”
“Far from the old familiar places, Peele,”
135
answered Marlowe. “Not at the Black Bull, nor at
Gerard’s Hall; nor at the Mermaid Tavern. And
are these names to be but memories? Why, it is
not two weeks since we secretly played Tancred
and Gismund to the crowded galleries in the
Bull; and then the dance around the fir-pole in
the high-roofed hall at Gerard’s! That was not
a month since, Peele. And verily my lips have
not yet dried from the last glasses of fine old
wine drank with thee, Nash, Jonson and the other
merry wags at the round table within the bow-window
at the Mermaid.”
Peele rocked backward and forward without
speaking.
“Ah well, such frivolity should have ended
long ago,” Marlowe went on, in a tone growing
sterner with every word. “When mine enemy,
Greene, dying of his surfeit of Rheinish wine and
pickled herring, besought his friends in his
Groat’s Worth of Wit [note 35] to abandon dissolute
companions and in solitude nourish their
spirit’s fire, why should I, despite his attack upon
me, have not listened to his warning voice addressed
to others, and not have waited for a finger
dipped in blood to write, ‘Here endeth thy career?’”
A pause followed in which no one spoke,
and again he continued: “’Tis well that this has
happened. Without it what could have stayed
me from wasting the hours which henceforth can
be spent only in intellectual effort? Now the
136
devil is chained. I can not even sell my soul
to him. The world with its temptations lieth as
distant as the fields of Trasymene. Is it not a
subject for congratulation? What campaigns
may I not enter; what conquests may I not
gain?”
With the egotism of a god, knowing himself,
and the source from which he drew his inspiration,
he continued his torrent of words:
“Tamburlaine was written with the collar of
the university about my neck; Faustus, while my
hatred of the existing laws designed to chain
one’s belief, prevented a just appreciation of true
religion; the Massacre of Paris, with my mind
disturbed from the effects of continuous dissipation;
Hero and Leander, while deep in Love’s
young dream; and so on with the list. But now
what is there to clog or muddy the fountains?
Is my mind not broader; are not the impediments
to studious application and undisturbed
contemplation removed? For twenty, thirty, yea
forty or fifty years, what is before me but the
opportunity to produce immortal and transcendent
work? Nay, give me ten years in solitude,
O thou dread force, and under my hand all form,
all thought, shall find expression in written
words!”
He fell forward on the table with outstretched
arms and clenched hands. Shakespere lifted him
up; pityingly brushed back the hair from his
137
face, and said: “Forget the matter for a moment.”
No other words were spoken; still the rain pattered
on the window opening towards St. Michael’s,
and no sounds came up from the narrow
walks in Crooked Lane.
At length Tamworth broke the silence. “I do
not doubt, dear Kit, that whatever may be thy
aim, thy arrow will reach. But life can not be
maintained without capital or revenue. Your
design being linked with an ambition for personal
immortality precludes the publication of
thy productions till after thy death or when hope
of life is gone. Now, where will come the fund
for thy maintenance?”
“Thou canst not appear as an actor,” suggested
Shakespere.
“And neither can the works you may produce
be sold as thine,” said Peele.
“Could they not be sold under some one else’s
name?” asked Marlowe. “At the proper time
their authorship could be confessed and established.”
“But in whose name?” queried Peele.
“Why not thine; at least temporarily?”
“Bah,” ejaculated Peele, “I could not pass thy
dramas off as mine. The style, my dear fellow,
the style. Henslowe would at once say, ‘What
Peele, this thy drama? Marry, and where didst
thou steal this new fire? Off with thee. It is
none of thine. Leave it. I will look up the
138
older dramatists, Greek and Latin, from which I
ween thou hast taken its entire,’”
“Then why not as thine, Shakespere?”
“Mine,” exclaimed Shakespere, shaking with
laughter which he could not control, “Greater
objections than those stated by Peele would arise.
Only a few years ago I held horses before the
Curtain and Theater. I write a play; Ho! Ho!”
He laughed so heartily that Tamworth joined
with him.
“Stop,” said Peele, endeavoring to interrupt
the sudden mirth, “The suggestion is a good one.
What does Henslowe know of your horseholding,
friend Will?”
“But,” answered Shakespere, “he knoweth that
I came from the miserable village of Stratford-on-Avon
only six years ago, where there are few
books and nothing better than a grammar school.
[note 36] Although I can say ‘Stipendium
peccati mors est,’ as being learned from thy Faustus,
Marlowe, I would die in the attempt to give its
meaning.”
“He surely will not question thee about thy
Latin or thy Greek,” said Tamworth, joining in
with the scheme, “and as thou hast never turned
a hand at such work, there are not, as in Peele’s
case, fair-skinned children of earlier birth to give
the lie to the paternity of the later ones of different
complexion.”
“And am I to claim them as mine?” asked
Shakespere.
139
“Only as may be necessary for the sale to theatrical
managers,” answered Marlowe.
“And perchance grow famous; for we know the
depth and strength of thy work.”
“Only for a time,” said Marlowe, impressively,
“In the end all will be clear.”
“So be it then,” said Shakespere.
“But thy handwriting, Marlowe, is too well
known. Still,” continued Tamworth, “the manuscript
may be copied, and as I write a clear hand
I would gladly aid thee.”
“But where are you to live, Kit?”
“At Southwark?” questioned the latter.
“Nay,” exclaimed Tamworth, “the Rose is
there, with many players who know thee, and its
numerous hangers-on. The heart of this city is
far better. I know of a retreat. No hunted deer
ever found so secure a covert. It is the building
known as the Prince’s Wardrobe on the Old Jewry.
Its corridors are unfrequented except by the
few tenants who, through the benevolence of the
present keeper, dwell in some of the chambers.
Its demolition, begun many years ago, has been
stayed. Once vacated because of notice of its
contemplated razing, it is again being occupied
through the apparent inertness of its owners.
But this inaction is due to other causes—”
“I have heard of secret chambers there,” interrupted
Peele.
“There are,” continued Tamworth, “It was
once used as a palace, but its early history is lost.
140
Some of its stone walls are down, and above the
cleared ruins at one end, divers lordly buildings
have been reared; but the half portion towards
St. Olave is intact. A question concerning its
title being now unsettled in the courts, no progress
can be made either in its repair or its destruction.
Years may pass before the question is
finally determined. The receiver appointed by
the courts is a descendant of Sir Anthony Cope,
who purchased the property from the crown in
1548, and, due to my acquaintance with him, and
late services rendered, I now have a furnished
chamber therein. The way out, or in, may be
easy of discovery, and my quarters are occasionally
visited by friends, but to me alone is known an
inner room where you can dwell in perfect safety.”
“Thy words are of good cheer,” exclaimed Marlowe,
“and no delay must be incurred.”
“Did you encounter no one upon entering
here?” asked Peele.
“No; I came in at the side entrance. It was
open. Crooked Lane was deserted as far as I
could see.”
“And on the road from Deptford?”
“No one who knew me appeared upon the road.
At the Golden Hind as I passed the tap-room
door I caught a glimpse of the drawer, one of the
actors who had been with me early in the evening,
and the wife of Frazer.”
“Ah; she has not escaped then?” exclaimed
141
Tamworth. “This is serious. She may be held
until after the discovery of the deed.”
“Undoubtedly she has been,” answered Marlowe,
“I could not catch the occasion of her resting
in the tap-room, neither could I pause, for
discovery would have been certain.”
“Did she see thee?”
“I think not, for the drawer stood before her,
so that only a portion of her gown was visible
to me. I mounted hurriedly in the inn-yard and
riding to the gnarled oak I waited under it, and
in the thick fog for at least an hour. She did not
come.”
“She will testify against thee.”
“Never,” exclaimed Marlowe.
“Ah,” said Tamworth, prolonging the word
and opening wide his eyes.
“Have no fears of that,” continued Marlowe,
firmly, and then as though to turn their thoughts
into another channel, he continued: “The ride
over that country road was lonely beyond all
comparison. I slunk by the lights at Redriffe like
one unarmed passing by the known lair of a
sleeping lion. At the moment they struck my
face I could have fallen from the saddle. But
no eye of careless watcher was apparently following
their seams into the darkness; for no haloo
broke the night. The wood of oak and elm
fencing the road this side the half-way house
was resonant with swaying limbs. A wind was
coming from the river, and the fog was like rain.”
142
“Was it dark?”
“So dark I could not see the ground.”
“Thy horse found the way and reached the
bridge?”
“No, I turned not in towards it; but passing
Bataille’s Inn, I rode down to a waterman’s
house close by the river’s bank. There I dismounted,
tied my horse and found the waterman.
He was tying his wherry at the foot of the landing.
With much persuasion, I induced him to
row me across and, reaching the stone steps somewhere
near the Swan, I came here with all haste.”
“And when were you last at your quarters in
Coward Lane?”
“Just before starting for Deptford.”
“Whatever is there must be left.”
“Nay,” exclaimed Marlowe, “I have much unfinished
work there.”
“Doth not Nash lodge in the same tenement?”
“Yes, in the room adjoining.”
“Doth he know of these writings?”
“All about them. He is engaged with me in
writing the tragedy of Dido. I read him the
two sestiads of Hero and Leander only two nights
since.”
“Well then such things can not be taken unless
Nash is numbered with us.”
“’Twould not be well,” said Tamworth, “the
lesser the number holding the secret, the less fear
of discovery.”
“Thy judgment is sound, Tamworth,” said Marlowe,
143
“let Nash finish the tragedy, and have him
place the poem of Hero and Leander in the hands
of Chapman with word that it was my dying
request that he complete it [note 37].”
“Good,” exclaimed Peele, “and perchance embodying
within it some golden lines touching thy
unfortunate demise.”
“Most excellent,” said Marlowe, smiling at the
thought of reading of his own death and the
estimate of his own worth expressed in the poetic
language of a loving friend.
“These matters,” said Tamworth, “will be attended
to as strictly as bequests should be by an
executor. We must at once reach my lodgings.”
“Leave the Count’s cloak and take this of
mine,” said Peele, taking down a short mantle
from a hook against the wall.
144
The human sea of London was at the period
of its deepest calm. The noisy idle white-caps of
the night had been laid at rest, and not yet had
the strong billows of the trade current begun their
steady roll. The sun might already have lifted
his rim slightly above the Langdon Hills, but no
evidence of his coming was as yet visible in the
labyrinth of London streets. One might have
turned one’s face upward in the drizzling rain and
noticed the clouds with faint glow suffused, but
whether it was moonlight filtering through broken
ranks of driving vapor, or the gray of the
dawn, could not for a time have been determined.
It was at this hour that two men were passing
into that ancient street of the city known as the
Old Jewry. Their heads were muffled in their
145
cloaks or capes; their nearer arms locked as they
walked abreast, and their steps were as swift as it
was possible to take in the darkness. They stumbled
along without a link light or a lanthorn to
show the holes in the broken pavements, the
turns of streets and other impediments and intricacies
of the way. It was not only unusual but
a matter to excite suspicion, for any person with
even the weight of an untattered coat on his back
to venture thus through the quarters from which
these two men had come. Here and there, a lanthorn
in the hands of a bellman of the night
blinked and wavered; and directly before them,
the flaring torch of a link-boy shot a shifting
light along black, dripping shop fronts and displayed
the figure, close following in its wake, of
a solitary horseman.
No part of the city was deemed safe after the
candles, burning in the horn receptacles before
the dwellings and shops, were extinguished. The
hour for such extinguishment was nine; and
close following it, on moonless and foggy nights,
bludgeon-bearing thieves issued from reeking alleys
into the public streets, and assaulted belated
passers. The bellman, with his formidable halberd,
might rush where he heard the cry of the
person assaulted, but long before he reached the
spot his lanthorn had warned the assaulter, and
naught but the bleeding victim, with rifled pockets,
would meet his gaze.
But the solitary thief, or skulking pairs of
146
rufflers, were not the only menace against night
walks. Bodies, numbering sometimes a hundred
men, having assembled in some obscure den,
would sally forth at midnight and rob the houses
of whomsoever were reported to have money or
treasure. Murder at such times, either of defenseless
citizens in night robes within their houses, or
inoffensive unfortunates stumbling into the ranks
of the lawless crews, was a crime of frequent occurrence.
The neighborhood of the junction of Poultry
street and the street of the Old Jewry was a
favorite rendezvous of these thieves; for the majority
of the persons stirring late at night in that
locality was of the class wearing jewels or carrying
coin, and the situation was favorable for robbing
without hazard. At the corner of the two
streets one could command a vision for many
blocks in several directions. The moving lights
of the guardians of the night could thus be
watched without fear of the unexpected approach
of the latter. While one thief might be thus occupied,
his fellows could halt, assault and rob the
incautious passer. The lofty buildings rendered
the shadows deep upon the pavements on all
nights, and the wide portico of St. Olave, with its
great columns, made an excellent ambush. Behind
this church ran Cutthroat Lane—a narrow
and never-lighted alley, into which one, with but
a few feet of separation from a pursuing officer,
could enter and vanish as though swallowed by
147
the sea. It was a row of shackly tenements, facing
one side of this alley, that thus gave friendly
aid. Their doors were always ajar, even when
winter storms prevailed; and stairs, ascending to
intricate upper halls, and descending into connecting
cellars, soon baffled all panting pursuers.
Even the cautious police who, in daytime, attempted
to thread the ways through which some desperado
had eluded pursuit, were confused with
blind passages and daunted by a darkness and
silence that imported evil.
On this particular night, five thieves were
hanging like trembling shadows about the portico
of St. Olave. The night was almost spent
and not one groat had they raised. All the passing
groups of men had comprised too many members
to warrant any attack and the one sole traveler,
whom they had seized at the mouth of Cutthroat
Lane proved to be a beggar. His unconscious
body now lay face downward in the mud of
that lane. The chance of his recovery from the
blow of one of the disappointed robbers was a
question for the doctors.
What business had beggars to be abroad at the
hour when gentlemen were returning from nightly
revels? Who could distinguish a ragged cloak
from one edged with gold in such darkness?
Gentlemen thieves were not to be lightly imposed
upon. A varlet who has no angels in his pockets
should be abed at dark. For such the sleep that
knows no waking is a blessing. This was the
148
argument of the men who had halted the beggar.
As the two men, whose steps we have been following,
entered the Old Jewry, their approach
was a matter of notice, and as they reached a spot
directly before the church, three of the thieves
sprang out of the shadows of its projecting entrance.
The attack came so unexpectedly that
the two men had no chance for flight, and safety
seemed to lie only in such effort. In the first
grapple, the taller man’s cloak was torn from him,
but this was of fortunate occurrence, for it enabled
him to draw his sword. His companion had been
felled to his knees, but, avoiding another blow
aimed at his head, he rose to his feet and staggered
to one side. The drawn sword of his friend
swung through the air. It cut a face wide open
in its career, and was again wielded in like manner,
but without effect. Then the wounded robber
seized the knees of the swordsman, only to be
thrust through and through, as the latter stumbled
and fell in the embrace.
In the meantime, the other man assailed, tugging
at the hilt of his own sword which was kept
from handy withdrawal by the folds of his cloak,
retreated backward into the middle of the street.
Approaching him was the robber who had delivered
the first ineffectual blow. In the tussle
he had dropped his bludgeon, and he was now
trusting to his own strength to overpower this
man before him. Suddenly another sword was
out of its scabbard. There was a quick thrust at
149
the dark body between outstretched hands which
had almost grasped the swordsman’s neck. A
groan escaped from agonized lips, and the wielder
of the sword felt warm blood upon his sword
hand. His victim had fallen heavily against him,
but he pushed him off like so much dead weight,
and at that moment he heard his friend’s voice:
“Run, Kit, for thy life!”
“I am with you,” came the answer.
He saw that two other shadows had joined the
decimated group. These two had been drowsing
on the portico, and at length, aroused by the cries,
had come forth. He saw his companion turn and
run, and he followed him.
The lights of the windmill tavern streamed
across the way, for its doors were open. They
reached the fronting pillars of its portico, as
though a haven, and then paused. Both of them
knew that they could not venture in, and fortunately
their assailants had given up the chase.
In the gloom, behind one of the columns, they
stood panting. Near them stood a man also in
the shadows. Their swift approach had been observed
by him; but if he had apprehended the
cause, it had not shaken him from his intent to
remain concealed. He might have heard the retreating
footsteps of their now baffled pursuers,
and this should have disturbed him; for the
cause of the men who had almost brushed against
him was his cause. It was his duty to pursue the
assailants; but there are times when the public
150
weal is forgotten—blotted out by thoughts of
one’s private welfare. And so it was with the
man in the darkness of the portico. The continuance
of his ability to act for the public, nay, possibly
his existence, depended on different service
than the arrest of midnight marauders.
This man was Gyves, the constable, and he was
waiting to see Bame leave the tavern so that he
might venture in, find Tabbard, and obtain by
persuasion or violence the warrant for the arrest
of Marlowe. He had waited there for hours,
through the mist which had drifted across the
portico, and then later, while the drizzling rain
had beaten in his face and set him shivering.
He had yet no knowledge of the destruction of
the writ, and no whisper of the sudden visit of
the plague had touched his ears. So it was that
the paper, upon which he dreamed his welfare
hung, and the man whom he had for the past
eight hours yearned most to see, were both beyond
power of production to him. But despite
all this, the arrest of Marlowe, which was his
ultimate object, required at that moment neither
the departure of Bame nor his possession of the
writ. And furthermore no long weary walk nor
tiresome search in an unfamiliar quarter would
have been necessary. He could have reached out
his hand and have arrested the two men under
the neighboring column for a disturbance of the
peace. Even then a sword was being sheathed by
one of them, and Gyves had heard the late outcry
151
which of itself was sufficient to have justified
him in taking them into custody to await further
investigation. One of the men was Christopher
Marlowe.
To us, with our limited vision, what a comedy
is life. Over what scenes of merriment could we
not amuse ourselves were we robbed of hearts
and consciences and there were added to our remaining
faculties the power of unlimited sight
alone; to see the struggles of one during a whole
life for a result which required only a few days’
effort along another line than that pursued; to
see the entanglement, in a single web, of many
with worthy designs, and their struggles liberating
only that one who as it appeared to us should
have remained entangled; to see the life pursuit
for a will-o’-the-wisp; to see genius strangled,
and dullness triumphant. Perhaps the truth
would then burst upon us, that we are but the
pawns and knights of the chess-board, moved by
an Omniscient hand toward the final victory of
the whole.
As the three men held back in the shadows,
three more men came forth from the portals of
the tavern; but only two of them walked. The
third was between the others, but instead of being
like them, erect, he was in a horizontal position.
He lay upon a stretcher which the two men bore.
He was motionless, and a rough cloth covered his
form.
Certain it was that the covering of the man
152
upon the stretcher should have concealed his
face, but through some inadvertency it had rolled
down upon his breast so that his face was revealed.
It was expressionless and that of one
from whom the soul had fled. A man with flaming
torch now ran out of the doors, as though to
lead the way, and as the light struck upon the
form upon the stretcher, one of the two men who
had escaped the murderous, bludgeons of the
thieves, clutched his companion’s arm and gasped:
“My God! the dead man is Tabbard.”
Then, as the flaming torch illuminated the man
in front, who, with back toward the corpse, bore
the stretcher, Marlowe, for he was the speaker,
sunk his fingers deep into the clutched arm, for
at that moment he heard a voice near him whisper:
“And Bame, Richard Bame, carries him.”
A shadow, shifting with the wavering of the
torch, fell across Marlowe’s face. The latter
looked to ascertain its cause and also the source
of the last words spoken, and saw the outline of
a man in the coat of an officer slink from the
portico into the rain and the darkness. The
torch now revealed an object close to the edge of
the pavement. It was a heavy cart with horses
attached like the one which had passed Tabbard
early that night. His body was being borne toward
it.
153
Marlowe and Tamworth now followed the example
of the constable and, having moved silently
along the street, in a few moments were in the
wide and dark hall of a large building near the
church of St. Olave.
“Hold to my arm,” said Tamworth, “This is
the Prince’s Wardrobe.”
“And entered without turning so much as a
knob or lifting a latch,” responded Marlowe.
“Here we climb the King’s staircase,” said
Tamworth, as one of his advancing feet struck
against an obstacle.
The morn was breaking, but the interior of the
building, although open and windswept, was
wrapped in utter darkness. Nought could be
distinguished of the broken columns down the
long hall, the tesselated pavement under foot, the
marred frescoes of the walls, the blackened stucco
of the ceilings, the solid staircase with heavy
stone balustrade ascending to a middle landing.
Once the principal palace of King Henry VI, it
154
had long since been remodeled and adapted to
plebeian uses. It has even survived its fitness for
the latter shifts, and partially dismantled by man
and ruined by time it stood simply as a landmark
of the fourteenth century.
The few words of the lawyer set moving
through the poet’s mind a vision of splendid
pageantry. The great hall rose out of shadow,
bright with the illumination of a thousand lamps,
and across its shining floor and up and down the
marble stairway moved figures resplendent in the
pomp of royalty—men of magnificent mien in
cloaks of cloth of gold and waving plumes;
court sycophants with cringing shoulders under
their rich mantles; clowns in cap and bells and
spangles; fair ladies in regal robes, their faces
beautiful in youth, or growing queenly with the
marks of age. All were raised as at a masque
under the signal of the Master of the Revels.
And this interior scene, from which kings,
courtiers and the fairest and most womanly of
women were to be drawn for all time, was not his
only vision of the tumultuous past. Outside,
again, Jack Cade, with his rebels, Kentish peasants,
ragged mendicants and starvelings of the
alleys, swept defiantly through the Old Jewry
and halted with deafening uproar before the barricaded
entrance. There at their head, he saw
the “shag-haired crafty kerne” and, close pressing
him, the leather-aproned smiths and hedge-born
hinds, awkward soldiers of the day’s enlistment,
155
from whose base lips all the drolleries of
the seamy side of life were to issue.
And he, the magic creator of forms more palpable
and enduring than those of clay, groping in
the darkness which might never be lifted, was
thus beginning the conjuration of the everlasting.
“Marlowe,” exclaimed Tamworth, noticing the
lack of pressure on his arm, and his friend’s
faltering footsteps. “You drag your feet as
though in sleep. See, the clouds are breaking and
the gray of the dawn is about us.”
They were passing along an upper corridor,
and at its end, through the glassless spaces between
the mullions of a lancet window, a glow
was spreading so that the rear gables of the row
of houses on the Lothbury could be seen shaking
themselves free of the murky air. Above their
steaming roofs, slender columns of smoke were
rising from the cold mouths of chimneys, and
early fires made gleaming spots on many of the
distant walls. The last wet gust of the storm
had splashed upon the open casement through
which now came, like a benison, the pure breath
of morning.
Down the corridor they turned, and, at length
halted, while Tamworth with a great key which
he had taken from a sunken niche in the wall,
unlocked and swung open a narrow door.
Through this they entered an apartment whose
single window did not yet admit enough light to
156
render distinctly visible the interior. The air
was cold and damp, and for the moment the
place seemed as gloomy as a vault. Tamworth
hastily lighted a lamp, which at first flamed upward
with black smoke, and as it did so Marlowe
glancing around him, uttered an exclamation of
surprise.
“You notice that something more than a mere
vestige of past regal splendor remains here,” said
Tamworth, smiling.
“Why, I should judge that the door had just
closed upon the departure of the prince.”
“A hundred years ago,” answered Tamworth.
“And—” began his companion.
“Has remained vacant until I entered as its
occupant.”
“Why this long disuse?”
“It is in a retired wing of the building. Only
two keepers have had charge since the Crown
parted with its title. The first, from what may
have been an over-refined reverence for royalty,
held this apartment locked and almost secret.
His successor found no use for it until I solicited
lodgment. He gave me possession five years
since.”
“It is a wonder that the tapestries have not been
removed,” said Marlowe, looking in admiration at
one end of the room where hung two magnificent
fabrics, still displaying in enduring colors scenes
from the Apocalypse. They were drawn back
from the middle line of the alcove before which
157
they hung; and, in the recess thus disclosed, the
outlines of a bed, with gorgeous canopy overhanging
it, could be seen. Other textiles of equally
antique manufacture, at many points detached
from the fastenings, hung here and there against
the walls. Separate pieces of Oriental carpet lay
over some spaces of the floor. The furniture was
dark as ebony. A lamp of brass, with four projecting
wings and blackened chains, suspended
from the center of the ceiling. The deep and
wide chimney-place was fit for a fire great enough
to warm the banqueting hall of a castle. Its mantel
was supported by elaborately carved columns
standing half out from the front of the chimney-wall.
“And where does that stairway lead?” asked
Marlowe, pointing at a dark opening in the floor
beside one wall. It was guarded by a brass railing
raised waist-high on a closely set balustrade, and
at its foot could be seen a solid door held shut by
an iron bar across its face.
“To an underground passageway.”
“For escape?”
“Evidently.”
“And ends where?”
“Under a marble slab which must be somewhere
in the chancel of the church of St. Olave. I have
passed along it measuring the distance.”
“But never issued at the other end?”
“No. The slab is closely set in its place, but it
hath hinges on its lower side.”
158
“And on its upper side, I doubt not,” said Marlowe
ironically, “are the words in fair letters
‘Touch not mine annointed’?”
“Possibly,” rejoined Tamworth.
“If the king ever rose from the grave,” said
Marlowe, smiling, “I imagine that he took great
pains to conceal it.”
“There is no tradition that this room was ever
occupied by a king or a prince; but what I know
of the life and character of the weak and unfortunate
monarch, Henry the Sixth, taken in connection
with the arrangement of this room and its
adjoining secret chamber, convinces me that a
crowned head once rested on the bed within the
alcove.”
“Ah, the secret room is an oratory, is it?”
“You surprise me,” exclaimed Tamworth, “how
could that have reached your ears?”
“I simply inferred it, for I certainly do not think
that the secret tunnel into the chancel was for the
purpose of easy attendance upon divine service.”
Tamworth smiled, and Marlowe continued
speaking:
“I knew of the imbecility of that prince and the
strength of his religious devotion; and naturally
in my mind was raised the picture of a world-weary
king in penitential cell.”
“You are right,” returned the lawyer. “See.”
He parted the heavy and worm-eaten hangings
suspended from the ornamental cornice of the
wall beside the painted window. The outline of
159
what appeared to be a walled window appeared.
Its sill, like that of the one that was open and
uncovered, was only a foot above the floor. He
pressed on one of the mullions, which, although
apparently blocked with stone on both sides, remained
standing out from the surface of the wall.
This surface rolled inward as he pressed. The
opening was wide enough to admit the passing of a
man in stooping posture.
“Come,” said Tamworth.
He stepped upon the stone sill, and as Marlowe,
holding back the musty tapestry for a moment,
pressed close in his wake, he entered a small
room.
They were in what was certainly a devotional
chamber. Before them in the center wall of a
semi-circular recess, or exedra, was a gilded crucifix
in bas-relief. A stone canopy extended from
the top of this recess, and was still fringed with
heavy black velvet. At the bottom of the recess
was a platform slightly raised above the floor of
the room. One could imagine that this low ambo
bore the imprints of the knees of the royal penitent.
The ceiling was dome-shaped overhead, as severe
in its smoothness and absence of tracery as
the supporting walls, which without curvature,
fronted each other with a space between of twenty
feet in length and twelve in breadth. In the
face of one wall, near the floor, was a dark cavity,
with an iron basket within it, for the maintenance
160
of fire during prolonged self-communion. A
leather-covered couch stood in one corner, and before
it hung a lamp in rusty chains. An iron
table, with legs covered with elaborate scrollwork,
stood at the end of the room furthest from the
couch. Upon its top was a great black-lettered
Mazarin Bible, and beside it was a solid square-seated
chair with high carved back. Above this
table hung a lamp similar to the one near the
couch; and in the smoky wall behind it was a
square window covered with an iron lattice. The
strips of the lattice were narrow, and not closely
crossed, so that the entrance of daylight was little
hindered. But no sunshine could enter, for two
buttresses extended far beyond its exterior face,
thus concealing it from the glance of vagrant
eyes in the narrow church-yard of St. Olave. It
looked upon that seldom-visited but thick-tenanted
piece of burial-earth.
“So there the king prayed,” murmured Marlowe,
pointing toward the crucifix, while Tamworth
nodded.
“And there he rested?” continued Marlowe,
turning his gaze toward the couch. No reply
came from Tamworth, who, with sad expression
on his face, remained a listener.
“And there he studied and meditated upon the
mutability of worldly things,” added Tamworth,
solemnly, as both glanced in the direction of the
chair and Bible.
161
“Study, meditation, prayer, and slumber,” repeated
Marlowe, as though to himself.
“Once the occupation of a king,” said Tamworth.
“And,” added the other, “mine also until
death.”
Tamworth was aroused from a morning sleep
by the pressure of a hand upon his shoulder. He
was lying undressed upon the bed within the alcove
where he had thrown himself after the inspection
of the secret oratory. He had vainly endeavored
to induce Marlowe to gain rest by slumber;
but the latter had alternately walked the floor
and occupied a chair before the window. His
restlessness of mind was still beyond control. The
faint figures of the angels on the tapestries, the
scroll work on the chimney-columns, the dragon
head from whose mouth came the lamp chains,
and the green trees within the courtyard, attracted
his attention only temporarily. Stronger than
these objects presented to his bodily eyes were
the mind’s pictures of the eventful night: his
meeting with Anne, the sword combat, the stripping
of the slain, the conference at the Boar’s
Head, the dead face of Tabbard, and his future
place of study. He could not shut them out; and
with them were troubled thoughts concerning
Anne. The hours passed; he watched the unbroken
slumber of his friend, and, at length unable
162
to remain inactive, he shook the sleeper into
consciousness.
“What will occur to-day at the Golden Hind?”
he asked as soon as the lawyer was awake.
“Still brooding on that? You better sleep,
Kit, and drown consciousness for a few hours.”
“No; answer me.”
“The inquest will be held at the tavern, and in
the room where the body lies.”
“You must be there,” said Marlowe in a decided
tone.
“For what purpose?”
“To see the woman.”
“Forget her,” said Tamworth.
“No; but more if she has been apprehended, she
may need aid or advice.”
“Possibly,” answered Tamworth, and then after
a moment’s thought he continued: “She may
even need to be warned against a betrayal of the
true situation of affairs.”
Marlowe was on the point of disputing this imputation
of bad faith; but he held his peace, for
he saw that this idea alone would cause the
lawyer to hasten to the scene of the crime.
“I will go,” at length said Tamworth.
“And tell her where I am, and that she must
keep me posted as to her whereabouts, and that I
hope for final deliverance. Tell her that I think
of her as of old. Tell her, that the future, though
dark, may clear. Tell her to wait for me. My
163
God! can you not bring her back with you? Let
no—”
“Hold! hold, man!” exclaimed Tamworth, “this
matter is too fresh in the minds of those who surround
her. They think that you are dead and
that the slayer is her husband. Every movement
of hers will be watched. A visit like that here
would be fatal. I will do what I can, but nothing
rash.”
“It rests with thee, then,” resumed Marlowe,
pressing his friend’s hand, “you recognize the
depth of my love. Do everything in thy power
to prevent an everlasting separation between us.
Do not increase my despair, I pray you. I may
fence myself from the world. I may succeed in
drowning the memory of my friends, their faces,
their voices; I may so dwell that hope is a word of
no import, and the future purposeless and empty;
but still there is one link in life that must not be
severed.”
“I understand,” said Tamworth, feelingly,
“whatever can be done with safety shall be done.
Rid thy mind of these morbid ideas, or every line
you write be tinctured with them. There is much
yet for you to live for. The future is not so dark
as you picture.”
Marlowe shook his head without replying.
“Now,” continued Tamworth, “we will see what
my purveyor has for us. It will be light to-day,
but before to-morrow there shall be notice given
of my increase of appetite.”
164
He threw open the richly paneled door of what
appeared to be a mediæval portable wardrobe. A
shelf in its interior slowly sank under pressure of
his hand, and disappeared from view down a dark
shaft.
“It is late for the morning meal, but good mistress
Pickle will send up something for us. The
keeper and his wife live directly below, and whenever
I signal with the dumb waiter, it soon rises
with the best the cupboard and fire-place afford.”
165
When Gyves, the constable, slunk away from
the portico of the Windmill Tavern, where he had
been exhausting his patience on protracted watch,
his face was the composite picture of all the hopeless
wretches whom he had arrested during his
long term of office. He had waited for Tabbard,
and—he had seen him. It was evident that no
demand upon the latter could be responded to.
What was he to do? To be without the warrant
meant the loss of his office and perhaps heavy fine
or severe punishment. It might be that the contents
of Tabbard’s pockets had been removed before
the body was taken from the tavern; but this
was not likely. Every one feared contagion; and
the dead, from plague, were not usually disturbed
more than was necessary to move them to the
death cart. A ray of hope scattered some of the
gloom on his countenance, and the breaking light
of the morning revealed it. He determined to
166
follow the cart, which was already passing down
the Old Jewry. He started upon this spur, and
at the corner of the Poultry overtook the cart,
which, turning west, entered Cheapside. Gyves
kept at a distance of thirty feet from the object
that he followed, either to avoid raising suspicions
of evil on the part of the living occupants of the
cart, or to avoid close proximity to the victims of
the plague.
The morning light was now strong enough for
Gyves to see that the cart was only half full of
bodies. His apprehension, that frequent halts
would ensue before they reached the potters’ field,
soon proved to be in part well founded. The first
one occurred near the mouth of a side street or
lane. Gloomy looking buildings stood at the
corners, and close behind each, facing on the lane,
were rows of small, miserable cottages. Despite
the ordinance prohibiting the building of houses
of frail and perishable material, these structures
had been raised with fronts of wood and roofs of
reeds. They were all of one story and arose from
the edge of the muddy walk—low walls of upright
planks, broken by narrow windows and spaces between
doorposts. The reeds of the roofs never
flourished in a locality more suitable for their
rank growth than the lane below. It was deep
with mud and water. Lights shone from some of
the windows, but so faintly that the still dull
glimmer of the morning seemed to mock the poverty
of their rays. On several of the doors red
167
crosses were printed, and two watchmen were pacing
to and fro before them, to see that these
marked doors were kept closed except for the purpose
of passing out the corpse of an inmate.
Sounds of lamentation came from the lane.
These were somewhat smothered by the thin walls
which only added to their mournfulness. The
cart turned into the lane, and Gyves heard one of
the watchmen say:
“Always late. Ten minutes more an’ it’ll be
sun up, and we wouldn’t dare to pass another
corpse to the cart. Why don’t you start earlier?”
“Always growling,” returned the driver. “How
many are here?”
“Six,” answered the watchman.
“It’s growing worse.”
“Yes; only two yesterday morning.”
“Which dwellings this time?” asked the second
man on the cart, who was known as a burier.
“There, there and there,” said the watchman,
pointing with the head of his halberd.
“What! again?” exclaimed the driver, looking at
the hovel nearest at hand.
“The last of the family,” added the watchman.
“Man or woman?”
“Neither; a ten-year-old girl.”
“Died alone?”
“Yes. A friend came early in the night to see
her, but the law, you know, allows no one to go
into and then come out of an infected house, except
you buriers.”
168
“And this friend said he would want to come
out.”
“Of course.”
“So he went away?”
“She did; it was a woman.”
“Then, the crying don’t come from that house.”
“No, from over there. They raised the window
an hour ago, and a man said, ‘My son just died
and my wife is now taken sick in the same way.’
He wanted to come out for medicine, but I
couldn’t let him. You can hear him.”
“We’ll have trouble with him, likely.”
“Yes. He may want to go to the church-yard.”
Just then the window was raised and the white
face of a man peered out over the sill. Even the
hardened buriers felt sick at heart, as they caught
the trembling tone of his voice and heard his
words. He said:
“So you have come for them?”
“Then there’s seven instead of six,” whispered
the watchman; “for I only counted on one here.”
“And everything is gone from me,” continued
the man at the window.
“We can’t say nothing cheerful,” said the
watchman, in low voice, to the two men near him,
“so it’s best to keep quiet, except when necessary.
Go in there first,” he added, pointing to the house
wherein lay the dead girl.
While the two buriers went in and were carrying
out the body, the watchman said to the man
at the window: “Is your door locked?”
169
“They’re all dead,” he answered, “there’s no
need coming in. You can’t help them any, and it’s
better they remain here than be thrown into that
black pit. I’ve seen it. I went out the night
John Andrews died. They threw him in naked,
and at least a hundred others were in the same
great hole. It isn’t christian-like.”
“Come, open the door,” said the watchman.
“No,” returned the man. “They’re my dead.”
“He’s crazy,” whispered the watchman.
“And we have no time to spare,” suggested the
driver.
“And you’ll have a load with the four over in
that house,” said the watchman.
“To-morrow we’ll come for that pale face, too,”
remarked the burier; and then they proceeded
with their task at the other house.
Gyves nervously thought of his own family as
he watched the proceedings in the lane. They
lived in no better quarters, and although the
plague had not yet visited his neighborhood, he
could find little to cheer him in that fact.
The cart now began rolling through Cheapside.
The sun, well cleared from the clouds along the
horizon, was rapidly drinking up the dampness of
streets and roof-tops. Gyves was reverent enough
to bow his head, as, gleaming before his eyes, he
saw the gilt cross in Cheap. It was an imposing
object for the center of the thoroughfare, but the
fact of it being an obstruction to the current of
midday trade was not apparent at this early hour,
170
when only one vehicle was wheeling under one of
its extended arms. This vehicle stopped for its
living load to refresh itself at the stream of water
pouring from the breast of the alabaster image of
Diana that stood out from the tabernacle under
the cross. During the interval Gyves’ eyes ranged
from the muddy and broken pavement to the
dangling signs of every conceivable trade, to the
projecting galleries of the upper stories of great
buildings, to the fronts of imposing churches, and
then to the open and continuing space ahead into
which Cheapside entered and ran on as Newgate
street. It was into Newgate street that the cart
was now driven. On it went in haste, for other
travelers were beginning to thread the thoroughfares,
and the Charter House burying ground was
still at some distance, outside the city wall. No
closed gates confronted them either at the city
wall or at the cemetery, through whose open ways
they passed.
Gyves was at length amid the tombs and the
cypresses of the now long since abandoned necropolis,
and was close enough to the cart to hear the
crunching of its wheels on the freshly graveled
road, and for the driver to notice him. He was
taken for a mourner, and even the gruff sexton
who looked from his window in the little house just
within the wall, failed to come forth and warn him
to keep outside the gate.
He idly watched the unloading of the vehicle;
and with that task completed, the men, as though
171
exhausted with the night’s unpleasant work, immediately
drove away without glancing at the solitary
figure near the pile of corpses. The burden
of the cart should have been cast immediately into
a common grave, but one had just been entirely
filled and a new one was not quite ready. This
condition of things was most opportune for Gyves.
He did not delay; but, taking hold of the shoulders
of one body wrapped in a sheet, he was about to
shove it off the pile, when he heard some one say
in a tone of remonstrance:
“What are you doing there?”
The voice came from a grave-digger, who,
having raised himself from a deep trench near at
hand, now stood near the pile of corpses. He had
been digging in the rain and the mud all night,
and the morning light and the warmth of his own
respiring body wrapped him in a steam. It arose,
as though from a dung-hill, for he was plastered
with black mud from head to foot. Gyves raised
his head and stared at him. There was nothing to
dread but the shovel, so, pulling two bodies apart,
and rolling one over the rest, he said:
“Looking for a brother.”
“Got a permit?”
“No,” gruffly answered Gyves.
“What do you want of him? He’s, dead, ain’t
he?”
“I want to identify him.”
“You’re taking a risk,” continued the grave
digger.
172
“How so?”
“The plague.”
“Bah!” exclaimed Gyves.
“And, furthermore, it’s a crime.”
“Go back to your hole,” growled Gyves.
“For you are rifling the body of the dead,” continued
the man, raising his voice.
Gyves had found the corpse of Tabbard; and, at
the last loud words, he was thrusting his hands into
the pockets of the dead man.
“Keep your clapper still,” sneered Gyves, contemptuously.
The man turned and ran toward the house near
the open gate of the cemetery, yelling for help as
he did so. Gyves had already completed his
search; there was nothing in the pockets. As he
clambered off the pile, he saw a man from the
house meet the grave-digger. They came toward
him. Their looks were menacing and the newcomer
held a blunderbuss in his hands. Gyves
could not retreat, so he confronted them.
“Give yourself up,” said the man with the blunderbuss.
He was the sexton and spoke authoritatively;
and the man with the shovel supported the
order with the words: “It never misses fire.”
“What should I give myself up for?” asked
Gyves.
“Trespassing.”
“And robbing the dead,” added the grave digger.
173
“Drop your gun,” commanded Gyves, “I’m an
officer.”
He pulled open his doublet exposing his badge
of authority.
“And, moreover,” he continued, “I have taken
nothing.”
The sexton looked inquiringly at his companion.
“I saw him search the pockets of one of those
corpses.”
“For my papers and to identify him,” responded
Gyves, “and found nothing. The paper I wanted
was not there.”
The guardian of the place appeared satisfied.
He lowered the muzzle of his blunderbuss, and the
three walked toward the entrance. Gyves had
been growing paler with every step taken by him.
The result of his search for the warrant had staggered
him much more than had the leveled shotgun.
He feared that Bame had it. He had no
idea of what prosecution might be instituted
against him, or what punishment might be inflicted;
but, knowing that thieves, found guilty of
stealing above twelve pence, were hung, he had
reason to fear a similar fate for his more grievous
offense. By the time he reached the sexton’s
house he was of the color of chalk and his knees
gave way. The two men assisted him to the steps
before the house.
“It is as I expected,” murmured the grave-digger.
“The plague?” queried the sexton, fixing his
wide open eyes upon Gyves’ face.
174
“Why, yes,” answered the grave-digger.
“No,” panted Gyves in a low voice, “I’ll be better
in a few minutes.”
Both men drew back and shook their heads.
They waited, fearful of seeing him lose consciousness,
rave and die; but much to their surprise his
color came back; he staggered to his feet; he asked
for water, which he received and drank; he uttered
his thanks, strode down the road, and passed
through the open gate.
When Gyves asserted his position as an officer
to the two men in the cemetery, he had felt that it
was about the last time he could take such a stand.
Later, upon that day, he was removed from office
at the instance of Bame, the charge being that he
had parted with official papers; neglected his duties,
and proved himself incompetent to perform
them. He could not produce the warrant. Bame
produced the fragment of the seal and portions of
the caption and the body of the writ. It closed
Gyves’ public career. He was plunged into abject
poverty; in the wake of famine came the black
destroyer, and his entire family was torn from him
in a few hours.
It was not strange that he attributed all his misfortune
to Bame. If at every curse he muttered
against his accuser, he had drawn a poniard across
a whetstone, the blade would have been as narrow
as a lancet. He dogged Bame’s steps; he waited
for him always with dark intentions; but like
Hamlet, he deferred action.
175
The morning was far advanced when Tamworth
reached the bottom of the steps of the Old Swan.
There, where the ebb and flow of the Thames had
placed its mark upon the masonry, he embarked
in a wherry and was soon passing under London
Bridge. The hot rays of the June sun were for a
few moments intercepted. The swift current bore
them with the velocity of a mill-race under the
arch beneath which the rower had directed the
wherry’s prow. The stone-work and the thick
road-bed of the bridge prevented him from hearing
the rattle of carts and the movement of the
tumultuous stream of foot passers overhead; but,
as the boat issued into the sunshine, he could see
the crowds approaching and pouring out of the
north end. High overhead rose the close row of
buildings which ran along the edge of the bridge,
like a line of fortifications. There were but three
breaks in this line from the London to the Southwark
side. The great dingy buildings of four,
five and six stories appeared as though hanging
176
tremulously on the verge of a precipice. The
sharp steeple of the chapel of St. Thomas, arising
above the tenth or central pier, together with the
towers of a great structure beside it, added to the
weirdness of the mid-air city, motionless above
restless waters.
Now moving into mid stream, at the urging of
his passenger, the wherryman plied his oars with
such vigor that the walls of the Tower soon rose
far in the background and the sharp bend of the
river at the lower pool hid the city itself from
view. The peace of wide and unbroken waters
pervaded here, for no vessels were moving against
the current, and the low hills fronting either bank
were still crowned with virgin forests. At the
Deptford wharf, Tamworth left the boat and hurriedly
walked through the town; by the Globe, by
the parish church of St. Nicholas, within whose
churchyard was soon to be laid the body of Francis
Frazer, and onward to the wayside tavern of
the Golden Hind.
When Tamworth reached the place last mentioned,
it was high noon. There were enough
horses before the tavern front to give him the idea
of a crowded tap-room within; but when he entered
the latter place he found it deserted, except
for the wife of the landlord, who, with anything
but a pleasant countenance, walked back and forth
before the bar.
“Good day, Mistress Dodsman,” said Tamworth,
and then with the intention of conveying the idea
177
that he knew nothing of the murder, or the inquest,
he continued: “A quiet house for this
hour. Where are the riders of the horses that
crowd this front?”
“The coroner’s inquest is being held,” she answered,
and shaking her head excitedly, resumed:
“Dodsman must needs be there, Tug and the serving
man, and so I am left to hold and entertain
the public.”
“What inquest?” inquired Tamworth.
“Over a murdered man.”
“Who?”
“I cannot swear who it is, for there is a question
in my mind.”
“How so?”
“The murdered man and the murderer were
alike as two peas, and I wouldn’t say whether the
Count lies up there or the actor, until the Count’s
wife speaks.”
“And what think others about this?”
“Well, the actor who encountered the Countess,
says the dead man is Marlowe, and he ought to
know something about it; but Tug says it is the
Count, and as he has a keen eye for guests when
living, some respect is due his opinion on a dead
one.”
“And what says the coroner?”
“Well, I’ve heard him say nothing, but he talked
first with the actor, and having got the impression
from him that it was Marlowe who was killed, I
178
heard that he impaneled his jury to hold an inquest
over Marlowe.”
“Ah,” said Tamworth, with a sigh of relief,
thinking that the scheme had not wholly miscarried.
“Yes,” said the woman, “and with all my interest
in the poor lady, who must face the coroner
and tell what she knows of the murder, I am compelled
to remain here.”
“Is she here?” calmly asked the lawyer.
“I think that she is in the room where the inquest
is being held, or if not, she soon will be.”
“As a witness?”
“Yes, so I suppose. Poor thing, when I left her
an hour ago, locked in the room where they had
carried her last night in a dead swoon, she was so
much disturbed by my refusal to say one word
about who had brought her there, about the murder,
or what was to take place to-day, that I pitied
her from the bottom of my heart.”
“Did she know Marlowe was killed?” asked Tamworth.
“His name was not mentioned.”
“Did she say nothing about her husband?”
“No; she saw that I would say nothing; and after
a why is this, and a why is that, and a shake
of my head, she stopped asking.”
“Which is the room of the inquest?”
“At the head of the stairs.”
Tamworth waited for no further words. The
door into the hall was open, and a moment after
179
he had entered the room to which he had
been directed. A scene of peculiar interest was
before him. The room was the one of the tragedy
of the previous night. Its most conspicuous
object was an antique bedstead with high oak head-board.
It had been removed from the alcove, and
now with its foot extended toward the center of
the room, it stood before the red arras. On it was
stretched the body of the dead man. It was still
attired as Marlowe had left it, and in all its
ghastly pallor, and unwashed of the blood which
followed the fierce thrust of the rapier, it lay exposed
to the morbid view of the vulgar. From
where he stood Tamworth could not see the face
of the corpse, but it was with a smile that he recognized
the scarlet doublet and purple lower garments
of his friend.
The sunlight coming from the direction of the
Thames, streamed through the two windows. It
fell upon the motley crowd of villagers packed
close against them. The other portion of the intent
audience held the space about the outer door.
Across the center of the room from the bed’s foot
was a table, along the further edge of which, with
his back against the wall, was one whom it required
no acuteness to single out as the coroner.
He was a solemn looking man in a misfitting powdered
periwig and damask cassock edged with fox-fur.
The air of pomposity which he had assumed
was apparent to the critical eye of Tamworth.
The latter smiled, as he noticed an open book in
180
law French, lying on the table and recognized the
text of Plowden. It was evident to him that this
book, like the great periwig and the rich cassock,
was used with the idea of filling the assemblage
with awe; and Tamworth wagered a hundred
pounds with himself that the man, who looked
occasionally at the lines, could no more interpret
their meaning than the landlord could who sat
close beside him. The red cheeks of the landlord
were a trifle paler than usual, and the serious expression
on his face denoted that he felt that a full
discovery of all the facts connected with the death
of his guest should be obtained for the good name
of his house.
Near these two personages were crowded together
six men in the rough garb of husbandmen.
They constituted the jury, and had been sworn
for a true verdict. The actor was being examined
when Tamworth entered. Closed in by the crowd,
Tamworth was not noticed by the chief actors in
the drama, and with interest he listened to the
actor’s testimony. He gave a vivid picture of his
encountering the woman in the dark hall and her
fainting at the foot of the stairs. He told how
he and the tapster had carried her into the tap-room,
and attempted to revive her; of how she
was dressed as though to leave the tavern; of how
they had heard footsteps, and, passing along the
hall before them, had seen Francis Frazer, who,
although seeing his wife, had not paused. That
his face was deathly pale, as he disappeared
181
through the door to the innyard. That, alarmed
that the woman did not revive, and impatient over
Frazer’s failure to return as they had anticipated,
they carried the unconscious woman to her room.
That there they had stumbled against the dead
body, which he identified as Christopher Marlowe.
Then the witness went further. He had not
been an intimate acquaintance of Marlowe, but he
had long known him by repute as a prince of good-fellows.
With such feeling had he mentioned this
characteristic of the man, and discoursed on his
genius as an actor, and writer, that the unlettered
crowd, whose model for a hero conformed to these
proportions, was ready to weep at the further mention
of his name, or give its united efforts to the
apprehension of the murderer. Already the vow
was on all lips to join in the hue and cry until
the pursued was run to earth. Each one in his
imagination had noted some dark nook in wayside
forest where possibly the murderer lay concealed;
and still with breathless interest they hung upon
the words of the tragic speaker.
In honest desire to see the deed avenged, the actor
testified to what had transpired before the
tragedy, and in vivid manner narrated the episode
of the tap-room, from where the drawn sword
had been first displayed, to the point where the
Count had suddenly begged to be excused, and had
quit the game of hazard. Did the Count know of
Marlowe’s coming to the tavern? he asked dramatically.
Had he formulated the murderous intent
182
at an hour long in advance of its execution?
Had he cut him down in the dark and then dragged
his body into this room?
A smothered cry of anguish arose from the
crowd at the last fierce question of the speaker, and
then, as in anticipation of further moving utterances,
the silence that fell was oppressive. In it,
the coroner glanced for the twentieth time at the
blood-stained rapier that lay upon the table. He
had noticed that it was from the scabbard belted
to the waist of the dead man. Before the actor
could resume he asked:
“Was that the sword drawn in the tap-room?”
The actor grasped it by the hilt and raised it
before his face. A shudder went through the
crowd; but no answer came from his lips. He
looked at the blade in amazement, then said:
“This is not the sword.”
“Then,” said the coroner, “the Count must have
been wounded.”
“Or,” suggested Dodsman, “Marlowe was killed
with his own weapon.”
“Possibly,” said the actor, and with this evident
refutation of his theory of an unforwarned attack
in a dark passage, he closed his argumentative testimony.
At the close of the actor’s examination,
Tug was called. His testimony corroborated the
actor’s, except that he insisted that the man who
had passed through the hall and into the innyard
was Marlowe. This statement created a sensation,
but the witness being weak and vacillating,
183
under a fire of questions, lost his positive manner,
and at length said that he might have been mistaken.
However, his statement had raised the
question of identity, and it required the testimony
of at least another to clear the minds of the jury.
There was a movement near Tamworth, as some
one in response to an order passed into the hall;
and a moment later a lady entered the door and
passed close beside him through the crowd. Her
face was downcast and partially concealed in her
handkerchief. She averted her face from the direction
of the bedstead, and as hurriedly as it was
possible to move, with so many pressing on all
sides, she reached the chair opposite to and facing
the coroner. Under his instruction she sat down.
Her back was toward the bedstead. Its occupant
could not be seen by her except by turning her
head.
All information concerning the inquest to be
held that day had been sedulously kept from her.
The landlord, with no knowledge as to his duties
either to his guest or to the Crown, and apprehensive
that any move on his part might involve
him in trouble, had determined to keep the wife
in ignorance of all proceedings, and on no condition
to allow the seal on her lips to be broken
by any one except the coroner. Upon the discovery
of the crime and while she still remained unconscious,
she had been carried to an apartment adjoining
her own, where, with the wife of the landlord,
184
she had been held awaiting the investigation
by the authorities.
It was in this uncertainty as to what was required
of her, and as to what had become of
Marlowe, that she entered the room of the inquest.
She at once recognized the judicial character of
the proceeding, and concluded that it was the inquest
being held over her husband. It was then
her mental comment that Marlowe had failed in
the concealment of the deed.
The coroner asked:
“Your name is—?”
“Anne Frazer.”
“The Countess,” came the whisper of a third
voice.
“How long have you been at this tavern?”
“Four days.”
“Were you in this room at any time before
twelve o’clock last night?”
“I was.”
“For how long?”
“From early in the day until near that hour.”
“Did you witness the death of this man?”
“I did.”
“Was any one else present?”
“There was.”
“Who?”
There was a prolonged silence after this question.
When no answer came, the nervousness of
the landlord displayed itself by the drumming of
his fingers on the table, and in a score of rapid
185
glances, first at the witness and then at the coroner.
In striking contrast with Dodsman’s anxiety
was the witness. She sat directly before the coroner
on the opposite side of the table. She had
answered clearly and to the point, until the direct
question came as to who was present besides herself.
Then she sat mute.
Tamworth could not but gaze in admiration at
this witness. Her face showed traces of a night
of unrest and intense thought and worry. If there
was any disturbance of mind from the ordeal, it did
not prevent the manifestation of a resolution that
was almost heroic. She steadily returned the gaze
of the coroner and remained as silent as a sphinx.
It was this attitude of determination and self reliance,
that, even more than her beauty, awakened
the admiration of the lawyer. He was not a man
with heart wholly unresponsive to the magnetism
of brilliant eyes; but his natural susceptibility had
been so toned by years of experience, that it was
the exhibition of strength of soul in another that
set the strings of his being in vibration.
“What is your answer?”
“I can not answer,” said the witness, decidedly.
It was her tone that caused the coroner to forbear
pressing the question; and with the idea of
reverting to it, he started on a new tack.
“Was any one injured except the dead man?”
he inquired, casting his eyes upon the rapier.
“No,” she answered.
He nodded significantly to the actor, and at the
186
same time Dodsman touched his shoulder, whispering,
“My theory is right; Marlowe was slain
with his own weapon.”
“Was there a combat?”
“There was.”
“But wait,” said the coroner, “I forgot to ask
if you were legally—I mean when were you married?”
“On last All Saints’ day at the church of St.
Peter’s on Cornhill in London.”
“To the man with whom you came to this tavern?”
“Yes, my Lord.”
“Now you say there was a combat. Did both
contestants draw their swords?”
“They did.”
“How was it that this man was killed with his
own weapon?”
“I do not think that I understand your question,”
answered the witness, looking at the coroner
with a surprised expression on her face.
The curtain that hid the truth trembled; the
slightest breath would have raised it, and Tamworth
alone grasped the whole situation. It
came to him like a flash. The woman as yet evidently
knew nothing of the change that had been
made in the apparel of the two men. As she knew
that it was her husband that had been slain, she
had no reason to think that this fact was not
known to every one present. She was testifying,
as she supposed, at an inquiry over the death of
187
Francis Frazer. The situation was critical; for
under a skillful examination, incited by her answer
that the dead man was not slain by his own
sword, suspicions might be aroused and the true
facts revealed. But the suddenness with which
the lawyer had apprehended the situation, had not
shaken his keen wit. The means to avert such a
catastrophe occurred to him, and before the coroner
could repeat the question, he said in clear
tones which rang through the room:
“You can not ask her further concerning this
matter. The law in no case alloweth the wife to
testify against her husband.”
The entrance of the murderer himself would
have created little more excitement. All eyes
were turned in the direction from which the voice
came. They saw a man standing prominent amid
the crowd near the door. He was of distinguished
appearance. His soft black hat, with high crown,
had the wide rim at its front upturned so that the
broad forehead of the owner was fully revealed.
Below this feature of the face, penetrating eyes
looked forth with an expression of unconquerable
will power. His thick luxuriant short beard was
trimmed in the style then worn by lawyers. The
latter adornment of his face, and the flowing locks
which concealed his ears, rested on a high ruff
which turned broadly outward with lace-fringed
edge. His richly embroidered doublet, with full
sleeves corded with white silk, was of black lustrous
taffeta.
188
He raised neither his hat nor his hand, as the
coroner glanced at him; but returned the latter’s
gaze with so steady a look, that no words of remonstrance
for the interruption came forth. That
he was a person of weight and authority required
no announcement. The coroner’s expression softened;
and in the way cleared for him by the wondering
crowd, he pushed forward.
“I am Tamworth, of Gray’s Inn,” he said, in
lower voice, “and appear as a friend of the court.”
He was standing beside the table, as these words
were spoken; and the obsequious Dodsman arose
from his chair, and waved his hand for him to be
seated beside the coroner, who could not refrain
from bowing as graciously as he knew how.
“As the proceeding is in behalf of the Crown,”
continued the lawyer, before taking the proffered
chair, “it should be conducted in strict accordance
with law.”
“Is it not being so conducted?” asked the coroner,
in a voice which was soft and low with
respect.
“Yes; except where the answers of the witness
may tend to criminate her husband.”
“True,” returned the coroner, assuming an air
of wisdom; then after a moment’s thought, he
said: “But as we have not learned how many persons
were present, and as the sword is evidently not
the Count’s, I am certainly at liberty to exhaust
that line of examination.”
“Undoubtedly,” returned Tamworth.
189
“How many persons were present when this deed
occurred?” asked the coroner.
“Three,” said the witness.
“Your husband was one?”
Before Tamworth could interpose an objection,
the witness answered by a question, “Why ask so
foolish a question?”
Tamworth smiled, and although he knew the
occasion of the witness’ inquiry, he looked at the
coroner and said: “See, she knoweth the rights
of a wife and will not answer. There is no law to
compel her.”
Anne looked thankfully at her champion; and,
although she could not perceive how any answers
could in any way affect her dead husband, she
could see that the coroner considered the lawyer’s
admonitions seriously. To know that she was not
wholly alone in her extremity, gave her additional
strength. The words of Marlowe, “Canst thou
keep this secret?” rang in her ears. They had
steeled her against disclosure of his name and the
account of the combat.
Now came the question, “Do you know the dead
man, Christopher Marlowe?”
The witness started at the name. It was the
first time it had been mentioned. But it was not
so much that fact as the way in which it was
coupled. Marlowe! the dead man! She stared at
the coroner with curious expression. It was one of
wonder growing into terror.
“I do not understand you,” she said, with trembling
190
voice. “The dead man, Christopher Marlowe?”
“Yes, he who was murdered by—”
“Dead, murdered, when?” she interrupted,
grasping the arms of the chair and leaning forward.
“’Tis well acted,” whispered the landlord.
“Madam, this ill becomes you,” sternly said the
coroner. “This inquest is over Marlowe. Your
husband, as we suspect, killed him. The law in
its wisdom prevents you testifying against the
murderer, but there is no occasion for this display
on your part. Answer me.”
The witness had arisen from her chair and
turned her head. She saw the figure on the bed,
and started, for at the first glimpse she thought
the coroner’s words were true. She recognized
the scarlet doublet, vest of the same color, and the
rest of the attire as that in which Marlowe had
appeared. The face—yes, that was also his, but—no,
it was not. She sank back in her chair, and,
in full flood, light burst upon her. Marlowe had
concealed the crime.
“I know the dead man,” she said firmly, “It is
Christopher Marlowe.”
191
At the close of Anne’s testimony and while the
coroner’s jury was in deliberation, Tamworth had
had an opportunity to speak to her. He stated
that Marlowe was secreted in the heart of London,
but where he would not disclose; that an
early meeting was devoutly prayed for, and that
the main purpose of his presence at the inquest
was to arrange for it; that the church of St. Olave
in the Old Jewry was deemed the most convenient
place; that she was to be at its entrance upon the
following Sabbath night at ten o’clock. This was
as much as could be communicated in the short
space of time allowed. A ready assent was given
by her, and with this, Tamworth left the tavern
and returned to London. His departure had been
too hasty; for with a delay of a few moments he
would have discovered the frustration of his plans
for the meeting. By the light of such discovery
another tryst might have been arranged but it
192
was darkness that ensued. Anne never appeared
before the church of St. Olave.
Tamworth had been careful to avoid raising
suspicions that he had anything more than a passing
interest in the wife of Francis Frazer. It
was this that caused him to leave before the hour
which he thought would mark her departure. If
he had at any moment entertained the idea that
the coroner would bind her over to attend before
the Grand Jury, or in Court, he had dismissed
such idea with the thought that sureties for her
attendance would be readily secured. The coroner
did bind her over despite Tamworth’s recent
exposition of the law concerning the wife’s incompetency
to testify against her husband. She
was unable to secure bail.
While Anne was testifying before the coroner
in such manner as to secure the peace of Marlowe,
Bame was as zealously working for an exactly contrary
object. If we should here announce that at
length the efforts of Anne became perverted and
joined those of the man who worked for destruction,
it would seem that this narration was descending
to a travesty of life; but such a concatenation
of events followed, and it arose as a natural sequence.
While Tabbard, with only temporary concern
and that mainly of pecuniary character, had
brought about the meeting of the lovers, and circumvented
the police to his own destruction, she,
whose heartstrings were interlaced with those of
the man whom the rustic Tabbard had aided, had
193
involved him in an affair which was to eclipse his
ascending star, and was to place him in the hands
of his arch enemy. When, in the Windmill tavern,
Bame had recognized Tabbard and imagined
evil from the hobnobbing of the latter with the
constable, his fear of a miscarriage of his plot of
destruction had been increased by seeing the exultant
expression on Tabbard’s face as he destroyed
the warrant. At that moment the character
of the scattered paper was unknown to him. All
that had transpired in the Windmill forced him to
the conclusion that he had been outwitted. He
had only reached this stage of mind when Tabbard’s
glass fell from his hand and the stricken
man rolled to the floor. Bame was the first one to
reach the victim. He heard his words, and then
picked up the largest pieces of the warrant. His
apprehensions were verified; Marlowe had escaped
him.
That night he held a vigil over the dying Tabbard,
who had been removed to a bed chamber of
the tavern, a cramped room in a corner of the
building, with a round window looking down in
the Old Jewry. Until the end came, Bame remained
beside the dying man, not in the spirit of
a ministering angel, but to gain information of
the whereabouts of Marlowe. Tabbard’s disconnected
utterances about Deptford and some one
whose interest he held at heart, conveyed no absolute
assurance that Marlowe could be found in the
locality mentioned; but it was a straw at which
194
the hearer grasped. The armorial device of the
house of Surrey upon the hilt of Tabbard’s short
sword proclaimed the wearer’s dependency upon
the Duke of that name. Bame knew of Sayes
Court, the country place of the Duke at Deptford,
and at once in mind he placed the actor there.
Had not the theaters closed for the season? Had
not the Duke withdrawn to Sayes Court during
the prevalence of the plague in London? Was it
not more than probable that the company of
actors, of which Marlowe was a member, was
gathering at Deptford for the entertainment of
royalty? These were the mental questions of the
Brownist, and carried affirmative answers with
them.
After taking the corpse of Tabbard to the death-cart,
Bame, first taking care to see that no member
of his sect was within sight, had re-entered the
tavern, braced himself up with a glass of charnico,
and fallen asleep at one of the lap-room tables.
It was but a short doze, for the morning stir began
early. He partook of breakfast where he sat, then
full of his intent to see Gyves punished, and Marlowe
apprehended, he passed into the street. Shop
blinds were being taken down, and the street criers
beginning their day-long noise. The latter shook
him uncomfortably, for the night had given him
no rest, and there was naught that appealed to
his wants in the cries of “rushes green” and “hot
sheep’s feet.” He required no rushes for the floors
of his dwelling and his hunger had been appeased.
195
The citterns played by some barbers close at the
corner, where he paused to consider whether he
should go first to his home or to the Justice, was
not unpleasant music, but it grated harshly on his
Puritanical ears; and reviving his thoughts of
playhouses and their orchestras, it started him
toward the Justice’s office. Tabbard’s horse, still
standing at the corner of St. Olave, attracted his
attention as he waited for the Justice to dress
himself and come below. It was a strange place
for a horse to be tied. The church was closed and
there were no open windows near at hand into
which the rider could have vanished. Tabbard’s
spurs had raised the query as to where the dead
man had left his horse, and in this forlorn-looking
steed he read the answer. He determined to put
him to use as soon as a proper lapse of time gave
additional assurance that he was right in attributing
ownership to Tabbard.
In the stuffy den of the Justice, he spread the
proof of Gyves’ offense upon the table, and swore
to a complaint against him for a misdemeanor in
allowing an accused person to escape. Then he
applied for an alias warrant on the old charge of
blasphemy against Marlowe, but as it appeared
that the latter had fled the country, the Justice
declined to act further until he had assurance that
the accused was within reach of his process. Bame
insisted, but the Justice shook his whole heavy
body with the violence of his negatives.
“What can be done?” demanded Bame.
196
“See the public prosecutor.”
“Can you not advise for the sake of the church?”
“Lay the charge before the higher authorities.”
“What, before the Queen? That has been done.”
“For what purpose, when your charge was made
here?”
“To give it greater publicity.”
“Was it made strong?” questioned the Justice.
“All that was necessary was to quote from his
writings, and to pound into the ears of the Queen
the quotation from Marlowe’s ‘Jew of Malta’:
“Good,” said the Justice, “you were equal to your
task, but you should have made it even more
bitter; for if the Queen is not moved by your first
accusation, she will not be by anything later.”
“It showed that he reviled religion; that he
persuaded one man to become an atheist; that he
meant to utter false money of the kingdom.”
“’Tis the same charge you made and swore to
here. Is it wholly true?”
“Can any crime be too heinous to attribute to
an atheist?” asked Bame with a vicious expression
on his face.
“Then such judicial process may issue from the
King’s Bench to bring him in from any county in
England wherever he may be found. You must
await the action of that higher court.”
197
“’Tis a grave public duty,” said Bame, solemnly,
“and I now go to Deptford to locate him in case
the Queen should move the King’s Bench to
action.”
Bame met with many delays before he rode
Tabbard’s horse across London Bridge. The verdict
of the coroner’s jury had been returned, and
the body of the slain man was being followed
to its resting place in the churchyard of St.
Nicholas when Bame overtook the small funeral
cortege just beyond the Golden Hind. The majority
of the train were actors and they bore the
rough board coffin on their shoulders. In answer
to his query, they had honestly but not correctly
stated that the deceased was Marlowe, and Bame,
feeling that the object of his wrath had forever
escaped him, abruptly reined in his horse.
“Where are you taking the body?” he asked.
“To St. Nicholas,” came the answer.
“’Tis unfit for Christian burial,” he exclaimed.
He was about to say more, but glances from several
members of the group froze his utterance.
The glances meant violence. They came from the
eyes of men who recognized him as a member of
the sect which not only cursed their profession
but was endeavoring to crush them out of existence.
He swung his horse’s head around and dug
his heels in the animal’s flanks. For his own good,
his flight had been well timed, for all that reached
him were their merited execrations.
At the Golden Hind he learned of the events
198
of the past twenty-four hours, and as he talked in
the tap-room, through the center came the coroner.
Anne was with him. She was to accompany
the officer to the house of the sheriff. The meeting
between uncle and niece was not without an
exhibition on her part of something approaching
filial affection. In his own household he had ever
presented himself as devoid of all the sterner and
harsher traits which made him an object of dislike
and hatred in the outer world, and great sympathy
and love had existed between them. Her elopement
had shaken these sentiments in him, but this
meeting had revived them. They conferred apart
while the good natured coroner attempted to
drown the heat of his late exciting session by
many deep bowls with Dodsman and several obsequious
and admiring loungers.
Many were the questions with which Bame plied
his niece. Whom had she married? How came
she here? Where had her husband fled? All were
answered except the last, she maintaining even
with Bame that Marlowe was the dead man.
At the conference between Bame and Anne, it
was decided that he should journey at once to
Canterbury and inform her father of her unfortunate
situation. There appeared no other plan by
which she could be released. Bame and Crossford
should stand as sureties for her future appearance.
The former agreed to bring about a reconciliation.
But then there was a matter which to her seemed
of more pressing importance. She required a courier
199
for the opposite direction, that is, toward London.
It took some deliberation to formulate her
story and as much more to determine whether it
were safe to convey even this story to Bame. The
question of safety concerned Marlowe only. Her
road for the meeting on the following Sunday evening
at the church of St. Olave was blocked as
effectually as though prison bars held her in. The
promise for her appearance there had gone from
her freely. Neither she, nor Tamworth, had suggested
any means or method for further communication
between herself and Marlowe, should
their meeting, as proposed, be prevented. The
thought of his being a fugitive from justice had
appalled her as to its far reaching consequences
to herself. It was only in some foreign country,
unknown to herself, that she had pictured him.
Tamworth’s communication had scattered her
fears. The order of the coroner for her detention
had again plunged her into a deeper pit of despair.
Here was the opportunity to convey the reason of
her inability to meet him as promised, and to post
him of her future. She realized that it was a dangerous
matter to run anyone into contact with
Marlowe, but here she apprehended no danger.
Up to the time of her departure from Bame’s
house, she knew that Bame was a stranger to the
man in question. It was not only unlikely but
highly improbable that he, a devout Brownist,
should know the licensed player, and unlicensed
200
writer. Thus reasoning, she placed the man she
loved into the hands of his most implacable enemy.
It was one of her husband’s friends, she said,
who would be at the entrance of the parish church
of St. Olave at ten o’clock on the evening of
June —. The meeting had been arranged before
the duel at the tavern. It concerned his departure
from England. His flight, she continued, would
prevent the meeting. It was a matter of great
concern, and at the moment of the separation between
herself and husband she had promised to
meet the man who would be in waiting for him.
Would Bame act in her behalf? The statement
was plausible, but Bame saw more in it than her
words conveyed. However, whether the meeting
was of her own concertion, with a nameless man
or with her husband, whom Bame had never seen,
did not seem of importance. What message was
he to bear?
She wrote, in few words, of her predicament and
prospects; she sealed it, and delivered it to Bame.
The missive ran thus: “I have word of thy present
safety and rejoice; for my situation had made me
fearful of thine own. To thy request for me to
meet thee, I returned my promise; but now the
hope of compliance hath vanished. I am held as a
witness. If the termination of my imprisonment
is dependent upon thy arrest, I pray that I may
never be at liberty. However, I have hope of an
early release, and of going to my father’s house
in Canterbury. In the meantime be content, I
201
pray thee, with the assurance of my love. The
bearer is to be trusted. He is my uncle and will
return here with thy answer. Let it be of where
I can find thee later. Sealed with my love. Anne.”
It has taken many pages to narrate events covering
only a full day in space of time; but in comparison
with the vast harvests of literature that
have been gleaned from the sowing of the night
of June 1, 1593, this sole noting of the steps of the
husbandmen who scattered the seed, is but a single
sheaf. And now with the coroner’s verdict in,
Francis Frazer buried under the name of Christopher
Marlowe, the latter darkly brooding in obscure
safety, and the world so cony-catched that
only after an interval of 300 years doth it see
clearly, we will trace the dark events leading up to
the darker ending of Bame.
Richard Bame was hung at Tyburn on the 6th
of December, 1594. That event is historical, and
it is well to fix it in the mind of the reader before
drawing his attention to a narration of what may
have been the reasons for this tragedy. In this connection
it is also well to emphasize a few other
historical facts. The accusation against Marlowe
for blasphemy was actually placed before the
Queen [note 31]. If Marlowe’s death followed
so closely on the heels of this proposed vigorous
prosecution of him for that ecclesiastical crime, it
was a remarkable coincidence. Conviction would
have been certain. It required no reading between
202
the lines of Faustus and the Jew of Malta. Flight,
or concealment, was the only escape for him.
What was better calculated to stay a search and
avert apprehension, than a report of death?
The reports, many and contradictory, appeared
[notes 9-13].
But why was his accuser hung? Was it due to
revengeful influences working for Marlowe, that
Bame, wearing the cockade of the condemned,
passed through crowds down Tyburn-road on his
last earthly ride? Or was this horrible culmination
of his days due wholly to his own misapplied
zeal and a catastrophe of criminal character?
203
A storm of almost unprecedented fury had prevailed
in London from early evening on June —,
1593. The wind, coming strong from the northeast,
increased in violence as the hours passed, and
out of heavy black clouds the rain fell in torrents.
It was a night for everyone in Middlesex to be well
housed and forgetful of the sea. Again and again,
the sole inmate of the oratory in the Prince’s
Wardrobe had looked out into the night. He
could not see beyond the flying buttresses at the
edges of the window, except when an occasional
flash of lightning seared the darkness. Under
these flashes the near churchyard appeared as
fleeting and as sorrowful as the face of the fallen
angel in our dreams; and the venerable walls of
St. Olave looked even more venerable and gloomy
as they stood forth with startling distinctness.
204
Every cranny became a marked feature of its
visible side and the long windows from their deep
setting showed the thickness of the masonry and
the rankness of the century-growth of vines that
clustered around them.
It was the night on which Marlowe expected
meeting Anne, and the storm made him apprehensive
that their plans might be frustrated. This
uneasiness caused him to leave the oratory long
before the appointed hour. Tamworth was not in
his apartment as Marlowe entered it, and with
lighted candle descended the stairs into the underground
passage leading to the church. He reached
its end with hasty steps, and having on a previous
night succeeded in putting in working order the
hinges on the slab that had blocked further passage,
he entered the chancel of the church. A
darkness as absolute as that of the night prevailed
in the church, except where, at the distance of a
hundred feet, the lights from the chantry shone
across a strip of benches or rude pews. He crept
cautiously to the open door of this chantry to see
that no one was in it and then retraced his steps
to the chancel where he lowered the raised slab
to its place, taking care to feel its distance from the
rail near at hand. He then passed through the
body of the church, and having reached the middle
door at the front, he unbolted it and stepped
without. He felt across every step of the wide
entrance, and finding that he was alone, he took
205
up his station near the door which he had loosely
closed.
It was about this time that Bame left his house
and started for St. Olave. Before doing so he had
taken off his conventional garb and donned his
shabbiest suit. Bame was not accustomed to carry
any weapon, but the storm and the darkness
prompted him to belt a sword to his waist. It
was with difficulty that he made any progress in
the storm, and at length reached the steps of the
church. Here he stood for a moment in the
meager shelter afforded by one of the columns of
the portico, and then began moving with extended
hands toward the entrance. He could see nothing,
and for some time in his measured progress he
encountered nothing but open space or the stone
wall. Suddenly a flash of lightning illuminated
the portico. In it he saw a man in loose cloak
standing beside him. Neither had realized the
presence of the other until the flash revealed it;
but in it Bame caught no glimpse of Marlowe’s
face.
“Hold!” he said, as the cloaked figure stepped
backward and again was entirely enveloped by the
darkness. If there were any answer to this command,
it was drowned by the roll of thunder which
followed the lightning.
“You await a lady here, do you not?” continued
Bame, proceeding on the theory that the man was
Francis Frazer, “Well, I come with word from
her.”
206
Still no answer came. Bame reached forward
and touched the shoulder of the silent figure, saying
as he did so, “I come from Anne.”
“So, what is the message?”
“She is held in custody by the coroner.”
“For what purpose?”
“As a witness before the grand jury.”
“When did you see her?”
“On the day of the inquest.”
“Who are you?”
There was something in the voice that struck
Bame peculiarly. He had heard it before, but
somehow it created a feeling of awe, and an involuntary
shudder passed through him. The reason
of this feeling was not apparent. He was
anxious to determine its cause. He answered the
last question by one like it.
“Who are you?”
“What is the purpose of your query? Are you
not satisfied that I am the person whom you seek?
You came from one at Deptford. Is that not
sufficient to assure you? If she did not tell you
who I am, there is no occasion for your knowing.”
Bame felt impelled to say that the reason of his
asking was because he thought he knew the
speaker, or at least the voice was familiar; but his
natural caution restrained him. He said with ill
reason:
“Before I delivered the message I wished to be
207
assured that you were the one for whom it was intended.”
“Out upon you,” said the other, “If she gave
you no name, my telling it could give you no assurance;
but this talk is idle while gusts of rain
blow in upon us. You have found me. Have
done with words. What is the message?”
“It is written,” said Bame.
“Well, give it me,” exclaimed the other impatiently.
“There is an answer expected.”
“And you are to bear it?”
“Yes; where can you read while I wait?”
“Within the church. A light burns in the
chantry.”
Bame fumbled in the pocket of his doublet, and
then he said: “I can not distinguish it from other
papers. I require a light to find it. Let us step
to the nearest tavern.”
“Nay, ’twould be a waste of time. Follow
me.”
He pushed on the door behind him, and Bame
heard hinges creak, but all about him was still
wrapped in darkness.
“Into the church?” he faltered.
“Aye. Not a word.”
His hand was grasped and he followed. He felt
his entrance to be a sacrilege and his awe concerning
his companion increased his trepidation.
When at length the entrance to the body of the
church was reached, a faint glow of light could
208
be seen from a narrow space in one wall. Toward
this they moved up the dark aisle, feeling the unseen
pews as they passed. Upon facing this glowing
space, they perceived the chantry. It was so
small that it hardly merited the name; but, rising
from the marble floor, was the low, richly-carved
tomb of the founder of the church, with raised
font before it, and, in niches in the wall behind
it, six blazing candles. Its walls were of solid
stone and no other door or windows opened from
it. The arched ceiling rose scarcely eight feet
overhead and bore no tracery nor stucco work
upon its surface. Into this chantry they entered.
Bame, forgetting to make a pretended search in
his pocket for the message, hastily handed it to
Marlowe. And now the lights were near and
strong enough to show clearly the faces of the
two men. Bame’s eyes and mouth bespoke an
astonishment that almost robbed him of the power
of speech. He recognized the man beside him,
but the latter without even a glance at his companion,
nervously broke the seal of the letter, and
passing around the tomb, held it so that the rays
from the candles fell upon it. Bame had noticed
that Marlowe was without a sword, and before the
second line of the message had been read he interrupted
the reading with the words:
“I thought thou wast dead.”
Marlowe raised his eyes and glared in wonder
at the speaker, who continued:
“Thou art Christopher Marlowe.”
209
Marlowe leaned back against the wall with his
hands so tightly clenched that their nails almost
entered his palms. The scowl grew deep on his
face, but no words came from his lips. It seemed
no occasion for speech, and action on his part was
forestalled; for Bame had drawn his short sword.
“I am Richard Bame. You have undoubtedly
heard of me as the uncle of Anne.”
“And as the swearer of false and vile charges
against the man of whom you speak,” said Marlowe,
his voice impetuously breaking forth.
“Against yourself,” interrupted Bame, “but not
as a false accuser. Listen to me.”
“But why should I; and why have you drawn
a weapon? You see that I am defenseless. You
came in the character of a bearer of good tidings;
why do you now assume a violent front? Is it not
enough that I am the friend of the one from whom
you come—your niece? Have I ever wronged
you? Put down your sword! even though the
time were opportune for murder, the sanctity of
the place should stay your hand. Doth not its
holiness appeal to thee?”
Bame began with the echo of the last word:
“You speak well, but to no purpose. You have
rendered me no personal injury, but you have attacked
not only my church, but all churches, all
faith, all religions. No,” he continued, shaking
his sword in his fervor as Marlowe was about to
reply, “Let me go on. Nothing is sacred in thine
eyes——”
210
“Cease,” exclaimed Marlowe, “You know little
of what you speak. Blinded by a fanaticism, narrow,
violent and perverted, you can see nothing
good in aught that promotes pleasure and breaks
the chrysalis of joy. You would tear down the
playhouses, and on the spot where laughter has
chased the gloom from the face of grief and
apathy, and where new generations are being educated
in the history of the past and in the polished
manners of the higher classes, a school, wide,
noble and elevating, you would erect houses for
wailing and for the blind worship of an unknown
God. And I, whom you deem the head and front
of atheism, you wished burned at the stake, and
now would take upon thyself what your religion
deems an unpardonable crime, that of sending my
soul unprepared before its Maker.”
“Maker!”, sneered Bame, “Maker, Thou hast
denied the existence of the Trinity.”
“Such denial,” began Marlowe, undisturbed by
the accusation, “is not inconsistent with the belief
in the existence of a supreme intellectual force of
which my soul is part. Thy mind is too narrow to
comprehend the impersonal and omniscient intellect
that rules by unswerving laws. Clinging to the
disgusting belief of a resurrection of the body,
you bury it with pomp and lamentation; waste
over it your tears, and dream of its reinhabitation
as the temple of the soul. Out upon thee. The
tenure of thy faith is most precarious. Under the
dark wings of death, nought but the longing for
211
eternal rest will pervade thee, like it has pervaded
and ever will pervade all manner of men, whether
with or without creed or belief. But such longing
contains no assurance of its attainment, but is only
the reconcilement of the soul to its coming change
of existence without the trammels of the flesh.
And this, I tell thee, blind apostle of a worn-out
creed, this world is governed by a force that
worketh ever toward perfection; the perfection of
the material is in beauty; of the spiritual, in wisdom.
And both matter and spirit are eternal.
Immortality is not a dream but a demonstrable
fact. Do not the waters of the stream break in
silver spray, or become mirrors for the face of
nature, or, being lifted by the sun, form the clouds
whose glorious colors flame and fade at twilight?
Do not even the dull boulders at length present
glassy faces, or, crumbling, form the powdered
soil on which flourishes and, aye, is part of, the
wild flowers? Do not the brilliant stars rise from
the nebula that strews the floor of heaven; thus
struggling through a thousand changes toward
ideal beauty in form, never losing one atom of
substance? And now what of the mind of man?
It grows with years and attains its utmost perfection
as the bodily forces fail. Then comes the
disintegration of the body for new forms as the
ages roll. If the material cannot be lost, how can
the spirit, the ego that knows, and is as superior
to the clay as the living face of woman is to the
clod under foot? It must continue under the
212
force that raised it, and in its just line of aspiration.
It is against the nature of all things, material
and spiritual, that the mind with its accumulated
knowledge from years of life should pass into
oblivion.”
The eloquence of the poet in the delivery of his
sermon of the soul had stilled the voluble Bame.
Marlowe appeared, for the moment, in Bame’s
mind as a martyr of persecution. He could have
chewed the accusation and swallowed it if he had
had it. In the transport of these friendly feelings
he felt tempted to sheath his sword, but at that
moment the sounds of footsteps attracted their
attention, and they became intent auditors. Low
voices reached their ears, and the noise created by
the stumbling movements of many persons in the
darkness came with shocking distinctness. Bame
stood nearest the folding doors of the chantry.
“Close them,” whispered Marlowe, pointing.
Bame turned in instant response, and pushed
to the narrow doors, bolting them. But circular
openings were in their fronts, and seeing this,
Marlowe hastily extinguished the burning candles.
The voices came nearer, and the footsteps now
sounded in the aisles.
“It cannot be the watchmen, for they are many.”
“And bear no lanterns.”
“It may be a band of thieves.”
“Did you not bar the entrance door?”
“No, I did not even close it.”
“Hush!” murmured Bame, “and see——”
213
A faint light flared up in one of the aisles, and