# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2014
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	J. Henri Fabre, Insect Adventures
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45812/45812-h/45812-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

pick and choose in the crockery dealer’s heap, which
acts as something of a guide to our memory by comparison;
she must, without hesitation, far away from
her home, cut out a disk that fits the top of her jar.
What is impossible to us is child’s play to her.
Where we could not do without a measure of some
kind, a bit of string, a pattern or a scrap of paper
with figures upon it, the little Bee needs nothing at
all. In housekeeping matters she is cleverer than
we are.
The insect excels us in practical geometry. I look
upon the Leaf-cutter’s pot and lid as an addition
to the many other marvels of instinct that cannot be
explained by mechanics; I submit it to the consideration
of science; and I pass on.
There are many Bees who, like the Leaf-cutters,
do not make their own dwellings,
but use shelters made by the work of others. Many
of the Osmia-bees seize the old homes of the Masons;
other honey-gatherers use earthworm galleries,
snail-shells, dry brambles which have been
made into hollow tubes by the mining Bees, and even
the homes of the Digger Wasps burrowed in
the sand. Among these borrowers are the Cotton-bees,
who fill the reeds with cottony satchels,
and the Resin-bees, who plug up snail-shells with
gum and resin.
There is a reason for such arrangement. The
Bees who work hard to make their homes, such as
the Mason-bee, who scrapes hard clay and makes a
large cement mansion, the Carpenter-bee, who bores
dead wood to a depth of nine inches, and the Anthophora,

who digs corridors and cells in the banks
hardened by the sun, have no time left to spend in
furnishing their cells elaborately. On the other
hand, the Bees who take possession of ready-made
homes, are artists in interior decorations. There is
the Leaf-cutting Bee, who makes her leafy baskets
with such skill; the Upholsterer-bee, who hangs her
cells with poppy-petals, and the Cotton-bee, who
makes the most beautiful purses of cotton.
We have only to look at the Cotton-bee’s nests,
to realize that the insect who makes these could not
be a digger, too. When newly-felted, and not yet
sticky with honey, the wadded purse is very elegant,
of a dazzling white. No bird’s-nest can compare
with it in fineness of material or in gracefulness of
form. How, with the little bales of cotton brought
up one by one in her mouth, can the Bee manage to
mat all together into one material and then to work
this into a thimble-shaped wallet? She has no other
tools to work with than those owned by the Mason-bees
and the Leaf-cutting Bees; namely, her jaws
and her feet. Yet what very different results are
obtained!
It is hard to see the Cotton-bees in action, since
they work inside the reeds when making the nests.
However, I will describe the little that I saw. The
Bee procures her cotton from many different kinds
of plants, such as thistles, mulleins, the woolly sage
and everlastings. She uses only the plants that are
dead and dry, however, never fresh ones. In
this way she avoids mildew, which would make its

appearance in her nests in the mass of hairs still
filled with sap.
She alights on the plant she wishes to use, scrapes
it with her mouth, and then passes the tiny flake to
her hind-legs, which hold it pressed against the chest,
mixes with it still more down, and makes the whole
into a little ball. When this is the size of a pea, it
goes back to the mouth, and the insect flies off, with
her bale of cotton in her mouth. If we have the patience
to wait, we shall see her coming back again and
again to the same plant, until her bags are all made.
The Cotton-bee uses different grades of cotton for
the different parts of her work. She is like the bird,
who furnishes the inside of her nest with wool to

make it soft for the little birds, and strengthens the
outside with sticks. The Bee makes her cells, the
grubs’ nurseries, of the very finest down, the cotton
gathered from a thistle; she makes the barrier plug
at the entrance of stiff, prickly hairs, such as the
coarse bristles scraped from a mullein-leaf.
I do not see her making the cells inside the bramble,
but I catch her preparing the plug for the top.
With her fore-legs she tears the cotton apart and
spreads it out; with her jaws she loosens the hard
lumps; with her forehead she presses each new layer
of the plug upon the one below. This is a rough
task; but probably her general way of working is
the same for the finer cells.
Some Cotton-bees after making the plug go even
further and fill up the empty space at the end of the
bramble with any kind of rubbish that they can
find: little pieces of gravel, bits of earth, grains of
sawdust, mortar, cypress-catkins, or broken leaves.
The pile is a real barricade, and will keep any foe
from breaking in.
The honey with which the Cotton-bee whose nest
I examined filled the cells was pale-yellow, all of
the same kind and only partly liquefied, so that it
would not trickle through the cotton bag. On this
honey the egg is laid. After a while the grub is
hatched and finds its food all ready. It plunges its
head in the honey, drinks long draughts, and grows
fat. We will leave it there, knowing that after a
while it will build a cocoon and turn into a Cotton-bee.
Another interesting Bee who uses a ready-made
home is the Resin-bee. In the stone-heaps which
have been left from the quarries, we often find the
Field-mouse sitting on a grass mattress, nibbling
acorns, almonds, olive-stones, apricot-stones, and

snail-shells. When he is gone, he has left behind
him, under the overhanging stones, a heap of empty
shells. Among these, there is always a hope of finding
a few plugged up with resin, the nests of this
sort of Bee. The Osmia-bees also use snail-shells,
but they plug them up with clay.
It is hard to tell the Resin-bees’ nests, because the
insect often makes its home at the very inside of the
spiral, a long way from the mouth. I hold up a
shell to the light. If it is quite transparent, I know
that it is empty and I put it back to be used for future
nests. If the second whorl is opaque, does not
let the light through, the spiral contains something.
What? Earth washed in by the rain? Remnants
of the dead Snail? That remains to be seen. With
a little pocket-trowel I make a wide window in the
middle of the final whorl. If I see a gleaming resin
floor, with incrustations of gravel, the thing is
settled: I have a Resin-bee’s nest.
The Bee picks out the particular whorl of the
shell which is the right size for her nest. In large
shells, the nest is near the back; in smaller shells, at
the very front, where the passage is widest. She

always makes a partition of a mosaic formed of bits
of gravel set in gum. I did not know at first what
this gum was. It is amber-colored, semi-transparent,
brittle, soluble in spirits of wine, and burns
with a sooty flame and a strong smell of resin. These
characteristics told me that the Bee uses the
resinous drops that ooze from the trunks of various
cone-bearing trees. There are plenty of junipers
in the neighborhood, and I think that these form
the main part of this Bee’s materials. If there
were pines, cypresses, and other cone-bearing trees
near, she would probably use those.
After the lid of resin and gravel, the Bee stops
up the shell still further with bits of gravel, catkins
and needles of the juniper, and other odds
and ends, including a few rare little land-shells.
This is the secondary barrier, to make the shell still
safer for her nest. The Cotton-bee uses the
same sort of barrier in the bramble. The Resin-bee
uses it only in the larger shells, where there is
much vacant space; in the smaller ones, where her
nest reaches nearly to the entrance, she does without
it.
The cells come next, farther back in the spiral.
There are usually only two. The front room, which
is the larger, contains a male, which in this kind of
Bee is larger than the female; the smaller back
room houses a female. It is extraordinary how the
mother Bee knows the sex of the egg she is laying.
This matter has never been explained to the satisfaction
of scientists.

The Resin-bee makes a mistake in choosing large
shells and not filling them up to the very entrance.
The Osmia-bee also makes her nest in snail-shells;
she often seizes upon the empty rooms in the Resin-bee’s
house and fills them with her mass of cells.
She then stops up the entrance with a thick clay
stopper. When July comes, this house with the two
families of tenants becomes the scene of a tragic conflict.
The Resin-bees, in the back rooms, on
attaining the adult state, burst their swaddling bands,
bore their way through the resin partitions, pass
through the gravel barricade and try to release themselves.
Alas, the strange family ahead blocks
the way! The Osmia inmates are still in the grub
stage; they mean to stay in their cells till the next
spring. The Resin-bees cannot get out through this
second row of clay-stoppered cells; they give up all
hope and perish behind the wall of earth. If their
mother had only foreseen this danger, the disaster
would never have happened; but instinct has failed
her for once. Misfortune has not taught the Resin-bees
anything through all the generations; and this
contradicts the theory of those scientists who say
that animals learn through experience.
A slender waist, a slim shape; an abdomen
tapering very much at the upper part and
fastened to the body as though by a thread; black
raiment with a red sash across the belly: there you
have a short description of the burrowing Sand-Wasps,
who hunt Caterpillars.
The Sand-Wasps choose for their burrows a light
soil, easily tunneled, in which the sand is held together
with a little clay and lime. Edges of paths,
sunny banks where the grass is rather bare—these
are the favorite spots. In spring, quite early in
April, we see the Hairy Sand-Wasp there.
Its burrow is a straight up-and-down hole, like a
well, about as thick as a goose-quill and about two
inches deep. At the bottom is a solitary cell, to
hold the egg. The Sand-Wasp digs by herself,

quietly, without hurrying, without any joyous enthusiasm.
As usual, the front feet serve as rakes
and the jaws do duty as mining-tools. When some
grain of sand is very hard to remove, you hear rising
from the well a sort of shrill grating sound made
by the quivering of the insect’s wings and of her
whole body. Every little while the Wasp appears
in the open with a load of dirt in her teeth, some
bit of gravel which she usually flies away with and
drops at a distance of a few inches, so as not to
litter the place.
Some of these grains the Sand-Wasp does not
treat as she does the rest. Instead of flying off and
dropping them far from the work yard, she removes
them on foot and lays them near her burrow. She
has a special use for them. When her home is dug,
she looks at this little heap of stones to see if there
is any there to suit her. If there is not, she explores
the neighborhood until she finds what she wants, a
small flat stone a little larger in diameter than the
mouth of her hole. She carries off this slab in her
jaws and lays it, as a temporary door, over the opening
of the burrow. To-morrow, when she comes
back from hunting, the Wasp will know how to find
her home, made safe by this heavy door; she will
bring back a paralyzed caterpillar, grasped by the
skin of its neck and dragged between her legs; she
will lift the slab, which looks exactly like the other
little stones around, and which she alone is able to
identify; she will let down the game to the bottom
of her well, lay her egg and close the house for good

by sweeping into the hole all the rubbish, which she
has kept near by.
The Hairy Sand-Wasp hunts a particular sort of
prey, a kind of large Caterpillar called the Gray
Worm, which spends most of its time underground.
How does she then get hold of it? We shall see.
One day I was returning from a walk when I saw a
Hairy Sand-Wasp very busy at the foot of a tuft
of thyme. I at once lay down on the ground, close
to where she was working. My presence did not
frighten the Wasp; in fact, she came and settled on
my sleeve for a moment, decided that her visitor
was harmless, since he did not move, and returned
to her tuft of thyme. As an old stager, I knew what

this tameness meant: the Wasp was too busy to
bother about me.
The insect scratched the ground at the foot of the
plant, where the root joined the stem, pulled up slender
grass rootlets and poked her head under the
little clods which she had lifted. She ran hurriedly
this way and that around the thyme, looking at every
crevice. She was not digging herself a burrow but
hunting the game hidden underground; she was like
a Dog trying to dig a Rabbit out of his hole.
Presently, excited by what was happening overhead,
a big Gray Worm made up his mind to leave
his lair and come up to the light of day. That settled

him: the Wasp was on the spot at once, gripping
him by the skin of his neck and holding tight in spite
of his contortions. Perched on the monster’s back,
the Wasp bent her abdomen and deliberately, without
hurrying, like a clever surgeon, drove her lancet-sting
into the back surface of each of the victim’s
rings or segments, from the first to the last. Not
a ring was left without receiving a stab; all, whether
with legs or without, were dealt with in order, from
front to back.
The Wasp’s skill would make science turn green
with envy! She knows by instinct what man hardly
ever knows; she knows her victim’s nervous system
and exactly what nerve centers to strike to make
it motionless without killing it. Where does she
receive this knowledge? From the power that rules
the world, and guides the ignorant by the laws of
its inspiration.
I will tell you about another encounter of a Sand-Wasp
with a Gray Worm which I witnessed. It was
in May, when I detected a Sand-Wasp giving a last
sweep of the rake to her burrow, on the smooth,
hard path. She had paralyzed her Caterpillar, probably,
and left it a few yards away from the home
while she made ready the entrance. At last the cave
is pronounced spick and span, and the doorway
thought wide enough to admit the bulky prey. The
Sand-Wasp sets off in search of her captive.
She finds it easily. It is a Gray Worm, lying on
the ground: but, alas, the Ants have found it, too;
they have already invaded it. The Wasp now scorns

it. She will not have anything to do with a Worm
which she must share with Ants. To drive them
away is impossible; for each one sent to the right-about,
ten would return to the attack. So the Wasp
seems to think; for she goes on with her hunting,
without indulging in useless strife.
She explores the soil within a radius of ten feet
from the nest, on foot, little by little, without hurrying;
she lashes the ground continually with her
antennæ curved like a bow. For nearly three hours,
in the heat of the sun, I watch her search. What
a difficult thing a Gray Worm is to find, for a Wasp
who needs it just at that moment!
It is no less difficult for man. I have a plan. I
wish to give the Wasp a Worm in order to see how
she paralyzes it.
Favier, my old soldier friend, is there, gardening.
I call out to him:
“Come here, quick; I want some Gray Worms!”
I explain the thing to him. He understands at
once and goes in search. He digs at the foot of the
lettuces, he scrapes among the strawberry-beds, he
inspects the iris-borders. I know his sharp eyes
and his intelligence; I have every confidence in him.
Meanwhile, time passes.
“Well, Favier? Where’s that Gray Worm?”
“I can’t find one, sir.”
“Bother! Then come to the rescue, you others!
Claire, Aglaé, all of you! Hurry up, hunt and
find!”
The whole family is put at work. All its members

become very active. But nothing turns up: three
hours pass and not one of us has found the Caterpillar.
The Sand-Wasp does not find it either. I see her
hunting persistently in spots where the earth is
slightly cracked. She wears herself out in clearing-operations;
with a great effort she removes lumps of
earth the size of an apricot-stone. These spots are
soon given up, however. Then a suspicion comes to
me: perhaps the Gray Worm, foreseeing a gathering
storm, has dug its way lower down. The huntress
Wasp very well knows where it lies, but cannot get
it out from its deep hiding-place. Wherever the
Sand-Wasp scratches, there must a Gray Worm be;
she leaves the place only because she cannot dig deep
enough. It was very stupid of me not to have
thought of this earlier. Would such an experienced
huntress pay any attention to a place where there
is really nothing? What nonsense!
I make up my mind to help her. The insect, at
this moment, is digging a tilled and absolutely bare
spot. It leaves the place, as it has already done with
so many others. I myself continue the work, with
the blade of a knife. I do not find anything, either;
and I leave it. The insect comes back and again
begins to scratch at a certain part of my excavations.
I understand:
“Get out of that, you clumsy fellow!” the Wasp
seems to say. “I’ll show you where the thing lives!”
I dig at the spot she indicates and unearth a Gray
Worm. Well done, my clever Sand-Wasp! Did I

not say that you would never have raked at an empty
burrow?
Following the same system, I obtain a second
Gray Worm, followed by a third and a fourth. The
digging is always done at bare spots that have been
turned by the pitchfork a few months earlier. There
is absolutely nothing to show the presence of the
Caterpillar from without. Well, Favier, Claire,
Aglaé, and the rest of you, what have you to say?
In three hours you have not been able to dig me up
a single Gray Worm, whereas this clever huntress
supplies me with as many as I want, once that I have
thought of coming to her assistance!
I leave the Wasp her fifth Worm, which she unearths
with my help. I will tell in numbered paragraphs
the various acts of the gorgeous drama that
passes before my eyes. I am lying on the ground,
close to the slaughterer, and not one detail escapes
me.
1. The Sand-Wasp seizes the Caterpillar by the
back of the neck with the curved pincers of her jaws.
The Gray Worm struggles violently, rolling and unrolling
its body. The Wasp is quite unconcerned:
she stands aside and thus avoids the shocks. Her
sting strikes the Caterpillar at the joint between the
first ring and the head, in the middle of the under
side, at a spot where the skin is more delicate. This
is the most important blow, the one which will
master the Gray Worm and make it more easy to
handle.
“The gorgeous drama.”
2. The Sand-Wasp now leaves her prey. She
flattens herself on the ground, with wild movements,
rolling on her side, twitching and dangling her limbs,
fluttering her wings, as though in danger of death.
I am afraid that the huntress has received a nasty
wound in the contest. I am overcome with emotion
at seeing the plucky Wasp finish so piteously. But
suddenly the Wasp recovers, smooths her wings,
curls her antennæ, and returns briskly to the attack.
What I had taken for the convulsions of approaching
death was the wild enthusiasm of victory. The

Wasp was congratulating herself on the way she
had floored the enemy.
3. The Wasp grips the Caterpillar by the skin
of the back, a little lower than before, and pricks the
second ring, still on the under side. I then see her
gradually going back along the Gray Worm, each
time seizing the back a little lower down, clasping
it with the jaws, those wide pincers, and each time
driving the sting into the next ring. In this way
are wounded the first three rings, with the true legs;
the next two rings, which are legless; and the four
rings, with the pro-legs, which are not real legs, but
simply little protuberances. In all, nine stings. After
the first prick of the needle, the Gray Worm offers
but a feeble resistance.
4. Lastly, the Sand-Wasp, opening the forceps
of her jaws to their full width, seizes the Caterpillar’s
head and crunches it, squeezing it with a
series of leisurely movements, without creating a
wound. She pauses after each squeezing as if to
learn the effect produced; she stops, waits, and
begins again. This handling of the brain cannot be
carried too far, or the insect would die; and strange
to say, the Wasp does not wish to kill the Caterpillar.
The surgeon has finished. The poor patient, the
Worm, lies on the ground on its side, half doubled
up. It is motionless, lifeless, unable to resist when
the Wasp drags it to the burrow, unable to harm
the grub that is to feed upon it. This is the purpose
of the Wasp’s proceedings. She is procuring food for

her babies, which are as yet non-existent. She will
drag the Caterpillar to her burrow and lay an egg
upon it. When the grub comes out of the egg, it will
have the Caterpillar to feed upon. But suppose this
Caterpillar were active? One movement of his body
would crush the egg against the wall of the cell. No,
the Caterpillar must be motionless; but it must not
be dead, for if it were, it would speedily decay and
be unfit eating for the fastidious little grub. The
Wasp, therefore, drives her poisoned sting into the
nerve-centers of every segment whose movement
could hurt the grub-baby. She does better than that.
The victim’s head is still unhurt, the jaws are at
work; they might easily, as the Caterpillar is
dragged to the burrow, grip some bit of straw in
the ground and stop progress. The Caterpillar,
therefore, must be rendered torpid, and the Wasp
does this by munching his head. She does not use
her sting on the brain, because that would kill the
Caterpillar; she merely squeezes it enough to make
the Caterpillar unconscious.
Though we admire the wonderful skill of the
Wasp, we cannot help feeling sorry for the victim,
the poor Gray Worm. If we were farmers, however,
we should not waste any pity on the Worm.
These Caterpillars are a dreadful scourge to agricultural
crops, as well as to garden produce. Curled
in their burrows by day, they climb to the surface
at night and gnaw the base or collar of plants. Everything
suits them: ornamental plants and edible plants
alike, flower-beds, market-gardens, and plants in

fields. When a seedling withers without apparent
cause, draw it to you gently; and the dying plant will
come up, but maimed, cut from its root. The Gray
Worm has passed that way in the night; its greedy
jaws have cut the plant. It is as bad as the White
Worm, the grub of the Cockchafer. When it
swarms in a beet-country, the damage amounts to
millions. This is the terrible enemy against which
the Sand-Wasp comes to our aid. Let us not feel
too sorry for it!
At the end of July the Yellow-winged Wasp
tears the cocoon that has protected her till
then and flies out of her underground cradle. During
the whole of August she is often seen flitting
about the fields in search of honey. But this careless
life does not last long, for by the beginning of September
the Wasp must begin to dig her burrows and
search for game for her family. For her burrows
she usually chooses some sandy soil on the high
banks by the side of the road. One thing is necessary:
the site must receive plenty of sunshine.
Ten or twelve Yellow-winged Wasps usually
work together. They scrape the earth with their
fore-feet like mischievous puppies. At the same
time, each worker sings her glad song, which is a
shrill noise, constantly broken off and rising higher

or sinking lower in a regular rhythm. One would
think they were a troop of merry companions singing
to encourage each other in their work. Meanwhile,
the sand flies, falling in a fine dust on their
quivering wings; and the too-large gravel, removed
bit by bit, rolls far away from the work yard. If a
piece seems too heavy to be moved, the insect gets up
steam with a shrill note which reminds one of the
workman’s “Hoo!”
Soon the cave takes shape; the insect dives into
it bodily. We still hear underground her untiring
song, while every little while we catch a glimpse of
her hind-legs, pushing a torrent of sand backwards
to the mouth of the burrow. From time to time the
Wasp comes outside the entrance to dust herself in
the sun, and to rid herself of grains of sand. In
spite of these interruptions, she manages to dig the
gallery in two or three hours. Then she comes to
her threshold to chant her triumph and give the finishing
polish to her work by smoothing out some
unevenness and carrying away a speck or two of
earth.
There are two, three, or four cells in the Yellow-winged
Wasp’s burrow, in each of which lies an egg.
But the Wasp does not content herself with
one burrow: she digs about ten, all in the month of
September, and she has to get food for all of them.
She has not a moment to lose, when, in so short a
time, she has to dig her burrows, procure a dozen
Crickets or more for food for her families, and stop
the burrows up again. Besides, there are gray days

and rainy days during the month, when she cannot
work.
The Yellow-winged Wasp is not content with comparatively
defenseless Beetles and Caterpillars;
she hunts the powerful Cricket. Watch her
chasing one. The terrified Cricket takes to
flight, hopping as fast as he can; the Wasp pursues
him hot-foot, reaches him, rushes upon him. There
follows, in the dust, a confused struggle, wherein
each fighter is in turn victor and vanquished, on top
and underneath. The issue seems doubtful. But
at last the Wasp triumphs. In spite of his vigorous
kicks, in spite of the snaps of his pincer-like jaws,
the Cricket is laid low and stretched upon his back.

The Wasp places herself upon him, belly to belly,
but in the opposite direction. She grasps one of the
threads at the tip of the Cricket’s abdomen with her
mouth and masters with her fore-legs the convulsive
efforts of his thick hinder-thighs. At the same time
her middle-legs hug the heaving sides of the
beaten insect, and her hind-legs force the joint
of the neck to open wide. The Wasp then
curves herself outward so as to offer the Cricket
no chance to bite her, and drives her poisoned sting
once into the victim’s neck, next into the joint of the
front two rings of the thorax, or part next the neck,
and lastly towards the abdomen. In less time than
it takes to tell, the murder is done; and the Wasp,
after making herself tidy again, gets ready to haul
home the victim.
You must acknowledge she knows how to fight,
better even than the Wasps who attack Beetles, or
those who capture Caterpillars. Those insects cannot
fly, they have no defensive weapons. What a
difference between them and the Cricket! The
Cricket is armed with dreadful jaws, capable of eating
the vitals out of the Wasp if they succeed in
seizing her; he has a pair of powerful legs, regular
clubs bristling with a double row of sharp spikes,
which can be used by the Cricket either to hop out
of his enemy’s reach, or to send her sprawling with
brutal kicks.
Notice, therefore, the precautions the Wasp takes
before setting her sting in motion. She turns the
Cricket upon his back so that he cannot use his hind-legs

to escape. She controls his spurred legs with
her fore-feet, so that he cannot kick her; and she
keeps his jaws at a distance with her own hind-legs.
She makes him motionless by grasping one of the
threads at the end of the abdomen. An athlete, an
expert wrestler, could not do better.
Consider, also, her science. She wishes to paralyze
the prey without killing it, so that it will remain
in a fit condition for food for her babies for many
weeks. If she should leave the Cricket any power
of motion, it would knock the eggs off; if she killed
it entirely, it would decay. How does she produce
this paralysis? She does just what a surgeon would
advise her to do; she strikes the nerve-centers of the
different parts of the Cricket’s body which are likely
to do harm, the three nervous centers that set the
legs in motion.
If we look at the Cricket a week, two weeks, or
even longer after the murder, we shall see the abdomen
moving slightly, a sign that he is still alive.
After the Wasp has paralyzed her Cricket, she
grips him with her feet, holding also one of his antennæ
in her mouth, and in this manner flies off with
him. She has to stop sometimes to take a minute’s
rest. Then she once more takes up her burden and,
with a great effort, carries him in one flight almost
to her home. The Wasp I am watching alights in
the middle of a Wasp village. She makes the rest
of her way on foot. She bestrides her victim and
advances, bearing her head proudly aloft and hauling
the Cricket, who trails between her legs, by the

antennæ held between her jaws. If the ground is
bare, she has an easy time; but sometimes she meets
with some spreading grass shoots, and then it is
curious to see her marches and countermarches, her
repeated attempts to get past, which she finally does
by some means or other, either by flight or by taking
another path.
At last she reaches home and places the Cricket
so that his antennæ exactly touch the mouth of the
burrow. The Wasp then leaves him and goes down
hastily to the bottom of the cave, perhaps to see
that everything is as it should be and no other Wasp
has made her nest there. A few seconds later she
reappears, showing her head out of doors and giving
a little cry of delight. The Cricket’s antennæ are
within her reach; she seizes them, and the game
is brought quickly down to the lair.
When the Yellow-winged Wasp has stacked up
three or four Crickets for each cell, she lays an egg
on one of them and closes the burrow. She does
this by sweeping the heaped-up sand outside the door
down the burrow. She mixes fair-sized bits of
gravel with the sand to make it stronger. If she
cannot find gravel of the right size within reach, she
goes and searches in the neighborhood, and seems
to choose the pieces as carefully as a mason would
choose the chief stones for his building. In a few
moments she has closed up the underground dwelling
so carefully that nothing remains to show where
it has been. Then she goes on, digs another burrow,
catches game for it, and walls it up. And so

on. When she is through laying all her eggs, she
goes back to the flowers, leading a careless, wandering
life until the first cold snap puts an end to her
existence, which has been so full of duties and excitements.
You have read about the Wasps who store
up paralyzed Caterpillars and Crickets for
their babies’ food, then close up the cells and fly
away; now you shall hear about a Wasp who feeds
her children with fresh food from day to day. This
is the Bembex, or the Fly-hunting Wasp, as I shall
call her.
This Wasp digs her burrows in very soft, light
sand, under a blazing sun and a blue sky. I go
out and watch her sometimes on an unshaded plain
where it is so hot that the only way to avoid sunstroke
is to lie down at full length behind some
sandy knoll, put one’s head down a rabbit-burrow,
or provide one’s self with a large umbrella. The
latter is what I did. If the reader will sit with me
under the umbrella at the end of July, he will see
the following sight.
A Fly-hunting Wasp arrives suddenly and alights,

without any hesitation, at a spot which to my eyes
looks exactly like the rest of the sandy surface. With
her front feet, which are armed with rows of stiff
hairs and remind one at the same time of a broom,
a brush, and a rake, she works at clearing her
underground dwelling. The insect stands on her
four hind-legs, while the front ones first scratch and
then sweep the shifting sand. She shoots the sand
backwards so fast that it gushes in a curve like a
stream of water, falling to the ground seven or
eight inches away. This spray of dust is kept up
evenly for five or ten minutes at a time by the swift,
graceful Wasp.
Mingled with this dust are tiny bits of wood, decayed
leaf stalks, particles of grit and other rubbish.
The Wasp picks them up in her mouth and carries
them away. This is really the purpose of her digging.
She is sifting out the sand at the entrance
to her home, which is all ready underground, having
been dug some time before. The Wasp wishes
to make the sand at the entrance to her burrow fine,
light, and free from any obstacle, so that when she
alights suddenly with a Fly for her children, she can
dig an entrance to her home quickly. She does this
work in her spare time, when her larva has enough
food to last it for a while, so that she does not
need to go hunting. She seems happy as she works
so fast and eagerly, and who knows that she is not
expressing in this way her mother’s satisfaction in
watching over the roof of her house where her baby
lives?

If we should take a knife and dig down into the
sand where the Wasp-mother is scratching, we
should find, first, an entrance corridor, as wide as
one’s finger, and perhaps eight to twelve inches
long, and then a room, hollowed out down below
where the sand is damper and firmer. It is large
enough to contain two or three walnuts; but all it
does hold at present is a Fly, a golden-green Greenbottle,
with a tiny white egg laid on the side. This
is the Wasp’s egg. It will hatch out in about twenty-four
hours, into a little worm, which will feed on
the dead Fly. For the Fly is dead, and not paralyzed,
as the food of other Wasp-babies often is.
At the end of two or three days the Wasp-grub
will have eaten up the little Fly. Meanwhile
the mother Wasp remains in the neighborhood and
you see her sometimes feeding herself by sipping the
honey of the field flowers, sometimes settling happily
on the burning sand, no doubt watching the outside
of the house. Every now and then she sifts

the sand at the entrance; then she flies away for a
while. But, however long she may stay away, she
never forgets the young larva who has food enough
to last only a short time; her mother’s instinct tells
her the hour when the grub has finished its food and
wants more. She therefore returns to the nest,
which, you must remember, does not show in the
least from the surface of the ground, as the shifting
sand has filled in the entrance; she knows, however,
exactly where to look for it; she goes down
into the earth, this time carrying a larger piece of
game. After leaving this in the underground room
she again leaves the house and waits outside until
the time comes to serve a third course. This is not
long, for the little worm is getting a larger appetite
all the time. Again the mother appears with
another Fly.
For nearly two weeks, while the larva is growing
up, the meals thus follow in succession, one by one,
as needed, and coming closer together as the infant
grows larger. Towards the end of the two weeks,
the mother is kept as busy as she can be satisfying
her hungry child, now a large, fat grub. You see
her at every moment coming back with a fresh capture,
at every moment setting out again upon the
chase. She does not cease her efforts until the grub
is stuffed full and refuses its food. I have counted
and found that sometimes the grub will eat as many
as eighty-two Flies.
I have wondered sometimes why this Wasp does
not lay up a store of food, as the other Wasps do,

close the door of her burrow and fly away, instead
of waiting about, as she does so patiently. I realize
that she does not do so because her Flies would
not keep; they would spoil and be unfit for eating.
But why does she kill the Fly instead of paralyzing
it? Possibly because the Fly would not make
a satisfactory preserved food; it is so slight and
frail, it would shrivel up and there would be nothing
of it; it must be eaten fresh to be worth anything.
Another reason almost certainly is that the Fly has
to be captured very quickly, on the wing. There is
not time for the Wasp to aim her sting, as the
Wasps do who are killing clumsy Worms or fat
Crickets on the ground. She must attack with claws,
mouth or sting wherever she can, and this method
of attack kills at once.
It is not easy to surprise a Wasp hunting, as she
flies far away from where her burrow lies; but one
day I had a quite unexpected experience as I was
sitting in the hot sun under my umbrella. I was not
the only one to enjoy the shade of the umbrella.
Gad-flies of various kinds would take refuge under
the silken dome and sit peacefully on every part of
the tightly stretched cover. To while away the
hours when I had nothing to do, it amused me to
watch their great gold eyes, which shone like carbuncles
under my umbrella; I loved to follow their
solemn progress when some part of the ceiling became
too hot and obliged them to move a little way
on.
One day, bang! The tight cover resounded like

the skin of a drum. Perhaps an oak had dropped
an acorn on the umbrella. Presently, one after the
other, bang, bang, bang! Can some practical joker
be flinging acorns or little pebbles at my umbrella?
I leave my tent and look around: nothing! I hear
the same sharp sounds again. I look up at the ceiling
and the mystery is explained. The Fly-hunting
Wasps of the neighborhood, who all eat Gad-flies,
had discovered the rich game that was keeping me
company and were impudently coming into my shelter
to seize the Flies on the ceiling. Things were
going to perfection: I had only to sit still and look.
Every moment a Wasp would enter, swift as
lightning, and dart up to the silken ceiling, which
resounded with a sharp thud. Some rumpus was going
on aloft, where so lively was the fray that one
could not tell which was attacker, which attacked.
The struggle did not last long: the Wasp would soon
retire with a victim between her legs. The dull herd
of Gad-flies would not leave the dangerous shelter.
It was so hot outside! Why get excited?
“One day, bang!”
Let us watch the Wasp as she returns to the burrow
with her capture held under her body between
her legs. As she draws near her home, she makes
a shrill humming, which has something plaintive
about it and which lasts until the insect sets foot to
earth. The Wasp hovers above the sand and then
dips down, very slowly and cautiously, all the time
humming. If her keen eyes see anything unusual,
she slows up in her descent, hovers for a second or
two, goes up again, comes down again and flies away,

swift as an arrow. We shall see in a few moments
what it is that makes her hesitate. Soon she is back
again, looks at things once more from a height, then
comes down slowly and alights at a spot which looks
exactly like the rest of the sandy surface.
I think she has landed more or less on chance, and
will now look about for the entrance to her home.
But no; she is exactly over her burrow. Without
once letting go her prey, she scratches a little in front
of her, gives a push with her head, and at
once enters, carrying the Fly. The sand falls in,
the door closes, and the Wasp is at home. It makes
no difference that I have seen this Wasp return to
her nest hundreds of times; I am always astonished
to behold the keen-sighted insect find without hesitation
a door which does not show at all.
The Wasp does not always hesitate in the air before
alighting at her house, and when she does, it is
because she sees her nest is threatened by a very
grave danger. Her plaintive hum shows anxiety; she
never gives it when there is no peril. But who is
the enemy? It is a miserable little Fly, feeble and
harmless in appearance, whom we have mentioned
in another chapter. The Wasp, the scourge of the
Fly-tribe, the fierce slayer of large Gad-flies, does
not enter her home because she sees herself watched
by another Fly, a tiny dwarf, who would make
scarcely a mouthful for her larvæ.
I feel just as I should if I saw my Cat fleeing in
terror from a Mouse. Why does the Wasp not
pounce upon the little wretch of a Fly and get rid

of her? I do not know. It must be because this
wretched little Fly has her tiny part to play in the
universe, as well as the Wasp. These things are
ordered somehow, in a way we do not understand.
As I shall mention elsewhere, this is the Fly that
lays her eggs on the game the Wasp puts in the nest
for her own baby; and the Fly’s offspring eat the
food of the Wasp-grub, and sometimes eat the grub
itself, if provisions are scarce. The way the Fly
manages her business is interesting. She never enters
the Wasp’s burrow, but she waits with the greatest
patience for the moment when the Wasp dives
into her home, with her game clasped between her
legs. Just as she has half her body well within the
entrance and is about to disappear underground, the
Fly dashes up and settles on the piece of game that
projects a little way beyond the hinder end of the
Wasp; and while the latter is delayed by the difficulty
of entering, the former, with wonderful swiftness,
lays an egg on the prey, or even two or three
in quick succession. The hesitation of the Wasp,
hampered by her load, lasts but the twinkling of an

eye. No matter: the Gnat has accomplished what
she wished to, and now she goes and squats in the
sun, close to the burrow, and plans fresh deeds of
darkness.
A number of these Flies, usually three or four, are
apt to station themselves on the sand at one time
near a burrow, of which they well know the entrance,
carefully hidden though it be. Their dull-brown
color, their great blood-red eyes, their astonishing
patience, have often reminded me of a picture
of brigands, clad in dark clothes, with red handkerchiefs
around their heads, waiting in ambush for
an opportunity to hold up some travelers.

It is when the poor Wasp sees these brigands that
she hesitates. At last she comes nearer, however.
The Midges then take flight and follow behind the
Wasp. If she turns, they turn also, so as to keep
exactly behind her; if she advances, they advance;
if she retreats, they retreat. She cannot keep them
off. At last she grows weary and alights; they also
alight, still behind her. The Wasp darts off again,
with an indignant whimpering; the Midges dart
after her. The Wasp tries one more way to get rid
of them. She flies far away at full speed, hoping
that they will follow and lose their way. But they
know too much for that. They settle down on the
sand again near the burrow and wait for her to come
back. Come she does; the pursuit begins all over
again; the mother’s patience is worn out, and at last
they have a chance to lay their eggs as she goes
into the burrow.
We shall end our chapter with the story of the
Wasp-grub to whom no accidents happen, into whose
burrow no nasty Fly-eggs enter. For two weeks it
eats and grows; then it begins to weave its cocoon.
It has not very much silk in its body to use for this,
so it uses grains of sand to strengthen it. First it
pushes away the remains of its food and forces them
into a corner of the cell. Then, having swept its
floor, it fixes to the different walls of its room
threads of a beautiful white silk, forming a web
which makes a kind of scaffold for the next work.
It then weaves a hammock of silk in the center of
the threads. This hammock is like a sack open wide

at one end and closed at the other in a point. The
grub, leaning half out of its hammock, picks up the
sand almost grain by grain with its mouth. If any
grain found is too large, it is thrown away. When
the sand is sorted in this way, the grub brings some
into the hammock in its mouth, and begins to spread
it in an even layer on the lower side of the hammock-sack;
it adds grains also to the upper side, fixing
them in the silk as one would place stones in putty.
The cocoon is still open at one end. It is time
to close it. The grub weaves a cap of silk which
fits the mouth of the sack exactly, and lays grains of
sand one by one upon this foundation. The cocoon
is all finished now, except that the grub gives some
finishing touches to the inside by glazing the walls
with varnish to protect its delicate skin from the
rough sand. It then goes peacefully to sleep, to
wait for its transformation into a Wasp like its
mother.
In August or September, let us go into some
gorge with bare and sun-scorched sides. When
we find a slope well-baked by the summer heat, a
quiet corner with the temperature of an oven, we
shall call a halt; there is a fine harvest to be gathered
here. This tropical land is the native soil of a host
of Wasps and Bees, some of them busily piling the
household provisions in underground warehouses—here
a stack of Weevils, Locusts or Spiders, there
a whole assortment of Flies, Bees, or Caterpillars,—while
others are storing up honey in wallets or
clay pots, cottony bags or urns made with pieces of
leaves.
With the Bees and Wasps who go quietly about
their business, mingle others whom we call parasites,
prowlers hurrying from one home to the next, lying

in wait at the doors, watching for a chance to settle
their family at the expense of others.
It is something like the struggle that goes on in
our world. No sooner has a worker by means of
hard labor gotten together a fortune for his children
than those who have not worked come hurrying
up to fight for its possession. To one who saves
there are sometimes five, six or more bent upon his
ruin; and often it ends not merely in robbery but in
black murder! The worker’s family, the object of
so much care, for whom that home was built and
those provisions stored, is devoured by the intruders.
Grubs or insect-babies are shut up in cells
closed on every side, protected by silken coverings,
in order that they may sleep quietly while the changes
needed to make them into full-grown insects take
place. In vain are all these precautions taken. An
enemy will succeed in getting into the impregnable
fortress. Each foe has his special tactics to accomplish
this—tactics contrived with the most surprising
skill. See, some strange insect inserts her egg
by means of a probe beside the torpid grub, the
rightful owner; or else a tiny worm, an atom,
comes creeping and crawling, slips in and reaches
the sleeper, who will never wake again, because the
ferocious visitor will eat him up. The interloper
makes the victim’s cell and cocoon his own cell and
cocoon; and next year, instead of the mistress of the
house, there will come from below ground the bandit
who stole the dwelling and ate the occupant.
Look at this one, striped black, white, and red,

with the figure of a clumsy, hairy Ant. She explores
the slope on foot, looks at every nook and corner,
sounds the soil with her antennæ. She is a kind of
Wasp without wings, named Mutilla, the terrible
enemy of the other Wasp-grubs sleeping in their
cradles. Though the female Mutilla has no wings,
she carries a sharp dagger, or sting. If you saw her,
you might think she was a sort of sturdy Ant, gayer
in dress than other Ants. If you watched her for
some time, you would see her, after trotting about
for a bit, stop somewhere and begin to scratch and
dig, finally laying bare a burrow underground, of
which there was no trace outside; but she can see
what we cannot. She goes into the burrow, stays

there for a while, and at last reappears to replace
the rubbish and close the door as it was at the start.
The abominable deed is done: the Mutilla’s egg has
been laid in another’s cocoon, beside the slumbering
grub or larva on which it will feed.
Here are other insects, all aglitter with gleams of
gold, emerald, blue, and purple. They are the humming-birds
of the insect-world, and are called the
Golden Wasps. You would never think of them as
thieves or murderers; but they, too, feed on the
children of other Wasps. One of them, half emerald
and half pale-pink, boldly enters the burrow of
a Fly-hunting Wasp at the very moment when the
mother is at home, bringing a fresh piece of game
to her babies, whom she feeds from day to day. The
elegant criminal, the Golden Wasp who does not
know how to dig, takes this moment when the door
is open to enter. If the mother were away, the
house would be shut up, and the Golden Wasp, that
sneak-thief in royal robes, could not get in. She
enters, therefore, dwarf as she is, the house of the
giantess whose ruin she is planning; she makes her
way right to the back, never bothering about the
Wasp, with her sting and her powerful jaws. The
Wasp-mother either does not know the danger or is
paralyzed with terror. She lets the strange Wasp
have her way.
Next year, if we open the cells of the poor Fly-hunting
Wasp, we shall find some which contain a
russet-silk cocoon, the shape of a thimble, with its
opening closed with a flat lid. In this silky covering,

which is protected by the hard outer shell, is a grub
of the Golden Wasp. As for the grub of the Fly-hunter,
that grub which wove the silk and encrusted
the outer casing with sand, it has disappeared entirely,
all but a few tattered shreds of skin. Disappeared
how? The Golden Wasp’s grub has eaten it.
One of these splendid-appearing, criminal Golden
Wasps is dressed in lapis-lazuli on the front part of
the body and in bronze and gold on the abdomen,
with a scarf of blue at the end. When one of the
Mason-wasps has built on the rock her heap of
dome-shaped cells, with a covering of little pebbles
set in the plaster, when the grubs have eaten up their
store of Caterpillars and hung their rooms with silk,

we see the Golden Wasp settle on the outside of the
nest. Probably some tiny crack, some defect in the
cement, allows her to insert her probe and lay her
egg. At any rate, about the end of the following
May, the Mason-wasp’s chamber holds a cocoon
which again is shaped like a thimble. From this
cocoon comes a Golden Wasp. There is nothing
left of the Mason-wasp’s grub; the Golden Wasp
has gorged herself upon it.
Flies, as we have seen, often act the part of robbers.
They are not the least to be dreaded, though
they are weak, sometimes so feeble that one cannot
take them in his fingers without crushing them. One
species called Bombylii are clad in velvet so delicate
that the least touch rubs it off. They are fluffs of
down almost as frail as a snowflake, but they can
fly with wonderful quickness. See this one, hovering
motionless two feet above the ground. Her
wings vibrate so rapidly one cannot see the motion
at all, and they seem to be in repose. The insect
looks as though it were hung at one point in space
by some invisible thread. You make a movement,
and your Fly has disappeared. You look about for
her. There is nothing here, nothing there. Then
where is she? Close by you. She is back where she
started, before you could see where she went to.
What is she doing, there in the air? She is up to
some mischief; she is watching for a chance to leave
her egg where it will feed on some other insect’s
provisions. I do not know yet what sort of insect
she preys upon, nor what she wishes for her children,

whether honey, game, or the grubs themselves.
I know more about the actions of certain tiny,
pale-gray Flies, called Tachinæ, who, cowering on
the sand in the sun, near a burrow, patiently wait
for the hour at which to strike the fell blow. When
the different Wasps return from hunting, one kind
with her Gad-fly, another with a Bee, another with
a Beetle, another with a Locust, at once the Gray
Flies are there, coming and going, turning and twisting
with the Wasp, always behind her and never
losing her. At the moment when the Wasp huntress
goes indoors, with her captured game between her
legs, they fling themselves on her prey, which is on
the point of disappearing underground, and quickly
lay their eggs upon it. The thing is done in the
twinkling of an eye; before the Wasp has crossed
the threshold of her home, the food for her babies
holds the germs of a new set of guests, who will feed
on it and starve the children of the house to death.
Perhaps, after all, we should not blame too much
these insects which feed on others, or on the food of
others. An idle human being who feeds at other
people’s tables is contemptible; we call him a parasite
because he lives at his neighbor’s expense. The
insect never does this; that is to say, it does not live
on the food of another of the same species. You
remember the Mason-bees: not one of the Bees
touches another’s honey, unless the owner is dead or
has stayed away a long time. The other Bees and
Wasps behave in the same way.
What we call parasitism in insects is really a kind

of hunting. The Mutilla, for instance, is a huntress,
and her prey is the grub of another kind of Wasp,
just as the game of this other kind of Wasp may be
a Caterpillar or a Beetle. When it comes to this,
we are all hunters, or thieves, whichever way you
look at it, and Man the greatest of all. He steals
the milk from the Calf, he steals the honey from the
children of the Bee, just as the Gray Fly takes the
food of the Wasps’ babies. She does it to feed her
children; and Man helps himself to everything he
can find to feed his.
There are various kinds of insects that perform
a very useful work in the world, for
which they do not always receive credit. When you
pass a dead Mole in the fields, and see Ants,
Beetles and Flies on it, you shudder and get away
from the spot as quickly as possible. You think they
are horrid, dirty insects; but they are not; they are
busy making the world a cleaner place for you to live
in. Let us watch some of these Flies at work, and
we shall get an idea of the wonderful things they do
in this connection.
You have seen the Greenbottle Flies. They are a
beautiful golden-green which shines like metal, and
they have red eyes, set in a silver border. They
scent dead animals from far away, and rush to lay
their eggs in them. A few days afterward, the
flesh of the corpse has turned into liquid, in which
are thousands of tiny grubs with pointed heads. This
is very unpleasant, perhaps you think; but, after all,
it is the best and easiest way for dead things to disappear,
to be absorbed in the soil and pass on to

another form of life. And it is the little Greenbottle
worms that produce this liquid.
If the corpse were left undisturbed, it would dry
up and take a long while to disappear. The Greenbottle
grubs, and the grubs of other Flies as well,
have a wonderful power of turning solid things into
liquid. When I give the Greenbottle grubs a piece
of hard-boiled white of egg to feed upon, they turn
it at once into a colorless liquid which looks like
water. They have some sort of pepsin which comes
out of their mouths and does this work. It is like the
gastric juice in our stomach, which dissolves and renders
digestible the food we eat. The grubs or worms
live on the broth they make in this way until it has
all disappeared.
Other Flies whose worms do this work are the
Gray Flesh-flies and the big Bluebottles, whom you
often see buzzing about the window-panes. Do not
let them come near the meat for your dinner, for if
they do they will surely make it uneatable. Out in
the fields, however, they are in their right element.
They give back to life, with all speed, the remains
of that which has lived; they change corpses into an
essence which enriches our foster-mother earth.
In my piece of waste ground stand some pine-trees.
Every year the Caterpillar takes possession
of them and spins his great purses in their
branches. To protect the pine-needles, which are
horribly eaten, I have to destroy the nests each winter
with a long forked stick.
You hungry little Caterpillars, if I let you have
your way, I should soon be robbed of the murmur of
my once so leafy pines. But I am going to make a
compact with you. You have a story to tell. Tell
it to me; and for a year, for two years or longer,
until I know more or less about it, I will leave you
undisturbed.
The result of my compact with the Caterpillars
is that I soon have some thirty nests within a few
steps of my door. With such treasures daily before
my eyes, I cannot help seeing the Pine Caterpillar’s

story unfolded at full length. These Caterpillars
are also called the Processionaries, because they always
go abroad in a procession, one following
closely after the other.
First of all, the egg. During the first half of August,
if we look at the lower branches of the pines,
we shall discover, here and there on the foliage, certain

little whitish cylinders spotting the dark green.
These are the Pine Moth’s eggs; each cylinder is
the cluster laid by one mother. The cylinder is like
a tiny muff about an inch long and a fifth or sixth of
an inch wide, wrapped around the base of the pine-needles,
which are grouped in twos. This muff has
a silky appearance and is white slightly tinted with
russet. It is covered with scales that overlap like
the tiles on a roof. The whole thing resembles
somewhat a walnut-catkin that is not yet full-grown.
The scales, soft as velvet to the touch and carefully
laid one upon the other, form a roof that protects
the eggs. Not a drop of rain or dew can penetrate.
Where did this soft covering come from?
From the mother Moth; she has stripped a part of
her body for her children. Like the Eider-duck, she
has made a warm overcoat for her eggs out of her
own down.
If one removes the scaly fleece with pincers the
eggs appear, looking like little white-enamel beads.
There are about three hundred of them in one cylinder.
Quite a family for one mother! They are
beautifully placed, and remind one of a tiny cob of
Indian corn. Nobody, young or old, learned or
ignorant, could help exclaiming, on seeing the Pine
Moth’s pretty little spike,
“How handsome!”
And what will strike us most will be not the beautiful
enamel pearls, but the way in which they are
put together with such geometrical regularity. Is
it not strange that a tiny Moth should follow the

laws of order? But the more we study nature, the
more we realize that there is order everywhere. It
is the beauty of the universe, the same under every
sun, whether the suns be single or many, white or
red, blue or yellow. Why all this regularity in the
curve of the petals of a flower, why all this elegance
in the chasings on a Beetle’s wing-cases? Is that
infinite grace, even in the tiniest details, the result of
brutal, uncontrolled forces? It seems hardly likely.
Is there not Some One back of it all, Some One who
is a supreme lover of beauty? That would explain
everything.
These are very deep thoughts about a group of
Moth-eggs that will bear a crop of Caterpillars.
It cannot be helped. The minute we begin to investigate
the tiniest things in nature, we have to begin
asking “Why?” And science cannot answer us.
That is the strange part of it.
The Pine Moth’s eggs hatch in September. If
one lifts the scales of the little muff, one can see black
heads appear, which nibble and push back their coverings.
The tiny creatures come out slowly all over
the surface. They are pale yellow, with a black head
twice as large as their body. The first thing they
do is to eat the pine-needles on which their nest was
placed; then they fall to on the near-by needles.
From time to time, three or four who have eaten
as much as they want fall into line and walk in step
in a little procession. This is practice for the coming
processions. If I disturb them, they sway the
front half of their bodies and wag their heads.

“When winter is near they will build a stronger
tent.”

The next thing they do is to spin a little tent at
the place where their nest was. The tent is a small
ball made of gauze, supported on some leaves. Inside
it the Caterpillars take a rest during the hottest
part of the day. In the afternoon they leave this
shelter and start feeding again.
In less than an hour, you see, after coming from
the egg, the young Caterpillar shows what he can
do. He eats leaves, he forms processions, and he
spins tents.
In twenty-four hours the little tent has become
as large as a hazel-nut, and in two weeks it is the size
of an apple. But it is still only a temporary summer
tent. When winter is near, they will build a stronger
one. In the meantime, the Caterpillars eat the leaves
around which their tent is stretched. Their house
gives them at the same time board and lodging. This
is a good arrangement, because it saves them from
going out, and they are so young and so tiny that it
is dangerous for them to go out yet awhile.
When this tent gives way, owing to the Caterpillars
having nibbled the leaves supporting it, the family
moves on, like the Arabs, and erects a new tent
higher up on the pine-tree. Sometimes they reach
the very top of the tree.
In the meantime the Caterpillars have changed
their dress. They now wear six little bright red
patches on their backs, surrounded with scarlet
bristles. In the midst of these red patches are specks
of gold. The hairs on their sides and underneath
are whitish.

In November they begin to build their winter tent
high up in the pine at the tip of a bough. They surround
the leaves at the end of the bough with a network
of silk. Leaves and silk together are stronger
than silk alone. By the time it is finished it is as
large as a half-gallon measure and about the shape of
an egg, with a sheath over the supporting branch. In
the center of the nest is a milk-white mass of thickly-woven
threads mingled with green leaves. At the
top are round openings, the doors of the house,
through which the Caterpillars go in and out. There
is a sort of veranda on top made of threads stretched
from the tips of the leaves projecting from the dome,
where the Caterpillars come and doze in the sun,
heaped one upon the other, with rounded backs. The
threads above are an awning, to keep the sun from
being too warm for them.
The inside of the Caterpillars’ nest is not at all
a tidy place; it is full of rags, shreds of the Caterpillars’
skins, and dirt.
The Caterpillars stay in their nest all night, and
come out about ten o’clock in the morning to take
the sun on their terrace or veranda. They spend
the whole day there, dozing. Motionless, heaped
together, they steep themselves deliciously in warmth
and from time to time show their bliss by nodding
and wagging their heads. At six or seven o’clock,
when it grows dark, the sleepers awake, bestir themselves,
and go their several ways over the surface of
the nest.
Wherever they go, they strengthen the nest or enlarge

it by the threads of silk that come out of their
mouths and trail behind them. More green leaves
are taken in, and the tent becomes bigger and bigger.
They are busy doing this for an hour or two every
evening. So far, they have known nothing but summer;
but they seem to realize that winter is coming.
They work away at their house with an ardor that
seems to say:
“Oh, how nice and warm we shall be in our beds
here, nestling one against the other, when the pine-tree
swings aloft its frosted candelabra! Let us
work with a will!”
Yes, Caterpillars, my friends, let us work with a
will, great and small, men and grubs alike, so that we

may fall asleep peacefully; you with the torpor that
makes way for your transformation into Moths, we
with that last sleep which breaks off life only to renew
it. Let us work!
After the day’s work comes their dinner. The
Caterpillars come down from the nest and begin on
the pine-needles below. It is a magnificent sight to
see the red-coated band lined up in twos and threes
on each needle and in ranks so closely formed that
the green sprigs of the branch bend under the load.
The diners, all motionless, all poking their heads
forward, nibble in silence, placidly. Their broad
black foreheads gleam in the rays of my lantern.
They eat far into the night. Then they go back to
the nest, where, for a little longer, they continue
spinning on the surface. It is one or two o’clock in
the morning when the last of the band goes indoors.
The Pine Caterpillars eat only three kinds of pine:
the Scotch pine, the maritime pine, and the Aleppo
pine; never the leaves of the other cone-bearing
trees, with one exception. In vain I offer them other
foliage from the evergreens in my yard: the spruce,
the yew, the juniper, the cypress. What! Am I
asking them, the Pine Caterpillars, to bite into that?
They will take good care not to, in spite of the tempting
resinous smell! They would die of hunger rather
than touch it! One cone-bearing tree and one only
is excepted: the cedar. They will eat the leaves of
that. Why the cedar and not the others? I do not
know. The Caterpillar’s stomach is as particular
as ours, and has its secrets.

To guide them as they wander about their tree,
the Caterpillars have their silk ribbon, formed by
threads from their mouths. They follow this on
their return. Sometimes they miss it and strike the
ribbon made by another band of Caterpillars. They
follow it and reach a strange dwelling. No matter!
There is not the least quarreling between the owners
and the new arrivals. Both go on browsing peacefully,
as though nothing had happened. And all
without hesitation, when bedtime comes, make for
the nest, like brothers who have always lived together;
all do some spinning before going to rest,
thicken the blanket a little, and are then swallowed
up in the same dormitory. By accidents like these
some nests grow to be very large. Each for all and
all for each. So says the Processionary, who every
evening spends his little capital of silk on enlarging
a shelter that is often new to him. What would he
do with his puny skein, if alone? Hardly anything.
But there are hundreds and hundreds of them in the
spinning-mill; and the result of their tiny contributions
is a stuff belonging to all, a thick blanket splendidly
warm in winter. In working for himself, each
works for the others; and the others work for him.
Lucky Caterpillars that know nothing of property,
the cause of strife!
There is an old story about a Ram which was
thrown into the water from on board ship, whereupon
all the sheep leaped into the sea one after the
other; “for,” says the teller of the story, “it is the
nature of the sheep always to follow the first, wheresoever
it goes; which makes Aristotle mark them for
the most silly and foolish animals in the world.”
The Pine Caterpillars are even more sheeplike
than sheep. Where the first goes all the others go,
in a regular string, with not an empty space between
them.
They proceed in single file, each touching with
its head the rear of the one in front of it. No matter
how the one in front twists and turns, the whole
procession does the same. Another odd thing: they
are all, you might say, tight-rope walkers; they all
follow a silken rail. The leading Caterpillar dribbles
his thread on the path he makes, the second Caterpillar
steps on it and doubles it with his thread; and
all the others add their rope, so that after the procession
has passed, there is left a narrow white ribbon
whose dazzling whiteness shimmers in the sun.
This is a sumptuous manner of road-making: we
sprinkle our roads with broken stones and level them
by the pressure of a heavy steam-roller; they lay
over their paths a soft satin rail!
“They Proceed in Single File.”
What is the use of all this luxury? Could they
not, like other Caterpillars, walk about without

these costly preparations? I see two reasons. It is
night when the Processionaries go forth to feed, and
they follow a very winding route. They go down
one branch, up another, from the needle to the twig,
from the twig to the branch, and so on. When it is
time to go home, they would have hard work to find
their way if it were not for the silken thread they
leave behind them. It reminds one of the story of
Theseus (in the “Tanglewood Tales,” or the old
mythologies), who would have been lost in the Cretan
labyrinth if it had not been for the clue of thread
which Ariadne gave him.
Sometimes, too, they take longer expeditions by
day, marching in procession for thirty yards or so.
They are not looking for food; they are off on a trip,
seeing the world, perhaps looking for a place to bury
themselves later on, in the second stage before they
become Moths. In a walk of this distance, the guiding-thread
is very necessary.
The guiding-thread, too, brings them all back
home to the nest when they are separated, hunting
for food in the pine-tree. They pick up their threads,
and come hurrying from a host of twigs, from here,
from there, from above, from below, back to the
group. So the silk is more than a road: it is a social
bond that keeps all the members of the community
united.
At the head of every procession, long or short,
goes the first Caterpillar, the leader. He is
leader only by chance; everything depends upon the
order in which they happen to line up. If the file

should break up, for some reason, and form again,
some other Caterpillar might have first rank. But
the leader’s temporary duties give him airs of his
own. While the others follow passively in a close
file, he, the captain, tosses himself about and flings
the front of his body hither and thither. As he
marches ahead he seems to be seeking his way. Does
he really explore the country? Does he choose the
best places? Or are his hesitations only the result
of the absence of the guiding-thread the rest follow?
Why cannot I read what passes under his black,
shiny skull, so like a drop of tar? To judge by actions,
he has sense enough to recognize very rough
places, over-slippery surfaces, dusty places, and,
above all, the threads left by other Caterpillars.
This is all, or nearly all, that my long acquaintance
with the Processionaries has taught me about their
brain power.
The processions vary greatly in length. The finest
one I ever saw was twelve or thirteen yards long
and numbered about three hundred Caterpillars,
drawn up with absolute precision in a wavy line. If
there were only two in a row, however, the order
would still be perfect: the second touches and follows
the first.
I make up my mind to play a trick upon the Caterpillars
which have hatched out in my greenhouse. I
wish to arrange their silken track so that it will join
on to itself and form an endless circuit, with no
branch tracks leading from it. Will the Processionaries

then go round and round upon a road that
never comes to an end?
Chance makes it easy for me to arrange something
of this sort. On the shelf in my greenhouse
in which the nests are planted stand some big palm
vases measuring nearly a yard and a half in circumference
at the top. The Caterpillars often scale the
sides and climb up to the molding which forms a
cornice or ledge around the opening. This place
suits them for their processions. It provides me
with a circular track all ready-made.
One day I discover a numerous troop making their
way up and gradually reaching the favorite ledge.
Slowly, in single file, the Caterpillars climb the great
vase, mount the ledge, and advance in regular procession,
while others are constantly arriving and continuing
the series. I wait for the string to close up,
that is to say, for the leader, who is following the
circular track, to return to the point from which he
started. This happens in a quarter of an hour. I
now have a circle of Caterpillars around the top of
the vase.
The next thing is to get rid of the rest of the
Caterpillars who are on their way up and who might
disturb the experiment; we must also do away with
all the silken paths that lead from the top of the
vase to the ground. With a thick hair-pencil I sweep
away the Caterpillars; with a big brush I carefully
rub down the vase and get rid of every thread which
the Caterpillars have laid on the march. When

these preparations are finished, a curious sight
awaits us.
The Caterpillars are going round and round on
the ledge at the top of the vase. They no longer
have a leader, because the circle is continuous; but
they do not know this, and each follows the one
in front of him, who he thinks is the leader.
The rail of silk has grown into a narrow ribbon,
which the Caterpillars keep adding to. It has no
branches anywhere. Will they walk endlessly round
and round until their strength gives out entirely?
Old-fashioned scholars were fond of quoting the
tale of the Donkey who, when placed between two
bundles of hay, starved to death because he was unable
to decide in favor of either. They slandered
the worthy animal. The Donkey, who is no more
foolish than any one else, would feast off both

bundles. Will my Caterpillars show a little of his
common-sense? Will they make up their minds to
leave their closed circuit, to swerve to this side or
that? I thought that they would, and I was wrong.
I said to myself:
“The procession will go on turning for some
time, for an hour, two hours perhaps; then the
Caterpillars will perceive their mistake. They will
abandon the deceptive road and make their descent
somewhere or other.”
That they should remain up there, hard pressed
by hunger and the lack of shelter, when nothing prevented
them from going away, seemed to me unthinkable
foolishness. Facts, however, forced me
to accept the incredible.
The Caterpillars keep on marching round the
vase for hours and hours. As evening comes on,
there are more or less lengthy halts; they go more
slowly at times, especially as it grows colder. At
ten o’clock in the evening the walk is little more
than a lazy swaying of the body. Grazing-time
comes, when the other Caterpillars come crowding
out from their nests to feast on the pine-needles.
The ones on the vase would gladly take part in the
feast; they must have an appetite after a ten hours’
walk. A branch of pine is not a hand’s breadth
away from them. To reach it they have only to go
down the vase; and the poor wretches, foolish slaves
of their ribbon that they are, cannot make up their
minds to do so. At half-past ten I leave them to go
to bed; I am sure that during the night they will

come to their senses. At dawn I visit them again.
They are lined up as on the day before, but motionless.
When the air grows a little warmer, they
shake off their torpor, revive, and start walking
again in their circle.
Things go on as before during the next day. The
following night is very cold. The poor Caterpillars
spend a bad night. I find them clustered in two heaps
on the top of the vase, without any attempt at order.
They have huddled together to keep warm.
Perhaps, now that they are divided into two parts,
one of the leaders, not being obliged to follow a
Caterpillar in front of him, will have the sense to
break away. I am delighted to see them lining up
by degrees into two distinct files, with two leaders,
free to go where they please. At the sight of their
large black heads swaying anxiously from side to
side, I am inclined to think they will leave the enchanted
circle. But I am soon undeceived. As the
ranks fill out, the two sections of the chain meet and
the circle is formed again. Again the Caterpillars
march round and round all day.
The next night is again cold, and the Caterpillars
gather in a heap which overflows both sides of the
fatal ribbon. Next morning, when they awake, some
of them who find themselves outside the track actually
follow a leader who climbs to the top of the
vase and down the inside. There are seven of these
daring ones. The rest pay no attention to them and
walk round the circle again.
The Caterpillars inside the vase find no food

there, and retrace their steps along their thread to
the top, strike the procession again, and slip back
into the ranks.
Another day passes, and another. The sixth day
is warm, and for the first time I see daring leaders,
who, drunk with heat, stand on their hind-legs at the
extreme edge of the vase and fling themselves forward
into space. At last one of them decided to
take the plunge. He slips under the ledge and four
follow him. They go halfway down the vase, then
their courage fails and they climb up again and rejoin
the procession. But a start has been made and
a new track laid. Two days later, on the eighth day
of the experiment, the Caterpillars—now singly,
then in small groups, then again in strings of some
length—come down from the ledge by starting on
this fresh path. At sunset the last of the Caterpillars
is back in the nest at the foot.
I figure that they have walked for eighty-four
hours, and covered a good deal more than a quarter
of a mile while traveling in the circle. It was only
the disorder due to the cold nights that ever set them
off the track and back to safety. Poor, stupid Caterpillars!
People are fond of saying that animals can
reason, but there are no beginnings of a reasoning
power to be seen in them.
In January the Pine Caterpillar sheds his skin for
the second time. He is not nearly so pretty afterwards,
but he has gained some new organs which
are very useful. The hairs on the middle of his back
are now of a dull reddish color, made paler still by
many long white hairs mixed in with them. This
faded costume has an odd feature. On the back
may be seen eight gashes, like mouths, which open
and close at the Caterpillar’s will. When the mouths
are open there appears in each of them a little swelling,
which seems extremely sensitive, for at the
slightest irritation it goes in again.

What is the use of these queer mouths and tumors,
as we call the little swellings? Certainly not
to breathe with, for no one, not even a Caterpillar,
breathes from the middle of his back. Let us consider
the habits of the Pine Caterpillar, and perhaps
we shall find out.
The Pine Caterpillar is most active during the
winter, and at night. But if the north wind blow
too violently, if the cold be too piercing, if it snow,
or rain, or if the mist thicken into an icy drizzle, the
Caterpillars prudently stay at home, sheltering
under their waterproof tent.
It would be convenient to foresee these disagreeable
weather conditions. The Caterpillar dreads
them. A drop of rain sets him in a flutter; a snowflake
exasperates him. To start for the grazing-grounds
at dark of night, in uncertain weather,
would be dangerous, for the procession goes some
distance and travels slowly. The flock would have a
bad time of it before regaining shelter, if they were
caught in a sudden storm, such as are frequent in
the bad season of the year. Can the Pine Caterpillar
possibly be able to foretell the weather? Let
me tell how I came to suspect this.
One night some friends came to see my Caterpillars
in the greenhouse start on their nightly pilgrimage.
We waited till nine o’clock, then went in. But,
but ... what is this? Not a Caterpillar outside
the nests! Last night and on the nights before
they came out in countless numbers; to-night not one
is to be seen. We waited till ten o’clock, till eleven,

till midnight. Then, very much mortified, I had to
send my friends away.
Next day I found that it had rained in the night
and again in the morning, and that there was snow
on the mountains. Had the Caterpillars, more sensitive
than any of us to atmospheric changes, refused
to venture out because they had known what was
going to happen? After all, why not? I thought I
would keep on observing them.
I found that whenever the weather chart in the
newspaper announced a coming depression of the
atmosphere, such as is made by storms, my greenhouse
Caterpillars stayed at home, though neither
rain, snow, nor cold could affect them in their indoor
shelter. Sometimes they foretold the storm two days
ahead. Their gift for scenting bad weather very
soon won the confidence of the household. When
we had to go into town to buy provisions, we used
to consult our Caterpillars the night before; and according
to what they did, we went or stayed at home.
The second dress of the Pine Caterpillar, therefore,
seems to bring with it the power to foretell the
weather. And this power is probably given by the
wide mouths, which yawn open to sample the air
from time to time and to give a warning of the sudden
storm.
When March comes, the Caterpillars leave their
nest and their pine-tree and go on their final trip.
On the twentieth of March I spent a whole morning
watching a file about three yards long, containing
about a hundred of the Caterpillars, now much
faded as to their coats. The procession toils grimly
along, up and down over the uneven ground. Then
it breaks into groups, which halt and form independent
processions.
They have important business on hand. After two
hours or so of marching, the little procession reaches
the foot of a wall, where the soil is powdery, very
dry, and easy to burrow in. The Caterpillar at the
head of the row explores, and digs a little, as if to
find out the nature of the ground. The others,
trusting their leader, follow him blindly. Whatever
he decides will be adopted by all. Finally the
leading Caterpillar finds a spot he likes; he stops,
and the others break up into a swarming heap. All
their backs are joggling pell-mell; all their feet are
raking; all their jaws are digging the soil. Little
by little, they make a hole in which to bury themselves.
For some time to come the tunneled soil
cracks and rises and covers itself with little mole-hills;
then all is still. The Caterpillars have descended
to a depth of three inches, and are weaving,
or about to weave, their cocoons.
Two weeks later I dug down and found them

there, wrapped in scanty white silk, soiled with dirt.
Sometimes, if the soil permits, they bury themselves
as deep as nine inches.
How, then, does the Moth, that delicate creature,
with her flimsy wings and sweeping antennæ-plumes,
make her way above ground? She does not appear
till the end of July or in August. By that time the
soil is hard, having been beaten down by the rain
and baked by the sun. Never could a Moth break
her way through unless she had tools for the purpose
and were dressed with great simplicity.
From some cocoons that I kept in test-tubes in my
laboratory I found that the Pine Moth, on coming

out of the cocoon, has her finery bundled up. She
looks like a cylinder with rounded ends. The wings
are pressed against her breast like narrow scarfs;
the antennæ have not yet unfolded their plumes and
are turned back along the Moth’s sides. Her hair
fleece is laid flat, pointing backwards. Her legs
alone are free, to help her through the soil.
She needs even more preparation, though, to bore
her hole. If you pass the tip of your finger over her
head you will feel a few very rough wrinkles. The
magnifying-glass shows us that these are hard scales,
of which the longest and strongest is the top one,
in the middle of her forehead. There you have the
center-bit of her boring-tool. I see the Moths in the
sand in my test-tubes butting with their heads, jerking
now in one direction, now in another. They are
boring into the sand. By the following day they will
have bored a shaft ten inches long and reached the
surface.
When at last the Moth reaches the surface, she
slowly spreads her bunched wings, extends her antennæ,
and puffs out her fleece. She is all dressed
now, as nicely as she can be. To be sure, she is not
the most brilliant of our Moths, but she looks very
well. Her upper wings are gray, striped with a few
crinkly brown streaks; her under-wings white; throat
covered with thick gray fur; abdomen clad in bright-russet
velvet. The tip end of her body shines like
pale gold. At first sight it looks bare, but it is not:
it is covered with tiny scales, so close together that
they look like one piece.

There is something interesting about these scales.
However gently we touch them with the point of
a needle, they fly off in great numbers. This is the
golden fleece of which the mother robs herself to
make the nest or muff for her eggs at the base of the
pine-needles which we spoke of at the beginning of
the story.
The cabbage is the oldest vegetable we possess.
We know that people in classic times ate it, but
it goes much further back than that, so that indeed
we are ignorant of when or how mankind first began
cultivating it. The botanists tell us that originally
it was a long-stalked, scanty-leaved, ill-smelling wild
plant which grew on ocean cliffs. History pays but
little attention to such details: it celebrates the battlefields
on which we meet our death, it thinks the
plowed fields by which we thrive are not important
enough to speak of; it can tell us the names of
kings’ favorites, it cannot tell us of the beginning of
wheat! Perhaps some day it will be written differently.
It is too bad that we do not know more about the
cabbage, for it would have some very interesting
things to teach us. It is certainly a treasure in itself.
Other creatures think so besides man; and

one of these is the Caterpillar of the common Large
White Butterfly. This Caterpillar feeds on the leaves
of the cabbage and all kinds of cabbagey plants,
such as the cauliflower, the Brussels sprout, the kohlrabi,
and the rutabaga, all near relatives of the cabbage.
It will feed also on other plants which belong to
the cabbage family. They are all of the order of
the Cruciferæ, so-called by the botanists because the
petals are four in number and arranged in a cross.
The White Butterfly lays her eggs only on this order
of plants. How she knows them is a mystery. I
have studied flowers and plants for fifty years and
more, yet, if I wished to find out if a plant new to me
was or was not one of the Cruciferæ, and there were
no flowers or fruit to guide me, I should believe the
White Butterfly’s record on the matter sooner than
anything I could find in books.
The White Butterfly has two families a year: one
in April and May, the other in September. This is
just the time that cabbages are ripe in our part of
the world. The Butterfly’s calendar agrees with the
gardener’s. When there are provisions to be eaten,
the Caterpillars are on hand.
The eggs are a bright orange-yellow and are laid
in slabs, sometimes on the upper surface, sometimes
on the lower surface of the leaves. The Caterpillars

come out of their eggs in about a week, and the first
thing they do is to eat the egg-shells, or egg-wrappers,
before tackling the green leaves. It is the first
time I have ever seen the grub make a meal of the
sack in which it was born, and I wonder what reason
it has. I suspect as follows: the leaves of the cabbage
are waxed and slippery. To walk on them without
falling off, the grub needs bits of silk, something
for its legs to grip. To make this silk, it needs special
food; so it eats the egg-wrapper, which is of a
horny substance of the same nature as silk, and
probably easily changed to the latter in the stomach
of the little grub.
Soon the grubs get hungry for green food, and
then the ruin of the cabbages commences. What appetites
they have! I served up to a herd of these
Caterpillars which I had in my laboratory a bunch
of leaves picked from among the biggest cabbages:
two hours later nothing was left but the thick
middle veins. At this rate the cabbage bed will not
last long.
The gluttonous Caterpillars do nothing at all but
eat, unless we except a curious motion they sometimes
indulge in. When several Caterpillars are
grazing side by side, you sometimes see all the heads
in the row briskly lifted and as briskly lowered, time
after time, all together and as accurately as if they

were Prussian soldiers drilling. I do not know
whether this is their way of showing that they would
fight, if necessary, or a sign of pleasure in the eating
and the warm sun. Anyhow, it is the only exercise
they take until they are full-grown and fat.
After a whole month of grazing, the Caterpillars
at last have enough. They begin to climb in every
direction. They walk about anyhow, with the front
part of their bodies raised and searching space. It
is now the beginning of cold weather, and my Caterpillar
guests are in a small greenhouse. I leave the
door of the house open. Soon the whole crowd have
disappeared.
I find them scattered all over the neighboring
walls, some thirty yards off. They are under ledges
and eaves, which will serve them as shelters through
the winter. The Cabbage-caterpillar is hardy and
does not mind the cold.
In these shelters they weave themselves hammock
cocoons and turn into chrysales, from which
next spring the Moths will come.
We may be interested in the story of the Cabbage-caterpillar,
but we know that there would be not

enough cabbages for us if he were allowed full sway.
So we are not ill-pleased to hear that there is still
another insect who preys upon him and keeps him
from being too numerous. If the Cabbage-caterpillar
is our enemy, this insect is our friend. Yet she
is so small, she works so discreetly, that the gardener
does not know her, has not even heard of her. If
he were to see her by accident, flitting around the
plant which she protects, he would take no notice of
her, would not dream of the help she is giving him.
I am going to give the tiny midget her deserts.
Scientists call her by a name as long as she is tiny.
Part of the name is Microgaster. It is what I shall
have to call her, for she has no other that I know of.
You must blame the wise scientists who named her
that, and not me.
How does she work? Well, we shall see. In the

spring, let us look about our kitchen-gardens. We
can hardly help noticing against the walls or on the
withered grasses at the foot of the hedges some
very small yellow cocoons, heaped into masses the
size of a hazel-nut. Beside each group lies a Cabbage-caterpillar,
sometimes dead and always looking
very tattered. These cocoons are the work of the
Microgaster’s family, hatched or on the point of
hatching; they have been feeding on the poor Caterpillar.
The little Microgaster or Midge is about the size
of a Gnat. When the Caterpillar-moth lays her orange
eggs on the cabbage leaves, the Midge hastens
up and with a slender, horny prickle she possesses,
lays her egg inside the film of the Moth’s egg. Often
many Midges lay their little eggs in the same Moth’s
egg. Judging by the cocoons, there are sometimes
as many as sixty-five Midges to one Caterpillar.
As the Caterpillar grows up, it does not seem to
suffer; it feeds on the cabbage leaves and, when that
is done, makes its pilgrimage as usual to find the place
where it will weave its cocoon. It even begins this
work; but it is listless, it has no strength; it grows
thin and dies. No wonder, with a host of worms
of the little Microgaster in its body, drinking its
blood! The Caterpillar has obligingly lived till just
the time when the Microgaster’s worms are ready to
come out. They do so, and begin to weave their cocoons,
where they turn into Midges with the long
name.
It was an evening long to be remembered, when
the Great Peacock Moths came to my house.
This Moth is magnificent, the largest in Europe, clad
in maroon velvet, with a necktie of white fur. The
wings are sprinkled with gray and brown, crossed by
a faint zigzag and edged with smoky white, and
they have in the center a round patch, a great eye
with a black pupil and a many-colored iris containing
black, white, chestnut, and purple arcs. The
Moth is hatched from a Caterpillar also remarkable
in appearance, being yellow with beads of turquoise-blue.
It feeds on almond leaves.
Well, on the morning of the sixth of May, a female
Great Peacock Moth came out of her cocoon
in my presence, on the table of my insect-laboratory.
I at once caged her under a wire-gauze bell-jar. I
did not think much about the matter. I kept her on

general principles, for I am always on the lookout
for something to happen.
I was glad afterwards that I had done so. At
nine o’clock in the evening, just as the household is
going to bed, there is a great stir in the room next
to mine. Little Paul, half-undressed, is rushing
about, jumping and stamping, knocking the chairs
over like a mad thing. I hear him call me:
“Come, quick!” he screams. “Come and see these
Moths, big as birds! The room is full of them!”
I hurry in. The child has not exaggerated very
much. The room is full of giant Moths. Four are
already caught and lodged in a bird-cage. Many
others are fluttering on the ceiling.
At this sight, I remember my prisoner of the morning.
“Put on your things, laddie,” I say to my son.
“Leave your cage and come with me. We shall see
something interesting.”
We run downstairs to go to my study, which is in
the right wing of the house. In the kitchen I find
the servant, who is also bewildered by what is happening
and stands flicking her apron at great Moths
whom she took at first for Bats. It seems that the
Great Peacock has taken possession of pretty nearly
every part of the house.
We enter my study, candle in hand. One of the
windows had been left open, and what we see is unforgetable.
With a soft flick-flack the great Moths
fly around the bell-jar, alight, set off again, come
back, fly up to the ceiling and down. They rush

at the candle, putting it out with a stroke of their
wings; they descend on our shoulders, clinging to
our clothes, grazing our faces. The scene suggests
a wizard’s cave, with its whirl of Bats. Little Paul
holds my hand tighter than usual, to keep up his
courage.
How many are there? About twenty in this room.
Add to these the number who have strayed into the
other parts of the house, and the total cannot be
much short of forty. Forty lovers, who have come
to pay their respects to the bride born that morning—the
princess imprisoned in her tower!
Every night that week the Moths come to court
their princess. It is stormy weather, so dark one
can hardly see one’s hand before one’s face. Our
house is difficult for them to reach. It is hidden by
tall plane-trees, pines, and cypresses; clusters of
bushy shrubs make a rampart a few steps away from
the door. It is through this tangle, in complete darkness,
that the Great Peacock has to tack about to
reach his lady.
Under such conditions the Brown Owl would not
dare leave the hole in his tree. Yet the Moth goes
forward without hesitating and passes through without
knocking against things. He steers his way so
skillfully that he arrives in a state of perfect freshness,
with his big wings unharmed, with not a scratch
upon him. The darkness is light enough for him.
With a view to his wedding, the one and only
object of his life, the Great Peacock is gifted with a
wonderful talent. He is able to discover the object

of his desire in spite of distance, obstacles, and darkness.
For two or three evenings he is allowed a few
hours to find his mate. If he cannot find her, all is
over. He dies.
The Great Peacock knows nothing of eating.
While so many other Moths, jolly companions one
and all, flit from flower to flower, dipping into the
honeyed cups, he never thinks of refreshment. No
wonder he does not live long. Two or three evenings,
just time enough to allow the couple to meet,
and that is all; the big Moth has lived.
Before we come to the Beetle, I must first tell
you about my friend, the Dog, who hunts
truffles, which are underground mushrooms. Dogs
are quite often used for this purpose, and I have had
the good fortune on several occasions to go with a
Dog who was a great expert in this line. He was
certainly nothing to look at, this artist whom I was
so anxious to see at work: just a Dog, placid and deliberate
in his ways, ugly, unkempt; the sort of Dog
you would never have at your own fireside. Talent
and poverty often go hand in hand.
His master, a celebrated truffle-gatherer in the village,
was at first afraid that I wanted to steal his
secrets and set up a rival business, but when he found
that I only made drawings of mushrooms and set
down lists of underground vegetable things, he let
me join his expeditions.

It was agreed between us that the Dog should
act as he pleased and receive a bit of bread as his
reward after each discovery, no matter whether the
underground mushroom he discovered was a real
truffle, the kind people like to eat, or an uneatable
one. In no case was the master to drive the dog
away from a spot where experience told him there
was nothing salable to be found. As far as my
studies went, I did not care whether the mushrooms
were edible or not.
Conducted in this way, the expedition was very
successful. The busy Dog trotted along with his
nose to the wind, at a moderate pace. Every little
while he stopped, questioned the ground with his
nostrils, scratched for a few seconds, without too
much excitement, then looked up at his master as if
to say:
“Here we are, here we are! On my word of
honor as a Dog, there’s a truffle here.”
And he spoke the truth. The master dug at the
spot indicated. If the trowel went astray, the Dog
showed the man how to put it right by sniffing at
the bottom of the hole. The mushroom was always
there. A Dog’s nose cannot lie. But he made us
gather all sorts of underground mushrooms: the
large and the small, the fresh and the decayed, the
scented and the unscented, the fragrant and those
which were the reverse. I was surprised at my collection,
which included most of the underground
fungi of the neighborhood.
Is it smell as we understand it that guides the Dog

in his search? I do not believe that it is, otherwise
he would not point out so many varieties which smell
so very different. He must perceive something that
we cannot. It is a mistake to compare everything by
human standards. There are more sensations in the
world than we know of. Such secrets are known to
insects better than to other animals, like the Dog or
the Pig, who also hunts truffles with its nose. We will
hear now about the Truffle-hunting Beetle.
This is a pretty little black Beetle, with a pale and
velvety belly, round as a cherry-stone and much the
same size. By rubbing the tip of its abdomen against
the edge of its wing-cases it makes a soft chirrup like
that which little birds make when their mother comes

with their food. The male wears a graceful horn
on his head.
I found these Beetles in a certain pine-woods
where there are plenty of mushrooms. It is a
pleasant place, where my whole family like to go in
the mild days of autumn. They find everything
there: old Magpies’ nests, made of bundles of twigs;
Jays squabbling with each other, after filling their
crops with acorns on the oaks hard by; Rabbits
suddenly starting out of a rosemary bush, showing
their little white upturned tails. There is lovely sand
for the children to dig tunnels in, sand that is
easy to build into rows of huts which we thatch with
moss and top with a bit of reed by way of a chimney.
And when we are there we lunch off an apple to
the sound of the Æolian harps of the breezes softly
sighing through the pine-needles!
Yes, for the children it is a real paradise. The
grown-ups also enjoy it, and one of my chief enjoyments
is watching my Truffle-beetle. His burrows
may be seen here and there. The door is left open
and surrounded merely by a padding of sand. The
burrow is about nine inches deep, going straight
down in very loose soil. When I cut into it with a
knife, I often find that it is empty. The insect has
left during the night, having finished its business
there and gone to settle elsewhere. The Truffle-beetle
is a tramp, a night-walker, who leaves his
home whenever he feels like it and easily gets a new
one. Sometimes I do find the insect at the bottom
of the pit, always alone, sometimes a male, sometimes

a female, never two at the same time. The
burrow is not a house for the family; it is a sort of
bachelor house, dug for comfort only for the solitary
Beetle.
The Beetle in this house is clutching a small mushroom,
usually partly eaten. He will not part from
it. It is his treasure, his worldly goods. Scattered
crumbs tell us that we have caught him feasting.
When we take his prize away from him we find
that it is a sort of little underground mushroom,
closely related to the truffle.
This throws a light upon the habits of the Beetle
and his reason for making new burrows so often. In
the calm of the twilight, the little gadabout takes to
the fields, chirruping softly as he goes, cheering himself
with song. He explores the soil, questions it
as to its contents, just as the Dog does when hunting
for truffles. His sense of smell tells him when the
coveted morsel is underneath, covered by a few
inches of sand. Certain of the exact spot where the
thing lies, he digs straight down and never fails to
reach it. As long as the provisions last, he does not
go out again. Blissfully he feeds at the bottom of
the well he has dug to reach the mushroom. He
does not care whether his door is open or not.
When he has eaten all his food, he moves, looking
for more, and to find it he digs a new burrow,
which will be given up in its turn. Thus he spends
all autumn and the next spring, the seasons for mushrooms,
traveling from one of his little hotels to another.

This truffle which the Beetle hunts appears to have
no particular odor. How, then, can he detect it
from the ground over the place where it is buried?
He is a clever Beetle, and we do not know yet just
how he manages it.
Nowadays, people lay everything to heredity;
that is, they say that human beings and animals
both receive their special talents from their
ancestors, who have perhaps been developing them
through many generations. I do not altogether
agree with this theory. I am going to tell you my
own story to show that I did not inherit my passion
for insects from any of my ancestors.
Neither my grandfather nor my grandmother on
my mother’s side cared in the least about insects. I
did not know my grandfather, but I know that he had
a hard time making a living, and I am sure the only
attention he paid to an insect, if he met it, was to
crush it under his foot. Grandmother, who could
not even read, certainly cared nothing about science
or insects. If, sometimes, when rinsing her salad at
the tap, she found a Caterpillar on the lettuce leaves,

with a start of fright she would fling the loathsome
thing away.
My other grandparents, my father’s father and
mother, I knew well. Indeed, I went to live with
them when I was five or six years old, because my
father and mother were too poor to take care of me.
These grandparents lived on a poverty-stricken farm
away out in the country. They did not know how to
read; they had never opened a book in their lives.
Grandfather knew a great deal about cows and
sheep, but nothing about anything else. How dumfounded
he would have been to learn that, in the
distant future, one of his family would spend his
time studying insignificant insects! If he had guessed
that that lunatic was myself, seated at the table by
his side, what a smack I should have caught in the
neck!
“The idea of wasting one’s time with that nonsense!”
he would have thundered.
Grandmother, dear soul, was too busy with washing
the clothes, minding the children, seeing to the
meals of the household, spinning, attending to the
chickens, curds and whey, butter, and pickles, to
think of anything else. Sometimes, in the evenings,
she used to tell us stories, as we sat around the fire,
about the Wolf who lived on the moors. I should
have very much liked to see this Wolf, the hero of
so many tales that made our flesh creep, but I never
did. I owe a great deal to you, dear grandmother;
it was in your lap that I found consolation for my
first sorrows. You have handed down to me, perhaps,

a little of your physical vigor, a little of your
love for work; but certainly you did not give me
my love for insects.
Nor did either of my own parents. My mother
was quite illiterate; my father had been to school as
a child, he knew how to read and write a little, but
he was too busy making a living to have room for
any other cares. A good cuff or two when he saw
me pinning an insect to a cork was all the encouragement
I received from him.
And yet I began to observe, to inquire into things,
when I was still almost a baby. My first memories
of this tendency will amuse you. One day when I
was five or six years old I was standing on the moor
in front of our farm, clad in a soiled frieze frock
flapping against my bare heels: I remember the
handkerchief hanging from my waist by a bit of
string,—a handkerchief, I am sorry to say, often
lost and replaced by the back of my sleeve.
My face was turned toward the sun. The dazzling
splendor fascinated me. No Moth was ever more
attracted by the light of the lamp. As I stood there,
I was asking myself a question. With what was I
enjoying the glorious radiance, with my mouth or
my eyes? Reader, do not smile: this was true scientific
curiosity. I opened my mouth wide and closed
my eyes: the glory disappeared. I opened my eyes
and shut my mouth: the glory reappeared. I repeated
the performance, with the same result. The
question was solved: I had learned by deduction that
I see the sun with my eyes. Oh, what a discovery!

That evening, I told the whole house about it. Grandmother
smiled lovingly at my simplicity: the others
laughed at it.
Another find. At nightfall, amidst the neighboring
bushes, a sort of jingle attracted my attention,
sounding very faintly and softly through the evening
silence. Who is making that noise? Is it a little
Bird chirping in his nest? We must look into the
matter and that quickly. True, there is a Wolf, who
comes out of the woods at this time, so they tell me.
Let’s go all the same, but not too far: just there,
behind that clump of gloom.
I stand on the lookout for long, but all in vain.

At the faintest sound of movement in the brushwood,
the jingle ceases. I try again next day and the day
after. This time, my stubborn watch succeeds.
Whoosh! A grab of my hand and I hold the singer.
It is not a Bird; it is a kind of Grasshopper whose
hind-legs my playfellows have taught me to like; a
poor reward for my long hiding. The best part of
the business is not the two haunches with the shrimpy
flavor, but what I have just learned. I now know,
from personal observation, that the Grasshopper
sings. I did not tell of my discovery, for fear of
the same laughter that had greeted my story about
the sun.
Oh, what pretty flowers, in a field close to the
house! They seem to smile at me with their great
violet eyes. Later on, I see, in their place, bunches
of big red cherries. I taste them. They are not
nice and they have no stones. What can those cherries
be? At the end of the summer, grandfather
comes with a spade and turns my field topsy-turvy.
From underground there comes, by the basketful
and sackful, a sort of round root. I know that root;
it abounds in the house; time after time I have
cooked it in the peat-stove. It is the potato. Its
violet flower and its red fruit are pigeonholed for
good and all in my memory.
With an ever-watchful eye for animals and plants,
the future observer, the little six-year-old monkey,
practiced by himself, all unawares. He went to the
flower, he went to the insect, even as the Large
White Butterfly goes to the cabbage and the Red Admiral

to the thistle. He looked and inquired, drawn
by a curiosity whereof heredity did not know the
secret.
A little later on I am back in the village, in my
father’s house. I am now seven years old; and it
is high time that I went to school. Nothing could
have turned out better; the master is my godfather.
What shall I call the room in which I was to become
acquainted with the alphabet? It would be difficult
to find the exact word, because the room served for
every purpose. It was at once a school, a kitchen,
a bedroom, a dining-room and, at times, a chicken-house
and a piggery. Palatial schools were not
dreamed of in those days; any wretched hovel was
thought good enough.
A broad fixed ladder led to the floor above. Under
the ladder stood a big bed in a boarded recess.
What was there upstairs? I never quite knew. I
would see the master sometimes bring down an armful
of hay for the Ass, sometimes a basket of potatoes
which the housewife emptied into the pot in
which the little porkers’ food was cooked. It must
have been a sort of loft, a storehouse of provisions
for man and beast. Those two rooms were all there
were in the whole dwelling.
“The fire was not exactly lit for us.”
To return to the lower one, the schoolroom: a
window faces south, the only window in the house,
a low, narrow window whose frame you can touch at
the same time with your head and both your shoulders.
This sunny opening is the only lively spot in
the dwelling; it overlooks the greater part of the

village, which straggles along the slopes of a slanting
valley. In the window-recess is the master’s little
table.
The opposite wall contains a niche in which stands
a gleaming copper pail full of water. Here the
parched children can relieve their thirst when they
please, with a cup left within their reach. At the
top of the niche are a few shelves bright with pewter
plates, dishes, and drinking-vessels, which are taken
down from their sanctuary on great occasions only.
More or less everywhere, at any spot which the
light touches, are crudely colored pictures pasted on
the walls. Against the far wall stands the large
fireplace. In the middle is the hearth, but, on the
right and left, are two breast-high recesses, half
wood and half stone. Each of them is a bed, with a
mattress stuffed with chaff of winnowed corn. Two
sliding planks serve as shutters and close the chest if
the sleeper would be alone. These beds are used
by the favored ones of the house, the two boarders.
They must lie snug in there at night, with their shutters
closed, when the north wind howls at the mouth
of the dark valley and sends the snow awhirl. The
rest is occupied by the hearth and its accessories: the
three-legged stools; the salt-box, hanging against the
wall to keep its contents dry; the heavy shovel which
it takes two hands to wield; lastly, the bellows like
those with which I used to blow out my cheeks in
grandfather’s house. They are made of a mighty
branch of pine, hollowed throughout its length with
a red-hot iron. One blows through this channel.

With a couple of stones for supports, the master’s
bundle of sticks and our own logs blaze and flicker,
each of us having to bring a log of wood in the
morning, if he would share in the treat.
For that matter, the fire was not exactly lit for
us, but, above all, to warm a row of three pots in
which simmered the Pigs’ food, a mixture of potatoes
and bran. That, in spite of our each giving a
log, was the real object of the brushwood-fire. The
two boarders, on their stools, in the best places, and
we others sitting on our heels, formed a semicircle
around those big kettles, full to the brim and giving
off little jets of steam, with puff-puff-puffing sounds.
The bolder among us, when the master was not
looking, would dig a knife into a well-cooked potato
and add it to their bit of bread; for I must say that,
if we did little work in my school, at least we did a
deal of eating. It was the regular custom to crack
a few nuts and nibble at a crust while writing our
page or setting out our rows of figures.
We, the smaller ones, in addition to the comfort
of studying with our mouths full, had every now and
then two other delights, which were quite as good
as cracking nuts. The back-door gave upon the
yard where the Hen, surrounded by her brood of
Chicks, scratched, while the little Pigs, of whom
there were a dozen, wallowed in their stone trough.
This door would open sometimes to let one of us
out, a privilege which we abused, for the sly ones
among us were careful not to close it on returning.
Forthwith, the porkers would come running in, one

after the other, attracted by the smell of the boiled
potatoes. My bench, the one where the youngsters
sat, stood against the wall, under the copper pail,
and was right in the way of the Pigs. Up they came
trotting and grunting, curling their little tails; they
rubbed against our legs; they poked their cold pink
snouts into our hands in search of a scrap of crust;

they questioned us with their sharp little eyes to learn
if we happened to have a dry chestnut for them in
our pockets. When they had gone the round, some
this way and some that, they went back to the farmyard,
driven away by a friendly flick of the master’s
handkerchief.
Next came the visit of the Hen, bringing her
velvet-coated Chicks to see us. All of us eagerly
crumbled a little bread for our pretty visitors. We
vied with one another in calling them to us and
tickling with our fingers their soft and downy backs.
What could we learn in such a school as that!
Each of the younger pupils had, or rather was supposed
to have, in his hands a little penny book, the
alphabet, printed on gray paper. It began, on the
cover, with a Pigeon, or something like it. Next
came a cross, with the letters in their order. But,
if the little book was to be of any use, the master
should have shown us something about it. For
this, the worthy man, too much taken up with the
big ones, had not the time. He gave us the book
only to make us look like scholars. We were to
study it on our bench, to decipher it with the help
of our next neighbor, in case he might know one or
two of the letters. Our studying came to nothing,
being every moment disturbed by a visit to the potatoes
in the stew-pots, a quarrel among playmates
about a marble, the grunting invasion of the little
Pigs or the arrival of the Chicks.
The big ones used to write. They had the benefit
of the small amount of light in the room, by the

narrow window, and of the large and only table
with its circle of seats. The school supplied nothing,
not even a drop of ink; every one had to come
with a full set of utensils. The inkhorn of those days
was a long cardboard box divided into two parts.
The upper compartment held the pens, made of
goose- or turkey-quill trimmed with a penknife; the
lower contained, in a tiny well, ink made of soot
mixed with vinegar.
The master’s great business was to mend the pens—and
then to trace at the head of the white page a
line of strokes, single letters, or words, according to
the scholar’s capabilities. When that is over keep
an eye on the work of art which is coming to adorn
the copy! With what undulating movements of the
wrist does the master’s hand, resting on the little
finger, prepare and plan its flight! All at once the
hand starts off, flies, whirls; and lo and behold, under
the line of writing is unfurled a garland of
circles, spirals, and flourishes, framing a bird with
outspread wings, the whole, if you please, in red
ink, the only kind worthy of such a pen. Large and
small, we stood awestruck in the presence of these
marvels.
What was read at my school? At most, in French,
a few selections from sacred history. Latin came
oftener, to teach us to sing vespers properly.
And history, geography? No one ever heard of
them. What difference did it make to us whether
the earth was round or square! In either case, it was
just as hard to make it bring forth anything.

And grammar? The master troubled his head
very little about that; and we still less. And arithmetic?
Yes, we did a little of this, but not under
that learned name. We called it sums. On Saturday
evening, to finish up the week, there was a general
orgy of sums. The top boys stood up and, in a
loud voice, recited the multiplication table up to
twelve times. When this recital was over, the whole
class, the little ones included, took it up in chorus,
creating such an uproar that Chicks and porkers
took to flight if they happened to be there.
When all is said, our master was an excellent man
who could have kept school very well but for his
lack of one thing; and that was time. He managed
the property of an absentee landlord. He had under
his care an old castle with four towers, which had
become so many pigeon-houses; he directed the getting-in
of the hay, the walnuts, the apples and the
oats. We used to help him during the summer. Lessons
at that time were less dull. They were often
given on the hay or on the straw; oftener still, lesson-time
was spent in cleaning out the dove-cot or
stamping on the Snails that had sallied in rainy
weather from their fortresses, the tall box borders
of the garden belonging to the castle.
Our master was a barber. With his light hand,
which was so clever at beautifying our copies with
curlicue birds, he shaved the notabilities of the
place: the mayor, the parish-priest, the notary. Our
master was a bell-ringer. A wedding or a christening
interrupted the lessons; he had to ring a peal. A

gathering storm gave us a holiday; the great bell
must be tolled to ward off the lightning and the hail.
Our master was a choir-singer. Our master wound
up and regulated the village-clock. This was his
proudest duty. Giving a glance at the sun, to tell
the time more or less nearly, he would climb to the
top of the steeple, open a huge cage of rafters and
find himself in a maze of wheels and springs whereof
the secret was known to him alone.
With such a school and such a master and such
examples, what will become of my natural tastes, as
yet so undeveloped? In those surroundings, they
seem bound to perish, stifled forever. Yet no, the
germ has life; it works in my veins, never to leave
them again. It finds food everywhere, down to the
cover of my penny alphabet, beautified with a crude
picture of a Pigeon which I study much more
eagerly than the A B C. Its round eye, with its
circlet of dots, seems to smile upon me. Its wing, of
which I count the feathers one by one, tells me of
flights on high, among the beautiful clouds; it carries
me to the beeches raising their smooth trunks above
a mossy carpet studded with white mushrooms
that look like eggs, dropped by some wandering hen;
it takes me to the snow-clad peaks where the birds
leave the starry print of their red feet. He is a
fine fellow, my Pigeon-friend; he consoles me for the
woes hidden behind the cover of my book. Thanks
to him, I sit quietly on my bench and wait more or
less till school is over.
School out-of-doors has other charms. When the

master takes us to kill the Snails in the box borders,
I do not always do so. My heel sometimes hesitates
before coming down upon the handful which I have
gathered. They are so pretty! Just think, there
are yellow ones and pink, white ones and brown, all
with dark spiral streaks. I fill my pockets with the
handsomest, so as to feast my eyes on them at my
leisure.
On hay-making days in the master’s field, I strike
up an acquaintance with the Frog. Flayed and stuck
at the end of a split stick, he serves as bait to tempt
the Crayfish to come out of his retreat by the brook-side.

On the alder-trees I catch the Hoplia, the
splendid Beetle who pales the azure of the heavens.
I pick the narcissus and learn to gather, with the tip
of my tongue, the tiny drop of honey that lies right
at the bottom of the cleft corolla. I also learn that
too-long indulgence in this feast brings a headache;
but this discomfort in no way impairs my admiration
for the glorious white flower, which wears a
narrow red collar at the throat of its funnel.
When we go to beat the walnut-trees, the barren
grass-plots provide me with Locusts spreading their
wings, some into a blue fan, others into a red. And
thus the country school, even in the heart of winter,
furnished continuous food for my interest in things.
My passion for animals and plants made progress
of itself.
What did not make progress was my acquaintance
with my letters, greatly neglected in favor
of the Pigeon. I was still at the same stage,
hopelessly behindhand with the alphabet, when
my father, by a chance inspiration, brought me
home from the town what was to give me a start
along the road of reading. It was a large print,
price three cents, colored and divided into compartments
in which animals of all sorts taught the A B C
by means of the first letters of their names. You
began with the sacred beast, the Donkey, whose
name, Âne, with a big initial, taught me the letter A.
The Bœuf, the Ox, stood for B; the Canard, the
Duck, told me about C; the Dindon, the Turkey,
gave me the letter D. And so on with the rest. A

few compartments, it is true, were lacking in clearness.
I had no friendly feeling for the Hippopotamus,
the Kamichi, or Horned Screamer, and the
Zebu, who aimed at making me say H, K, and Z.
No matter; father came to my aid in hard cases; and
I made such rapid progress that, in a few days, I
was able to turn in good earnest the pages of my little
Pigeon-book, hitherto so undecipherable. I was
initiated; I knew how to spell. My parents marveled.
I can explain this unexpected progress to-day.
Those speaking pictures, which brought me
amongst my friends the beasts, were in harmony
with my tastes. I have the animals to thank for
teaching me to read. Animals forever!
Luck favored me a second time. As a reward for
learning to read, I was given La Fontaine’s Fables,
in a popular, cheap edition, crammed with pictures,
small, I admit, and very inaccurate, but still delightful.
Here were the Crow, the Fox, the Wolf, the
Magpie, the Frog, the Rabbit, the Donkey, the Dog,
the Cat; all persons of my acquaintance. The glorious
book was immensely to my taste, with its skimpy
illustrations in which the animals walked and talked.
As to understanding what it said, that was another
story! Never mind, my lad! Put together syllables
that say nothing to you as yet; they will speak to you
later and La Fontaine will always remain your
friend.
I come to the time when I was ten years old and
at Rodez College. I was well thought of in the
school, for I cut a good figure in composition and

translation. In that classical atmosphere, there was
talk of Procas, King of Alba, and of his two sons,
Numitor and Amulius. We heard of Cynœgirus, the
strong-jawed man, who, having lost his two hands in
battle, seized and held a Persian galley with his
teeth, and of Cadmus the Phœnician, who sowed a
dragon’s teeth as though they were beans and gathered
his harvest in the shape of a host of armed men,
who killed one another as they rose up from the
ground. The only one who survived the slaughter
was one as tough as leather, presumably the son of
the big back grinder-tooth.
Had they talked to me about the man in the moon,
I could not have been more startled. I made up for
it with my animals. While admiring Cadmus and
Cynœgirus, I hardly ever failed, on Sundays and
Thursdays, to go and see if the cowslip or the yellow
daffodil was making its appearance in the meadows,
if the Linnet was hatching on the juniper-bushes, if
the Cockchafers were plopping down from the wind-shaken
poplars.
By easy stages I came to Virgil and was very
much smitten with Melibœus, Corydon, Menalcas,
Damœtas and the rest of them. Within the frame
in which the characters moved were exquisite details
concerning the Bee, the Cicada, the Turtle-dove,
the Crow, the Nanny-goat, and the golden broom. A
real delight were these stories of the fields, sung in
sonorous verse; and the Latin poet left a lasting impression
on my classical recollections.
Then, suddenly, good-by to my studies, good-by

to Tityrus and Menalcas. Ill-luck is swooping down
on us, relentlessly. Hunger threatens us at home.
And now, boy, put your trust in God; run about and
earn your penn’orth of potatoes as best you can.
Life is about to become a hideous inferno. Let us
pass quickly over this phase.
During this sad time, my love for the insects
ought to have gone under. Not at all. I still remember
a certain Pine Cockchafer met for the first time.
The plumes on her antennæ, her pretty pattern of
white spots on a dark-brown ground, were as a ray
of sunshine in the gloomy wretchedness of the day.
To cut a long story short: good fortune, which
never abandons the brave, brought me to the primary
normal school at Vaucluse, where I was certain
of food: dried chestnuts and chick-peas. The
principal, a man of broad views, soon came to trust
his new assistant. He left me practically a free
hand so long as I satisfied the school curriculum,
which was very modest in those days. I was a little
ahead of my fellow-pupils. I took advantage of this

to get some order into my vague knowledge of plants
and animals. While a dictation lesson was being corrected
around me, I would examine, in the recesses
of my desk, the oleander’s fruit, the snap-dragon’s
seed-vessel, the Wasp’s sting and the Ground-beetle’s
wing-case.
With this foretaste of natural science, picked up
haphazard and secretly, I left school more deeply in
love than ever with insects and flowers. And yet I
had to give it all up. Natural history could not bring
me anywhere. The schoolmasters of the time despised
it; Latin, Greek, and mathematics were the
subjects to study.
So I flung myself with might and main into higher
mathematics: a hard battle, if ever there was one,
without teachers, face to face for days on end with
abstruse problems. Next I studied the physical
sciences in the same manner, with an impossible laboratory,
the work of my own hands. I went against
my feelings: I buried my natural-history books at
the bottom of my trunk.
And so, in the end, I am sent to teach physics and
chemistry at Ajaccio College. This time, the temptation
is too much for me. The sea, with its wonders,
the beach, covered with beautiful shells, the
myrtles, arbutus, and other trees; all this paradise
of gorgeous nature is more attractive than geometry
and trigonometry. I give up. I divide my spare time
into two parts. The larger part is devoted to mathematics,
by which I expect to make my way in the

world; the other is spent, with much misgiving, in
botanizing and looking for the treasures of the sea.
We never know what will happen to us. Mathematics,
on which I spent so much time in my youth,
has been of hardly any good to me; and animals,
which I avoided as much as ever I could, are the
consolation of my old age.
I met two famous scientists in Ajaccio: Requien, a
well-known botanist, and Moquin-Tandom, who gave
me my first lesson in natural history. He stayed at
my house, as the hotel was full. The day before he
left he said to me:
“You interest yourself in shells. That is something,
but it is not enough. You must look into the
animal itself. I will show you how it’s done.”
He took a sharp pair of scissors from the family
work-basket and a couple of needles, and showed me
the anatomy of a snail in a soup-plate filled with
water. Gradually he explained and sketched the organs
which he spread before my eyes. This was
the only, the never-to-be-forgotten lesson in natural
history that I ever received in my life.
It is time to finish this story about myself. It
shows that from early childhood I have felt drawn
towards the things of nature. I have the gift of observation.
Why and how? I do not know.
We have all of us, men and animals, some special
gift. One child takes to music, another is always
modeling things out of clay; another is quick at figures.
It is the same way with insects. One kind of
Bee can cut leaves; another builds clay houses, Spiders

know how to make webs. These gifts exist because
they exist, and that is all any one can say. In
human beings, we call the special gift genius. In an
insect, we call it instinct. Instinct is the animal’s
genius.
In the disagreeable season of the year, when the
insect has nothing to do and retires to winter
quarters, an observer who looks in the sunny nooks,
grubs in the sand, lifts the stones, or searches the
brushwood, will often find something very interesting,
a real work of art. Happy are they who can
appreciate such treasures! I wish them all the joys
they have brought me and will continue to bring me,
in spite of the vexations of life, which grow ever
more bitter as the years follow their swift downward
course.
Should the seekers rummage among the wild
grasses in the willow-beds and thickets, I wish them
the delight of finding the wonderful object that, at
this moment, lies before my eyes. It is the work of
a Spider, the nest of the Banded Spider.
In bearing and coloring, this Spider is among the
handsomest that I know. On her fat body, nearly

as large as a hazel-nut, are alternate yellow, black,
and silver sashes, to which she owes her name of
Banded. Her eight long legs, with their dark-brown
and pale-brown rings, surround her body like the
spokes of a wheel.
Any small prey suits her; and, as long as she can
find supports for her web, she settles wherever the
Locust hops, wherever the Fly hovers, wherever the
Dragon-fly dances or the Butterfly flits. Usually, because
of the greater abundance of game there, she
spreads her web across some brooklet, from bank to
bank, among the rushes. She also stretches it
sometimes in the thickets of evergreen oak, on the
slopes with the scrubby grass, dear to Grasshoppers.
Her hunting-weapon is a large upright web, whose
outer boundary is fastened to the neighboring
branches by a number of moorings. Her web is like
that of the other weaving Spiders. Straight threads
run out like spokes of a wheel from a central point.
Over these runs a continuous spiral thread, forming
chords, or cross-bars, from the center to the circumference.
It is magnificently large and magnificently
symmetrical.
In the lower part of the web, starting from the
center, a thick wide ribbon descends zigzag-wise
across the spokes. This is the Spider’s trademark,
the way she signs her work of art. Also, the strong
silk zigzag gives greater firmness to the web.
The net needs to be firm to hold the heavy insects
that light on it. The Spider cannot pick and
choose her prizes. Seated motionless in the center

of the web, her eight legs widespread to feel the
shaking of the network in any direction, she waits
for what luck will bring her: sometimes some giddy
weak thing unable to control its flight, sometimes
some powerful prey rushing headlong with a reckless
bound.
The Locust in particular, the fiery Locust, who
releases the spring of his long shanks at random,
often falls into the trap. One imagines that his
strength ought to frighten the Spider; the kick of his
spurred legs should enable him to make a hole then
and there in the web and to get away. But not
at all. If he does not free himself at the first effort,
the Locust is lost.

Turning her back on the game, the Banded Spider
works all her spinnerets—the spinneret is the organ
with which she makes her silk, and is pierced with
tiny holes like the mouth of a watering-pot—at one
and the same time. She gathers the silky spray with
her hind-legs, which are longer than the others and
open wide apart to allow the silk to spread. In this
way the Spider obtains not a thread but a rainbow-colored
sheet, a sort of clouded fan wherein the
threads are kept almost separate. Her two hind-legs
fling this sheet, or shroud, by rapid alternate
armfuls, while, at the same time, they turn the Locust
over and over, swathing it completely.
The gladiator of old times, when forced to fight
against powerful wild beasts, appeared in the ring
with a rope-net folded over his left shoulder. The
animal made its spring. The man, with a sudden
movement of his right arm, cast the net as a fisherman
does; he covered the beast and tangled it in
the meshes. A thrust of the trident, or three-pronged
spear, gave the finishing touch to the vanquished
foe.
The Spider works in the same way, with this advantage,
that she can renew her armful of fetters.
If the first is not enough, a second instantly follows,
and another and yet another until she has used up all
her silk.
When all movement ceases under the snowy winding-sheet,
the Spider goes up to her bound prisoner.
She has a better weapon than the gladiator’s three-pronged
spear: she has her poison-fangs. She gnaws

at the Locust. When she has finished, she flings the
clean-bled remains out of the net and returns to her
waiting-place in the centre of the web.
The Spiders show their great talents even better
in the business of motherhood than in their hunting.
The silk bag, the nest, in which the Banded Spider
houses her eggs, is a much greater marvel than the
bird’s nest. In shape it is a balloon turned upside
down, nearly the size of a pigeon’s egg. The top
tapers like a pear and is cut short and crowned with
a scalloped rim, the corners of which are lengthened
by means of moorings that fasten the nest to the
near-by twigs. The whole, a graceful egg-shaped
object, hangs straight down among a few threads
that steady it.
The top of the Spider’s nest is hollowed into a
bowl closed with a silky padding. Covering all the
rest of the nest is a wrapper of thick, compact white

satin, adorned with ribbons and patterns of brown
and even black silk. We know at once the use of
this satin wrapper; it is a waterproof cover which
neither dew nor rain can penetrate.
The Spider’s nest, down among the dead grasses,
close to the ground, must protect its contents from
the winter cold. Let us cut the wrapper with our
scissors. Underneath, we find a thick layer of reddish-brown
silk, not worked into a fabric this time,
but puffed into an extra-fine wadding. This is a comforter,
a quilt, for the Spider’s babies, softer than
any swan’s down and warm as toast.
In the middle of this quilt hangs a cylindrical
pocket, round at the bottom, cut square at the top
and closed with a padded lid. It is made of extremely
fine satin; it holds the Spider’s eggs, pretty
little orange-colored beads, which, glued together,
form a little globe the size of a pea. These are the
treasures which must be guarded against the
weather.
When the Spider is making her pouch she moves
slowly round and round, paying out a single thread.
The hind-legs draw it out and place it in position
on that which is already done. Thus is formed the
satin bag. Guy-ropes bind it to the nearest threads
and keep it stretched, especially at the mouth. The
bag is just large enough to hold all the eggs, without
any room left over.
When the Spider has laid her eggs, she begins to
work her spinneret once more, but in a different
manner. Her body sinks and touches a point, goes

back, sinks again and touches another point, first
here, then there, making confused zigzags. At the
same time, the hind-legs tread the material given
out. The result is not a woven cloth, but a sort of
felt, a blanketing.
To make the eider-down quilt, she turns out reddish-brown
silk, finer than the other and coming out
in clouds which she beats into a sort of froth with
her hind-legs. The egg-pocket disappears, drowned
in this exquisite wadding.

Again she changes her material, making the white
silk of the outer wrapper. Already the bag has
taken its balloon shape, tapering towards the neck.
She now decorates the nest with brown markings,
making for this purpose still a different kind of silk,
varying in color from russet to black. When this
is done, the work is finished.
What a wonderful silk-factory the Spider runs!
With a very simple and never-varying plant, consisting
of her own hind-legs and spinnerets, she produces,
by turns, rope-maker’s, spinner’s, weaver’s,
ribbon-maker’s and felt-maker’s work. How does
she do it? How can she obtain, as she wishes, skeins
of different colors and grades? How does she turn
them out, first in this fashion, then in that? I see
the results, but I do not understand the machinery
and still less the process. It beats me altogether.
When the Spider has finished her nest, she moves
away with slow strides, without giving a glance at
the bag. The rest does not interest her: time and
the sun will hatch the eggs. By weaving the house
for her children she has used up all her silk. If
she returned to her web now, she would not have
any with which to bind her prey. Besides, she no
longer has any appetite. Withered and languid, she
drags out her existence for a few days and, at last,
dies. This is how things happen when I keep the
Spiders in my cages; this is how they must happen
in the brushwood.
The pretty orange-yellow eggs of the Banded
Spider number above five hundred. They are inclosed,
you will remember, in a white-satin nest, in
which there is no opening of any kind. How will
the little Spiders get out, when their time comes
and their mother is not there to help them?
The animal and vegetable kingdoms are sometimes
very much alike. The Spider’s nest seems to
me like an animal fruit, which holds eggs instead of
seeds. Now seeds have all sorts of ways of scattering.
The fruit of the garden balsam, when ripe,
splits, at the least touch, into five fleshy valves, which
curl up and shoot their seeds to a distance. You all
know the jewel-weeds, or touch-me-nots, along the
wayside, whose seed pods explode when you touch
them. Then there are light seeds, like the dandelion,
which have tufts or plumes to carry them away.
The “keys” of the elm are formed of a broad, light
fan with the seed cased in the center; those of the
maple are joined in pairs and are like the unfurled
wings of a bird; those of the ash, carved like the
blade of an oar, perform the most distant journeys
when driven before the storm. Like the plant, the
insect also sometimes has ways of shooting its large
families out into the world. You will notice this
in the case of many Spiders, and particularly this
Banded Spider.
As March comes on the Spiders begin to hatch out

inside the nest. If we cut it open with the scissors
we shall find some scattered over the eider-down outside
the center room, and some still in the orange
eggs. The little Spiders have not got their beautiful
banded dresses yet; they are pale yellow on
top, with black-rimmed eyes, and white and brown
underneath. They stay in the outer room of the
nest for four months, during which time their bodies
harden and they grow mature.
When June and July come, they are anxious to be
off, but they cannot make a hole in the tough fabric
of the nest. Never mind, the nest will open of
itself, like a ripe seed-pod. Some day, when the
sun is very hot, the satin bursts. Some of the Spiderlings,
all mixed up with their flossy mattress, shoot
out of the balloon. They are in frantic commotion.
Others stay inside the nest and come out in
their own good time. But as they come out, all
of them climb up the near-by twigs and send out
little threads which float, break, and fly away, carrying
the tiny Spiders with them. You shall hear
more about these flying machines of the young
Spiders in the next chapters.
The Spider has a bad name: most of us think
her a horrid animal, and hasten to crush her
under our feet. Nevertheless, any one who observes
her knows that she is a hard worker, a talented
weaver, a wily huntress, and very interesting in other
ways. Yes, the Spider is well worth studying, apart
from any scientific reasons; but she is said to be
poisonous, and that is her crime and the main reason
why we hate her. She is poisonous, in a way, if
by that we understand that the animal is armed with
two fangs which cause the immediate death of the
little victims that she catches; but there is a great
difference between killing a Midge and harming a
Man. However quickly the Spider’s poison kills
insects, it is not as a rule serious for us and causes
less trouble than a gnat-bite. That, at least, is what
we can safely say about the great majority of Spiders.
Nevertheless, a few are to be feared. The Italians

say that the Tarantula produces convulsions
and frenzied dances in the person stung by her.
Music is the only cure for this, and they tell us some
tunes are better than others. The tarantella,
a lively dance, probably owes its name to this idea
of the Italian peasants. The story makes us feel
like laughing, but, after all, the bite of the Tarantula
may possibly bring on some nervous trouble which
music will relieve; and possibly a very energetic
dance makes the patient break out into a perspiration
and so get rid of the poison.
The most powerful Spider in my neighborhood,
the Black-bellied Tarantula, will presently show us
what her poison can do. But first I will introduce
her to you in her home, and tell you about her hunting.
This Tarantula is dressed in black velvet on the
lower surface, with brown stripes on the abdomen
and gray and white rings around the legs. Her
favorite dwelling-place is the dry, pebbly ground,
covered with sun-scorched thyme. In my plot of
waste ground, there are quite twenty of these Spiders’
burrows. I hardly ever pass by one of these
haunts without giving a glance down the pit where
gleam, like diamonds, the four great eyes, the four
telescopes of the hermit. The four other eyes,
which are much smaller, are not visible at that depth.
The Tarantula’s dwellings are pits about a foot
deep, dug by herself with her fangs, going straight
down at first and then bent elbow-wise. They are
about an inch wide. On the edge of the hole stands

a curb, formed of straw, bits and scraps of all sorts,
and even small pebbles, the size of a hazel-nut. The
whole is kept in place and cemented with the Spider’s
silk. Sometimes this curb, or little tower, is an inch
high; sometimes it is a mere rim.
I wished to catch some of these Spiders, so I
waved a spikelet of grass at the entrance of the
burrow to imitate the humming of a Bee. I expected
that the Tarantula would rush out, thinking she
heard a prey. My scheme did not succeed. The
Tarantula, indeed, came a little way up her tube to
find out the meaning of the sounds at her door; but
she soon scented a trap; she remained motionless at
mid-height and would not come any farther.
I found that the best method to secure the wily
Tarantula was to procure a supply of live Bumble-bees.
I put one into a little bottle with a mouth
just wide enough to cover the opening of the burrow;
and I turned the apparatus thus baited over
the opening. The powerful Bee at first fluttered and
hummed about her glass prison; then, seeing a burrow
like that made by her own family, she went into
it without much hesitation. She was very foolish:
while she went down, the Spider came up; and the
meeting took place in the perpendicular passage.
For a few moments, I heard a sort of death-song:
it was the humming of the poor Bumble-bee. This
was followed by a long silence. I removed the bottle
and explored the pit with a pair of pincers.
I brought out the Bumble-bee, motionless, dead.
A terrible tragedy must have happened. The Spider

followed, refusing to let go so rich a booty. Game
and huntress were brought outside the hole, which I
stopped up with a pebble. Outside her own house
the Tarantula is timid and hardly able to run away.
To push her with a straw into a paper bag was the
work of a second. Soon I had a colony of Tarantulas
in my laboratory.
I did not give the Tarantula the Bee merely in
order to capture her. I wished to know also her
manner of hunting. I knew that she is one of those
insects who live from day to day on what they kill.
She does not store up preserved food for her children,
like the Beetles; she is not a “paralyzer,” like
the Wasps you have read about, who cleverly spare

their game so as to leave it a glimmer of life and
keep it fresh for weeks at a time; she is a killer,
who makes a meal off her capture on the spot. I
wished to find out how she kills them so quickly.
She does not go in for peaceable game. The big
Grasshopper, with the powerful jaws, the Bee and
other wearers of poisoned daggers must fall into her
hole from time to time, and the duel she fights with
them is nearly equal as far as weapons go. For the
poisonous fangs of the Spider the Wasp has her
poisoned dagger or sting. Which of the two bandits
shall have the best of it? The Tarantula has no
second means of defense, no cord to bind her victim,
as the Garden Spiders have. These cover the
captives with their silk, making all resistance impossible.
The Tarantula has a riskier job. She has
only her courage and her fangs, and she must leap
upon her dangerous prey and kill it quickly. She
must know exactly where to strike, for, strong
though her poison is, I cannot believe it would kill
the prey instantly at any point where she happens
to bite. She must bite in some spot of vital importance.
Instead of with the Bumble-bee, who enters the
Spider’s burrow, I wish to make the Tarantula fight
with some other insect, who will stay above ground.
For this purpose I take one of the largest and most
powerful Bees that I can find, the Carpenter-bee,
clad in black velvet, with wings of purple gauze.
She is nearly an inch long; her sting is very painful
and produces a swelling that hurts for a long time.
I know, because I have been stung. Here indeed is
a foe worthy of the Tarantula.
I catch several Carpenter-bees, place them one
by one in bottles, and choose a strong, bold Tarantula,
one moreover who appears to be very hungry.
I put the bottle baited with a Carpenter-bee upside
down over her door. The Bee buzzes gravely in
her glass bell; the Spider comes up from the recesses
of her cave; she is on the threshold, but inside;
she looks; she waits. I also wait. The quarters,
the half-hours pass; nothing happens. The
Spider goes down again: she probably thought the

attempt too dangerous. I try in this way three more
Tarantulas, but cannot make them leave their lairs.
At last I have better success. A Spider suddenly
rushes from her hole: she is unusually warlike,
doubtless because she is very hungry. She attacks
the Bee in the bottle, and the combat lasts for but
the twinkling of an eye. The sturdy Carpenter-bee
is dead. Where did the murderess strike her?
Right in the nape of the neck; her fangs are still
there. She has the knowledge which I suspected:
she has bitten the only point she could bite to produce
sudden death. She has struck the center of
the victim’s nervous system.
I make more experiments and find that it is only
once in a while that the Tarantula will come out to
fight the Carpenter-bee, but each time that she
does so she kills it in the same way. The reason of
the Tarantula’s hesitation is plain. An insect of
this kind cannot be seized recklessly: the Tarantula
who missed her strike by biting at random would do
so at the risk of her life. Stung in any other place,
the Bee might live for hours and manage to sting
her foe with her poisoned dagger. The Spider is
well aware of this. In the safe shelter of her
threshold she watches for the right moment; she
waits for the big Bee to face her, when the neck is
easily grabbed.
The Tarantula’s poison is a pretty dangerous
weapon, as we shall see. I make a Tarantula bite
the leg of a young, well-fledged Sparrow, ready to
leave the nest. A drop of blood flows; the wounded
spot is surrounded by a reddish circle, changing to
purple. The bird almost immediately loses the use
of its leg, which drags, with the toes doubled in; it
hops upon the other leg. Aside from this, the patient
does not seem to trouble much about his hurt;
his appetite is good. My daughters feed him on
Flies, bread-crumb, apricot-pulp. He is sure to get
well; he will recover his strength; the poor victim

of the curiosity of science will be restored to liberty.
This is the wish and intention of us all. Twelve
hours later, we are still more hopeful; the invalid
takes nourishment readily; he clamors for it, if we
keep him waiting. Two days after, he refuses his
food. Wrapping himself stoically in his rumpled
feathers, the Sparrow hunches into a ball, now motionless,
now twitching. My girls take him in the
hollow of their hands and warm him with their
breath. The spasms become more frequent. A
gasp tells us that all is over. The bird is dead.
There is a certain coolness among us at the
evening meal. I read silent reproaches, because of
my experiment, in the eyes of the home-circle; I
know they think me cruel. The death of the unfortunate
Sparrow has saddened the whole family.
I myself feel remorseful: what I have found out
seems to me too dearly bought.
Nevertheless, I had the courage to try again with
a Mole who was caught stealing from our lettuce-beds.
I put him in a cage and fed him on a varied
diet of insects—Beetles and Grasshoppers. He
crunched them up with a fine appetite. Twenty-four
hours of this life convinced me that the Mole was
making the best of the bill of fare and taking kindly
to his captivity.
I made the Tarantula bite him at the tip of the
snout. When put back in his cage, the Mole kept
on scratching his nose with his broad paws. The
thing seemed to burn, to itch. From now on, he ate
less and less of the store of insects: on the evening

of the following day, he refused them altogether.
About thirty-six hours after being bitten, the Mole
died during the night, and certainly not from starvation,
for there were still many live insects in the
cage.
The bite of my Tarantula is therefore dangerous
to other animals than insects: it is fatal to the Sparrow,
it is fatal to the Mole. I did not make any
more experiments, but I should say that people had
better beware of the bite of this Spider. It is not
to be trifled with.
Think, just for a moment, of the skill of the
Spider, the insect-killer, as contrasted with the skill
of the Wasps, the insect-paralyzers. These insect-killers,
who live on their prey, strike the game dead
at once by stinging the nerve-centers of the neck;
the paralyzers, on the other hand, who wish to keep
the food fresh for their larvæ, destroy the power
of movement by stinging the game in the other nerve-centers,
lower down. They do not acquire this
knowledge, they have it as soon as they are born.
And they teach those of us who think that there is
something behind it all, that there is Some One who
has planned things for insects and men alike.
From the Tarantulas whom I have captured and
placed in pans filled with earth in my laboratory, I
learn still more about their hunting. They are really

magnificent, these captives. With their great bodies
inside their burrows, their heads outside, their glassy
eyes staring, their legs gathered for a spring, for
hours and hours they wait, motionless, bathing luxuriously
in the sun.
Should a titbit to her liking happen to pass, at
once the watcher darts from her tall tower, swift as
an arrow from the bow. With a dagger-thrust in
the neck, she stabs the Locust, Dragon-fly, or other
prey; and she as quickly climbs her tower and retires
with her capture. The performance is a wonderful
exhibition of skill and speed.
She very seldom misses the game, provided that
it pass at a convenient distance, within reach of her
bound. But if it be farther away she takes no notice
of it. Scorning to go in pursuit, she allows it to
roam at will.
This proves that the Tarantula has great patience,
for the burrow has nothing that can serve to attract
victims. At best, refuge provided by the tower
may, once in a long while, tempt some weary wayfaring
insect to use it as a resting-place. But, if
the game does not come to-day, it is sure to come
to-morrow, the next day, or later, for there are many
Locusts hopping in the waste land, and they are not
always able to regulate their leaps. Some day or
other, chance is bound to bring one of them near
the burrow. Then the Spider springs upon the victim
from the ramparts. Until then, she stoically
watches and fasts. She will dine when she can; but
she will finally dine.

The Tarantula really does not suffer much from
a long fast. She has an accommodating stomach,
which is satisfied to be gorged to-day and to remain
empty afterwards for goodness knows how long.
When I had the Spiders in my laboratory, I sometimes
neglected to feed them for weeks at a time,
and they were none the worse for it. After they
have fasted a long time, they do not pine away, but
are smitten with a wolf-like hunger.
In her youth, before she has a burrow, the Tarantula
earns her living in another manner. Clad in
gray like her elders, but without the black-velvet
apron which she receives on reaching the marriageable
age, she roams among the stubby grass. This
is true hunting. When the right kind of game heaves
in sight, the Spider pursues it, drives it from its shelters,
follows it hot-foot. The fugitive gains the
heights, and makes as though to fly away. He has
not the time. With an upward leap, the Tarantula
grabs him before he can rise.
I am charmed with the quick way in which my
year-old Spider boarders seize the Flies that I
provide for them. In vain does the Fly take refuge a
couple of inches up, on some blade of grass. With
a sudden spring into the air, the Spider pounces on
her prey. No Cat is quicker in catching her Mouse.
But these are the feats of youth not handicapped
by fatness. Later, when the bag of eggs has to be
trailed along, the Tarantula cannot indulge in gymnastics.
She then digs herself her hunting-lodge,

and sits in her watch-tower, on the lookout for
game.
You will be surprised to hear how devoted this terrible
Tarantula is to her family.
Early one morning in August, I found a Tarantula
spinning on the ground a silk network covering
an extent about as large as the palm of one’s hand.
It was coarse and shapeless, but firmly fixed. This is
the floor on which the Spider means to work. It
will protect her nest from the sand.
On this floor she weaves a round mat, about the
size of a fifty-cent piece and made of superb white
silk. She thickens the outer part of it, until it becomes
a sort of bowl, surrounded by a wide, flat
edge. Upon this bowl she lays her eggs. These she
covers with silk. The result is a pill set in the middle
of a circular carpet.

With her legs she takes up and breaks off one by
one the threads that keep the round mat stretched
on the coarse floor. At the same time, she grips this
sheet with her fangs, lifts it by degrees, tears it from
its base, and folds it over upon the globe of eggs. It
is hard work. The whole thing totters, the floor collapses,
heavy with sand. The Tarantula, by a movement
of her legs, casts these soiled shreds aside.
She pulls with her fangs and sweeps with her broom-like
legs, till she has pulled away her bag of eggs.
It is like a white-silk pill, soft and sticky to the
touch, as big as an average cherry. If you look
closely, you will notice, running horizontally around
the middle, a fold which a needle is able to raise
without breaking it. This is the edge of the circular
mat, drawn over the lower half of the bag. The
upper half, through which the young Tarantulas
will go out, is less well protected: its only wrapper
is the silk spun over the eggs immediately after they
were laid.
Inside, there is nothing but the eggs: no mattress,
no soft eider down, like that of the Banded
Spider. This Tarantula has no need to guard her
eggs against the weather, for the hatching will take
place long before the cold weather comes.
The mother has been busy the whole morning over
her bag. Now she is tired. She embraces her dear
pill and remains motionless. I shall see her no more
to-day. Next morning I find the Spider carrying her
bag of eggs slung behind her.
For three weeks and more the Tarantula trails

the bag of eggs hanging to her spinnerets. When
she comes up from her shaft to lean upon the curb
and bask in the sun, when she suddenly retires underground
in the face of danger, and when she is
roaming the country before settling down, she never
lets go her precious bag, though it is a very inconvenient
burden in walking, climbing or leaping. If,
by some accident, it become detached from the fastening
to which it is hung, she flings herself madly
on her treasure and lovingly embraces it, ready to
bite the person who would take it from her. She
restores the pill to its place with a quick touch of
her spinnerets, and strides off, still threatening.
Towards the end of summer, every morning, as
soon as the sun is hot, the Tarantulas come up from
the bottom of their burrows with their bags and station
themselves at the opening. Earlier in the season
they have taken long naps on the threshold in
the sun in the middle of the day; but now they ascend
for a different reason. Before, the Tarantula
came out into the sun for her own sake. Leaning
on the parapet, she had the front half of her body
outside the pit and the back half inside. Her eyes
took their fill of light; the body remained in the
dark. When carrying her egg-bag the Spider reverses
her position: the front is in the pit, the rear
outside. With her hind-legs she holds the white
pill, bulging with germs, lifted above the entrance;
gently she turns and re-turns it, so as to present every
side to the life-giving rays of the sun. And this
goes on for half the day, as long as the temperature

is high; and it is repeated daily, with exquisite patience,
during three or four weeks. To hatch its
eggs, the bird covers them with the quilt of its
breast; it strains them to the furnace of its heart.
The Tarantula turns hers in front of the hearth of
hearths: she gives them the sun as an incubator.
In the early days of September, the young ones,
who have been some time hatched, are ready to come
out. The pill rips open along the middle fold. We
have read of this fold. Does the mother, feeling
the brood quicken inside the satin wrapper, herself
break open the vessel at the right moment? It
seems probable. On the other hand, it may burst
of itself, as does the Banded Spider’s balloon, a
tough wallet which opens a breach of its own accord,
long after the mother has ceased to exist.

As they come out of the pill, the little Tarantulas,
to the number of about a couple of hundred, clamber
on the mother Tarantula’s back and there sit
motionless, jammed close together, forming a sort
of bark of mingled legs and bodies. The mother
cannot be recognized under this live cloak. When
the hatching is over, the wallet is loosened from the
spinnerets and cast aside as a worthless rag.
The little ones are very good: none stirs, none
tries to get more room for himself at his neighbor’s
expense. What are they doing there, so quietly?
They allow themselves to be carted about, like the
young of the Opossum. Whether she sit in long
meditation at the bottom of her den, or come to the
opening, in mild weather, to bask in the sun, the
Tarantula never throws off her greatcoat of swarming
youngsters until the fine season comes.
If, in the middle of winter, in January, or February,
I happen, out in the fields, to ransack the Spider’s
dwelling, after the rain, snow, and frost have
battered it and, as a rule, destroyed the curb at
the entrance, I always find her at home, still full of
vigor, still carrying her family. This upbringing
of her youngsters on her back lasts five or six
months at least, without interruption. The celebrated
American carrier, the Opossum, who lets
her children go after a few weeks’ carting, cuts a
poor figure beside the Tarantula.
“Does she help them to regain their place on her back?”
What do the little ones eat on their mother’s
spine? Nothing, so far as I know. I do not see
them grow larger. I find them, when they finally

leave to shift for themselves, just as they were when
they left the bag.
During the bad season, the mother herself eats
very little. At long intervals she accepts, in my
jars, a belated Locust, whom I have captured, for
her benefit, in the sunnier nooks. In order to keep
herself in condition, as she is when she is dug up in
the course of my winter excavations, she must therefore
sometimes break her fast and come out in
search of prey, without, of course, discarding her
live cloak of youngsters.
The expedition has its dangers. The little Spiders
may be brushed off by a blade of grass. What
becomes of them when they have a fall? Does the
mother give them a thought? Does she help them
to regain their place on her back? Not at all.
The affection of a Spider’s heart, divided among
some hundreds, can spare but a very feeble portion
to each. The Tarantula hardly troubles, whether
one youngster fall from his place, or six, or all of
them. She waits quietly for the victims of the mishap
to get out of their own difficulty, which they do
for that matter, and very nimbly.
I sweep the whole family from the back of one of
my boarders with a hair-pencil. Not a sign of
emotion, not an attempt at search on the part of the
mother. After trotting about a little on the sand,
the dislodged youngsters find, these here, those there,
one or another of the mother’s legs, spread wide in
a circle. By means of these climbing-poles they
swarm to the top, and soon the group on the mother’s

back resumes its original form. Not one of the
lot is missing. The Tarantula’s sons know their
trade as acrobats to perfection: the mother need not
trouble her head about their fall.
Does the Tarantula at least feed the youngsters
who, for seven months, swarm upon her back? Does
she invite them to the party when she has captured
a prize? I thought so at first; and I gave special
attention to watching the mothers eat. Usually, the
prey is devoured out of sight, in the burrow; but
sometimes a meal is taken on the threshold, in the
open air. Well, I see then that while the mother
eats, the youngsters do not budge from their camping
ground on her back. Not one quits its place
or gives a sign of wishing to slip down and join in
the meal. Nor does the mother invite them to come

and refresh themselves, or put any left-over food
aside for them. She feeds and the others look on,
or rather remain indifferent to what is happening.
Their perfect quiet during the Tarantula’s feast is
a proof that they are not hungry.
Then what do they live upon, during their seven
months’ upbringing on the mother’s back? One
thinks of their absorbing nourishment from their
mother’s skin. We must give up this notion. Never
are they seen to put their mouths to it. And the
Tarantula, far from being exhausted and shriveling,
keeps perfectly well and plump; she even puts
on flesh.
Once more, with what do the little ones keep up
their strength? We do not like to suggest that they
are still living on the food they received in the egg,
especially when we consider that they must use
the energy drawn from this food to produce silk,
a material of the highest importance, of which a
plentiful use will be made presently. There must
be other powers at play in the tiny animal’s machinery.
We could understand their not needing anything
to eat if they did not move; complete quiet is not
life. But the young Spiders, although usually quiet
on their mother’s back, are at all times ready for
exercise and for agile swarming. When they fall
from the mother’s baby-carriage, they briskly pick
themselves up, briskly scramble up a leg and make
their way to the top. It is a splendidly nimble and
spirited performance. Besides, once seated, they

have to keep a firm balance; they have to stretch and
stiffen their little limbs in order to hang on to their
neighbors. As a matter of fact, there is no absolute
rest for them.
Now physiology teaches us that not a muscle
works without using up energy. The animal is like
a machine; it must renew its body, which wears out
with movement, and it must have something to make
heat, which is turned into action. We can compare
it with the locomotive-engine. As the iron horse
does its work, it gradually wears out its pistons, its
rods, its wheels, its boiler-tubes, all of which have
to be made good from time to time. The foundry-man
and the blacksmith repair it, supply it with
new parts; it is as if they were giving it food to renew
itself. But, although it be brand-new, it cannot
move until the stoker shovels some coal into its
inside and sets fire to it. This coal is like energy-producing
food; it makes the engine work.
Things are just the same with the animal. Since
nothing is made from nothing, the little new-born
animal is made from the food there was in the egg.
This is tissue-forming food which increases the body,
up to a certain point, and renews it as it wears away.
But it must have heat-food, or energy-food, too.
Then the animal will walk, run, jump, swim, fly, or
move in any one of a thousand manners.
To return to the young Spiders: they grow no
larger until after they leave their mother. At the
age of seven months they are the same as at birth.
The egg supplied the food necessary for their tiny

frames; and they do not need more tissue-forming
food as long as they do not grow. This we can understand.
But where do they get the energy-food
that makes them able to move about so actively?
Here is an idea. What is coal, the energy-food of
the locomotive? It is the fossil remains of trees
which, ages ago, drank the sunlight with their leaves.
Coal is really stored-up sunlight and the locomotive,
devouring it, is devouring sunlight.
Beasts of flesh and blood act no otherwise.
Whether they eat one another or plants, they always
live on the stimulant of the sun’s heat, a heat stored
in grass, fruit, seed, and those which feed on such.
The sun, the soul of the universe, is the supreme
giver of energy.
Instead of being served up in food and being
digested through the stomach, could not this sun-energy
enter the animal directly and charge it with
activity, just as the electric battery charges an accumulator
with power? Why not live on sun, seeing
that, after all, we find nothing but sun in the
fruits which we eat?
The chemists say they are going to feed us some
day on artificial food-stuffs put up in drug-stores.
Perhaps the laboratory and the factory will take
the place of the farm. Why should not physical
science do as well? It would leave to the chemist
the preparation of tissue-forming food; it would
give us energy-food. With the help of some ingenious
apparatus, it would pump into us our daily
supply of sun-energy, to be later spent in movement,

so that we could keep going without eating at all.
What a delightful world, where one would lunch off
a ray of sunshine!
Are we dreaming, or will something like this
happen some day? It is worth while surely for
the scientists to think about it.
As the month of March comes to an end, the
mother Tarantula is outside her burrow, squatting on
the parapet at the entrance. It is time for the youngsters
to leave her. She lets them do as they please,

seeming perfectly indifferent to what is happening.
The departure begins during glorious weather, in
the hottest hours of the morning. First these, then
those, of the little ones, according as they feel themselves
soaked with sunshine, leave the mother in
batches, run about for a moment on the ground, and
then quickly reach the trellis-work of the cage in
my laboratory, which they climb with surprising
quickness. They all make for the heights, though
their mother is accustomed to stay on the solid
ground. There is an upright ring at the top of the
cage. The youngsters hurry to it. They hang out
threads across the opening; they stretch others from
the ring to the nearest points of the trellis-work.
On these foot-bridges they perform slack-rope exercises.
The tiny legs open out from time to time
as though to reach the most distant points. I begin
to realize that they wish to go higher.
I top the trellis with a branch as high again.
The little Spiders hastily scramble up it, reach the
tip of the topmost twigs and from there send out
threads that fasten themselves to every surrounding
object. These are suspension-bridges; and my beasties
nimbly run along them, incessantly passing to and
fro. They seem to wish to climb still higher.
I take a nine-foot reed, with tiny branches spreading
right up to the top, and place it above the cage.
The little Tarantulas clamber to the very summit.
Here they send out longer threads, which are left
to float, and which again form bridges when their
loose ends touch some object. The rope-dancers

embark upon them and form garlands which the
least breath of air swings daintily. One cannot see
the threads at all unless they come between the eyes
and the sun; the Spiders look as if they were dancing
in the air.
Then, suddenly, shaken by the air-currents, the
delicate mooring breaks and flies through space.
Behold the little Spiders fly off and away, hanging
to their threads! If the wind be favorable, they
can land at great distances.
The bands of little Spiders keep on leaving thus
for a week or two, if the weather is fine. On cloudy
days, none dreams of going. The travelers need
the kisses of the sun, which give them energy and
vigor.
At last, the whole family has disappeared, carried
afar by its flying-ropes. The mother is alone. The
loss of her children hardly seems to distress her.
She goes on with her hunting with greater energy,
now that she is not hampered with her coat of little
ones. She will have other families, become a grandmother
and a great-grandmother, for the Tarantulas
live several years.
In this species of Tarantula, as we have seen, a
sudden instinct arises in the young ones, to disappear,
as promptly and forever, a few hours later.
This is the climbing-instinct, which is unknown to
the older Tarantula and soon forgotten by the young
ones, who alight upon the ground and wander there
for many a long day before they begin to build their
burrows. Neither of them dreams of climbing to

the top of a grass-stalk. Yet here we have the young
Tarantula, wishing to leave her mother and to travel
far away by the easiest and swiftest methods, suddenly
becoming an enthusiastic climber. We know
her object. From on high, finding a wide space beneath
her, she sends a thread floating. It is caught
by the wind, and carries her hanging to it. We have
our aeroplanes; she too possesses her flying-machine.
She makes it in her hour of need, and when
the journey is finished thinks no more about it.
Prettily shaped and clad, as far as a Spider
can be, the Clotho Spider is, above all, a very
clever spinstress. She is named after the Clotho of
antiquity, the youngest of the Three Fates, who
holds the distaff whence our destinies are spun. It
is a pity that the Fate Clotho cannot spin as soft
lives for us as the exquisite silk the Spider Clotho
spins for herself!
If we would make the acquaintance of the Clotho
Spider we must go up the rocky slopes in the olive-land,
scorched and blistered by the sun, turn over
the flat stones, those of a fair size, search, above all,
the piles which the shepherds set up for a seat from
which to watch the sheep browsing amongst the lavender
below. Do not be too easily disheartened if
you do not find her at first. The Clotho is rare;
not every spot suits her. If we are lucky, we shall
see, clinging to the lower surface of the stone which

we have lifted, a queer-looking thing, shaped like
the dome of a building turned upside down, and
about half the size of a tangerine orange. The outside
is hung with small shells, bits of earth, and,
especially, dried insects.
The edge of the dome is scalloped into a dozen
pointed scallops, the points of which spread and are
fixed to the stone. A flat roof closes the top of the
dwelling.
Where is the entrance? All the arches of the edge
open upon the roof; not one leads inside. Yet the
owner of the house must go out from time to time,
if only in search of food; on returning from her
expedition, she must go in again. How does she
make her exits and her entrances? A straw will
tell us the secret.
Pass it over the threshold of the various arches.
It finds them all carefully closed, apparently. But

one of the scallops, if cleverly coaxed, opens at the
edge into two lips and stands slightly ajar. This is
the door, which at once shuts again of its own elasticity.
Nor is this all: the Spider, when she returns
home, often bolts herself in; that is to say, she joins
and fastens the two leaves of the door with a little
silk.
The Clotho, when in danger, runs quickly home;
she opens the chink with a touch of her claw, enters
and disappears. The door closes of itself and is supplied,
in case of need, with a lock consisting of a few
threads. No burglar, on the outside of so many
arches, one and all alike, will ever discover under
which one the fugitive vanished so suddenly.
Let us open the Spider’s cabin. What luxury!
We have read how the Princess in the fairy-tale was
unable to rest, if there was a crumpled rose-leaf in
her bed. The Clotho is quite as fastidious. Her
couch is more delicate than swan’s-down and whiter
than the fleece of clouds where brood the summer
storms. It is the ideal blanket. Above is a canopy
or tester of equal softness. Between the two nestles
the Spider, short-legged, clad in somber garments,
with five yellow favors on her back.
Rest in this exquisite retreat demands that it be
perfectly steady, especially on gusty days, when sharp
draughts creep under the stone dwelling. By taking
a careful look at her we can see how the Spider manages
this. The arches that bear the weight of the
building are fastened to the stone at each end. Moreover,
where they touch, you may see a cluster of

diverging threads that creep along the stone and
cling to it throughout their length, which spreads
afar. I have measured some that were fully nine
feet long. These are so many cables; they are like
the ropes and pegs that hold the Arab’s tent in
position.
Another detail attracts our attention: whereas the
inside of the house is exquisitely clean, the outside is
covered with dirt, bits of earth, chips of rotten wood,
little pieces of gravel. Often there are worse things
still: hung up or embedded are the dry carcasses of
Beetles that favor under-rock shelters; parts of
Thousand-legged Worms, bleached by the sun;
snail-shells, chosen from among the smallest.
These relics are plainly, for the most part, table-leavings,
broken victuals. Unskilled in laying traps,
the Clotho lives upon the insects who wander from
one stone to another. Whoever ventures under the
slab at night is strangled by the hostess; and the
dried-up carcass, instead of being flung to a distance,
is hung to the silken wall, as though the Spider
wished to make a bogey-house of her home. But
this cannot be her aim. To act like the ogre who
hangs his victim from the castle battlements is the
worst way to disarm suspicion in the passers-by
whom you are lying in wait to capture.
There are other reasons which increase our doubts.
The shells hung up are most often empty; but there
are also some occupied by the Snail, alive and untouched.
What can the Spider do with these snail-shells
wherein the animal retreats so far that she cannot

reach it? The Spider cannot break the hard
shell or get at the hermit through the opening. Then
why should she collect these prizes, whose slimy flesh
is probably not to her taste? We begin to suspect a
simple question of ballast and balance. The House
Spider prevents her web, spun in a corner of the
wall, from losing its shape at the least breath of air,
by loading it with crumbling plaster and allowing
tiny fragments of mortar to accumulate. The Clotho
Spider dumps down on her abode any more or less
heavy object, mainly corpses of insects, because she
need not look for these and finds them ready to hand
after each meal. They are weights, not trophies;
they take the place of materials that must otherwise
be collected from a distance and lifted to the top.
In this way, a breastwork is obtained that strengthens
and steadies the house. Further balance is often
given by tiny shells and other objects hanging a
long way down. The Clotho knows the laws of
balancing; by means of additional weights, she is able
to lower the center of gravity and thus to give her
dwelling the proper equilibrium and roominess.
Now what does she do in her softly-wadded
home? Nothing, that I know of. With a full
stomach, her legs luxuriously stretched over the
down carpet, she does nothing, thinks of nothing;
she listens to the sound of the earth revolving on its
axis. It is not sleep, still less is it waking; it is a
middle state where the Spider is conscious of nothing
except that she is happy. We ourselves, when comfortably
in bed, enjoy, just before we fall asleep, a

few moments of bliss, when we neither think nor
worry; and those moments are among the sweetest in
our lives. The Clotho Spider seems to know similar
moments and to make the most of them.
Of the six Garden Spiders I have noticed, two
only, the Banded and the Silky Spiders, stay
constantly in their webs, even under the blinding rays
of a fierce sun. The others, as a rule, do not show
themselves until nightfall. At some distance from
the net they have a rough and ready retreat in the
brambles, a hiding-place made of a few leaves held
together by stretched threads. It is here that they
usually remain in the daytime, motionless and sunk
in meditation.
But the shrill light that vexes them is the joy of
the fields. At such time, the Locust hops more
nimbly than ever, more gayly skims the Dragon-fly.
Besides, the sticky web, in spite of the rents suffered
during the night, is still in fairly good condition.
If some giddy-pated insect allow himself to be

caught, will the Spider, at the distance whereto she
has retired, be unable to take advantage of the windfall?
Never fear. She arrives in a flash. How
does she know what has happened? Let us explain
the matter.
It is the vibration of the web which tells her,
rather than the sight of the captured object. To
prove this, I laid upon several Spiders’ webs a dead
Locust. I placed the Locust where the Spider might
have plainly seen it. Sometimes the Spider was in
her web, and sometimes she was outside, in her
hiding-place. In both cases, nothing happened at
first. The Spider remained motionless, even when
the Locust was at a short distance in front of her.
She did not seem to see the game at all. Then, with
a long straw, I set the dead insect trembling.
That was quite enough. The Banded Spider and
the Silky Spider hastened to the central floor, the
others, who were in hiding, came down from the
branch; all went to the Locust, bound him with tape,
treated him, in short, as they would treat a live prey
captured under the usual conditions. It took the
shaking of the web to decide them to attack.
If we look carefully behind the web of any Spider
with a daytime hiding-place, we shall see a thread
that starts from the center of the web and reaches
the place where the Spider lurks. It is joined to the
web at the central point only. Its length is usually
about twenty-two inches, but the Angular Spider,
settled high up in the trees, has shown me some as
long as eight or nine feet.

“The slanting cord is a telegraph wire.”

This slanting line is a foot-bridge by which the
Spider hurries to her web when there is something
going on there, and then, when her errand is finished,
returns to her hut. But that is not all it is. If
it were, the foot-bridge would be fastened to the
upper end of the web. The journey would then be
shorter and the slope less steep.
The line starts from the center of the net because
that is the place where the spokes meet and therefore
where the vibration from any part of the net is best
felt. Anything that moves upon the web sets it
shaking. All then that is needed is a thread going
from this central point to carry to a distance the
news of a prey struggling in some part or other of
the net. The slanting cord is not only a foot-bridge:
it is a signaling-apparatus, a telegraph-wire.
In their youth, the Garden Spiders, who are then
very wide-awake, know nothing of the art of telegraphy.
Only the old Spiders, meditating or dozing
in their green tent, are warned from afar, by telegraph,
of what takes place on the net.
To save herself from keeping a close watch that
would be drudgery and to remain alive to events even
when resting, with her back turned on the net, the
hidden Spider always has her foot upon the telegraph-wire.
Here is a true story to prove it.
An Angular Spider has spun her web between two
laurestine-shrubs, covering a width of nearly a yard.
The sun beats upon the snare, which is abandoned
long before dawn. The Spider is in her day house, a
resort easily discovered by following the telegraph-wire.

It is a vaulted chamber of dead leaves, joined
together with a few bits of silk. The refuge is deep:
the Spider disappears in it entirely, all but her
rounded hind-quarters, which bar the entrance.
With her front half plunged into the back of her
hut, the Spider certainly cannot see her web; she
could not even if she had good sight, instead of being
half blind as she is. Does she give up hunting
during this period of bright sunlight? Not at all.
Look again.
Wonderful! One of her hind-legs is stretched
outside the leafy cabin; and the signaling-thread
ends just at the tip of that leg. Whoever has not
seen the Spider in this attitude, with her hand, so
to speak, on the telegraph-receiver, knows nothing of
one of the most curious examples of animal cleverness.
Let any game appear upon the scene, and the
slumberer, at once aroused by means of the leg
receiving the vibrations, hastens up. A Locust whom
I myself lay on the web gives her this agreeable
shock, and what follows? If she is satisfied with
her prey, I am still more satisfied with what I have
learned.
One word more. The web is often shaken by the
wind. The signaling-cord must pass this vibration
to the Spider. Nevertheless, she does not leave her
hut and remains indifferent to the commotion prevailing
in the net. Her line, therefore, is something
better than a bell-rope; it is a telephone capable, like
our own, of transmitting infinitesimal waves of

sound. Clutching her telephone-wire with a toe, the
Spider listens with her leg; she can tell the difference
between the vibration proceeding from a prisoner
and the mere shaking caused by the wind.
The Banded Spider, who works so hard to
give her eggs a wonderfully perfect dwelling-house,
becomes, after that, careless of her family.
For what reasons? She lacks the time. She has to
die when the first cold comes, whereas the eggs are
to pass the winter in their cozy home. She cannot
help deserting the nest. But, if the hatching were
earlier and took place in the Spider’s life, I imagine
that she would be as devoted to her family as a
Bird is. So I gather from the behavior of a shapely
Spider who weaves no webs, lies in wait for her
prey, and walks sideways, like a Crab.
This Spider with the Crab-like figure does not
know how to make nets for catching game. Without
springs or snares, she lies hidden among the flowers,
and waits for the arrival of the prey, which she kills

by a scientific stab in the neck. The particular species
I have observed is passionately fond of the pursuit
of the Domestic Bee.
The Bee appears, seeking no quarrel, intent upon
plunder. She tests the flowers with her tongue; she
chooses a spot that will yield a good return. Soon
she is wrapped up in her harvesting. While she is
filling her baskets and distending her crop, the Crab-spider,
that bandit lurking under cover of the
flowers, comes out of her hiding-place, creeps round
behind the bustling insect, steals up close, and, with
a sudden rush, nabs her in the nape of the neck.
In vain the Bee protests and darts her sting at random;
the assailant does not let go.
Besides, the bite in the neck is paralyzing, because
the nerve-centers are affected. The poor thing’s legs
stiffen; and all is over in a second. The murderess
Spider now sucks the victim’s blood at her ease and,
when she has done, scornfully flings the drained
corpse aside.
We shall see the cruel vampire become a model
of devotion where her family is concerned. The
ogre loved his children; he ate the children of others.
Under the tyranny of hunger, we are all of us,
beasts and men alike, ogres.
After all, this cutter of Bees’ throats is a pretty,
a very pretty creature, in spite of her unwieldy body
fashioned like a squat pyramid and embossed on the
base, on either side, with a pimple shaped like a
camel’s hump. The skin, more pleasing to the eye
than any satin, is milk-white in some, in others lemon-yellow.

There are fine ladies among them who
adorn their legs with a number of pink bracelets and
their backs with crimson patterns. A narrow, pale-green
ribbon sometimes edges the right and left of
the breast. The costume is not so rich as that of the
Banded Spider, but much more elegant because of its
soberness, its daintiness, and the artistic blending of
its colors. People who shrink from touching any
other Spider do not fear to handle the beautiful Crab
Spider, so gentle in appearance.
Skillful in the prompt despatch of her prey, the
little Crab-spider is no less clever in the nesting art.
I find her settled on a privet in the inclosure. Here,
in the heart of a cluster of flowers, the luxurious
creature plaits a little pocket of white satin, shaped
like a wee thimble. It is the receptacle for the eggs.
A round, flat lid, of a felted fabric, closes the mouth.
Above this ceiling rises a dome of stretched
threads and faded flowerets which have fallen from
the cluster. This is the watcher’s conning-tower.
An opening, which is always free, gives access to this
post.
Here the Spider remains on constant duty. She
has thinned greatly since she laid her eggs, has
almost lost her figure. At the least alarm, she sallies
forth, waves a threatening limb at the passing
stranger and invites him, with a gesture, to keep his
distance. Having put the intruder to flight, she
quickly returns indoors.
And what does she do in there, under her arch
of withered flowers and silk? Night and day, she
shields the precious eggs with her poor body spread
out flat. Eating is neglected. No more lying in wait,
no more Bees drained to the last drop of blood.
Motionless, rapt in meditation, the Spider is sitting
on her eggs.
The brooding Hen does likewise, but she is also
a heating-apparatus and, with the gentle warmth of

her body, awakens the germs to life. For the Spider,
the heat of the sun is enough; and this alone keeps
me from saying that she “broods.”
For two or three weeks, the little Spider, more
and more wrinkled by lack of food, never relaxes her
position. What is the withered thing waiting for,
before expiring? She is waiting for her children to
emerge; the dying creature is still of use to them.
When the Banded Spider’s little ones come out
from their balloon, they have long been orphans.
There is none to come to their assistance; and they
have not the strength to free themselves without
help. The balloon has to split automatically and
to scatter the youngsters and their flossy mattress all
mixed up together. The Crab-spider’s wallet,
sheathed in leaves over the greater part of its surface,
never bursts; nor does the lid rise, so carefully
is it sealed down. Nevertheless, after the delivery
of the brood, we see, at the edge of the lid, a small,
gaping hole, an exit-window. Who contrived this
window, which was not there at first?
The fabric is too thick and tough to have yielded
to the twitches of the feeble little prisoners. It was
the mother, therefore, who, feeling her offspring
shuffle impatiently under the silken ceiling, herself
made a hole in the bag. She persists in living for
five or six weeks, despite her shattered health, so
as to give a last helping hand and open the door for
her family. After performing this duty, she gently
lets herself die, hugging her nest and turning into a

shriveled relic. The Hen does not reach this height
of unselfishness!
It is in July that some little Crab-spiders that I
have in my laboratory come out of their eggs. Knowing
their acrobatic habits, I have placed a bundle of
slender twigs at the top of the cage in which they
were born. All of them pass through the wire gauze
and form a group on the summit of the brushwood,
where they swiftly weave a roomy lounge of criss-cross
threads. Here they stay, pretty quietly, for a
day or two; then foot-bridges begin to be flung from
one object to the next. This is the fortunate
moment.
I put the bunch laden with beasties on a small
table, in the shade, before the open window. Soon
they begin to spin threads to carry them away, but
slowly and unsteadily. They hesitate, go back, fall
short at the end of a thread, climb up again. In
short, much trouble for a poor result.

As matters continue to drag, it occurs to me, at
eleven o’clock, to take the bundle of brushwood
swarming with the little Spiders, all eager to be off,
and place it on the window-sill, in the glare of the
sun. After a few minutes of heat and light, things
move much faster. The little Spiders run to the top
of the twigs, bustle about actively. I cannot see
them manufacturing the ropes or sending them floating
at the mercy of the air; but I guess their presence.
Three or four Spiders start at a time, each going
her own way. All are moving upwards, all are
climbing some support, as can be told by the nimble
motion of their legs. Moreover, you can see the
thread behind them, where it is of double thickness.
Then, at a certain height, individual movement
ceases. The tiny animal soars in space and shines, lit
up by the sun. Softly it sways, then suddenly takes
flight.
What has happened? There is a slight breeze
outside. The floating cable has snapped and the
creature has gone off, borne on its parachute. I see
it drifting away, showing, like a spot of light, against
the dark foliage of the near cypresses, some forty
feet distant. It rises higher, it crosses over the
cypress-screen, it disappears. Others follow, some
higher, some lower, hither and thither.
“Like the finish of a fireworks display.”
But the throng has finished its preparations; the
hour has come to disperse in swarms. We now see,
from the crest of the brushwood, a continuous spray
of starters, who shoot up like tiny rockets and mount
in a spreading cluster. In the end, it is like the

bouquet at the finish of a fireworks display, the
sheaf of rockets fired all at once. The comparison
is correct down to the dazzling light itself. Flaming
in the sun like so many gleaming points, the little
Spiders are the sparks of that living fireworks.
What a glorious send-off! What an entrance into
the world!
Sooner or later, nearer or farther, the fall comes.
To live, we have to descend, often very low, alas!
The Spiderling, therefore, touches land. The parachute
tempers her fall. She is not hurt.
The rest of her story escapes me. What infinitely
tiny Midges does she capture before possessing the
strength to stab her Bee? What are the methods,
what the wiles of atom contending with atom? I
know not. We shall find her again in spring, grown
quite large and crouching among the flowers whence
the Bee takes toll.
While the Garden Spiders are incomparable
weavers, many other Spiders have even more
ingenious devices for catching game. Some of them
are real celebrities, who are mentioned in all the
books.
Certain Bird Spiders, or American Tarantulas,
live in a burrow like the Tarantula I have been telling
you about, but their burrow is more perfect than
hers. My Tarantula surrounds the mouth of her
hole with a simple curb, a mere collection of tiny
pebbles, sticks, and silk; the American ones fix a
movable floor to theirs, a round shutter with a hinge,
a groove, and a set of bolts. When one of these
Tarantulas comes home, the lid drops into the groove
and fits so exactly one cannot tell where it joins. If
any one from outside tries to raise the trap-door, the

Spider pushes the bolt,—that is to say, plants her
claws into certain holes on the opposite side to the
hinge,—props herself against the wall, and holds
the door firmly.
Another, the Water Spider, builds herself an
elegant silken diving-bell, in which she stores air.
She waits in it for the coming of game and keeps
cool meanwhile. On scorching hot days, hers must
be a real palace of luxury, such as men have sometimes
ventured to build under water, with mighty
blocks of stone and marble. Tiberius, the wicked
Roman Emperor, had such a submarine palace; but
his is only a hateful memory, whereas the Water
Spider’s dainty tower still flourishes.
If I had had the chance to observe these Spiders,
I should gladly add a few unpublished facts to their
life-history; but I must give up the idea. The Water
Spider is not found in my district. The American
Tarantula, the expert in hinged doors, I saw once
only, by the side of a path. I was occupied with
something else, and did not give it more than a passing
glance. I have never seen it again.
But it is not only the uncommon insects that are
worth attention. The common ones, if carefully
observed, can tell us things just as important. I am
interested in the Labyrinth Spider, which I find
oftener than any other in the fields. Several times a
week, in July, I go to study my Spiders on the spot,
early in the morning, before the sun beats fiercely on
one’s neck. The children come with me, each provided
with an orange in case they get thirsty.

We soon discover high silk buildings, the threads
beaded with dew and glittering in the sun. The
children are wonderstruck at those glorious chandeliers,
so that they even forget their oranges for a
moment. I am not indifferent to them, either. Our
Spider’s labyrinth is a splendid spectacle. That and
the concert of the Thrushes are worth getting up for.
Half an hour’s heat, and the magic jewels disappear
with the dew. Now is the time to look at the
webs. Here is one spreading its sheet over a large
cluster of rock-roses; it is the size of a handkerchief.
Many guy-ropes moor it to the brushwood. It
covers the bush like a piece of white muslin.
The web is flat at the edges and gradually hollows
into a crater, not unlike the bell of a hunting-horn.
At the center is a funnel whose neck, narrowing by
degrees, is eight or nine inches deep and leads back
into the leafy thicket.
At the entrance to the tube sits the Spider, who
looks at us and shows no great excitement at our
presence. She is gray, modestly adorned on the
thorax with two black ribbons and on the abdomen
with two stripes in which white specks alternate with
brown. She has a sort of double tail at the end of
her body, a rather curious feature in a Spider.
I expected to find, at the bottom of the Spider’s
funnel, a wadded cell where she might rest in her
hours of leisure. On the contrary, there is only a
sort of door, which stands always ajar so that the
Spider may escape at any time through the grass and
gain the open.

Above, in the Spider’s web, there is a forest of
ropes. It might be the rigging of a ship disabled by
a storm. They run from every twig of the supporting
boughs, they are fastened to the tip of every
branch. There are long ropes and short ropes, upright
and slanting, straight and bent, taut and slack,
all criss-cross and a-tangle, to the height of three feet
or so. The whole makes a chaos of netting, a real
labyrinth which none but the very strongest insects
can break through.
There is nothing like the sticky snare of the
Garden Spiders here. The threads are not sticky,
but they are very bewildering. See this small Locust
who has lighted on the rigging. He is unable to get
a steady foothold on that shaky support; he flounders
about; and the more he struggles, the more he
is entangled. The Spider, looking at him from her
funnel, lets him have his way. She does not run up
the ropes; she waits until the desperate prisoner in
his struggles falls on the main part of the web.
Then she comes, flings herself upon her prey, and
slowly drains his blood. The Locust is lifeless at
the first bite; the Spider’s poison has settled him.
When laying-time is at hand, the Spider changes
her residence; she leaves her web, which is still in
excellent condition; she does not come back to it.
The time has come to make the nest. But where?
The Spider knows well; I am in the dark. I spend
whole mornings ransacking the bushes, until at last
I learn the secret. The nest is some distance away
from the web, in a low, thick cluster of bushes; it is

a clumsy bundle of dead leaves, roughly drawn together
with silk threads. Under this rude covering
is a pouch of fine texture containing the egg-casket.
I am disappointed in the appearance of this
Spider’s nest, until I remember that she probably cannot
do better in the places where she builds. In the

midst of a dense thicket, among a tangle of dead
leaves and twigs, there is no room for an elegant
piece of work. By way of experiment, I carry half
a dozen Labyrinth Spiders into my laboratory near
the laying-time, place them in large wire-gauze
cages, standing in earthen pans filled with sand, with
a sprig of thyme planted in the center to give a support
for each nest. Now they will show what they
can do.
The experiment works perfectly. By the end of
August I have six nests, magnificent in shape and of
a dazzling whiteness. The Spiders have had elbow-room,
and they have done their best. The nests are
ovals of exquisite white muslin, nearly as large as a
Hen’s egg. They are open at either end. The front-entrance
broadens into a gallery; the back-entrance
tapers into a funnel-neck. It is somewhat the same
construction as that of the Labyrinth web. Even the
labyrinth is repeated, for in front of the bell-shaped
mouth is a tangle of threads. The Spider has her
pattern by heart, and uses it on all occasions.
This palace of silk is a guard-house. Behind the
soft, milky, partly transparent wall glimmers the
egg-casket, its shape vaguely suggesting the star of
some order of knighthood. It is a large pocket, of
a splendid dead-white, with pillars on every side
which keep it motionless in the center of the nest.
There are about ten of these pillars; they are slender
in the middle and wider at both ends. They form
corridors around the central room. The mother
walks gravely to and fro under the arches of these

corridors, which are like the cloisters of a nunnery;
she stops first here, then there; she listens to all that
happens inside the satin wrapper of her egg-wallet.
I would not disturb her for anything; but I find, from
nests I have picked up in the fields, that the purse
contains about a hundred eggs, very pale amber-yellow
beads.
When I remove the outer white-satin wall, I come
upon a kernel of earthy matter, grains of sand mixed
with the silk. However did they get there? Did
they soak through the rain-water? No, the wrapper
is spotless white outside. They have been put there
by the mother herself. She has built around her eggs,
to protect them from parasites, a wall composed of
a great deal of sand and a little silk.
Inside this is still another silken wrapper, and then
come the little Spiders, already hatched out and moving
about in their nursery.
But, to go back—why does the mother leave her
fine web when laying-time comes, and make her nest
so far away? She has her reason, you may depend
upon it. Her large net, like a sheet, with the labyrinth
stretched above, is very conspicuous; parasites
will not fail to come running at this signal, showing
up against the green; if her nest is near, they will
certainly find it; and a strange grub, feasting on a
hundred new-laid eggs, will ruin her home. So the
wise Labyrinth Spider shifts her quarters, and goes
off at night to explore the neighborhood for a
less dangerous retreat for her coming family. The
low brambles dragging along the ground, keeping

their leaves through the winter, and catching the
dead leaves from the oaks hard by, or rosemary
tufts, low and bushy, suit her perfectly. In such
spots I usually find her nest.
Many Spiders leave their nests after they have
laid the eggs, but the Labyrinth, like the Crab-spider,
remains to watch over hers. She does not become
thin and wither away, like the Crab-spider. She
keeps her appetite, she is on the lookout for Locusts;
and so she builds a hunting-box, a tangle of threads,
on the outside of her nest.
When she is not hunting, as we have seen, she
walks the corridors around her eggs, she listens to
find out if all is well. If I shake the nest at any
point with a straw, she quickly runs up to inquire
what is happening. Probably she keeps off parasites
in this way.
The Spider’s appetite for Locusts shows that she
must have more to do. Insects, unlike some human
beings, eat only that they may work. When I
watch her, I find out what this work is. For nearly
another month, I see her adding layer upon layer
to the walls of her nest. These were at first semi-transparent;
they become thick and opaque. This is
why the Spider eats, so that she may fill her silk-glands
and make a thick wrapper for her nest.
About the middle of September the little Spiders
come out of their eggs, but they do not leave their
house, where they are to spend the winter packed in
soft wadding. The mother continues to watch and
spin, but she grows less active from day to day.

She eats fewer Locusts; she sometimes scorns those
whom I myself entangle in her trap. But for four or
five months longer she keeps on making her inspection-rounds
of her egg-casket, happy at hearing the
new-born Spiders swarming inside. At last, when
October ends, she clutches her children’s nursery and
dies. She has done all that a mother’s devotion can
do; the special Providence that watches over tiny
animals will do the rest. When spring comes, the
youngsters will come out of their snug homes and
scatter all over the neighborhood on their floating
threads, like the little Crab-spiders you have read
about.
The smallest garden contains the Garden Spiders,
all clever weavers.
Let us go every evening, step by step, from one
border of tall rosemaries to the next. Should things
move too slowly, we will sit down at the foot of the
shrubs, where the light falls favorably, and watch
with unwearying attention. Let us give ourselves a
title, “Inspector of Spiders’ Webs!” There are not
many people in that profession, and we shan’t make
any money by it; but never mind, we shall learn some
very interesting things.
The Spiders I watch are young ones, much slenderer
than they will be in the late autumn. They
work by day, work even in the sun, whereas the
old ones weave only at night. Work starts in July,
a couple of hours before sunset.

The spinstresses of my inclosures then leave their
daytime hiding-places, choose their posts and begin
to spin, one here, another there. There are many of
them; we can choose where we please. Let us stop
in front of this one, whom we surprise in the act of
laying the foundations of her web. She runs about
the rosemary hedge, from the tip of one branch to
another, within the limits of some eighteen inches.
Gradually, she puts a thread in position, drawing it
from her body with the combs attached to her hind-legs.
She comes and goes impetuously, as though at
random; she goes up, comes down, goes up again,
dives down again and each time strengthens the
points of contact with threads distributed here and
there. The result is a sort of frame. The shapeless
structure is what she wishes; it marks out a flat, free,
and perpendicular space. This is all that is necessary.
A special thread, the foundation of the stronger
net which will be built later, is stretched across the
area of the other. It can be told from the others by
its isolation, its position at a distance from any twig
that might interfere with its swaying length. It
never fails to have, in the middle, a thick white point,
formed of a little silk cushion.
The time has come to weave the hunting-snare.
The Spider starts from the center, which bears the
white signpost, and, running along the cross-thread,
hurriedly reaches the circumference, that is to say,
the irregular frame inclosing the free space. Still
with the same sudden movement, she rushes from the
outside to the center; she starts again backwards and

forwards, makes for the right, the left, the top, the
bottom; she hoists herself up, dives down, climbs up
again, runs down and always returns to the central
landmark by roads that slant in the most unexpected
manner. Each time a radius or spoke is laid, here,
there, or elsewhere, in what looks like mad disorder.
Any one looking at the finished web, so neat and
regular in appearance, would think that the Spider
laid the spokes in an orderly fashion, one after the
other. She does nothing of the sort, but she knows
what she is about, all the same. After setting a few
spokes in one direction, the Spider runs across to the
other side to draw some in the opposite direction.

These sudden changes have a reason; they show us
how clever the Spider is in her business. If she
began by laying all the spokes on one side, she would
pull the web out of shape or even destroy it. She
must put some on the other side to balance. She is
a past mistress of the secrets of rope-building, without
serving an apprenticeship.
One would think that this interrupted and apparently
disordered labor must result in a confused
piece of work. Wrong: the rays are equidistant and
form a beautifully regular circle. Their number is
a characteristic mark of the different species. The
Angular Epeira places twenty-one in her web, the
Banded Epeira thirty-two, the Silky Epeira forty-two.
These numbers are not absolutely fixed; but
the variation is very slight.
Now which of us would undertake, offhand, without
much preliminary experiment and without measuring-instruments,
to divide a circle into a given
quantity of sectors or parts of equal width? The
Garden Spider, though weighted with a wallet and
tottering on threads shaken by the wind, performs
the delicate division without stopping to think. She
achieves it by a method which seems mad according
to our notions of geometry. Out of disorder she
brings order. We are amazed at the result obtained.
How does this Spider come to succeed with her difficult
problem, so strangely managed? I am still
asking myself the question.
The laying of the radii or spokes is finished. The
Spider takes her place in the center, on the little

cushion. Stationed on this support, she slowly turns
round and round. She is engaged on a delicate piece
of work. With an extremely thin thread, she describes
from spoke to spoke, starting from the center,
a spiral line with very close coils. This is the center
of the web. I will call it the “resting-floor.”
The thread now becomes thicker. The first could
hardly be seen; the second is plainly visible. The
Spider shifts her position with great slanting strides,
turns a few times, moving farther and farther from
the center, fixes her line each time to the spoke which
she crosses, and at last comes to a stop at the lower
edge of the frame. She has described a spiral with
coils of rapidly-increasing width. The average distance
between the coils, even in the webs of the
young Spiders, is about one third of an inch.
This spiral is not a curved line. All curves are
banished from the Spiders’ work; nothing is used
but the straight line and its combinations. This line
forms the cross-bars, or supporting rungs, connecting
the spokes, or radii.
All this is but a support for the snaring-web.
Clinging on the one hand to the radii, on the other
to the cross-bars, the Spider covers the same ground
as when laying the first spiral, but in the opposite
direction: formerly, she moved away from the
center; now she moves towards it and with closer
and more numerous circles. She starts from the end
of the first spiral, near the outside of the web.
What follows is hard to observe, for the movements
are very quick and jerky, consisting of a series

of sudden little rushes, sways, and bends that bewilder
the eye. The two hind-legs, the weaving implements,
keep going constantly. One draws out the
thread from the spinneret, and passes it to the other,
which lays it on the radius. As soon as the radius is
touched, the thread sticks to it by its own glue.
The Spider, without a stop of any kind, turns and
turns and turns, drawing nearer to the center and
always fixing her thread at each spoke which she
crosses. At last, at some distance from the center,
on the edge of what I have called the resting-floor,
the Spider suddenly ends her spiral. She next eats
the little cushion in the center, which is a mat of

ends of saved silk. She does this to economize silk,
for after she has eaten it the cushion will be turned
into silk for the next web she spins.
Two Spiders, the Banded and the Silky, sign their
work by laying a broad white ribbon in a thick zigzag
from the center to the lower edge of the web.
Sometimes they put a second band of the same shape,
but a little shorter, opposite the first, on the upper
part of the web.
The spiral part of the Garden Spider’s web is a
wonderful contrivance. The thread that forms it
may be seen with the naked eye to be different from
that of the framework and the spokes. It glitters in
the sun, and looks as though it were knotted. I cannot
examine it through the microscope outdoors because
the web shakes so, but by passing a sheet of
glass under the web and lifting it I can take away a
few pieces of thread to study. The microscope now
shows me an astounding sight.
Those threads, so slender as to be almost invisible,

are very closely twisted twine, something like the
gold cord of officers’ sword-knots. Moreover, they
are hollow. They contain a sticky moisture resembling
a strong solution of gum arabic. I can see it
trickling from the broken ends. This moisture must
ooze through the threads, making them sticky.
Indeed, they are sticky. When I lay a straw flat
upon them, it adheres at once. We see now that the
Garden Spider hunts, not with springs, but with
sticky snares that catch everything, down to the dandelion-plume
that barely brushes against the web.
Nevertheless, the Spider herself is not caught in her
own snare. Why?
For one thing, she spends most of her time on her
resting-floor in the middle of the web, which the
spiral does not enter. The resting-floor is not at
all sticky, as I find when I pass a straw against it.
But sometimes when a victim is caught, perhaps right
at the end of the web, the Spider has to rush up
quickly to bind it and overcome its attempts to free
itself. She seems to be able to walk upon her network
perfectly well then. Has she something on her
feet which makes them slip over the glue? Has she
perhaps oiled them? Oil, you know, is the best
thing to prevent surfaces from sticking.
I pull out the leg of a live Spider and put it to
soak for an hour in disulphide of carbon, which dissolves
fat. I wash it carefully with a brush dipped
in the same fluid. When the washing is finished, the
leg sticks to the spiral of the web! We see now that
the Spider varnishes herself with a special sweat so

that she can go on any part of her web without
difficulty. However, she does not wish to remain on
the spiral too long, or the oil might wear away, so
most of the time she stays on her safe resting-floor.
This spiral thread of the Spider’s is very quick to
absorb moisture, as I find out by experiment. For
this reason the Garden Spiders, when they weave
their webs in the early morning, leave that part of
the work unfinished, if the air turns misty. They
build the general framework, they lay the spokes,
they make the resting-floor, for all these parts are
not affected by excess moisture; but they are very
careful not to work at the sticky spiral, which, if
soaked by the fog, would dissolve into sticky threads
and lose its usefulness by being wet. The net that
was started will be finished to-morrow, if the weather
is right. But on hot days this property of the spiral
is a fine thing; it does not dry up, but absorbs all the
moisture in the atmosphere and remains, at the most
scorching times of day, supple, elastic, and more and
more sticky. What bird-catcher could compete with
the Garden Spider in the art of laying snares? And
all this industry and cunning for the capture of a
Moth!
Then, too, what a passion the Spider has for production.
I calculated that, in one sitting, each time
that she remakes her web, the Angular Spider produces
some twenty yards of gummy thread. The more
skillful Silky Spider produces thirty. Well, during
two months, the Angular Spider, my neighbor, renewed
her snare nearly every evening. During that

time she manufactured something like three quarters
of a mile of this tubular thread, rolled into a tight
twist and bulging with glue.
We cannot but wonder how she ever carries so
much in her little body, how she manages to twist
her silk into this tube, how she fills it with glue!
And how does she first turn out plain threads, then
russet foam, for her nest, then black stripes to adorn
the nest? I see the results, but I cannot understand
the working of her factory.
[This chapter, one of the most wonderful in
Fabre’s books, is included in a simplified form in
this volume, on account of its interest to such younger
readers as have studied geometry.]
When we look at the webs of the Garden
Spiders, especially those of the Silky Spider
and the Banded Spider, we notice first that the spokes
or radii are equally spaced; the angles formed by
each consecutive pair are of the same value; and this
in spite of their number, which in the webs of the
Silky Spider sometimes exceeds forty. We know in
what a strange way the Spider weaves her web and
divides the area of the web into a large number of
equal parts or sectors, a number which is almost always
the same in the work of each species of Spider.

The Spider darts here and there when laying her
spokes as if she had no plan, and this irresponsible
way of working produces a beautiful web like the
rose-window in a church, a web which no designer
could have drawn better with compasses.
We shall also notice that, in each sector, the various
chords, parts of the angular spiral, are parallel
to one another and gradually draw closer together
as they near the center. With the two radiating
lines that frame them they form obtuse angles on
one side and acute angles on the other; and these
angles remain constant in the same sector, because
the chords are parallel.
There is more than this: these same angles, the
obtuse as well as the acute, do not alter in value,
from one sector to another, as far as the eye can
judge. Taken as a whole, therefore, the spiral consists
of a series of cross-bars intersecting the several
radiating lines obliquely at angles of equal value.
By this characteristic we recognize what geometricians
have named the “logarithmic spiral.” It is
famous in science. The logarithmic spiral describes
an endless number of circuits around its pole, to
which it constantly draws nearer without ever being
able to reach it. We could not see such a line, the
whole of it, even with our best philosophical instruments.
It exists only in the imagination of scientists.
But the Spider knows it, and winds her spiral in the
same way, and very accurately at that.
Another property of this spiral is that if one in
imagination winds a flexible thread around it, then

unwinds the thread, keeping it taut the while, its
free end will describe a spiral similar at all points
to the original. The curve will merely have changed
places. Jacques Bernouilli, the professor of mathematics
who discovered this magnificent theorem, had
engraved on his tomb, as one of his proudest titles
to fame, the spiral and its double, made by the unwinding
of the thread. Written underneath it was
the sentence: Eadem mutata resurgo. “I rise again
like unto myself.” It was a splendid flight of fancy
which showed his belief in immortality.
Now is this logarithmic spiral, with its curious
properties, merely an idea of the geometricians? Is
it a mere dream, an abstract riddle?
No, it is a reality in the service of life, a method
of construction often employed by animals in their
architecture. The Mollusk never makes its shell
without reference to the scientific curve. The first-born
of the species knew it and put it into practice;
it was as perfect in the dawn of creation as it can be
to-day.
There are perfect examples of this spiral found in
the shells of fossils. To this day, the last representative
of an ancient tribe, the Nautilus of the
Southern Seas, remains faithful to the old design,
and still whirls its spiral logarithmically, as did its
ancestors in the earliest ages of the world’s existence.
Even in the stagnant waters of our grassy ditches, a
tiny Shellfish, no bigger than a duckweed, rolls its
shell in the same manner. The common snail-shell
is constructed according to logarithmic laws.
Where do these creatures pick up this science?
We are told that the Mollusk is descended from the
Worm. One day the Worm, rendered frisky by the
sun, brandished its tail and twisted it into a corkscrew
for sheer glee. There and then the plan of the
future spiral shell was discovered.
This is what is taught quite seriously, in these
days, as the very last word in science. But the
Spider will have none of this theory. For she is not
related to the Worm; and yet she is familiar with the
logarithmic spiral and uses it in her web, in a simpler
form. The Mollusk has years in which to build her

spiral, so she makes it very perfectly. The Spider
has only an hour at the most to spread her net, so
she makes only a skeleton of the curve; but she
knows the same line dear to the Snail. What guides
her? Nothing but an inborn skill, whose effects the
animal is no more able to control than the flower is
able to control the arrangement of its petals and
stamens. The Spider practices higher geometry
without knowing or caring. The thing works of
itself and takes its way from an instinct imposed
upon creation at the start.
The stone thrown by the hand returns to earth
describing a certain curve; the dead leaf torn and
wafted away by a breath of wind makes its journey
from the tree to the ground with a similar curve.
The curve is known to science and is called the
“parabola.”
The geometricians speculate still more about this
curve; they imagine it rolling on an indefinite straight
line and ask what course the focus of the curve follows.
The answer comes that the focus of the parabola
describes a “catenary,” a line whose algebraic
symbol is so complicated that a numeral will not express
it. The nearest it can get is this terrible sum:
[text]
The geometricians do not attempt to refer to it by
this number; they give it a letter, e.
Is this line imaginary? Not at all; you may see
the catenary frequently. It is the shape taken by a
flexible cord when held at each end and relaxed; it
is the line that governs the shape of a sail filled out
by the wind. All this answers to the number e.

What a quantity of abstruse science for a bit of
string! Let us not be surprised. A pellet of shot
swinging at the end of a thread, a drop of dew
trickling down a straw, a splash of water rippling
under the kisses of the air, a mere trifle, after all,
becomes tremendously complicated when we wish to
examine it with the eye of calculation. We need the
club of Hercules to crush a fly.
Our methods of mathematical investigation are
certainly ingenious; we cannot too much admire the
mighty brains that have invented them; but how slow
and laborious they seem when compared with the
smallest actual things! Shall we never be able to
inquire into reality in a simpler fashion? Shall we
be intelligent enough some day to do without all
these heavy formulæ? Why not?
Here we have the magic number e reappearing,
written on a Spider’s thread. On a misty morning
the sticky threads are laden with tiny drops, and,
bending under the burden, have become so many
catenaries, so many chains of limpid gems, graceful
chaplets arranged in exquisite order and following
the curve of a swing. If the sun pierce the mist, the
whole lights up with rainbow-colored fires and becomes
a dazzling cluster of diamonds. The number
e is in its glory.
Geometry, that is to say, the science of harmony
in space, rules over everything. We find it in the
arrangement of the scales of a fir-cone, as in the
arrangement of a Spider’s sticky snare; we find it in
the spiral of a snail-shell, in the chaplet of a Spider’s

thread, as in the orbit of a planet; it is everywhere,
as perfect in the world of atoms as in the world of
immensities.
And this universal geometry tells us of a Universal
Geometrician, whose divine compass has
measured all things. I prefer that, as an explanation
of the logarithmic curve of the Nautilus and the
Garden Spiders, to the Worm screwing up the tip of
its tail. It may not perhaps be in agreement with
some latter-day teaching, but it takes a loftier flight.
Variant spelling and hyphenation have been preserved
as printed; simple typographical errors have been corrected.
In the Table of Contents, the printed page numbers were all off
by 10: page 7 should read page 17, page 21 should read page 31, and
so on. The page numbers have been updated for the plain text version
of this book. (The HTML and e-reader versions do not use page
references in the ToC.)
The following changes were also made:
All changes are also noted in the source code: search <!--TN:
Text of the terrible sum:

1 + 1/1 + 1/(1.2) + 1/(1.2.3) + 1/(1.2.3.4) + 1/(1.2.3.4.5) + etc.


Petty truths, I shall be told, those presented by the habits
of a spider or a grasshopper. There are no petty truths
today; there is but one truth, whose looking-glass to our
uncertain eyes seems broken, though its every fragment,
whether reflecting the evolution of a planet or the flight
of a bee, contains the supreme law.
Maurice Maeterlinck
“What a day it was when I first became a herdsman
of ducks!”
BY
J. HENRI FABRE
Selections from Alexander Teixeira de Mattos’
Translation of Fabre’s “Souvenirs Entomologiques”
RETOLD FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
BY
LOUISE SEYMOUR HASBROUCK
ILLUSTRATED BY
ELIAS GOLDBERG
NEW YORK
DODD, MEAD AND COMPANY
1917

COPYRIGHT, 1917,
By DODD, MEAD & COMPANY, Inc.
Jean Henri Fabre, author of the long series
of “Souvenirs Entomologiques” from which these
studies are taken, was a French school-teacher and
scientist whose peculiar gift for the observation and
description of insect life won for him the title of the
“insects’ Homer.” A distinguished English critic
says of him, “Fabre is the wisest man, and the best
read in the book of nature, of whom the centuries
have left us any record.” The fact that he was
mainly self-taught, and that his life was an unending
struggle with poverty and disappointment, increases
our admiration for his wonderful achievements in
natural science.
A very interesting account of his early years, given
by himself, will be found in Chapter XVII of this
volume. The salaries of rural teachers and professors
were extremely small in France during the last
century, and Fabre, who married young, could barely
support his large family. Nature study was not
in the school curriculum, and it was years before he
could devote more than scanty spare hours to the
work. At the age of thirty-two, however, he published
the first volume of his insect studies. It attracted
the attention of scientists and brought him
a prize from the French Institute. Other volumes
were published from time to time, but some of
Fabre’s fellow scientists were displeased because the

books were too interesting! They feared, said
Fabre, “lest a page that is read without fatigue
should not always be the expression of the truth.”
He defended himself from this extraordinary complaint
in a characteristic way.
“Come here, one and all of you,” he addressed his
friends, the insects. “You, the sting-bearers, and
you, the wing-cased armor-clads—take up my defense
and bear witness in my favor. Tell of the intimate
terms on which I live with you, of the patience
with which I observe you, of the care with which I
record your actions. Your evidence is unanimous;
yes, my pages, though they bristle not with hollow
formulas or learned smatterings, are the exact narrative
of facts observed, neither more nor less; and
whoso cares to question you in his turn will obtain
the same replies.
“And then, my dear insects, if you cannot convince
these good people, because you do not carry
the weight of tedium, I, in my turn, will say to them:
“‘You rip up the animal and I study it alive;
you turn it into an object of horror and pity, whereas
I cause it to be loved; you labor in a torture-chamber
and dissecting-room, I make my observation
under the blue sky to the song of the cicadas;
you subject cell and protoplasm to chemical tests, I
study instinct in its loftiest manifestations; you pry
into death, I pry into life.... I write above all for
the young. I want to make them love the natural
history which you make them hate; and that is why,
while keeping strictly in the domain of truth, I avoid

your scientific prose, which too often, alas, seems
borrowed from some Iroquois idiom.’”
Fabre, though an inspiring teacher, had no talent
for pushing himself, and did not advance beyond
an assistant professorship at a tiny salary. The
other professors at Avignon, where he taught for
twenty years, were jealous of him because his lectures
on natural history attracted much attention,
and nicknamed him “the Fly.” He was turned out
of his house at short notice because the owners,
two maiden ladies, had been influenced by his enemies,
who considered his teachings in natural history
irreligious. Many years later, the invaluable textbooks
he had written were discontinued from use
in the schools because they contained too much religion!
A process which he invented for the extraction
of dye from madder flowers, by which he
hoped to make himself independent, proved unprofitable
on account of the appearance on the market
of the cheaper aniline dyes.
Though unknown during most of his lifetime to
the world at large, Fabre through his writings
gained the friendship of several celebrated men.
Charles Darwin called him the “incomparable observer.”
The Minister of Education in France invited
him to Paris and had him made a Chevalier
of the Legion of Honor, and presented him to
the Emperor, Napoleon III. He was offered the
post of tutor to the Prince Imperial, but preferred
his country life and original researches, even though
they meant continued poverty.

At last, after forty years of drudgery, Fabre secured
from his textbooks a small independent income,
which released him from teaching and enabled
him to buy at Serignan a house and garden of his
own, and a small piece of waste ground, dedicated
to thistles and insects—a “cursed ground,” he
wrote, “which no one would have as a gift to sow
with a pinch of turnip seed,” but “an earthly paradise
for bees and wasps”—and, on that account,
for him also.
“It is a little late, O my pretty insects,” he adds—he
was at this time over sixty; “I greatly fear the
peach is offered to me only when I am beginning to
have no teeth wherewith to eat it.” He lived, however,
to spend many years at his chosen studies.
During the last years of his life his fame spread,
and in 1910, in his eighty-eighth year, some of his
admirers arranged a jubilee celebration for him at
Serignan. Many famous men attended, and letters
and telegrams poured in from all parts of the world.
He died five years later, at the age of ninety-two.
CHAPTER
INSECT ADVENTURES
I am never tired of looking in a pond. What busy
life there is in that green world! On the warm
mud of the edges, the Frog’s little Tadpole basks and
frisks in its black legions; down in the water, the
orange-bellied Newt steers his way slowly with the
broad rudder of his flat tail; among the reeds are
stationed the little fleets of the Caddis-worms, half-protruding
from their tubes, which are now a tiny
bit of stick and again a tower of little shells.
In the deep places, the Water-beetle dives, carrying
with him his extra supply of breath, an air-bubble
at the tip of the wing-cases and, under the chest, a
film of gas that gleams like a silver breast plate; on
the surface, the ballet of those shimmering pearls,
the Whirligigs, turns and twists about; hard by,
there swims the troop of the Pond-skaters, who glide
along with side-strokes like those which the cobbler
makes when sewing.

Here are the Water-boatmen, who swim on their
backs with two oars spread crosswise, and the flat
Water-scorpions; here, clad in mud, is the grub of
the largest of our Dragon-flies, so curious because
of its manner of moving: it fills its hinder parts, a
yawning funnel, with water, spirts it out again and
advances just so far as the recoil of its water cannon.
There are plenty of peaceful Shellfish. At the
bottom, the plump River-snails discreetly raise their
lid, opening ever so little the shutters of their dwelling;
on the level of the water, in the glades of the
water-garden, the Pond-snails take the air. Dark
Leeches writhe upon their prey, a chunk of Earthworm;
thousands of tiny, reddish grubs, future Mosquitoes,
go spinning around and twist and curve like
so many graceful Dolphins.
Yes, a stagnant pool, though but a few feet wide,
hatched by the sun, is an immense world, a marvel
to the child who, tired of his paper boat, amuses
himself by noticing what is happening in the water.
Let me tell what I remember of my first pond, which
I explored when I was seven years old.
We had nothing but the little house inherited by
my mother, and its patch of garden. Our money was
almost all gone. What was to be done? That
was the stern question which father and mother sat
talking over one evening.
Do you remember Hop-o’-My-Thumb, who hid
under the wood-cutter’s stool and listened to
his parents overcome by want? I was like him.
I also listened, pretending to sleep, with my elbows

on the table. It was not blood-curdling designs that
I heard but grand plans that set my heart rejoicing.
“Suppose we breed some ducks,” says mother.
“They sell very well in town. Henri would mind
them and take them down to the brook. And we
could feed them on the grease from the tallow-factory,
which they say is excellent for ducks, and which
we could buy for a small price.”
“Very well,” says father, “let’s breed some ducks.
There may be difficulties in the way; but we’ll have
a try.”
That night I had dreams of paradise: I was with
my ducklings, clad in their yellow suits; I took them
to the pond, I watched them have their bath, I

brought them back again, carrying the more tired
ones in a basket.
A month or two after the little birds of my
dreams were a reality. There were twenty-four of
them. They had been hatched by two hens, of whom
one, the big black one, was an inmate of the house,
while the other was borrowed from a neighbor.
To bring them up, the big, black hen is enough,
so careful is she of her adopted family. At first
everything goes perfectly: a tub with two fingers’
depth of water serves as a pond. On sunny days
the ducklings bathe in it under the anxious eye of
the hen.
Two weeks later, the tub no longer satisfies. It
contains neither cresses crammed with tiny Shellfish
nor Worms and Tadpoles, dainty morsels both. The
time has come for dives and hunts among the tangle
of the water-weeds; and for us the day of trouble
has also come. How are we, right up at the top of
the hill, to get water enough for a pond for our
broods? In summer, we have hardly water to drink!
Near the house there is only a scanty spring from
which four or five families besides ourselves draw
their water with copper pails. By the time that the
schoolmasters donkey has quenched her thirst and
the neighbors have taken their provision for the day,
the spring-basin is dry. We have to wait four-and-twenty
hours for it to fill. No, there is no place there
for ducklings.
There is a brook at the foot of the hill, but to
go down to it with the troop of ducklings is dangerous.

On the way through the village we might meet
murdering cats, or some surly dog might frighten
and scatter the little band; and it would be a puzzling
task to collect them all again. But there is still
another spot, part way up the hill, where there is a
meadow and a pond of some size. It is very quiet
there, and the place can be reached by a deserted
footpath. The ducklings will be well off.
What a day it was when I first became a herdsman
of ducks! Why must there be a drawback to
such joys? Walking on the hard stones had given
me a large and painful blister on the heel. If I
had wanted to put on the shoes stowed away in the
cupboard for Sundays and holidays, I could not. I
had to go barefoot over the broken stones, dragging
my leg and carrying high the injured heel.
The ducks, too, poor little things, had sensitive
soles to their feet; they limped, they quacked with
fatigue. They would have refused to go any farther
towards the pond if I had not, from time to time,
called a halt under the shelter of an ash.
We are there at last. The place could not be better
for my birdlets: shallow, tepid water, with a few

muddy knolls and little green islands. The pleasures
of the bath begin at once. The ducklings clap their
beaks and rummage here, there, and everywhere;
they sift each mouthful, throwing out the clear water
and swallowing the good bits. In the deeper parts
they point their tails into the air and stick their
heads under water. They are happy: and it is a
blessed thing to see them at work. I too am enjoying
the pond.
What is this? On the mud lie some loose, knotted,
soot-covered cords. One might take them for
threads of wool like those which you pull out of
an old ravelly stocking. Can some shepherdess,
knitting a black sock and finding her work turn out
badly, have begun all over again and, in her impatience,
have thrown down the wool with all the
dropped stitches? It really looks like it.
I take up one of those cords in my hand. It is
sticky and very loose; the thing slips through my
fingers before they can catch hold of it. A few of
the knots burst and shed their contents. What comes
out is a black ball, the size of a pin’s head, followed
by a flat tail. I recognize, on a very small scale, a
familiar object: the Tadpole, the Frog’s baby.
Here are some other creatures. They spin around
on the surface of the water and their black backs
gleam in the sun. If I lift a hand to seize them, that
moment they disappear, I do not know where. It’s
a pity; I should have liked much to see them closer
and to make them wriggle in a little bowl which I
should have put ready for them.

Let us look at the bottom of the water, pulling
aside those bunches of green string from which beads
of air are rising and gathering into foam. There is
something of everything underneath. I see pretty
shells with compact whorls, flat as beans; I notice
little worms carrying tufts and feathers; I make out
some with flabby fins constantly flapping on their
backs. What are they all doing there? What are
their names? I do not know. And I stare at them
for ever so long, held by the mystery of the waters.
At the place where the pond dribbles into the
near-by field, are some alder-trees; and here I make
a glorious find. It is a Beetle—not a very large one,
oh, no! He is smaller than a cherry-stone, but of an
unutterable blue. The angels in paradise must wear
dresses of that color. I put the glorious one inside
an empty snail-shell, which I plug up with a leaf. I
shall admire that living jewel at my leisure, when I
get back. Other things call me away.
The spring that feeds the pond trickles from the
rock, cold and clear. The water first collects into a
cup, the size of the hollow of one’s two hands, and
then runs over in a stream. These falls call for a
mill: that goes without saying. I build one with two
bits of straw, crossed on an axis, and supported by
flat stones set on edge. The mill is a great success.
I am sorry I have no playmates but the ducklings
to admire it.
Let us contrive a dam to hold back the waters
and form a pool. There are plenty of stones for
the brickwork. I pick the most suitable; I break

the larger ones. And, while collecting these blocks,
suddenly I forget all about the dam which I meant
to build.
On one of the broken stones, in a hole large
enough for me to put my fist into, something gleams
like glass. The hollow is lined with facets gathered
in sixes which flash and glitter in the sun. I have
seen something like this in church, on the great
saints’-days, when the light of the candles in the big
chandelier kindles the stars in its hanging crystal.
We children, lying, in summer, on the straw of
the threshing-floor, have told one another stories of
the treasures which a dragon guards underground.
Those treasures now return to my mind: the names
of precious stones ring out uncertainly but gloriously
in my memory. I think of the king’s crown, of the
princesses’ necklaces. In breaking stones, can I have
found, but on a much richer scale, the thing that
shines quite small in my mother’s ring? I want more
such.
The dragon of the subterranean treasures treats
me generously. He gives me his diamonds in such
quantities that soon I possess a heap of broken stones
sparkling with magnificent clusters. He does more:
he gives me his gold. The trickle of water from the
rock falls on a bed of fine sand which it swirls into
bubbles. If I bend over towards the light, I see
something like gold-filings whirling where the fall
touches the bottom. Is it really the famous metal
of which twenty-franc pieces, so rare with us at home,
are made? One would think so, from the glitter.
“I think of the king’s crown, of the princesses’
necklace.”

I take a pinch of sand and place it in my palm.
The brilliant particles are numerous, but so small
that I have to pick them up with a straw moistened
in my mouth. Let us drop this: they are too tiny
and too bothersome to collect. The big, valuable
lumps must be farther on, in the thickness of the
rock. We’ll come back later; we’ll blast the mountain.
I break more stones. Oh, what a queer thing has
just come loose, all in one piece! It is turned spiral-wise,
like certain flat Snails that come out of the
cracks of old walls in rainy weather. With its
gnarled sides, it looks like a little ram’s-horn. How
do things like that find their way into the stone?
Treasures and curiosities make my pockets bulge
with pebbles. It is late and the little ducklings have
had all they want to eat. “Come along, youngsters,”
I say to them, “let’s go home.” My blistered heel is
forgotten in my excitement.
The walk back is a delight, as I think of all the
wonderful things I have found. But a sad disappointment
is waiting for me when I reach home.
My parents catch sight of my bulging pockets, with
their disgraceful load of stones. The cloth has
given way under the rough and heavy burden.
“You rascal!” says father, at sight of the damage.
“I send you to mind the ducks and you amuse yourself
picking up stones, as though there weren’t
enough of them all round the house! Make haste
and throw them away!”
Broken-hearted, I obey. Diamonds, gold-dust,

petrified ram’s-horn, heavenly Beetle, are all flung on
a rubbish-heap outside the door.
Mother bewails her lot:
“A nice thing, bringing up children to see them
turn out so badly! You’ll bring me to my grave.
Green stuff I don’t mind: it does for the rabbits. But
stones, which ruin your pockets; poisonous animals,
which’ll sting your hand: what good are they to you,
silly? There’s no doubt about it; some one has
thrown a spell over you!”
Poor mother! She was right. A spell had been

cast upon me—a spell which Nature herself had
woven. In later years I found out that the diamonds
of the duck-pool were rock-crystal, the gold-dust,
mica; but the fascination of the pond held good for
all that. It was full of secrets that were worth more
to me than diamonds or gold.
Have you ever had an indoor pond? Such a pond
is easy to make and one can watch the life of the
water in it even better than outdoors, where the
ponds are too large and have too much in them. Besides,
when out-of-doors, one is likely to be disturbed
by passers-by.
For my indoor pond, the blacksmith made me a
framework of iron rods. The carpenter, who is
also a glazier, set the framework on a wooden base
and supplied it with a movable board as a lid; he
then fixed thick panes of glass in the four sides. The
bottom of the pond was made of tarred sheet iron,
and had a trap to let the water out. The contrivance
looked very well, standing on a little table in
front of a sunny window. It held about ten or twelve
gallons.

I put in it first some limy incrustations with which
certain springs in my neighborhood cover the dead
clumps of rushes. It is light, full of holes, and looks
a little like a coral reef. Moreover, it is covered
with a short, green, velvety moss of tiny pond-weed.
I count upon this pond-weed to keep the water
healthy. How? Let us see.
The living creatures in the pond fill the water,
just as living people fill the air, with gases unfit to
breathe. Somehow the pond must get rid of these
gases, or its inhabitants will die. This is what the
pond-weed does; it breathes in and burns up the
unwholesome gases, changing them into a life-giving
gas.
If you will look at the pond when the sun is shining
on it, you will see this change take place. How
beautiful the water-weeds are! The green-carpeted
reef is lit up with countless sparkling points and
looks like a fairy lawn of velvet, studded with thousands
of diamond pin-heads. From this exquisite
jewelry pearls constantly break loose and are at
once replaced by others; slowly they rise, like tiny
globes of light. They spread on every side. It is
a constant display of fireworks in the depth of the
water.
This is what is really happening: The weeds are
decomposing—that is, separating into its elements—the
unwholesome carbonic acid gas with which the
water is filled; they keep the carbon to use in their
own cells; they breathe out the oxygen in tiny bubbles,
the pearls that you have seen. These partly dissolve

in the water, making it healthful for the little
water-creatures to breathe, and partly reach the surface,
where they vanish in the air, making it good
for us to breathe.
No matter how often I see it, I cannot help being
interested in this everyday marvel of a bundle of
weeds purifying a stagnant pool; I look with a
delighted eye upon the ceaseless spray of spreading
bubbles; I see in imagination the prehistoric times
when seaweed, the first-born of plants, produced the
first atmosphere for living things to breathe at the
time when the land of the continents was beginning
to rise out of the oceans. What I see before my
eyes, between the glass panes of my pond, tells me
the story of the planet surrounding itself with pure
air.
[The caddis-worm is the grub of the caddis-fly,
which is like a small moth and is often seen flitting
over our streams and ponds. There are about one
hundred and fifty species of this fly in America.]
Whom shall I lodge in my glass trough,
kept always wholesome by the action of
the water-weeds? I shall keep Caddis-worms, those
insects which clothe themselves with little sticks and
other materials. They are among the most ingenious
of the self-clothing insects.
The particular species of Caddis-worm I have
chosen is found in muddy-bottomed, stagnant pools
crammed with small reeds. It is the little grub that
carries through the still waters a bundle of tiny fragments
fallen from the reeds. Its sheath, a traveling

house, is an elaborate piece of work, made of
many different materials.
The young worms, the beginners, start with a
sort of deep basket in wicker-work, made of small,
stiff roots, long steeped and peeled under water.
The grub that has made a find of these fibers saws
them with its jaws and cuts them into little straight
sticks, which it fixes one by one to the edge of its
basket, always crosswise. This pile of spikes is a
fine protection, but hard to steer through the tangle
of water-plants. Sooner or later the worm forsakes
it, and builds with round bits of wood, browned by
the water, often as wide as a thick straw and a
finger’s breadth long, more or less—taking them as
chance supplies them.
It does not always use wood, however. If there
are plenty of small, dead Pond-snails in the pond, all
of the same size, the Caddis-worm makes a splendid
patchwork scabbard; with a cluster of slender roots,
reduced by rotting to their stiff, straight, woody axis,
it manufactures pretty specimens of wicker-work like
baskets. With grains of rice, which I gave the
grubs in my glass pond as an experiment, they built
themselves magnificent towers of ivory. Next to the
sheaths of snail-shells, this was the prettiest thing I
ever saw the Caddis-worms make.
What is the use of these houses which the Caddis-worms
carry about with them? I catch a glimpse
of the reason for making them. My glass pond was
at first occupied by a dozen Water-beetles, whose
diving performances are so curious to watch. One
day, meaning no harm and for want of a better place
to put them, I fling among them a couple of handfuls
of Caddis-worms. Blunderer that I am, what have I
done! The pirate Water-beetles, hiding in the
rugged corners of the rockwork, at once perceive the
windfall. They rise to the surface with great
strokes of their oars; they hasten and fling themselves
upon the crowd of carpenter Caddis-worms.
Each Beetle grabs a sheath by the middle and tries
to rip it open by tearing off shells and sticks. While
this is going on, the Caddis-worm, close-pressed, appears
at the mouth of the sheath, slips out, and
quickly escapes under the eyes of the Water-beetle,
who appears to notice nothing.
The brutal ripper of sheaths does not see the little
worm, like a white sausage, that slips between his
legs, passes under his fangs, and madly flees. He
continues to tear away the outer case and to tug
at the silken lining. When the breach is made, he is
quite crestfallen at not finding what he expected.
Poor fool! Your victim went out under your nose
and you never saw it. The worm has sunk to the
bottom and taken refuge in the mysteries of the rockwork.

If things were happening in a larger, outdoor
pond, it is clear that, with their clever way of removing
themselves, most of the worms would escape scot-free.
Fleeing to a distance and recovering from
the sharp alarm, they would build themselves a new
scabbard, and all would be over until the next attack,
which would be foiled all over again by the very
same trick!
Caddis-worms are able to remain on the level of
the water indefinitely with no other support than
their house; they can rest in unsinkable flotillas and
can even shift their place by working the rudder.
How do they do it? Do their sticks make a sort
of raft? Can the shells contain a few bubbles of air
and serve as floats? Let us see.
I remove a number of Caddis-worms from their
sheaths and put the sheaths in the water. Not one
of them floats, neither those made of shells nor
those of woody materials. The Worm also, when
removed from its tube, is unable to float.
This is how the Worm manages. When at rest,
at the bottom of the pond, it fills the whole of the
tube of its sheath. When it wishes to reach the top
of the pond, it climbs up the reeds, dragging its house
of sticks with it; then it sticks the front of its body
out of the sheath, leaving a vacant space in the rear,
like the vacuum in a pump when one draws out the
piston. This promptly fills with air, enabling the
Worm to float, sheath and all, just as the air in a
life-preserver holds a person up in the water. The
Caddis-worm does not need to cling to the grasses
any longer. It can move about on the surface of the
pond, in the glad sunlight.
To be sure, it is not very talented as a boatman.
But it can turn round, tack about and shift its place
slightly by using the front part of its body, which is

out of the tube, as a rudder and paddle; and that is
all it wishes to do. When it has had enough of the
sun, and thinks it time to return to the quiet of the
mud-bed at the bottom, it draws itself back into its
sheath, expelling the air, and at once begins to sink.
We have our submarines—the Caddis-worms
have theirs. They can come out of the water, they
can dip down and even stop at mid-depth by releasing
gradually the surplus air. And this apparatus,
so perfectly balanced, so skillful, requires no knowledge
on the part of its maker. It comes into being
of itself, in accordance with the plans of the universal
harmony of things.
At a school where I once taught, one subject
in particular appealed to both master and
pupils. This was open-air geometry, practical surveying.
When May came, once every week we left
the gloomy schoolroom for the fields. It was a
regular holiday. We did our surveying on an untilled
plain, covered with flowering thyme and
rounded pebbles. There was room there for making
every sort of triangle or polygon.
Well, from the very first day, my attention was
attracted by something suspicious. If I sent one of
the boys to plant a stake, I would see him stop frequently
on his way, bend down, stand up again, look
about and stoop once more, neglecting his straight
line and his signals. Another, who was told to pick
up the arrows, would forget and take up a pebble
instead; and a third, instead of measuring angles,
would crumble a clod of earth between his fingers.
Most of them were caught licking a bit of straw.
The surveying suffered. What could the mystery be?
I inquired; and everything was explained. The
scholars had known for a long time what the master
had not yet heard of, namely, that there was a big
black Bee who made clay nests on the pebbles in
the fields. These nests contained honey; and my
surveyors used to open them and empty the cells with
a straw. The honey, although rather strong-flavored,
was most acceptable. I grew fond of it myself,
and joined the nest-hunters, putting off the lesson

until later. It was thus that I first made the acquaintance
of the Mason-bee.
The Bee herself is a magnificent insect, with dark-violet
wings and a black-velvet dress. We have two
kinds of Mason-bees in our district: this one, who
builds by herself on walls or pebbles, and the Sicilian
Mason-bee, who builds in colonies under sheds and
roofs. Both use the same kind of material: hard
clay, mixed with a little sand and kneaded into a
paste with the Bee’s own saliva, forming, when dry,
a sort of hard cement.
Man’s masonry is formed of stones laid one above
the other and cemented together with lime. The
Mason-bee’s work can bear comparison with ours.
Instead of stones, she uses big pieces of gravel. She
chooses them carefully one by one, picks out the hardest
bits, generally with corners, which, fitting one
into the other, make a solid whole. She holds them
together with layers of her mortar, sparingly applied.
Thus the outside of her cell looks like a rough
stone house; but the inside, which must be smooth
in order not to hurt the Bee-baby’s tender skin, is
covered with a coat of pure mortar. This inner
whitewash, however, is not put on artistically, but in
great splashes; and the grub takes care, after it has
finished eating its honey, to make itself a cocoon and
hang the walls of its room with silk.
When the cell is finished, the Bee at once sets to
work to provide food for it. The flowers round
about, especially those of the yellow broom, which
in May deck the pebbly borders of the mountain

streams with gold, supply her with sugary liquid and
pollen. She comes with her crop swollen with honey
and her body yellowed underneath with pollen-dust.
She dives headfirst into the cell; and for a few moments
you see her jerk violently as she empties her
crop of the honey-sirup. Afterwards, she comes
out of the cell, only to go in again at once, but this
time backwards. The Bee now brushes the lower
side of her abdomen with her two hind-legs and rids
herself of her load of pollen. Once more she comes
out and once more goes in headfirst. It is a question
of stirring the materials, with her jaws for a
spoon, and making the whole into a smooth mixture.
She does not do this after every journey; only once
in a while, when she has gathered a good deal of
food.
When the cell is half full of food, she thinks there
is enough. An egg must now be laid on top of
the paste and the house must be closed. All this is
done quickly. The cover is a lid of pure mortar,
which the Bee builds by degrees, working from the
outside to the center. Two days at most appeared
to me to be enough for everything, provided that no
bad weather—rain or merely clouds—came to interrupt
the work. Then a second cell is built, with
its back to the first and provisioned in the same
manner. A third, a fourth, and so on follow, each
supplied with honey and an egg and closed before
the foundations of the next are laid.
“The flowers which deck the mountain streams with
gold supply her with sugary liquid and pollen.”
When all the cells are finished, the Bee builds a
thick cover over the group, to protect her grub-babies

from damp, heat and cold. This cover is made of
the usual mortar, but on this occasion with no small
stones in it. The Bee applies it pellet by pellet,
trowelful by trowelful, to the depth of about a third
of an inch over the cluster of cells, which disappear
entirely under the clay covering. When this is done,
the nest has the shape of a rough dome, equal in
size to half an orange. One would take it for a
round lump of mud which had been thrown and half
crushed against a stone and had then dried where it
was. This outer covering dries as quickly as the
cement we use in our houses; and the nest is soon
almost as hard as a stone.
Instead of building a brand-new nest on a hitherto
unoccupied bowlder, the Mason-bee of the Walls is
always glad to make use of old nests built the year
before. These need only a little repair to put them
in good condition. The Bee who has chosen one of
these nests looks about to see what parts need repairing,
tears off the strips of cocoon hanging from the
walls, removes the fragments of clay that fell from
the ceiling when the young Bee of the preceding year
bored her way through it, gives a coat of mortar to
parts that need it, mends the opening a little, and
that is all. She then goes about storing honey and
laying her egg, as she would in a new cell. When all
the cells, one after the other, are thus furnished, the
Bee puts a few touches on the outer dome of cement,
if it needs them; and she is through.
From one and the same nest there come out several
inhabitants, brothers and sisters, the males with

a bright brick-red fleece, and the female of a splendid
velvety black, with dark-violet wings. They are all
the children of the Bee who built or repaired and
furnished the cells. The male Bees lead a careless
existence, never work, and do not return to the clay
houses except for a brief moment to woo the ladies;
they have nothing to do with the housekeeping or
the new nests. What they want is the nectar in the
flower-cups, not mortar to build with. There are
left the sisters, who will be the mothers of the next
family. As sisters, they all have equal rights to the
nest. They do not go by this rule, however. The
nest belongs to the one who first takes possession of
it. If any of the others or any neighbors dispute her
ownership, she fights them until they have the worst
of it and fly away, leaving her in peace.
All is not smooth sailing after the Mason-bee has
finished building her dome of cells. It is then that
a certain Stelis-wasp, much smaller than the Mason-bee,
appears, looks carefully at the outside of the
Mason-bee’s home, and makes up her mind, weak
and small as she is, to introduce her eggs into this
cement fortress. Everything is most carefully closed:
a layer of rough plaster, at least two fifths of an
inch thick, entirely covers the cells, which are each
of them sealed with a thick mortar plug. The plaster
is almost as hard as a rock. Never mind! The little
insect is going to reach the honey in those cells.

She pluckily sets to. Atom by atom, she drives a
hole in the plaster and scoops out a shaft just large
enough to let her through; she reaches the lid of the
cell and gnaws it till she catches sight of the honey.
It is a slow and painful process, in which the feeble
Wasp wears herself out. I find it hard to break the
plaster with the point of my knife. How much
harder, then, for the insect, with her tiny pincers!
When she reaches the honey, the Stelis-wasp slips
through and, on the surface of the provisions, side
by side with the Mason-bee’s, she lays a number of
her own eggs. The honey-food will be the common
property of all the new arrivals, the Stelis-wasp’s
grubs as well as the Mason-bee’s.
The next thing for the parasite Wasp to do is
to wall up the opening she has made, so that other
robbers cannot get in. At the foot of the nest, the
Wasp collects a little red earth; she makes it into
mortar by wetting it with saliva; and with the pellets
thus prepared she fills up the entrance shaft as
neatly as if she were a master-mason. The mortar,
being red, shows up against the Bee’s house, which
is white; so when we see the red speck on the pale
background of the Bee’s nest we know a Stelis-wasp
has been that way.
As a result of the Stelis’ action, the poor Bee-baby
will starve to death. The Wasp’s grubs mature
first and eat up all the food.
Sometimes, when a Mason-bee has stayed too long
among the flowers, getting honey for her cell, she
finds the cell closed when she returns home. A neighbor
Bee has taken the opportunity to lay her eggs
there, after finishing the building and stocking it
with provisions. The real Bee-owner is shut out.
She does not hesitate long about what to do. After
she has examined her former home very carefully, to
make sure it is closed against her, she seems to say
to herself, “An egg for an egg, a cell for a cell.
You’ve stolen my house; I’ll steal yours.” She goes
to another Bee’s dwelling and patiently gnaws the
mortar lid or door. When she has made an opening,

she stands bending over the cell, her head half-buried
in it, as if thinking. She goes away, she returns
undecidedly; at last she makes up her mind.
The other Bees, meanwhile, pay no attention to her,
not even the one who laid the egg in the cell.
The Bee who has turned burglar snaps up the
strange egg from the surface of the honey and flings
it on the rubbish-heap as carelessly as if she were ridding
the house of a bit of dirt. Then, although there
is already plenty of honey in the cell, she adds more
from her own stock, lays her own egg, and closes up
the house again. The lid is repaired to look like
new and everything restored to order. The Bee has
had her revenge; her anger is appeased. Next time
she lays an egg it will be in her own cell, unless that
has again been seized by another.
I have told you about the robber Stelis-wasp who
enters the Bee’s cement house and steals the provisions
laid up for the Bee-baby; she is not the only
one who despoils the poor Mason-bee. There is
another Bee, the Dioxys, who acts in about the same
way as the Stelis-wasp, except that she sometimes
does even worse, and eats up the grub itself, as well
as its honey. Then there are the Osmia-bees and
the Leaf-cutting Bees, who make themselves very
much at home in the Bees’ houses, when they get a
chance, keeping out the real owners; and there are
also three flies, whose grubs eat the Bee-grub alive!
It sometimes seems wonderful that the Mason-bee
should ever live to grow up; and you will be glad to
hear of three other visitors the Bee-grub has, which
actually help instead of making it impossible for
it to live. These are three Beetles.
The old nests which the Mason-bees build in, to
save themselves the trouble of making new ones, are
often in a very insanitary condition. The cells are
full of dead larvæ (larva is another word for grub,
and both words mean the first stage of the insect
after leaving the egg, when it looks like a little
worm), which, for some reason or other, could not
break through their hard prisons; of honey which
has not been eaten and has turned sour; of tattered
cocoons, and shreds of skin, left behind when the
grubs turned into Bees. All these dead and useless

things are, of course, not pleasant to have in any
house, especially in a tidy Bee’s.
Here is where the Beetles come to the rescue. They
enter the Bee’s house and lay their eggs there. The
larvæ, when they come out of the eggs, begin to
make themselves useful. Two species of larvæ gnaw
the remains of the dead Bees; the third, which is
quite a good-looking worm, with a black head and
the rest of its body a pretty pink, takes care of the
spoiled honey. This worm turns into a Beetle in a
red dress with blue ornaments, whom you may often
see strolling about the Bee’s house in the working
season, tasting here and there drops of honey oozing
from some cracked cell. The Bees leave him in
peace, as if they knew that it was his duty to keep
their house wholesome.
Still later, when the Bee’s house, exposed as it is
to wind and weather, cracks and falls to pieces almost
entirely, the Bees leave it for good and all, and still
other insects take possession of it. These are gypsies,
who are not particular where they camp out. Spiders
make their homes in the blind alleys which used to
be cells, and weave white-satin screens, behind which
they lie in wait for passing game. The Hunting-wasps
arrange nooks with earthen embankments or
clay partitions, and there store up small members of
the Spider tribe as food for their families. So we
see that the house that the Mason-bee built for herself
is useful to many others, good, bad, or indifferent
friends of hers as the case may be.
I wished to know something more about my
Mason-bees. I had heard that they knew how
to find their nests even if carried away from them.
One day I managed to capture forty Bees from a
nest under the eaves of my shed, and to put them
one by one in screws of paper. I asked my daughter
Aglaé to stay near the nest and watch for the return
of the Bees. Things being thus arranged, I carried
off my forty captives to a spot two and a half miles
from home.
I had to mark each captive with a mixture of chalk
and gum arabic before I set her free. It was no easy
business. I was stung many times, and sometimes I
forgot myself and squeezed the Bee harder than I
should have. As a result, about twenty out of my
forty Bees were injured. The rest started off, in different

directions at first; but most of them seemed to
me to be making for their home.
Meanwhile a stiff breeze sprang up, making
things still harder for the Bees. They must have had
to fly close to the ground; they could not possibly go
up high and get a view of the country.
Under the circumstances, I hardly thought, when
I reached home, that the Bees would be there. But
Aglaé greeted me at once, her cheeks flushed with
excitement:
“Two!” she cried. “Two arrived at twenty minutes
to three, with a load of pollen under their bellies!”
I had released my insects at about two o’clock;
these first arrivals had therefore flown two miles and
a half in less than three quarters of an hour, and
lingered to forage on the way.
As it was growing late, we had to stop our observations.
Next day, however, I took another count
of my Mason-bees and found fifteen with a white
spot as I had marked them. At least fifteen out of
the twenty then had returned, in spite of having the
wind against them, and in spite of having been taken
to a place where they had almost certainly never been
before. These Bees do not go far afield, for they
have all the food and building material they want
near home. Then how did my exiles return? What
guided them? It was certainly not memory, but
some special faculty which we cannot explain, it is
so different from anything we ourselves possess.
The Cat is supposed to have the same power as
the Bee to find its way home. I never believed this
till I saw what some Cats of my own could do. Let
me tell you the story.
One day there appeared upon my garden wall a
wretched-looking Cat, with matted coat and protruding

ribs; so thin that his back was a jagged ridge.
My children, at that time very young, took pity on
his misery. Bread soaked in milk was offered him
at the end of a reed. He took it. And the mouthfuls
succeeded one another to such good purpose that
at last he had had enough and went, paying no attention
to the “Puss! Puss!” of his compassionate
friends. But after a while he grew hungry again,
and reappeared on top of the wall. He received the
same fare of bread soaked in milk, the same soft
words. He allowed himself to be tempted. He
came down from the wall. The children were able
to stroke his back. Goodness, how thin he was!
It was the great topic of conversation. We discussed
it at table: we would tame the tramp, we
would keep him, we would make him a bed of hay.
It was a most important matter: I can see to this day,
I shall always see, the council of rattleheads deliberating
on the Cat’s fate. They were not satisfied
until the savage animal remained. Soon he grew
into a magnificent Tom. His large, round head, his
muscular legs, his reddish fur, flecked with darker
patches, reminded one of a little jaguar. He was
christened Ginger because of his tawny hue. A mate
joined him later, picked up in almost similar circumstances.
Such was the beginning of my series of
Gingers, which I have kept for almost twenty years,
in spite of various movings.
The first time we moved we were anxious about
our Cats. We were all of us attached to them and
should have thought it nothing short of criminal to

abandon the poor creatures, whom we had so often
petted, to distress and probably to thoughtless persecution.
The shes and the kittens would travel without
any trouble: all you have to do is to put them in
a basket; they will keep quiet on the journey. But
the old Tom-cats were a serious problem. I had two,
the head of the family and one of his descendants,
quite as strong as himself. We decided to take the
grandfather, if he consented to come, and to leave
the grandson behind, after finding him a home.
My friend Dr. Loriol offered to take the younger
cat. The animal was carried to him at nightfall in
a closed hamper. Hardly were we seated at the
evening meal, talking of the good fortune of our
Tom-cat, when we saw a dripping mass jump through
the window. The shapeless bundle came and rubbed
itself against our legs, purring with happiness. It
was the Cat.
I heard his story next day. On arriving at Dr.
Loriol’s, he was locked up in a bedroom. The moment
he saw himself a prisoner in the unfamiliar
room, he began to jump about wildly on the furniture,
against the window panes, among the ornaments
on the mantelpiece, threatening to make short
work of everything. Mrs. Loriol was frightened by
the little lunatic; she hastened to open the window;
and the Cat leapt out among the passers-by. A few
minutes later, he was back at home. And it was no
easy matter: he had to cross the town almost from
end to end; he had to make his way through a long
labyrinth of crowded streets, among a thousand

dangers, including boys and dogs; lastly—and this
perhaps was even harder—he had to pass over a
river which ran through the town. There were
bridges at hand, many, in fact; but the animal, taking
the shortest cut, had used none of them, bravely
jumping into the water, as the streaming fur showed.
I had pity on the poor Cat, so faithful to his home.
We agreed to take him with us. We were spared
the worry: a few days later, he was found lying stiff
and stark under a shrub in the garden. Some one

had poisoned him for me. Who? It was not likely
that it was a friend!
There was still the old Cat. He could not be
found when we left our home, so the carter was
promised an extra two dollars if he would bring the
Cat to us at our new home with one of his loads.
On his last journey with our goods he brought him,
stowed away under the driver’s seat. I scarcely knew
my old Tom when we opened the moving prison in
which he had been kept since the day before. He
came out looking a most alarming beast, scratching
and spitting, with bristling hair, bloodshot eyes, lips
white with foam. I thought him mad and watched
him closely for a time. I was wrong: he was merely
bewildered and frightened. Had there been trouble
with the carter when he was caught? Did he have a
bad time on the journey? I do not know. What I
do know is that the very nature of the Cat seemed
changed: there was no more friendly purring, no
more rubbing against our legs; nothing but a wild
expression and the deepest gloom. Kind treatment
could not soothe him. One day I found him lying
dead in the ashes on the hearth. Grief, with the help
of old age, had killed him. Would he have gone
back to our old home, if he had had the strength? I
would not venture to say so. But, at least, I think
it very remarkable that an animal should let itself die
of homesickness because the weakness of old age
prevented it from returning to its former haunts.
The next time we move, the family of Gingers
have been renewed: the old ones have passed away,

new ones have come, including a full-grown Tom,
worthy in every way of his ancestors. He alone will
give us some trouble in moving; the others, the
babies and the mothers, can be removed easily. We
put them into baskets. The Tom has one to himself,
so that the peace may be kept. The journey is made
by carriage. Nothing striking happens before our
arrival. When we let the mother Cats out of their
hampers, they inspect the new home, explore the
rooms one by one; with their pink noses they recognize
the furniture: they find their own seats, their
own tables, their own armchairs; but the surroundings
are different. They give little surprised miaows