# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Emile Zola, The Downfall
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13851/13851-h/13851-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

They were indeed uhlans, the first Prussians that the 106th had set eyes
 on. They had been in the field nearly six weeks now, and in all that time
 not only had they never smelt powder, but had never even seen an enemy.
 The news spread through the ranks, and every head was turned to look at
 them. Not such bad-looking fellows, those uhlans, after all.
 

 “One of them looks like a jolly little fat fellow,” Loubet remarked.
 

 But presently an entire squadron came out and showed itself on a plateau
 to the left of the little wood, and at sight of the threatening
 demonstration the column halted. An officer came riding up with orders,
 and the 106th moved off a little and took position on the bank of a small
 stream behind a clump of trees. The artillery had come hurrying back from
 the front on a gallop and taken possession of a low, rounded hill. For
 near two hours they remained there thus in line of battle without the
 occurrence of anything further; the body of hostile cavalry remained
 motionless in the distance, and finally, concluding that they were only
 wasting time that was valuable, the officers set the column moving again.
 

 “Ah well,” Jean murmured regretfully, “we are not booked for it this
 time.”
 

 Maurice, too, had felt his finger-tips tingling with the desire to have
 just one shot. He kept harping on the theme of the mistake they had made
 the day before in not going to the support of the 5th corps. If the
 Prussians had not made their attack yet, it must be because their infantry
 had not got up in sufficient strength, whence it was evident that their
 display of cavalry in the distance was made with no other end than to
 harass us and check the advance of our corps. We had again fallen into the
 trap set for us, and thenceforth the regiment was constantly greeted with
 the sight of uhlans popping up on its left flank wherever the ground was
 favorable for them, tracking it like sleuthhounds, disappearing behind a
 farmhouse only to reappear at the corner of a wood.
 

 It eventually produced a disheartening effect on the troops to see that
 cordon closing in on them in the distance and enveloping them as in the
 meshes of some gigantic, invisible net. Even Pache and Lapoulle had an
 opinion on the subject.
 

 “It is beginning to be tiresome!” they said. “It would be a comfort to
 send them our compliments in the shape of a musket-ball!”
 

 But they kept toiling wearily onward on their tired feet, that seemed to
 them as if they were of lead. In the distress and suffering of that day's
 march there was ever present to all the undefined sensation of the
 proximity of the enemy, drawing in on them from every quarter, just as we
 are conscious of the coming storm before we have seen a cloud on the
 horizon. Instructions were given the rear-guard to use severe measures, if
 necessary, to keep the column well closed up; but there was not much
 straggling, aware as everyone was that the Prussians were close in our
 rear, and ready to snap up every unfortunate that they could lay hands on.
 Their infantry was coming up with the rapidity of the whirlwind, making
 its twenty-five miles a day, while the French regiments, in their
 demoralized condition, seemed in comparison to be marking time.
 

 At Authe the weather cleared, and Maurice, taking his bearings by the
 position of the sun, noticed that instead of bearing off toward Chene,
 which lay three good leagues from where they were, they had turned and
 were moving directly eastward. It was two o'clock; the men, after
 shivering in the rain for two days, were now suffering from the intense
 heat. The road ascended, with long sweeping curves, through a region of
 utter desolation: not a house, not a living being, the only relief to the
 dreariness of the waste lands an occasional little somber wood; and the
 oppressive silence communicated itself to the men, who toiled onward with
 drooping heads, bathed in perspiration. At last Saint-Pierremont appeared
 before them, a few empty houses on a small elevation. They did not pass
 through the village. Maurice observed that here they made a sudden wheel
 to the left, resuming their northern course, toward la Besace. He now
 understood the route that had been adopted in their attempt to reach
 Mouzon ahead of the Prussians; but would they succeed, with such weary,
 demoralized troops? At Saint-Pierremont the three uhlans had shown
 themselves again, at a turn in the road leading to Buzancy, and just as
 the rear-guard was leaving the village a battery was unmasked and a few
 shells came tumbling among them, without doing any injury, however. No
 response was attempted, and the march was continued with constantly
 increasing effort.
 

 From Saint-Pierremont to la Besace the distance is three good leagues, and
 when Maurice imparted that information to Jean the latter made a gesture
 of discouragement: the men would never be able to accomplish it; they
 showed it by their shortness of breath, by their haggard faces. The road
 continued to ascend, between gently sloping hills on either side that were
 gradually drawing closer together. The condition of the men necessitated a
 halt, but the only effect of their brief repose was to increase the
 stiffness of their benumbed limbs, and when the order was given to march
 the state of affairs was worse than it had been before; the regiments made
 no progress, men were everywhere falling in the ranks. Jean, noticing
 Maurice's pallid face and glassy eyes, infringed on what was his usual
 custom and conversed, endeavoring by his volubility to divert the other's
 attention and keep him awake as he moved automatically forward,
 unconscious of his actions.
 

 “Your sister lives in Sedan, you say; perhaps we shall be there before
 long.”
 

 “What, at Sedan? Never! You must be crazy; it don't lie in our way.”
 

 “Is your sister young?”
 

 “Just my age; you know I told you we are twins.”
 

 “Is she like you?”
 

 “Yes, she is fair-haired, too; and oh! such pretty curling hair! She is a
 mite of a woman, with a little thin face, not one of your noisy, flashy
 hoydens, ah, no!—Dear Henriette!”
 

 “You love her very dearly!”
 

 “Yes, yes—”
 

 There was silence between them after that, and Jean, glancing at Maurice,
 saw that his eyes were closing and he was about to fall.
 

 “Hallo there, old fellow! Come, confound it all, brace up! Let me take
 your gun a moment; that will give you a chance to rest. They can't have
 the cruelty to make us march any further to-day! we shall leave half our
 men by the roadside.”
 

 At that moment he caught sight of Osches lying straight ahead of them, its
 few poor hovels climbing in straggling fashion up the hillside, and the
 yellow church, embowered in trees, looking down on them from its perch
 upon the summit.
 

 “There's where we shall rest, for certain.”
 

 He had guessed aright; General Douay saw the exhausted condition of the
 troops, and was convinced that it would be useless to attempt to reach la
 Besace that day. What particularly influenced his determination, however,
 was the arrival of the train, that ill-starred train that had been
 trailing in his rear since they left Rheims, and of which the nine long
 miles of vehicles and animals had so terribly impeded his movements. He
 had given instructions from Quatre-Champs to direct it straight on
 Saint-Pierremont, and it was not until Osches that the teams came up with
 the corps, in such a state of exhaustion that the horses refused to stir.
 It was now five o'clock; the general, not liking the prospect of
 attempting the pass of Stonne at that late hour, determined to take the
 responsibility of abridging the task assigned them by the marshal. The
 corps was halted and proceeded to encamp; the train below in the meadows,
 guarded by a division, while the artillery took position on the hills to
 the rear, and the brigade detailed to act as rear-guard on the morrow
 rested on a height facing Saint-Pierremont. The other division, which
 included Bourgain-Desfeuilles' brigade, bivouacked on a wide plateau,
 bordered by an oak wood, behind the church. There was such confusion in
 locating the bodies of troops that it was dark before the 106th could move
 into its position at the edge of the wood.
 

 “Zut!” said Chouteau in a furious rage, “no eating for me; I want
 to sleep!”
 

 And that was the cry of all; they were overcome with fatigue. Many of them
 lacked strength and courage to erect their tents, but dropping where they
 stood, at once fell fast asleep on the bare ground. In order to eat,
 moreover, rations would have been necessary, and the commissary wagons,
 which were waiting for the 7th corps to come to them at la Besace, could
 not well be at Osches at the same time. In the universal relaxation of
 order and system even the customary corporal's call was omitted: it was
 everyone for himself. There were to be no more issues of rations from that
 time forth; the soldiers were to subsist on the provisions they were
 supposed to carry in their knapsacks, and that evening the sacks were
 empty; few indeed were those who could muster a crust of bread or some
 crumbs of the abundance in which they had been living at Vouziers of late.
 There was coffee, and those who were not too tired made and drank it
 without sugar.
 

 When Jean thought to make a division of his wealth by eating one of his
 biscuits himself and giving the other to Maurice, he discovered that the
 latter was sound asleep. He thought at first he would awake him, but
 changed his mind and stoically replaced the biscuits in his sack,
 concealing them with as much caution as if they had been bags of gold; he
 could get along with coffee, like the rest of the boys. He had insisted on
 having the tent put up, and they were all stretched on the ground beneath
 its shelter when Loubet returned from a foraging expedition, bringing in
 some carrots that he had found in a neighboring field. As there was no
 fire to cook them by they munched them raw, but the vegetables only served
 to aggravate their hunger, and they made Pache ill.
 

 “No, no; let him sleep,” said Jean to Chouteau, who was shaking Maurice to
 wake him and give him his share.
 

 “Ah,” Lapoulle broke in, “we shall be at Angouleme to-morrow, and then
 we'll have some bread. I had a cousin in the army once, who was stationed
 at Angouleme. Nice garrison, that.”
 

 They all looked surprised, and Chouteau exclaimed:
 

 “Angouleme—what are you talking about! Just listen to the bloody
 fool, saying he is at Angouleme!”
 

 It was impossible to extract any explanation from Lapoulle. He had
 insisted that morning that the uhlans that they sighted were some of
 Bazaine's troops.
 

 Then darkness descended on the camp, black as ink, silent as death.
 Notwithstanding the coolness of the night air the men had not been
 permitted to make fires; the Prussians were known to be only a few miles
 away, and it would not do to put them on the alert; orders even were
 transmitted in a hushed voice. The officers had notified their men before
 retiring that the start would be made at about four in the morning, in
 order that they might have all the rest possible, and all had hastened to
 turn in and were sleeping greedily, forgetful of their troubles. Above the
 scattered camps the deep respiration of all those slumbering crowds,
 rising upon the stillness of the night, was like the long-drawn breathing
 of old Mother Earth.
 

 Suddenly a shot rang out in the darkness and aroused the sleepers. It was
 about three o'clock, and the obscurity was profound. Immediately everyone
 was on foot, the alarm spread through the camp; it was supposed the
 Prussians were attacking. It was only Loubet who, unable to sleep longer,
 had taken it in his head to make a foray into the oak-wood, which he
 thought gave promise of rabbits: what a jolly good lark it would be if he
 could bring in a pair of nice rabbits for the comrades' breakfast! But as
 he was looking about for a favorable place in which to conceal himself, he
 heard the sound of voices and the snapping of dry branches under heavy
 footsteps; men were coming toward him; he took alarm and discharged his
 piece, believing the Prussians were at hand. Maurice, Jean, and others
 came running up in haste, when a hoarse voice made itself heard:
 

 “For God's sake, don't shoot!”
 

 And there at the edge of the wood stood a tall, lanky man, whose thick,
 bristling beard they could just distinguish in the darkness. He wore a
 gray blouse, confined at the waist by a red belt, and carried a musket
 slung by a strap over his shoulder. He hurriedly explained that he was
 French, a sergeant of francs-tireurs, and had come with two of his men
 from the wood of Dieulet, bringing important information for the general.
 

 “Hallo there, Cabasse! Ducat!” he shouted, turning his head, “hallo! you
 infernal poltroons, come here!”
 

 The men were evidently badly scared, but they came forward. Ducat, short
 and fat, with a pale face and scanty hair; Cabasse short and lean, with a
 black face and a long nose not much thicker than a knife-blade.
 

 Meantime Maurice had stepped up and taken a closer look at the sergeant;
 he finally asked him:
 

 “Tell me, are you not Guillaume Sambuc, of Remilly?”
 

 And when the man hesitatingly answered in the affirmative Maurice recoiled
 a step or two, for this Sambuc had the reputation of being a particularly
 hard case, the worthy son of a family of woodcutters who had all gone to
 the bad, the drunken father being found one night lying by the roadside
 with his throat cut, the mother and daughter, who lived by begging and
 stealing, having disappeared, most likely, in the seclusion of some
 penitentiary. He, Guillaume, did a little in the poaching and smuggling
 lines, and only one of that litter of wolves' whelps had grown up to be an
 honest man, and that was Prosper, the hussar, who had gone to work on a
 farm before he was conscripted, because he hated the life of the forest.
 

 “I saw your brother at Vouziers,” Maurice continued; “he is well.”
 

 Sambuc made no reply. To end the situation he said:
 

 “Take me to the general. Tell him that the francs-tireurs of the wood of
 Dieulet have something important to say to him.”
 

 On the way back to the camp Maurice reflected on those free companies that
 had excited such great expectations at the time of their formation, and
 had since been the object of such bitter denunciation throughout the
 country. Their professed purpose was to wage a sort of guerilla warfare,
 lying in ambush behind hedges, harassing the enemy, picking off his
 sentinels, holding the woods, from which not a Prussian was to emerge
 alive; while the truth of the matter was that they had made themselves the
 terror of the peasantry, whom they failed utterly to protect and whose
 fields they devastated. Every ne'er-do-well who hated the restraints of
 the regular service made haste to join their ranks, well pleased with the
 chance that exempted him from discipline and enabled him to lead the life
 of a tramp, tippling in pothouses and sleeping by the roadside at his own
 sweet will. Some of the companies were recruited from the very worst
 material imaginable.
 

 “Hallo there, Cabasse! Ducat!” Sambuc was constantly repeating, turning to
 his henchmen at every step he took, “Come along, will you, you snails!”
 

 Maurice was as little charmed with the two men as with their leader.
 Cabasse, the little lean fellow, was a native of Toulon, had served as
 waiter in a cafe at Marseilles, had failed at Sedan as a broker in
 southern produce, and finally had brought up in a police-court, where it
 came near going hard with him, in connection with a robbery of which the
 details were suppressed. Ducat, the little fat man, quondam huissier
 at Blainville, where he had been forced to sell out his business on
 account of a malodorous woman scrape, had recently been brought face to
 face with the court of assizes for an indiscretion of a similar nature at
 Raucourt, where he was accountant in a factory. The latter quoted Latin in
 his conversation, while the other could scarcely read, but the two were
 well mated, as unprepossessing a pair as one could expect to meet in a
 summer's day.
 

 The camp was already astir; Jean and Maurice took the francs-tireurs to
 Captain Beaudoin, who conducted them to the quarters of Colonel Vineuil.
 The colonel attempted to question them, but Sambuc, intrenching himself in
 his dignity, refused to speak to anyone except the general. Now
 Bourgain-Desfeuilles had taken up his quarters that night with the cure of
 Osches, and just then appeared, rubbing his eyes, in the doorway of the
 parsonage; he was in a horribly bad humor at his slumbers having been thus
 prematurely cut short, and the prospect that he saw before him of another
 day of famine and fatigue; hence his reception of the men who were brought
 before him was not exactly lamblike. Who were they? Whence did they come?
 What did they want? Ah, some of those francs-tireurs gentlemen—eh!
 Same thing as skulkers and riff-raff!
 

 “General,” Sambuc replied, without allowing himself to be disconcerted,
 “we and our comrades are stationed in the woods of Dieulet—”
 

 “The woods of Dieulet—where's that?”
 

 “Between Stenay and Mouzon, General.”
 

 “What do I know of your Stenay and Mouzon? Do you expect me to be familiar
 with all these strange names?”
 

 The colonel was distressed by his chief's display of ignorance; he hastily
 interfered to remind him that Stenay and Mouzon were on the Meuse, and
 that, as the Germans had occupied the former of those towns, the army was
 about to attempt the passage of the river at the other, which was situated
 more to the northward.
 

 “So you see, General,” Sambuc continued, “we've come to tell you that the
 woods of Dieulet are alive with Prussians. There was an engagement
 yesterday as the 5th corps was leaving Bois-les-Dames, somewhere about
 Nonart—”
 

 “What, yesterday? There was fighting yesterday?”
 

 “Yes, General, the 5th corps was engaged as it was falling back; it must
 have been at Beaumont last night. So, while some of us hurried off to
 report to it the movements of the enemy, we thought it best to come and
 let you know how matters stood, so that you might go to its assistance,
 for it will certainly have sixty thousand men to deal with in the
 morning.”
 

 General Bourgain-Desfeuilles gave a contemptuous shrug of his shoulders.
 

 “Sixty thousand men! Why the devil don't you call it a hundred thousand at
 once? You were dreaming, young man; your fright has made you see double.
 It is impossible there should be sixty thousand Germans so near us without
 our knowing it.”
 

 And so he went on. It was to no purpose that Sambuc appealed to Ducat and
 Cabasse to confirm his statement.
 

 “We saw the guns,” the Provencal declared; “and those chaps must be crazy
 to take them through the forest, where the rains of the past few days have
 left the roads in such a state that they sink in the mud up to the hubs.”
 

 “They have someone to guide them, for certain,” said the ex-bailiff.
 

 Since leaving Vouziers the general had stoutly refused to attach any
 further credit to reports of the junction of the two German armies which,
 as he said, they had been trying to stuff down his throat. He did not even
 consider it worth his while to send the francs-tireurs before his corps
 commander, to whom the partisans supposed, all along, that they were
 talking; if they should attempt to listen to all the yarns that were
 brought them by tramps and peasants, they would have their hands full and
 be driven from pillar to post without ever advancing a step. He directed
 the three men to remain with the column, however, since they were
 acquainted with the country.
 

 “They are good fellows, all the same,” Jean said to Maurice, as they were
 returning to fold the tent, “to have tramped three leagues across lots to
 let us know.”
 

 The young man agreed with him and commended their action, knowing as he
 did the country, and deeply alarmed to hear that the Prussians were in
 Dieulet forest and moving on Sommanthe and Beaumont. He had flung himself
 down by the roadside, exhausted before the march had commenced, with a
 sorrowing heart and an empty stomach, at the dawning of that day which he
 felt was to be so disastrous for them all. Distressed to see him looking
 so pale, the corporal affectionately asked him:
 

 “Are you feeling so badly still? What is it? Does your foot pain you?”
 

 Maurice shook his head. His foot had ceased to trouble him, thanks to the
 big shoes.
 

 “Then you are hungry.” And Jean, seeing that he did not answer, took from
 his knapsack one of the two remaining biscuits, and with a falsehood for
 which he may be forgiven: “Here, take it; I kept your share for you. I ate
 mine a while ago.”
 

 Day was breaking when the 7th corps marched out of Osches en route for
 Mouzon by way of la Besace, where they should have bivouacked. The train,
 cause of so many woes, had been sent on ahead, guarded by the first
 division, and if its own wagons, well horsed as for the most part they
 were, got over the ground at a satisfactory pace, the requisitioned
 vehicles, most of them empty, delayed the troops and produced sad
 confusion among the hills of the defile of Stonne. After leaving the
 hamlet of la Berliere the road rises more sharply between wooded hills on
 either side. Finally, about eight o'clock, the two remaining divisions got
 under way, when Marshal MacMahon came galloping up, vexed to find there
 those troops that he supposed had left la Besace that morning, with only a
 short march between them and Mouzon; his comment to General Douay on the
 subject was expressed in warm language. It was determined that the first
 division and the train should be allowed to proceed on their way to
 Mouzon, but that the two other divisions, that they might not be further
 retarded by this cumbrous advance-guard, should move by the way of
 Raucourt and Autrecourt so as to pass the Meuse at Villers. The movement
 to the north was dictated by the marshal's intense anxiety to place the
 river between his army and the enemy; cost what it might, they must be on
 the right bank that night. The rear-guard had not yet left Osches when a
 Prussian battery, recommencing the performance of the previous day, began
 to play on them from a distant eminence, over in the direction of
 Saint-Pierremont. They made the mistake of firing a few shots in reply;
 then the last of the troops filed out of the town.
 

 Until nearly eleven o'clock the 106th slowly pursued its way along the
 road which zigzags through the pass of Stonne between high hills. On the
 left hand the precipitous summits rear their heads, devoid of vegetation,
 while to the right the gentler slopes are clad with woods down to the
 roadside. The sun had come out again, and the heat was intense down in the
 inclosed valley, where an oppressive solitude prevailed. After leaving la
 Berliere, which lies at the foot of a lofty and desolate mountain
 surmounted by a Calvary, there is not a house to be seen, not a human
 being, not an animal grazing in the meadows. And the men, the day before
 so faint with hunger, so spent with fatigue, who since that time had had
 no food to restore, no slumber, to speak of, to refresh them, were now
 dragging themselves listlessly along, disheartened, filled with sullen
 anger.
 

 Soon after that, just as the men had been halted for a short rest along
 the roadside, the roar of artillery was heard away at their right; judging
 from the distinctness of the detonations the firing could not be more than
 two leagues distant. Upon the troops, weary with waiting, tired of
 retreating, the effect was magical; in the twinkling of an eye everyone
 was on his feet, eager, in a quiver of excitement, no longer mindful of
 his hunger and fatigue: why did they not advance? They preferred to fight,
 to die, rather than keep on flying thus, no one knew why or whither.
 

 General Bourgain-Desfeuilles, accompanied by Colonel de Vineuil, had
 climbed a hill on the right to reconnoiter the country. They were visible
 up there in a little clearing between two belts of wood, scanning the
 surrounding hills with their field-glasses, when all at once they
 dispatched an aide-de-camp to the column, with instructions to send up to
 them the francs-tireurs if they were still there. A few men, Jean and
 Maurice among them, accompanied the latter, in case there should be need
 of messengers.
 

 “A beastly country this, with its everlasting hills and woods!” the
 general shouted, as soon as he caught sight of Sambuc. “You hear the music—where
 is it? where is the fighting going on?”
 

 Sambuc, with Ducat and Cabasse close at his heels, listened a moment
 before he answered, casting his eye over the wide horizon, and Maurice,
 standing beside him and gazing out over the panorama of valley and forest
 that lay beneath him, was struck with admiration. It was like a boundless
 sea, whose gigantic waves had been arrested by some mighty force. In the
 foreground the somber verdure of the woods made splashes of sober color on
 the yellow of the fields, while in the brilliant sunlight the distant
 hills were bathed in purplish vapors. And while nothing was to be seen,
 not even the tiniest smoke-wreath floating on the cloudless sky, the
 cannon were thundering away in the distance, like the muttering of a
 rising storm.
 

 “Here is Sommanthe, to the right,” Sambuc said at last, pointing to a high
 hill crowned by a wood. “Yoncq lies off yonder to the left. The fighting
 is at Beaumont, General.”
 

 “Either at Varniforet or Beaumont,” Ducat observed.
 

 The general muttered below his breath: “Beaumont, Beaumont—a man can
 never tell where he is in this d——d country.” Then raising his
 voice: “And how far may this Beaumont be from here?”
 

 “A little more than six miles, if you take the road from Chene to Stenay,
 which runs up the valley yonder.”
 

 There was no cessation of the firing, which seemed to be advancing from
 west to east with a continuous succession of reports like peals of
 thunder. Sambuc added:
 

 “Bigre! it's getting warm. It is just what I expected; you know
 what I told you this morning, General; it is certainly the batteries that
 we saw in the wood of Dieulet. By this time the whole army that came up
 through Buzancy and Beauclair is at work mauling the 5th corps.”
 

 There was silence among them, while the battle raging in the distance
 growled more furiously than ever, and Maurice had to set tight his teeth
 to keep himself from speaking his mind aloud. Why did they not hasten
 whither the guns were calling them, without such waste of words? He had
 never known what it was to be excited thus; every discharge found an echo
 in his bosom and inspired him with a fierce longing to be present at the
 conflict, to put an end to it. Were they to pass by that battle, so near
 almost that they could stretch forth their arm and touch it with their
 hand, and never expend a cartridge? It must be to decide a wager that some
 one had made, that since the beginning of the campaign they were dragged
 about the country thus, always flying before the enemy! At Vouziers they
 had heard the musketry of the rear-guard, at Osches the German guns had
 played a moment on their retreating backs; and now they were to run for it
 again, they were not to be allowed to advance at double-quick to the
 succor of comrades in distress! Maurice looked at Jean, who was also very
 pale, his eyes shining with a bright, feverish light. Every heart leaped
 in every bosom at the loud summons of the artillery.
 

 While they were waiting a general, attended by his staff, was seen
 ascending the narrow path that wound up the hill. It was Douay, their
 corps-commander, who came hastening up, with anxiety depicted on his
 countenance, and when he had questioned the francs-tireurs he gave
 utterance to an exclamation of despair. But what could he have done, even
 had he learned their tidings that morning? The marshal's orders were
 explicit: they must be across the Meuse that night, cost what it might.
 And then again, how was he to collect his scattered troops, strung out
 along the road to Raucourt, and direct then on Beaumont? Could they arrive
 in time to be of use? The 5th corps must be in full retreat on Mouzon by
 that time, as was indicated by the sound of the firing, which was receding
 more and more to the eastward, as a deadly hurricane moves off after
 having accomplished its disastrous work. With a fierce gesture, expressive
 of his sense of impotency, General Douay outstretched his arms toward the
 wide horizon of hill and dale, of woods and fields, and the order went
 forth to proceed with the march to Raucourt.
 

 Ah, what a march was that through that dismal pass of Stonne, with the
 lofty summits o'erhanging them on either side, while through the woods on
 their right came the incessant volleying of the artillery. Colonel de
 Vineuil rode at the head of his regiment, bracing himself firmly in his
 saddle, his face set and very pale, his eyes winking like those of one
 trying not to weep. Captain Beaudoin strode along in silence, gnawing his
 mustache, while Lieutenant Rochas let slip an occasional imprecation,
 invoking ruin and destruction on himself and everyone besides. Even the
 most cowardly among the men, those who had the least stomach for fighting,
 were shamed and angered by their continuous retreat; they felt the bitter
 humiliation of turning their backs while those beasts of Prussians were
 murdering their comrades over yonder.
 

 After emerging from the pass the road, from a tortuous path among the
 hills, increased in width and led through a broad stretch of level
 country, dotted here and there with small woods. The 106th was now a
 portion of the rear-guard, and at every moment since leaving Osches had
 been expecting to feel the enemy's attack, for the Prussians were
 following the column step by step, never letting it escape their vigilant
 eyes, waiting, doubtless, for a favorable opportunity to fall on its rear.
 Their cavalry were on the alert to take advantage of any bit of ground
 that promised them an opportunity of getting in on our flank; several
 squadrons of Prussian Guards were seen advancing from behind a wood, but
 they gave up their purpose upon a demonstration made by a regiment of our
 hussars, who came up at a gallop, sweeping the road. Thanks to the
 breathing-spell afforded them by this circumstance the retreat went on in
 sufficiently good order, and Raucourt was not far away, when a spectacle
 greeted their eyes that filled them with consternation and completely
 demoralized the troops. Upon coming to a cross-road they suddenly caught
 sight of a hurrying, straggling, flying throng, wounded officers, soldiers
 without arms and without organization, runaway teams from the train, all—men
 and animals—mingled in wildest confusion, wild with panic. It was
 the wreck of one of the brigades of the 1st division, which had been sent
 that morning to escort the train to Mouzon; there had been an unfortunate
 misconception of orders, and this brigade and a portion of the wagons had
 taken a wrong road and reached Varniforet, near Beaumont, at the very time
 when the 5th corps was being driven back in disorder. Taken unawares,
 overborne by the flank attack of an enemy superior in numbers, they had
 fled; and bleeding, with haggard faces, crazed with fear, were now
 returning to spread consternation among their comrades; it was as if they
 had been wafted thither on the breath of the battle that had been raging
 incessantly since noon.
 

 Alarm and anxiety possessed everyone, from highest to lowest, as the
 column poured through Raucourt in wild stampede. Should they turn to the
 left, toward Autrecourt, and attempt to pass the Meuse at Villers, as had
 been previously decided? The general hesitated, fearing to encounter
 difficulties in crossing there, even if the bridge were not already in
 possession of the Prussians; he finally decided to keep straight on
 through the defile of Harancourt and thus reach Remilly before nightfall.
 First Mouzon, then Villers, and last Remilly; they were still pressing on
 northward, with the tramp of the uhlans on the road behind them. There
 remained scant four miles for them to accomplish, but it was five o'clock,
 and the men were sinking with fatigue. They had been under arms since
 daybreak, twelve hours had been consumed in advancing three short leagues;
 they were harassed and fatigued as much by their constant halts and the
 stress of their emotions as by the actual toil of the march. For the last
 two nights they had had scarce any sleep; their hunger had been unappeased
 since they left Vouziers. In Raucourt the distress was terrible; men fell
 in the ranks from sheer inanition.
 

 The little town is rich, with its numerous factories, its handsome
 thoroughfare lined with two rows of well-built houses, and its pretty
 church and mairie; but the night before Marshal MacMahon and the
 Emperor had passed that way with their respective staffs and all the
 imperial household, and during the whole of the present morning the entire
 1st corps had been streaming like a torrent through the main street. The
 resources of the place had not been adequate to meet the requirements of
 these hosts; the shelves of the bakers and grocers were empty, and even
 the houses of the bourgeois had been swept clean of provisions; there was
 no bread, no wine, no sugar, nothing capable of allaying hunger or thirst.
 Ladies had been seen to station themselves before their doors and deal out
 glasses of wine and cups of bouillon until cask and kettle alike were
 drained of their last drop. And so there was an end, and when, about three
 o'clock, the first regiments of the 7th corps began to appear the scene
 was a pitiful one; the broad street was filled from curb to curb with
 weary, dust-stained men, dying with hunger, and there was not a mouthful
 of food to give them. Many of them stopped, knocking at doors and
 extending their hands beseechingly toward windows, begging for a morsel of
 bread, and women were seen to cry and sob as they motioned that they could
 not help them, that they had nothing left.
 

 At the corner of the Rue Dix-Potiers Maurice had an attack of dizziness
 and reeled as if about to fall. To Jean, who came hastening up, he said:
 

 “No, leave me; it is all up with me. I may as well die here!”
 

 He had sunk down upon a door-step. The corporal spoke in a rough tone of
 displeasure assumed for the occasion:
 

 “Nom de Dieu! why don't you try to behave like a soldier! Do you
 want the Prussians to catch you? Come, get up!”
 

 Then, as the young man, lividly pale, his eyes tight-closed, almost
 unconscious, made no reply, he let slip another oath, but in another key
 this time, in a tone of infinite gentleness and pity:
 

 “Nom de Dieu! Nom de Dieu!”
 

 And running to a drinking-fountain near by, he filled his basin with water
 and hurried back to bathe his friend's face. Then, without further attempt
 at concealment, he took from his sack the last remaining biscuit that he
 had guarded with such jealous caution, and commenced crumbling it into
 small bits that he introduced between the other's teeth. The famishing man
 opened his eyes and ate greedily.
 

 “But you,” he asked, suddenly recollecting himself, “how comes it that you
 did not eat it?”
 

 “Oh, I!” said Jean. “I'm tough, I can wait. A good drink of Adam's ale,
 and I shall be all right.”
 

 He went and filled his basin again at the fountain, emptied it at a single
 draught, and came back smacking his lips in token of satisfaction with his
 feast. He, too, was cadaverously pale, and so faint with hunger that his
 hands were trembling like a leaf.
 

 “Come, get up, and let's be going. We must be getting back to the
 comrades, little one.”
 

 Maurice leaned on his arm and suffered himself to be helped along as if he
 had been a child; never had woman's arm about him so warmed his heart. In
 that extremity of distress, with death staring him in the face, it
 afforded him a deliciously cheering sense of comfort to know that someone
 loved and cared for him, and the reflection that that heart, which was so
 entirely his, was the heart of a simple-minded peasant, whose aspirations
 scarcely rose above the satisfaction of his daily wants, for whom he had
 recently experienced a feeling of repugnance, served to add to his
 gratitude a sensation of ineffable joy. Was it not the brotherhood that
 had prevailed in the world in its earlier days, the friendship that had
 existed before caste and culture were; that friendship which unites two
 men and makes them one in their common need of assistance, in the presence
 of Nature, the common enemy? He felt the tie of humanity uniting him and
 Jean, and was proud to know that the latter, his comforter and savior, was
 stronger than he; while to Jean, who did not analyze his sensations, it
 afforded unalloyed pleasure to be the instrument of protecting, in his
 friend, that cultivation and intelligence which, in himself, were only
 rudimentary. Since the death of his wife, who had been snatched away from
 him by a frightful catastrophe, he had believed that his heart was dead,
 he had sworn to have nothing more to do with those creatures, who, even
 when they are not wicked and depraved, are cause of so much suffering to
 man. And thus, to both of them their friendship was a comfort and relief.
 There was no need of any demonstrative display of affection; they
 understood each other; there was close community of sympathy between them,
 and, notwithstanding their apparent external dissimilarity, the bond of
 pity and common suffering made them as one during their terrible march
 that day to Remilly.
 

 As the French rear-guard left Raucourt by one end of the town the Germans
 came in at the other, and forthwith two of their batteries commenced
 firing from the position they had taken on the heights to the left; the
 106th, retreating along the road that follows the course of the Emmane,
 was directly in the line of fire. A shell cut down a poplar on the bank of
 the stream; another came and buried itself in the soft ground close to
 Captain Beaudoin, but did not burst. From there on to Harancourt, however,
 the walls of the pass kept approaching nearer and nearer, and the troops
 were crowded together in a narrow gorge commanded on either side by hills
 covered with trees. A handful of Prussians in ambush on those heights
 might have caused incalculable disaster. With the cannon thundering in
 their rear and the menace of a possible attack on either flank, the men's
 uneasiness increased with every step they took, and they were in haste to
 get out of such a dangerous neighborhood; hence they summoned up their
 reserved strength, and those soldiers who, but now in Raucourt, had scarce
 been able to drag themselves along, now, with the peril that lay behind
 them as an incentive, struck out at a good round pace. The very horses
 seemed to be conscious that the loss of a minute might cost them dear. And
 the impetus thus given continued; all was going well, the head of the
 column must have reached Remilly, when, all at once, their progress was
 arrested.
 

 “Heavens and earth!” said Chouteau, “are they going to leave us here in
 the road?”
 

 The regiment had not yet reached Harancourt, and the shells were still
 tumbling about them; while the men were marking time, awaiting the word to
 go ahead again, one burst, on the right of the column, without injuring
 anyone, fortunately. Five minutes passed, that seemed to them long as an
 eternity, and still they did not move; there was some obstacle on ahead
 that barred their way as effectually as if a strong wall had been built
 across the road. The colonel, standing up in his stirrups, peered
 nervously to the front, for he saw that it would require but little to
 create a panic among his men.
 

 “We are betrayed; everybody can see it,” shouted Chouteau.
 

 Murmurs of reproach arose on every side, the sullen muttering of their
 discontent exasperated by their fears. Yes, yes! they had been brought
 there to be sold, to be delivered over to the Prussians. In the baleful
 fatality that pursued them, and among all the blunders of their leaders,
 those dense intelligences were unable to account for such an uninterrupted
 succession of disasters on any other ground than that of treachery.
 

 “We are betrayed! we are betrayed!” the men wildly repeated.
 

 Then Loubet's fertile intellect evolved an idea: “It is like enough that
 that pig of an Emperor has sat himself down in the road, with his baggage,
 on purpose to keep us here.”
 

 The idle fancy was received as true, and immediately spread up and down
 the line; everyone declared that the imperial household had blocked the
 road and was responsible for the stoppage. There was a universal chorus of
 execration, of opprobrious epithets, an unchaining of the hatred and
 hostility that were inspired by the insolence of the Emperor's attendants,
 who took possession of the towns where they stopped at night as if they
 owned them, unpacking their luxuries, their costly wines and plate of gold
 and silver, before the eyes of the poor soldiers who were destitute of
 everything, filling the kitchens with the steam of savory viands while
 they, poor devils, had nothing for it but to tighten the belt of their
 trousers. Ah! that wretched Emperor, that miserable man, deposed from his
 throne and stripped of his command, a stranger in his own empire; whom
 they were conveying up and down the country along with the other baggage,
 like some piece of useless furniture, whose doom it was ever to drag
 behind him the irony of his imperial state: cent-gardes, horses,
 carriages, cooks, and vans, sweeping, as it were, the blood and mire from
 the roads of his defeat with the magnificence of his court mantle,
 embroidered with the heraldic bees!
 

 In rapid succession, one after the other, two more shells fell; Lieutenant
 Rochas had his kepi carried away by a fragment. The men huddled
 closer together and began to crowd forward, the movement gathering
 strength as it ran from rear to front. Inarticulate cries were heard,
 Lapoulle shouted furiously to go ahead. A minute longer and there would
 have been a horrible catastrophe, and many men must have been crushed to
 death in the mad struggle to escape from the funnel-like gorge.
 

 The colonel—he was very pale—turned and spoke to the soldiers:
 

 “My children, my children, be a little patient. I have sent to see what is
 the matter—it will only be a moment—”
 

 But they did not advance, and the seconds seemed like centuries. Jean,
 quite cool and collected, resumed his hold of Maurice's hand, and
 whispered to him that, in case their comrades began to shove, they two
 could leave the road, climb the hill on the left, and make their way to
 the stream. He looked about to see where the francs-tireurs were, thinking
 he might gain some information from them regarding the roads, but was told
 they had vanished while the column was passing through Raucourt. Just then
 the march was resumed, and almost immediately a bend in the road took them
 out of range of the German batteries. Later in the day it was ascertained
 that it was four cuirassier regiments of Bonnemain's division who, in the
 disorder of that ill-starred retreat, had thus blocked the road of the 7th
 corps and delayed the march.
 

 It was nearly dark when the 106th passed through Angecourt. The wooded
 hills continued on the right, but to the left the country was more level,
 and a valley was visible in the distance, veiled in bluish mists. At last,
 just as the shades of night were descending, they stood on the heights of
 Remilly and beheld a ribbon of pale silver unrolling its length upon a
 broad expanse of verdant plain. It was the Meuse, that Meuse they had so
 longed to see, and where it seemed as if victory awaited them.
 

 Pointing to some lights in the distance that were beginning to twinkle
 cheerily among the trees, down in that fertile valley that lay there so
 peaceful in the mellow twilight, Maurice said to Jean, with the glad
 content of a man revisiting a country that he knows and loves:
 

 “Look! over that way—that is Sedan!”
 

 
 
 

 Remilly is built on a hill that rises from the left bank of the Meuse,
 presenting the appearance of an amphitheater; the one village street that
 meanders circuitously down the sharp descent was thronged with men,
 horses, and vehicles in dire confusion. Half-way up the hill, in front of
 the church, some drivers had managed to interlock the wheels of their
 guns, and all the oaths and blows of the artillerymen were unavailing to
 get them forward. Further down, near the woolen mill, where the Emmane
 tumbles noisily over the dam, the road was choked with a long line of
 stranded baggage wagons, while close at hand, at the inn of the Maltese
 Cross, a constantly increasing crowd of angry soldiers pushed and
 struggled, and could not obtain so much as a glass of wine.
 

 All this mad hurly-burly was going on at the southern end of the village,
 which is here separated from the Meuse by a little grove of trees, and
 where the engineers had that morning stretched a bridge of boats across
 the river. There was a ferry to the right; the ferryman's house stood by
 itself, white and staring, amid a rank growth of weeds. Great fires had
 been built on either bank, which, being replenished from time to time,
 glared ruddily in the darkness and made the stream and both its shores as
 light as day. They served to show the immense multitude of men massed
 there, awaiting a chance to cross, while the footway only permitted the
 passage of two men abreast, and over the bridge proper the cavalry and
 artillery were obliged to proceed at a walk, so that the crossing promised
 to be a protracted operation. It was said that the troops still on the
 left bank comprised a brigade of the 1st corps, an ammunition train, and
 the four regiments of cuirassiers belonging to Bonnemain's division, while
 coming up in hot haste behind them was the 7th corps, over thirty thousand
 strong, possessed with the belief that the enemy was at their heels and
 pushing on with feverish eagerness to gain the security of the other
 shore.
 

 For a while despair reigned. What! they had been marching since morning
 with nothing to eat, they had summoned up all their energies to escape
 that deadly trap at Harancourt pass, only in the end to be landed in that
 slough of despond, with an insurmountable wall staring them in the face!
 It would be hours, perhaps, before it became the last comer's turn to
 cross, and everyone knew that even if the Prussians should not be
 enterprising enough to continue their pursuit in the darkness they would
 be there with the first glimpse of daylight. Orders came for them to stack
 muskets, however, and they made their camp on the great range of bare
 hills which slope downward to the meadows of the Meuse, with the Mouzon
 road running at their base. To their rear and occupying the level plateau
 on top of the range the guns of the reserve artillery were arranged in
 battery, pointed so as to sweep the entrance of the pass should there be
 necessity for it. And thus commenced another period of agonized, grumbling
 suspense.
 

 When finally the preparations were all completed the 106th found
 themselves posted in a field of stubble above the road, in a position that
 commanded a view of the broad plain. The men had parted regretfully with
 their arms, casting timorous looks behind them that showed they were
 apprehensive of a night attack. Their faces were stern and set, and
 silence reigned, only broken from time to time by some sullen murmur of
 angry complaint. It was nearly nine o'clock, they had been there two
 hours, and yet many of them, notwithstanding their terrible fatigue, could
 not sleep; stretched on the bare ground, they would start and bend their
 ears to catch the faintest sound that rose in the distance. They had
 ceased to fight their torturing hunger; they would eat over yonder, on the
 other bank, when they had passed the river; they would eat grass if
 nothing else was to be found. The crowd at the bridge, however, seemed to
 increase rather than diminish; the officers that General Douay had
 stationed there came back to him every few minutes, always bringing the
 same unwelcome report, that it would be hours and hours before any relief
 could be expected. Finally the general determined to go down to the bridge
 in person, and the men saw him on the bank, bestirring himself and others
 and hurrying the passage of the troops.
 

 Maurice, seated with Jean against a wall, pointed to the north, as he had
 done before. “There is Sedan in the distance. And look! Bazeilles is over
 yonder—and then comes Douzy, and then Carignan, more to the right.
 We shall concentrate at Carignan, I feel sure we shall. Ah! there is
 plenty of room, as you would see if it were daylight!”
 

 And his sweeping gesture embraced the entire valley that lay beneath them,
 enfolded in shadow. There was sufficient light remaining in the sky that
 they could distinguish the pale gleam of the river where it ran its course
 among the dusky meadows. The scattered trees made clumps of denser shade,
 especially a row of poplars to the left, whose tops were profiled on the
 horizon like the fantastic ornaments on some old castle gateway. And in
 the background, behind Sedan, dotted with countless little points of
 brilliant light, the shadows had mustered, denser and darker, as if all
 the forests of the Ardennes had collected the inky blackness of their
 secular oaks and cast it there.
 

 Jean's gaze came back to the bridge of boats beneath them.
 

 “Look there! everything is against us. We shall never get across.”
 

 The fires upon both banks blazed up more brightly just then, and their
 light was so intense that the whole fearful scene was pictured on the
 darkness with vivid distinctness. The boats on which the longitudinal
 girders rested, owing to the weight of the cavalry and artillery that had
 been crossing uninterruptedly since morning, had settled to such an extent
 that the floor of the bridge was covered with water. The cuirassiers were
 passing at the time, two abreast, in a long unbroken file, emerging from
 the obscurity of the hither shore to be swallowed up in the shadows of the
 other, and nothing was to be seen of the bridge; they appeared to be
 marching on the bosom of the ruddy stream, that flashed and danced in the
 flickering firelight. The horses snorted and hung back, manifesting every
 indication of terror as they felt the unstable pathway yielding beneath
 their feet, and the cuirassiers, standing erect in their stirrups and
 clutching at the reins, poured onward in a steady, unceasing stream,
 wrapped in their great white mantles, their helmets flashing in the red
 light of the flames. One might have taken them for some spectral band of
 knights, with locks of fire, going forth to do battle with the powers of
 darkness.
 

 Jean's suffering wrested from him a deep-toned exclamation:
 

 “Oh! I am hungry!”
 

 On every side, meantime, the men, notwithstanding the complainings of
 their empty stomachs, had thrown themselves down to sleep. Their fatigue
 was so great that it finally got the better of their fears and struck them
 down upon the bare earth, where they lay on their back, with open mouth
 and arms outstretched, like logs beneath the moonless sky. The bustle of
 the camp was stilled, and all along the naked range, from end to end,
 there reigned a silence as of death.
 

 “Oh! I am hungry; I am so hungry that I could eat dirt!”
 

 Jean, patient as he was and inured to hardship, could not restrain the
 cry; he had eaten nothing in thirty-six hours, and it was torn from him by
 sheer stress of physical suffering. Then Maurice, knowing that two or
 three hours at all events must elapse before their regiment could move to
 pass the stream, said:
 

 “See here, I have an uncle not far from here—you know, Uncle
 Fouchard, of whom you have heard me speak. His house is five or six
 hundred yards from here; I didn't like the idea, but as you are so hungry—The
 deuce! the old man can't refuse us bread!”
 

 His comrade made no objection and they went off together. Father
 Fouchard's little farm was situated just at the mouth of Harancourt pass,
 near the plateau where the artillery was posted. The house was a low
 structure, surrounded by quite an imposing cluster of dependencies; a
 barn, a stable, and cow-sheds, while across the road was a disused
 carriage-house which the old peasant had converted into an abattoir, where
 he slaughtered with his own hands the cattle which he afterward carried
 about the country in his wagon to his customers.
 

 Maurice was surprised as he approached the house to see no light.
 

 “Ah, the old miser! he has locked and barred everything tight and fast.
 Like as not he won't let us in.”
 

 But something that he saw brought him to a standstill. Before the house a
 dozen soldiers were moving to and fro, hungry plunderers, doubtless, on
 the prowl in quest of something to eat. First they had called, then had
 knocked, and now, seeing that the place was dark and deserted, they were
 hammering at the door with the butts of their muskets in an attempt to
 force it open. A growling chorus of encouragement greeted them from the
 outsiders of the circle.
 

 “Nom de Dieu! go ahead! smash it in, since there is no one at
 home!”
 

 All at once the shutter of a window in the garret was thrown back and a
 tall old man presented himself, bare-headed, wearing the peasant's blouse,
 with a candle in one hand and a gun in the other. Beneath the thick shock
 of bristling white hair was a square face, deeply seamed and wrinkled,
 with a strong nose, large, pale eyes, and stubborn chin.
 

 “You must be robbers, to smash things as you are doing!” he shouted in an
 angry tone. “What do you want?”
 

 The soldiers, taken by surprise, drew back a little way.
 

 “We are perishing with hunger; we want something to eat.”
 

 “I have nothing, not a crust. Do you suppose that I keep victuals in my
 house to fill a hundred thousand mouths? Others were here before you; yes,
 General Ducrot's men were here this morning, I tell you, and they cleaned
 me out of everything.”
 

 The soldiers came forward again, one by one.
 

 “Let us in, all the same; we can rest ourselves, and you can hunt up
 something—”
 

 And they were commencing to hammer at the door again, when the old fellow,
 placing his candle on the window-sill, raised his gun to his shoulder.
 

 “As true as that candle stands there, I'll put a hole in the first man
 that touches that door!”
 

 The prospect looked favorable for a row. Oaths and imprecations resounded,
 and one of the men was heard to shout that they would settle matters with
 the pig of a peasant, who was like all the rest of them and would throw
 his bread in the river rather than give a mouthful to a starving soldier.
 The light of the candle glinted on the barrels of the chassepots as they
 were brought to an aim; the angry men were about to shoot him where he
 stood, while he, headstrong and violent, would not yield an inch.
 

 “Nothing, nothing! Not a crust! I tell you they cleaned me out!”
 

 Maurice rushed in in affright, followed by Jean.
 

 “Comrades, comrades—”
 

 He knocked up the soldiers' guns, and raising his eyes, said entreatingly:
 

 “Come, be reasonable. Don't you know me? It is I.”
 

 “Who, I?”
 

 “Maurice Levasseur, your nephew.”
 

 Father Fouchard took up his candle. He recognized his nephew, beyond a
 doubt, but was firm in his resolve not to give so much as a glass of
 water.
 

 “How can I tell whether you are my nephew or not in this infernal
 darkness? Clear out, everyone of you, or I will fire!”
 

 And amid an uproar of execration, and threats to bring him down and burn
 the shanty, he still had nothing to say but: “Clear out, or I'll fire!”
 which he repeated more than twenty times.
 

 Suddenly a loud clear voice was heard rising above the din:
 

 “But not on me, father?”
 

 The others stood aside, and in the flickering light of the candle a man
 appeared, wearing the chevrons of a quartermaster-sergeant. It was Honore,
 whose battery was a short two hundred yards from there and who had been
 struggling for the last two hours against an irresistible longing to come
 and knock at that door. He had sworn never to set foot in that house
 again, and in all his four years of army life had not exchanged a single
 letter with that father whom he now addressed so curtly. The marauders had
 drawn apart and were conversing excitedly among themselves; what, the old
 man's son, and a “non-com.”! it wouldn't answer; better go and try their
 luck elsewhere! So they slunk away and vanished in the darkness.
 

 When Fouchard saw that he had nothing more to fear he said in a
 matter-of-course way, as if he had seen his son only the day before:
 

 “It's you—All right, I'll come down.”
 

 His descent was a matter of time. He could be heard inside the house
 opening locked doors and carefully fastening them again, the maneuvers of
 a man determined to leave nothing at loose ends. At last the door was
 opened, but only for a few inches, and the strong grasp that held it would
 let it go no further.
 

 “Come in, thou! and no one besides!”
 

 He could not turn away his nephew, however, notwithstanding his manifest
 repugnance.
 

 “Well, thou too!”
 

 He shut the door flat in Jean's face, in spite of Maurice's entreaties.
 But he was obdurate. No, no! he wouldn't have it; he had no use for
 strangers and robbers in his house, to smash and destroy his furniture!
 Finally Honore shoved their comrade inside the door by main strength and
 the old man had to make the best of it, grumbling and growling
 vindictively. He had carried his gun with him all this time. When at last
 he had ushered the three men into the common sitting-room and had stood
 his gun in a corner and placed the candle on the table, he sank into a
 mulish silence.
 

 “Say, father, we are perishing with hunger. You will let us have a little
 bread and cheese, won't you?”
 

 He made a pretense of not hearing and did not answer, turning his head at
 every instant toward the window as if listening for some other band that
 might be coming to lay siege to his house.
 

 “Uncle, Jean has been a brother to me; he deprived himself of food to give
 it to me. And we have seen such suffering together!”
 

 He turned and looked about the room to assure himself that nothing was
 missing, not giving the three soldiers so much as a glance, and at last,
 still without a word spoken, appeared to come to a decision. He suddenly
 arose, took the candle and went out, leaving them in darkness and
 carefully closing and locking the door behind him in order that no one
 might follow him. They could hear his footsteps on the stairs that led to
 the cellar. There was another long period of waiting, and when he
 returned, again locking and bolting everything after him, he placed upon
 the table a big loaf of bread and a cheese, amid a silence which, once his
 anger had blown over, was merely the result of cautious cunning, for no
 one can ever tell what may come of too much talking. The three men threw
 themselves ravenously upon the food, and the only sound to be heard in the
 room was the fierce grinding of their jaws.
 

 Honore rose, and going to the sideboard brought back a pitcher of water.
 

 “I think you might have given us some wine, father.”
 

 Whereupon Fouchard, now master of himself and no longer fearing that this
 anger might lead him into unguarded speech, once more found his tongue.
 

 “Wine! I haven't any, not a drop! The others, those fellows of Ducrot's,
 ate and drank all I had, robbed me of everything!”
 

 He was lying, and try to conceal it as he might the shifty expression in
 his great light eyes showed it. For the past two days he had been driving
 away his cattle, as well those reserved for work on the farm as those he
 had purchased to slaughter, and hiding them, no one knew where, in the
 depths of some wood or in some abandoned quarry, and he had devoted hours
 to burying all his household stores, wine, bread, and things of the least
 value, even to the flour and salt, so that anyone might have ransacked his
 cupboards and been none the richer for it. He had refused to sell anything
 to the first soldiers who came along; no one knew, he might be able to do
 better later on; and the patient, sly old curmudgeon indulged himself with
 vague dreams of wealth.
 

 Maurice, who was first to satisfy his appetite, commenced to talk.
 

 “Have you seen my sister Henriette lately?”
 

 The old man was pacing up and down the room, casting an occasional glance
 at Jean, who was bolting huge mouthfuls of bread; after apparently giving
 the subject long consideration he deliberately answered:
 

 “Henriette, yes, I saw her last month when I was in Sedan. But I saw
 Weiss, her husband, this morning. He was with Monsieur Delaherche, his
 boss, who had come over in his carriage to see the soldiers at Mouzon—which
 is the same as saying that they were out for a good time.”
 

 An expression of intense scorn flitted over the old peasant's impenetrable
 face.
 

 “Perhaps they saw more of the army than they wanted to, and didn't have
 such a very good time after all, for ever since three o'clock the roads
 have been impassable on account of the crowds of flying soldiers.”
 

 In the same unmoved voice, as if the matter were one of perfect
 indifference to him, he gave them some tidings of the defeat of the 5th
 corps, that had been surprised at Beaumont while the men were making their
 soup and chased by the Bavarians all the way to Mouzon. Some fugitives who
 had passed through Remilly, mad with terror, had told him that they had
 been betrayed once more and that de Failly had sold them to Bismarck.
 Maurice's thoughts reverted to the aimless, blundering movements of the
 last two days, to Marshal MacMahon hurrying on their retreat and insisting
 on getting them across the Meuse at every cost, after wasting so many
 precious hours in incomprehensible delays. It was too late. Doubtless the
 marshal, who had stormed so on finding the 7th corps still at Osches when
 he supposed it to be at la Besace, had felt assured that the 5th corps was
 safe in camp at Mouzon when, lingering in Beaumont, it had come to grief
 there. But what could they expect from troops so poorly officered,
 demoralized by suspense and incessant retreat, dying with hunger and
 fatigue?
 

 Fouchard had finally come and planted himself behind Jean's chair,
 watching with astonishment the inroads he was making on the bread and
 cheese. In a coldly sarcastic tone he asked:
 

 “Are you beginning to feel better, hein?”
 

 The corporal raised his head and replied with the same peasant-like
 directness:
 

 “Just beginning, thank you!”
 

 Honore, notwithstanding his hunger, had ceased from eating whenever it
 seemed to him that he heard a noise about the house. If he had struggled
 long, and finally been false to his oath never to set foot in that house
 again, the reason was that he could no longer withstand his craving desire
 to see Silvine. The letter that he had received from her at Rheims lay on
 his bosom, next his skin, that letter, so tenderly passionate, in which
 she told him that she loved him still, that she should never love anyone
 save him, despite the cruel past, despite Goliah and little Charlot, that
 man's child. He was thinking of naught save her, was wondering why he had
 not seen her yet, all the time watching himself that he might not let his
 father see his anxiety. At last his passion became too strong for him,
 however, and he asked in a tone as natural as he could command:
 

 “Is not Silvine with you any longer?”
 

 Fouchard gave his son a glance out of the corner of his eye, chuckling
 internally.
 

 “Yes, yes.”
 

 Then he expectorated and was silent, so that the artillery man had
 presently to broach the subject again.
 

 “She has gone to bed, then?”
 

 “No, no.”
 

 Finally the old fellow condescended to explain that he, too, had been
 taking an outing that morning, had driven over to Raucourt market in his
 wagon and taken his little servant with him. He saw no reason, because a
 lot of soldiers happened to pass that way, why folks should cease to eat
 meat or why a man should not attend to his business, so he had taken a
 sheep and a quarter of beef over there, as it was his custom to do every
 Tuesday, and had just disposed of the last of his stock-in-trade when up
 came the 7th corps and he found himself in the middle of a terrible
 hubbub. Everyone was running, pushing, and crowding. Then he became
 alarmed lest they should take his horse and wagon from him, and drove off,
 leaving his servant, who was just then making some purchases in the town.
 

 “Oh, Silvine will come back all right,” he concluded in his tranquil
 voice. “She must have taken shelter with Doctor Dalichamp, her godfather.
 You would think to look at her that she wouldn't dare to say boo to a
 goose, but she is a girl of courage, all the same. Yes, yes; she has lots
 of good qualities, Silvine has.”
 

 Was it an attempt on his part to be jocose? or did he wish to explain why
 it was he kept her in his service, that girl who had caused dissension
 between father and son, whose child by the Prussian was in the house? He
 again gave his boy that sidelong look and laughed his voiceless laugh.
 

 “Little Charlot is asleep there in his room; she surely won't be long
 away, now.”
 

 Honore, with quivering lips, looked so intently at his father that the old
 man began to pace the floor again. Mon Dieu! yes, the child was
 there; doubtless he would have to look on him. A painful silence filled
 the room, while he mechanically cut himself more bread and began to eat
 again. Jean also continued his operations in that line, without finding it
 necessary to say a word. Maurice contemplated the furniture, the old
 sideboard, the antique clock, and reflected on the long summer days that
 he had spent at Remilly in bygone times with his sister Henriette. The
 minutes slipped away, the clock struck eleven.
 

 “The devil!” he murmured, “it will never do to let the regiment go off
 without us!”
 

 He stepped to the window and opened it, Fouchard making no objection.
 Beneath lay the valley, a great bowl filled to the brim with blackness;
 presently, however, when his eyes became more accustomed to the obscurity,
 he had no difficulty in distinguishing the bridge, illuminated by the
 fires on the two banks. The cuirassiers were passing still, like phantoms
 in their long white cloaks, while their steeds trod upon the bosom of the
 stream and a chill wind of terror breathed on them from behind; and so the
 spectral train moved on, apparently interminable, in an endless,
 slow-moving vision of unsubstantial forms. Toward the right, over the bare
 hills where the slumbering army lay, there brooded a stillness and repose
 like death.
 

 “Ah well!” said Maurice with a gesture of disappointment, “'twill be
 to-morrow morning.”
 

 He had left the window open, and Father Fouchard, seizing his gun,
 straddled the sill and stepped outside, as lightly as a young man. For a
 time they could hear his tramp upon the road, as regular as that of a
 sentry pacing his beat, but presently it ceased and the only sound that
 reached their ears was the distant clamor on the crowded bridge; it must
 be that he had seated himself by the wayside, where he could watch for
 approaching danger and at slightest sign leap to defend his property.
 

 Honore's anxiety meantime was momentarily increasing; his eyes were fixed
 constantly on the clock. It was less than four miles from Raucourt to
 Remilly, an easy hour's walk for a woman as young and strong as Silvine.
 Why had she not returned in all that time since the old man lost sight of
 her in the confusion? He thought of the disorder of a retreating army
 corps, spreading over the country and blocking the roads; some accident
 must certainly have happened, and he pictured her in distress, wandering
 among the lonely fields, trampled under foot by the horsemen.
 

 But suddenly the three men rose to their feet, moved by a common impulse.
 There was a sound of rapid steps coming up the road and the old man was
 heard to cock his weapon.
 

 “Who goes there?” he shouted. “Is it you, Silvine?”
 

 There was no reply. He repeated his question, threatening to fire. Then a
 laboring, breathless voice managed to articulate:
 

 “Yes, yes, Father Fouchard; it is I.” And she quickly asked: “And
 Charlot?”
 

 “He is abed and asleep.”
 

 “That is well! Thanks.”
 

 There was no longer cause for her to hasten; she gave utterance to a
 deep-drawn sigh, as if to rid herself of her burden of fatigue and
 distress.
 

 “Go in by the window,” said Fouchard. “There is company in there.”
 

 She was greatly agitated when, leaping lightly into the room, she beheld
 the three men. In the uncertain candle-light she gave the impression of
 being very dark, with thick black hair and a pair of large, fine, lustrous
 eyes, the chief adornment of a small oval face, strong by reason of its
 tranquil resignation. The sudden meeting with Honore had sent all the
 blood rushing from her heart to her cheeks; and yet she was hardly
 surprised to find him there; he had been in her thoughts all the way home
 from Raucourt.
 

 He, trembling with agitation, his heart in his throat, spoke with affected
 calmness:
 

 “Good-evening, Silvine.”
 

 “Good-evening, Honore.”
 

 Then, to keep from breaking down and bursting into tears, she turned away,
 and recognizing Maurice, gave him a smile. Jean's presence was
 embarrassing to her. She felt as if she were choking somehow, and removed
 the foulard that she wore about her neck.
 

 Honore continued, dropping the friendly thou of other days:
 

 “We were anxious about you, Silvine, on account of the Prussians being so
 near at hand.”
 

 All at once her face became very pale and showed great distress; raising
 her hand to her eyes as if to shut out some atrocious vision, and
 directing an involuntary glance toward the room where Charlot was
 slumbering, she murmured:
 

 “The Prussians—Oh! yes, yes, I saw them.”
 

 Sinking wearily upon a chair she told how, when the 7th corps came into
 Raucourt, she had fled for shelter to the house of her godfather, Doctor
 Dalichamp, hoping that Father Fouchard would think to come and take her up
 before he left the town. The main street was filled with a surging throng,
 so dense that not even a dog could have squeezed his way through it, and
 up to four o'clock she had felt no particular alarm, tranquilly employed
 in scraping lint in company with some of the ladies of the place; for the
 doctor, with the thought that they might be called on to care for some of
 the wounded, should there be a battle over in the direction of Metz and
 Verdun, had been busying himself for the last two weeks with improvising a
 hospital in the great hall of the mairie. Some people who dropped
 in remarked that they might find use for their hospital sooner than they
 expected, and sure enough, a little after midday, the roar of artillery
 had reached their ears from over Beaumont way. But that was not near
 enough to cause anxiety and no one was alarmed, when, all at once, just as
 the last of the French troops were filing out of Raucourt, a shell, with a
 frightful crash, came tearing through the roof of a neighboring house. Two
 others followed in quick succession; it was a German battery shelling the
 rear-guard of the 7th corps. Some of the wounded from Beaumont had already
 been brought in to the mairie, where it was feared that the enemy's
 projectiles would finish them as they lay on their mattresses waiting for
 the doctor to come and operate on them. The men were crazed with fear, and
 would have risen and gone down into the cellars, notwithstanding their
 mangled limbs, which extorted from them shrieks of agony.
 

 “And then,” continued Silvine, “I don't know how it happened, but all at
 once the uproar was succeeded by a deathlike stillness. I had gone
 upstairs and was looking from a window that commanded a view of the street
 and fields. There was not a soul in sight, not a 'red-leg' to be seen
 anywhere, when I heard the tramp, tramp of heavy footsteps, and then a
 voice shouted something that I could not understand and all the muskets
 came to the ground together with a great crash. And I looked down into the
 street below, and there was a crowd of small, dirty-looking men in black,
 with ugly, big faces and wearing helmets like those our firemen wear.
 Someone told me they were Bavarians. Then I raised my eyes again and saw,
 oh! thousands and thousands of them, streaming in by the roads, across the
 fields, through the woods, in serried, never-ending columns. In the
 twinkling of an eye the ground was black with them, a black swarm, a swarm
 of black locusts, coming thicker and thicker, so that, in no time at all,
 the earth was hid from sight.”
 

 She shivered and repeated her former gesture, veiling her vision from some
 atrocious spectacle.
 

 “And the things that occurred afterward would exceed belief. It seems
 those men had been marching three days, and on top of that had fought at
 Beaumont like tigers; hence they were perishing with hunger, their eyes
 were starting from their sockets, they were beside themselves. The
 officers made no effort to restrain them; they broke into shops and
 private houses, smashing doors and windows, demolishing furniture,
 searching for something to eat and drink, no matter what, bolting whatever
 they could lay their hands on. I saw one in the shop of Monsieur Simonin,
 the grocer, ladling molasses from a cask with his helmet. Others were
 chewing strips of raw bacon, others again had filled their mouths with
 flour. They were told that our troops had been passing through the town
 for the last two days and there was nothing left, but here and there they
 found some trifling store that had been hid away, not sufficient to feed
 so many hungry mouths, and that made them think the folks were lying to
 them, and they went on to smash things more furiously than ever. In less
 than an hour, there was not a butcher's, grocer's, or baker's shop in the
 city left ungutted; even the private houses were entered, their cellars
 emptied, and their closets pillaged. At the doctor's—did you ever
 hear of such a thing? I caught one big fellow devouring the soap. But the
 cellar was the place where they did most mischief; we could hear them from
 upstairs smashing the bottles and yelling like demons, and they drew the
 spigots of the casks, so that the place was flooded with wine; when they
 came out their hands were red with the good wine they had spilled. And to
 show what happens, men when they make such brutes of themselves: a soldier
 found a large bottle of laudanum and drank it all down, in spite of
 Monsieur Dalichamp's efforts to prevent him. The poor wretch was in
 horrible agony when I came away; he must be dead by this time.”
 

 A great shudder ran through her, and she put her hand to her eyes to shut
 out the horrid sight.
 

 “No, no! I cannot bear it; I saw too much!”
 

 Father Fouchard had crossed the road and stationed himself at the open
 window where he could hear, and the tale of pillage made him uneasy; he
 had been told that the Prussians paid for all they took; were they going
 to start out as robbers at that late day? Maurice and Jean, too, were
 deeply interested in those details about an enemy whom the girl had seen,
 and whom they had not succeeded in setting eyes on in their whole month's
 campaigning, while Honore, pensive and with dry, parched lips, was
 conscious only of the sound of her voice; he could think of nothing
 save her and the misfortune that had parted them.
 

 Just then the door of the adjoining room was opened, and little Charlot
 appeared. He had heard his mother's voice, and came trotting into the
 apartment in his nightgown to give her a kiss. He was a chubby, pink
 little urchin, large and strong for his age, with a thatch of curling,
 straw-colored hair and big blue eyes. Silvine shivered at his sudden
 appearance, as if the sight of him had recalled to her mind the image of
 someone else that affected her disagreeably. Did she no longer recognize
 him, then, her darling child, that she looked at him thus, as if he were
 some evocation of that horrid nightmare! She burst into tears.
 

 “My poor, poor child!” she exclaimed, and clasped him wildly to her
 breast, while Honore, ghastly pale, noted how strikingly like the little
 one was to Goliah; the same broad, pink face, the true Teutonic type, in
 all the health and strength of rosy, smiling childhood. The son of the
 Prussian, the Prussian, as the pothouse wits of Remilly had styled
 him! And the French mother, who sat there, pressing him to her bosom, her
 heart still bleeding with the recollection of the cruel sights she had
 witnessed that day!
 

 “My poor child, be good; come with me back to bed. Say good-night, my poor
 child.”
 

 She vanished, bearing him away. When she returned from the adjoining room
 she was no longer weeping; her face wore its customary expression of calm
 and courageous resignation.
 

 It was Honore who, with a trembling voice, started the conversation again.
 

 “And what did the Prussians do then?”
 

 “Ah, yes; the Prussians. Well, they plundered right and left, destroying
 everything, eating and drinking all they could lay hands on. They stole
 linen as well, napkins and sheets, and even curtains, tearing them in
 strips to make bandages for their feet. I saw some whose feet were one raw
 lump of flesh, so long and hard had been their march. One little group I
 saw, seated at the edge of the gutter before the doctor's house, who had
 taken off their shoes and were bandaging themselves with handsome
 chemises, trimmed with lace, stolen, doubtless, from pretty Madame
 Lefevre, the manufacturer's wife. The pillage went on until night. The
 houses had no doors or windows left, and one passing in the street could
 look within and see the wrecked furniture, a scene of destruction that
 would have aroused the anger of a saint. For my part, I was almost wild,
 and could remain there no longer. They tried in vain to keep me, telling
 me that the roads were blocked, that I would certainly be killed; I
 started, and as soon as I was out of Raucourt, struck off to the right and
 took to the fields. Carts, loaded with wounded French and Prussians, were
 coming in from Beaumont. Two passed quite close to me in the darkness; I
 could hear the shrieks and groans, and I ran, oh! how I ran, across
 fields, through woods, I could not begin to tell you where, except that I
 made a wide circuit over toward Villers.
 

 “Twice I thought I heard soldiers coming and hid, but the only person I
 met was another woman, a fugitive like myself. She was from Beaumont, she
 said, and she told me things too horrible to repeat. After that we ran
 harder than ever. And at last I am here, so wretched, oh! so wretched with
 what I have seen!”
 

 Her tears flowed again in such abundance as to choke her utterance. The
 horrors of the day kept rising to her memory and would not down; she
 related the story that the woman of Beaumont had told her. That person
 lived in the main street of the village, where she had witnessed the
 passage of all the German artillery after nightfall. The column was
 accompanied on either side of the road by a file of soldiers bearing
 torches of pitch-pine, which illuminated the scene with the red glare of a
 great conflagration, and between the flaring, smoking lights the impetuous
 torrent of horses, guns, and men tore onward at a mad gallop. Their feet
 were winged with the tireless speed of victory as they rushed on in
 devilish pursuit of the French, to overtake them in some last ditch and
 crush them, annihilate them there. They stopped for nothing; on, on they
 went, heedless of what lay in their way. Horses fell; their traces were
 immediately cut, and they were left to be ground and torn by the pitiless
 wheels until they were a shapeless, bleeding mass. Human beings, prisoners
 and wounded men, who attempted to cross the road, were ruthlessly borne
 down and shared their fate. Although the men were dying with hunger the
 fierce hurricane poured on unchecked; was a loaf thrown to the drivers,
 they caught it flying; the torch-bearers passed slices of meat to them on
 the end of their bayonets, and then, with the same steel that had served
 that purpose, goaded their maddened horses on to further effort. And the
 night grew old, and still the artillery was passing, with the mad roar of
 a tempest let loose upon the land, amid the frantic cheering of the men.
 

 Maurice's fatigue was too much for him, and notwithstanding the interest
 with which he listened to Silvine's narrative, after the substantial meal
 he had eaten he let his head decline upon the table on his crossed arms.
 Jean's resistance lasted a little longer, but presently he too was
 overcome and fell dead asleep at the other end of the table. Father
 Fouchard had gone and taken his position in the road again; Honore was
 alone with Silvine, who was seated, motionless, before the still open
 window.
 

 The artilleryman rose, and drawing his chair to the window, stationed
 himself there beside her. The deep peacefulness of the night was instinct
 with the breathing of the multitude that lay lost in slumber there, but on
 it now rose other and louder sounds; the straining and creaking of the
 bridge, the hollow rumble of wheels; the artillery was crossing on the
 half-submerged structure. Horses reared and plunged in terror at sight of
 the swift-running stream, the wheel of a caisson ran over the guard-rail;
 immediately a hundred strong arms seized the encumbrance and hurled the
 heavy vehicle to the bottom of the river that it might not obstruct the
 passage. And as the young man watched the slow, toilsome retreat along the
 opposite bank, a movement that had commenced the day before and certainly
 would not be ended by the coming dawn, he could not help thinking of that
 other artillery that had gone storming through Beaumont, bearing down all
 before it, crushing men and horses in its path that it might not be
 delayed the fraction of a second.
 

 Honore drew his chair nearer to Silvine, and in the shuddering darkness,
 alive with all those sounds of menace, gently whispered:
 

 “You are unhappy?”
 

 “Oh! yes; so unhappy!”
 

 She was conscious of the subject on which he was about to speak, and her
 head sank sorrowfully on her bosom.
 

 “Tell me, how did it happen? I wish to know.”
 

 But she could not find words to answer him.
 

 “Did he take advantage of you, or was it with your consent?”
 

 Then she stammered, in a voice that was barely audible:
 

 “Mon Dieu! I do not know; I swear to you, I do not know, more than
 a babe unborn. I will not lie to you—I cannot! No, I have no excuse
 to offer; I cannot say he beat me. You had left me, I was beside myself,
 and it happened, how, I cannot, no, I cannot tell!”
 

 Sobs choked her utterance, and he, ashy pale and with a great lump rising
 in his throat, waited silently for a moment. The thought that she was
 unwilling to tell him a lie, however, was an assuagement to his rage and
 grief; he went on to question her further, anxious to know the many
 things, that as yet he had been unable to understand.
 

 “My father has kept you here, it seems?”
 

 She replied with her resigned, courageous air, without raising her eyes:
 

 “I work hard for him, it does not cost much to keep me, and as there is
 now another mouth to feed he has taken advantage of it to reduce my wages.
 He knows well enough that now, when he orders, there is nothing left for
 me but to obey.”
 

 “But why do you stay with him?”
 

 The question surprised her so that she looked him in the face.
 

 “Where would you have me go? Here my little one and I have at least a home
 and enough to keep us from starving.”
 

 They were silent again, both intently reading in the other's eyes, while
 up the shadowy valley the sounds of the sleeping camp came faintly to
 their ears, and the dull rumble of wheels upon the bridge of boats went on
 unceasingly. There was a shriek, the loud, despairing cry of man or beast
 in mortal peril, that passed, unspeakably mournful, through the dark
 night.
 

 “Listen, Silvine,” Honore slowly and feelingly went on; “you sent me a
 letter that afforded me great pleasure. I should have never come back
 here, but that letter—I have been reading it again this evening—speaks
 of things that could not have been expressed more delicately—”
 

 She had turned pale when first she heard the subject mentioned. Perhaps he
 was angry that she had dared to write to him, like one devoid of shame;
 then, as his meaning became more clear, her face reddened with delight.
 

 “I know you to be truthful, and knowing it, I believe what you wrote in
 that letter—yes, I believe it now implicitly. You were right in
 supposing that, if I were to die in battle without seeing you again, it
 would be a great sorrow to me to leave this world with the thought that
 you no longer loved me. And therefore, since you love me still, since I am
 your first and only love—” His tongue became thick, his emotion was
 so deep that expression failed him. “Listen, Silvine; if those beasts of
 Prussians let me live, you shall yet be mine, yes, as soon as I have
 served my time out we will be married.”
 

 She rose and stood erect upon her feet, gave a cry of joy, and threw
 herself upon the young man's bosom. She could not speak a word; every drop
 of blood in her veins was in her cheeks. He seated himself upon the chair
 and drew her down upon his lap.
 

 “I have thought the matter over carefully; it was to say what I have said
 that I came here this evening. Should my father refuse us his consent, the
 earth is large; we will go away. And your little one, no one shall harm
 him, mon Dieu! More will come along, and among them all I shall not
 know him from the others.”
 

 She was forgiven, fully and entirely. Such happiness seemed too great to
 be true; she resisted, murmuring:
 

 “No, it cannot be; it is too much; perhaps you might repent your
 generosity some day. But how good it is of you, Honore, and how I love
 you!”
 

 He silenced her with a kiss upon the lips, and strength was wanting her
 longer to put aside the great, the unhoped-for good fortune that had come
 to her; a life of happiness where she had looked forward to one of
 loneliness and sorrow! With an involuntary, irresistible impulse she threw
 her arms about him, kissing him again and again, straining him to her
 bosom with all her woman's strength, as a treasure that was lost and found
 again, that was hers, hers alone, that thenceforth no one was ever to take
 from her. He was hers once more, he whom she had lost, and she would die
 rather than let anyone deprive her of him.
 

 At that moment confused sounds reached their ears; the sleeping camp was
 awaking amid a tumult that rose and filled the dark vault of heaven.
 Hoarse voices were shouting orders, bugles were sounding, drums beating,
 and from the naked fields shadowy forms were seen emerging in
 indistinguishable masses, a surging, billowing sea whose waves were
 already streaming downward to the road beneath. The fires on the banks of
 the stream were dying down; all that could be seen there was masses of men
 moving confusedly to and fro; it was not even possible to tell if the
 movement across the river was still in progress. Never had the shades of
 night veiled such depths of distress, such abject misery of terror.
 

 Father Fouchard came to the window and shouted that the troops were
 moving. Jean and Maurice awoke, stiff and shivering, and got on their
 feet. Honore took Silvine's hands in his and gave them a swift parting
 clasp.
 

 “It is a promise. Wait for me.”
 

 She could find no word to say in answer, but all her soul went out to him
 in one long, last look, as he leaped from the window and hurried away to
 find his battery.
 

 “Good-by, father!”
 

 “Good-by, my boy!”
 

 And that was all; peasant and soldier parted as they had met, without
 embracing, like a father and son whose existence was of little import to
 each other.
 

 Maurice and Jean also left the farmhouse, and descended the steep hill on
 a run. When they reached the bottom the 106th was nowhere to be found; the
 regiments had all moved off. They made inquiries, running this way and
 that, and were directed first one way and then another. At last, when they
 had near lost their wits in the fearful confusion, they stumbled on their
 company, under the command of Lieutenant Rochas; as for the regiment and
 Captain Beaudoin, no one could say where they were. And Maurice was
 astounded when he noticed for the first time that that mob of men, guns,
 and horses was leaving Remilly and taking the Sedan road that lay on the
 left bank. Something was wrong again; the passage of the Meuse was
 abandoned, they were in full retreat to the north!
 

 An officer of chasseurs, who was standing near, spoke up in a loud voice:
 

 “Nom de Dieu! the time for us to make the movement was the 28th,
 when we were at Chene!”
 

 Others were more explicit in their information; fresh news had been
 received. About two o'clock in the morning one of Marshal MacMahon's aides
 had come riding up to say to General Douay that the whole army was ordered
 to retreat immediately on Sedan, without loss of a minute's time. The
 disaster of the 5th corps at Beaumont had involved the three other corps.
 The general, who was at that time down at the bridge of boats
 superintending operations, was in despair that only a portion of his 3d
 division had so far crossed the stream; it would soon be day, and they
 were liable to be attacked at any moment. He therefore sent instructions
 to the several organizations of his command to make at once for Sedan,
 each independently of the others, by the most direct roads, while he
 himself, leaving orders to burn the bridge of boats, took the road on the
 left bank with his 2d division and the artillery, and the 3d division
 pursued that on the right bank; the 1st, that had felt the enemy's claws
 at Beaumont, was flying in disorder across the country, no one knew where.
 Of the 7th corps, that had not seen a battle, all that remained were those
 scattered, incoherent fragments, lost among lanes and by-roads, running
 away in the darkness.
 

 It was not yet three o'clock, and the night was as black as ever. Maurice,
 although he knew the country, could not make out where they were in the
 noisy, surging throng that filled the road from ditch to ditch, pouring
 onward like a brawling mountain stream. Interspersed among the regiments
 were many fugitives from the rout at Beaumont, in ragged uniforms,
 begrimed with blood and dirt, who inoculated the others with their own
 terror. Down the wide valley, from the wooded hills across the stream,
 came one universal, all-pervading uproar, the scurrying tramp of other
 hosts in swift retreat; the 1st corps, coming from Carignan and Douzy, the
 12th flying from Mouzon with the shattered remnants of the 5th, moved like
 puppets and driven onward, all of them, by that one same, inexorable,
 irresistible pressure that since the 28th had been urging the army
 northward and driving it into the trap where it was to meet its doom.
 

 Day broke as Maurice's company was passing through Pont Maugis, and then
 he recognized their locality, the hills of Liry to the left, the Meuse
 running beside the road on the right. Bazeilles and Balan presented an
 inexpressibly funereal aspect, looming among the exhalations of the
 meadows in the chill, wan light of dawn, while against the somber
 background of her great forests Sedan was profiled in livid outlines,
 indistinct as the creation of some hideous nightmare. When they had left
 Wadelincourt behind them and were come at last to the Torcy gate, the
 governor long refused them admission; he only yielded, after a protracted
 conference, upon their threat to storm the place. It was five o'clock when
 at last the 7th corps, weary, cold, and hungry, entered Sedan.
 

 
 
 

 In the crush on the Place de Torcy that ensued upon the entrance of the
 troops into the city Jean became separated from Maurice, and all his
 attempts to find him again among the surging crowd were fruitless. It was
 a piece of extreme ill-luck, for he had accepted the young man's
 invitation to go with him to his sister's, where there would be rest and
 food for them, and even the luxury of a comfortable bed. The confusion was
 so great—the regiments disintegrated, no discipline, and no officers
 to enforce it—that the men were free to do pretty much as they
 pleased. There was plenty of time to look about them and hunt up their
 commands; they would have a few hours of sleep first.
 

 Jean in his bewilderment found himself on the viaduct of Torcy,
 overlooking the broad meadows which, by the governor's orders, had been
 flooded with water from the river. Then, passing through another archway
 and crossing the Pont de Meuse, he entered the old, rampart-girt city,
 where, among the tall and crowded houses and the damp, narrow streets, it
 seemed to him that night was descending again, notwithstanding the
 increasing daylight. He could not so much as remember the name of
 Maurice's brother-in-law; he only knew that his sister's name was
 Henriette. The outlook was not encouraging; all that kept him awake was
 the automatic movement of walking; he felt that he should drop were he to
 stop. The indistinct ringing in his ears was the same that is experienced
 by one drowning; he was only conscious of the ceaseless onpouring of the
 stream of men and animals that carried him along with it on its current.
 He had partaken of food at Remilly, sleep was now his great necessity; and
 the same was true of the shadowy bands that he saw flitting past him in
 those strange, fantastic streets. At every moment a man would sink upon
 the sidewalk or tumble into a doorway, and there would remain, as if
 struck by death.
 

 Raising his eyes, Jean read upon a signboard: Avenue de la
 Sous-Prefecture. At the end of the street was a monument standing in a
 public garden, and at the corner of the avenue he beheld a horseman, a
 chasseur d'Afrique, whose face seemed familiar to him. Was it not Prosper,
 the young man from Remilly, whom he had seen in Maurice's company at
 Vouziers? Perhaps he had been sent in with dispatches. He had dismounted,
 and his skeleton of a horse, so weak that he could scarcely stand, was
 trying to satisfy his hunger by gnawing at the tail-board of an army wagon
 that was drawn up against the curb. There had been no forage for the
 animals for the last two days, and they were literally dying of
 starvation. The big strong teeth rasped pitifully on the woodwork of the
 wagon, while the soldier stood by and wept as he watched the poor brute.
 

 Jean was moving away when it occurred to him that the trooper might be
 able to give him the address of Maurice's sister. He returned, but the
 other was gone, and it would have been useless to attempt to find him in
 that dense throng. He was utterly disheartened, and wandering aimlessly
 from street to street at last found himself again before the
 Sous-Prefecture, whence he struggled onward to the Place Turenne. Here he
 was comforted for an instant by catching sight of Lieutenant Rochas,
 standing in front of the Hotel de Ville with a few men of his company, at
 the foot of the statue he had seen before; if he could not find his friend
 he could at all events rejoin the regiment and have a tent to sleep under.
 Nothing had been seen of Captain Beaudoin; doubtless he had been swept
 away in the press and landed in some place far away, while the lieutenant
 was endeavoring to collect his scattered men and fruitlessly inquiring of
 everyone he met where division headquarters were. As he advanced into the
 city, however, his numbers, instead of increasing, dwindled. One man, with
 the gestures of a lunatic, entered an inn and was seen no more. Three
 others were halted in front of a grocer's shop by a party of zouaves who
 had obtained possession of a small cask of brandy; one was already lying
 senseless in the gutter, while the other two tried to get away, but were
 too stupid and dazed to move. Loubet and Chouteau had nudged each other
 with the elbow and disappeared down a blind alley in pursuit of a fat
 woman with a loaf of bread, so that all who remained with the lieutenant
 were Pache and Lapoulle, with some ten or a dozen more.
 

 Rochas was standing by the base of the bronze statue of Turenne, making
 heroic efforts to keep his eyes open. When he recognized Jean he murmured:
 

 “Ah, is it you, corporal? Where are your men?”
 

 Jean, by a gesture expressive in its vagueness, intimated that he did not
 know, but Pache, pointing to Lapoulle, answered with tears in his eyes:
 

 “Here we are; there are none left but us two. The merciful Lord have pity
 on our sufferings; it is too hard!”
 

 The other, the colossus with the colossal appetite, looked hungrily at
 Jean's hands, as if to reproach them for being always empty in those days.
 Perhaps, in his half-sleeping state, he had dreamed that Jean was away at
 the commissary's for rations.
 

 “D——n the luck!” he grumbled, “we'll have to tighten up our
 belts another hole!”
 

 Gaude, the bugler, was leaning against the iron railing, waiting for the
 lieutenant's order to sound the assembly; sleep came to him so suddenly
 that he slid from his position and within a second was lying flat on his
 back, unconscious. One by one they all succumbed to the drowsy influence
 and snored in concert, except Sergeant Sapin alone, who, with his little
 pinched nose in his small pale face, stood staring with distended eyes at
 the horizon of that strange city, as if trying to read his destiny there.
 

 Lieutenant Rochas meantime had yielded to an irresistible impulse and
 seated himself on the ground. He attempted to give an order.
 

 “Corporal, you will—you will—”
 

 And that was as far as he could proceed, for fatigue sealed his lips, and
 like the rest he suddenly sank down and was lost in slumber.
 

 Jean, not caring to share his comrades' fate and pillow his head on the
 hard stones, moved away; he was bent on finding a bed in which to sleep.
 At a window of the Hotel of the Golden Cross, on the opposite side of the
 square, he caught a glimpse of General Bourgain-Desfeuilles, already
 half-undressed and on the point of tasting the luxury of clean white
 sheets. Why should he be more self-denying than the rest of them? he asked
 himself; why should he suffer longer? And just then a name came to his
 recollection that caused him a thrill of delight, the name of the
 manufacturer in whose employment Maurice's brother-in-law was. M.
 Delaherche! yes, that was it. He accosted an old man who happened to be
 passing.
 

 “Can you tell me where M. Delaherche lives?”
 

 “In the Rue Maqua, near the corner of the Rue au Beurre; you can't mistake
 it; it is a big house, with statues in the garden.”
 

 The old man turned away, but presently came running back. “I see you
 belong to the 106th. If it is your regiment you are looking for, it left
 the city by the Chateau, down there. I just met the colonel, Monsieur de
 Vineuil; I used to know him when he lived at Mezieres.”
 

 But Jean went his way, with an angry gesture of impatience. No, no! no
 sleeping on the hard ground for him, now that he was certain of finding
 Maurice. And yet he could not help feeling a twinge of remorse as he
 thought of the dignified old colonel, who stood fatigue so manfully in
 spite of his years, sharing the sufferings of his men, with no more
 luxurious shelter than his tent. He strode across the Grande Rue with
 rapid steps and soon was in the midst of the tumult and uproar of the
 city; there he hailed a small boy, who conducted him to the Rue Maqua.
 

 There it was that in the last century a grand-uncle of the present
 Delaherche had built the monumental structure that had remained in the
 family a hundred and sixty years. There is more than one cloth factory in
 Sedan that dates back to the early years of Louis XV.; enormous piles,
 they are, covering as much ground as the Louvre, and with stately facades
 of royal magnificence. The one in the Rue Maqua was three stories high,
 and its tall windows were adorned with carvings of severe simplicity,
 while the palatial courtyard in the center was filled with grand old
 trees, gigantic elms that were coeval with the building itself. In it
 three generations of Delaherches had amassed comfortable fortunes for
 themselves. The father of Charles, the proprietor in our time, had
 inherited the property from a cousin who had died without being blessed
 with children, so that it was now a younger branch that was in possession.
 The affairs of the house had prospered under the father's control, but he
 was something of a blade and a roisterer, and his wife's existence with
 him was not one of unmixed happiness; the consequence of which was that
 the lady, when she became a widow, not caring to see a repetition by the
 son of the performances of the father, made haste to find a wife for him
 in the person of a simple-minded and exceedingly devout young woman, and
 subsequently kept him tied to her apron string until he had attained the
 mature age of fifty and over. But no one in this transitory world can tell
 what time has in store for him; when the devout young person's time came
 to leave this life Delaherche, who had known none of the joys of youth,
 fell head over ears in love with a young widow of Charleville, pretty
 Madame Maginot, who had been the subject of some gossip in her day, and in
 the autumn preceding the events recorded in this history had married her,
 in spite of all his mother's prayers and tears. It is proper to add that
 Sedan, which is very straitlaced in its notions of propriety, has always
 been inclined to frown on Charleville, the city of laughter and levity.
 And then again the marriage would never have been effected but for the
 fact that Gilberte's uncle was Colonel de Vineuil, who it was supposed
 would soon be made a general. This relationship and the idea that he had
 married into army circles was to the cloth manufacturer a source of great
 delight.
 

 That morning Delaherche, when he learned that the army was to pass through
 Mouzon, had invited Weiss, his accountant, to accompany him on that
 carriage ride of which we have heard Father Fouchard speak to Maurice.
 Tall and stout, with a florid complexion, prominent nose and thick lips,
 he was of a cheerful, sanguine temperament and had all the French
 bourgeois' boyish love for a handsome display of troops. Having
 ascertained from the apothecary at Mouzon that the Emperor was at Baybel,
 a farm in the vicinity, he had driven up there; had seen the monarch, and
 even had been near speaking to him, an adventure of such thrilling
 interest that he had talked of it incessantly ever since his return. But
 what a terrible return that had been, over roads choked with the
 panic-stricken fugitives from Beaumont! twenty times their cabriolet was
 near being overturned into the ditch. Obstacle after obstacle they had
 encountered, and it was night before the two men reached home. The element
 of the tragic and unforeseen there was in the whole business, that army
 that Delaherche had driven out to pass in review and which had brought him
 home with it, whether he would or no, in the mad gallop of its retreat,
 made him repeat again and again during their long drive:
 

 “I supposed it was moving on Verdun and would have given anything rather
 than miss seeing it. Ah well! I have seen it now, and I am afraid we shall
 see more of it in Sedan than we desire.”
 

 The following morning he was awakened at five o'clock by the hubbub, like
 the roar of water escaping from a broken dam, made by the 7th corps as it
 streamed through the city; he dressed in haste and went out, and almost
 the first person he set eyes on in the Place Turenne was Captain Beaudoin.
 When pretty Madame Maginot was living at Charleville the year before the
 captain had been one of her best friends, and Gilberte had introduced him
 to her husband before they were married. Rumor had it that the captain had
 abdicated his position as first favorite and made way for the cloth
 merchant from motives of delicacy, not caring to stand in the way of the
 great good fortune that seemed coming to his fair friend.
 

 “Hallo, is that you?” exclaimed Delaherche. “Good Heavens, what a state
 you're in!”
 

 It was but too true; the dandified Beaudoin, usually so trim and spruce,
 presented a sorry spectacle that morning in his soiled uniform and with
 his grimy face and hands. Greatly to his disgust he had had a party of
 Turcos for traveling companions, and could not explain how he had become
 separated from his company. Like all the others he was ready to drop with
 fatigue and hunger, but that was not what most afflicted him; he had not
 been able to change his linen since leaving Rheims, and was inconsolable.
 

 “Just think of it!” he wailed, “those idiots, those scoundrels, lost my
 baggage at Vouziers. If I ever catch them I will break every bone in their
 body! And now I haven't a thing, not a handkerchief, not a pair of socks!
 Upon my word, it is enough to make one mad!”
 

 Delaherche was for taking him home to his house forthwith, but he
 resisted. No, no; he was no longer a human being, he would not frighten
 people out of their wits. The manufacturer had to make solemn oath that
 neither his wife nor his mother had risen yet; and besides he should have
 soap, water, linen, everything he needed.
 

 It was seven o'clock when Captain Beaudoin, having done what he could with
 the means at his disposal to improve his appearance, and comforted by the
 sensation of wearing under his uniform a clean shirt of his host's, made
 his appearance in the spacious, high-ceiled dining room with its somber
 wainscoting. The elder Madame Delaherche was already there, for she was
 always on foot at daybreak, notwithstanding she was seventy-eight years
 old. Her hair was snowy white; in her long, lean face was a nose almost
 preternaturally thin and sharp and a mouth that had long since forgotten
 how to laugh. She rose, and with stately politeness invited the captain to
 be seated before one of the cups of cafe au lait that stood on the
 table.
 

 “But, perhaps, sir, you would prefer meat and wine after the fatigue to
 which you have been subjected?”
 

 He declined the offer, however. “A thousand thanks, madame; a little milk,
 with bread and butter, will be best for me.”
 

 At that moment a door was smartly opened and Gilberte entered the room
 with outstretched hand. Delaherche must have told her who was there, for
 her ordinary hour of rising was ten o'clock. She was tall, lithe of form
 and well-proportioned, with an abundance of handsome black hair, a pair of
 handsome black eyes, and a very rosy, wholesome complexion withal; she had
 a laughing, rather free and easy way with her, and it did not seem
 possible she could ever look angry. Her peignoir of beige, embroidered
 with red silk, was evidently of Parisian manufacture.
 

 “Ah, Captain,” she rapidly said, shaking hands with the young man, “how
 nice of you to stop and see us, away up in this out-of-the-world place!”
 But she was the first to see that she had “put her foot in it” and laugh
 at her own blunder. “Oh, what a stupid thing I am! I might know you would
 rather be somewhere else than at Sedan, under the circumstances. But I am
 very glad to see you once more.”
 

 She showed it; her face was bright and animated, while Madame Delaherche,
 who could not have failed to hear something of the gossip that had been
 current among the scandalmongers of Charleville, watched the pair closely
 with her puritanical air. The captain was very reserved in his behavior,
 however, manifesting nothing more than a pleasant recollection of
 hospitalities previously received in the house where he was visiting.
 

 They had no more than sat down at table than Delaherche, burning to
 relieve himself of the subject that filled his mind, commenced to relate
 his experiences of the day before.
 

 “You know I saw the Emperor at Baybel.”
 

 He was fairly started and nothing could stop him. He began by describing
 the farmhouse, a large structure with an interior court, surrounded by an
 iron railing, and situated on a gentle eminence overlooking Mouzon, to the
 left of the Carignan road. Then he came back to the 12th corps, whom he
 had visited in their camp among the vines on the hillsides; splendid
 troops they were, with their equipments brightly shining in the sunlight,
 and the sight of them had caused his heart to beat with patriotic ardor.
 

 “And there I was, sir, when the Emperor, who had alighted to breakfast and
 rest himself a bit, came out of the farmhouse. He wore a general's uniform
 and carried an overcoat across his arm, although the sun was very hot. He
 was followed by a servant bearing a camp stool. He did not look to me like
 a well man; ah no, far from it; his stooping form, the sallowness of his
 complexion, the feebleness of his movements, all indicated him to be in a
 very bad way. I was not surprised, for the druggist at Mouzon, when he
 recommended me to drive on to Baybel, told me that an aide-de-camp had
 just been in his shop to get some medicine—you understand what I
 mean, medicine for—” The presence of his wife and mother prevented
 him from alluding more explicitly to the nature of the Emperor's
 complaint, which was an obstinate diarrhea that he had contracted at Chene
 and which compelled him to make those frequent halts at houses along the
 road. “Well, then, the attendant opened the camp stool and placed it in
 the shade of a clump of trees at the edge of a field of wheat, and the
 Emperor sat down on it. Sitting there in a limp, dejected attitude,
 perfectly still, he looked for all the world like a small shopkeeper
 taking a sun bath for his rheumatism. His dull eyes wandered over the wide
 horizon, the Meuse coursing through the valley at his feet, before him the
 range of wooded heights whose summits recede and are lost in the distance,
 on the left the waving tree-tops of Dieulet forest, on the right the
 verdure-clad eminence of Sommanthe. He was surrounded by his military
 family, aides and officers of rank, and a colonel of dragoons, who had
 already applied to me for information about the country, had just motioned
 me not to go away, when all at once—” Delaherche rose from his
 chair, for he had reached the point where the dramatic interest of his
 story culminated and it became necessary to re-enforce words by gestures.
 “All at once there is a succession of sharp reports and right in front of
 us, over the wood of Dieulet, shells are seen circling through the air. It
 produced on me no more effect than a display of fireworks in broad
 daylight, sir, upon my word it didn't! The people about the Emperor, of
 course, showed a good deal of agitation and uneasiness. The colonel of
 dragoons comes running up again to ask if I can give them an idea whence
 the firing proceeds. I answer him off-hand: 'It is at Beaumont; there is
 not the slightest doubt about it.' He returns to the Emperor, on whose
 knees an aide-de-camp was unfolding a map. The Emperor was evidently of
 opinion that the fighting was not at Beaumont, for he sent the colonel
 back to me a third time. But I couldn't well do otherwise than stick to
 what I had said before, could I, now? the more that the shells kept flying
 through the air, nearer and nearer, following the line of the Mouzon road.
 And then, sir, as sure as I see you standing there, I saw the Emperor turn
 his pale face toward me. Yes sir, he looked at me a moment with those dim
 eyes of his, that were filled with an expression of melancholy and
 distrust. And then his face declined upon his map again and he made no
 further movement.”
 

 Delaherche, although he was an ardent Bonapartist at the time of the
 plebiscite, had admitted after our early defeats that the government was
 responsible for some mistakes, but he stood up for the dynasty,
 compassionating and excusing Napoleon III., deceived and betrayed as he
 was by everyone. It was his firm opinion that the men at whose door should
 be laid the responsibility for all our disasters were none other than
 those Republican deputies of the opposition who had stood in the way of
 voting the necessary men and money.
 

 “And did the Emperor return to the farmhouse?” asked Captain Beaudoin.
 

 “That's more than I can say, my dear sir; I left him sitting on his stool.
 It was midday, the battle was drawing nearer, and it occurred to me that
 it was time to be thinking of my own return. All that I can tell you
 besides is that a general to whom I pointed out the position of Carignan
 in the distance, in the plain to our rear, appeared greatly surprised to
 learn that the Belgian frontier lay in that direction and was only a few
 miles away. Ah, that the poor Emperor should have to rely on such
 servants!”
 

 Gilberte, all smiles, was giving her attention to the captain and keeping
 him supplied with buttered toast, as much at ease as she had ever been in
 bygone days when she received him in her salon during her widowhood. She
 insisted that he should accept a bed with them, but he declined, and it
 was agreed that he should rest for an hour or two on a sofa in
 Delaherche's study before going out to find his regiment. As he was taking
 the sugar bowl from the young woman's hands old Madame Delaherche, who had
 kept her eye on them, distinctly saw him squeeze her fingers, and the old
 lady's suspicions were confirmed. At that moment a servant came to the
 door.
 

 “Monsieur, there is a soldier outside who wants to know the address of
 Monsieur Weiss.”
 

 There was nothing “stuck-up” about Delaherche, people said; he was fond of
 popularity and was always delighted to have a chat with those of an
 inferior station.
 

 “He wants Weiss's address! that's odd. Bring the soldier in here.”
 

 Jean entered the room in such an exhausted state that he reeled as if he
 had been drunk. He started at seeing his captain seated at the table with
 two ladies, and involuntarily withdrew the hand that he had extended
 toward a chair in order to steady himself; he replied briefly to the
 questions of the manufacturer, who played his part of the soldier's friend
 with great cordiality. In a few words he explained his relation toward
 Maurice and the reason why he was looking for him.
 

 “He is a corporal in my company,” the captain finally said by way of
 cutting short the conversation, and inaugurated a series of questions on
 his own account to learn what had become of the regiment. As Jean went on
 to tell that the colonel had been seen crossing the city to reach his camp
 at the head of what few men were left him, Gilberte again thoughtlessly
 spoke up, with the vivacity of a woman whose beauty is supposed to atone
 for her indiscretion:
 

 “Oh! he is my uncle; why does he not come and breakfast with us? We could
 fix up a room for him here. Can't we send someone for him?”
 

 But the old lady discouraged the project with an authority there was no
 disputing. The good old bourgeois blood of the frontier towns flowed in
 her veins; her austerely patriotic sentiments were almost those of a man.
 She broke the stern silence that she had preserved during the meal by
 saying:
 

 “Never mind Monsieur de Vineuil; he is doing his duty.”
 

 Her short speech was productive of embarrassment among the party.
 Delaherche conducted the captain to his study, where he saw him safely
 bestowed upon the sofa; Gilberte moved lightly off about her business, no
 more disconcerted by her rebuff than is the bird that shakes its wings in
 gay defiance of the shower; while the handmaid to whom Jean had been
 intrusted led him by a very labyrinth of passages and staircases through
 the various departments of the factory.
 

 The Weiss family lived in the Rue des Voyards, but their house, which was
 Delaherche's property, communicated with the great structure in the Rue
 Maqua. The Rue des Voyards was at that time one of the most squalid
 streets in Sedan, being nothing more than a damp, narrow lane, its normal
 darkness intensified by the proximity of the ramparts, which ran parallel
 to it. The roofs of the tall houses almost met, the dark passages were
 like the mouths of caverns, and more particularly so at that end where
 rose the high college walls. Weiss, however, with free quarters and free
 fuel on his third floor, found the location a convenient one on account of
 its nearness to his office, to which he could descend in slippers without
 having to go around by the street. His life had been a happy one since his
 marriage with Henriette, so long the object of his hopes and wishes since
 first he came to know her at Chene, filling her dead mother's place when
 only six years old and keeping the house for her father, the
 tax-collector; while he, entering the big refinery almost on the footing
 of a laborer, was picking up an education as best he could, and fitting
 himself for the accountant's position which was the reward of his
 unremitting toil. And even when he had attained to that measure of success
 his dream was not to be realized; not until the father had been removed by
 death, not until the brother at Paris had been guilty of those excesses:
 that brother Maurice to whom his twin sister had in some sort made herself
 a servant, to whom she had sacrificed her little all to make him a
 gentleman—not until then was Henriette to be his wife. She had never
 been aught more than a little drudge at home; she could barely read and
 write; she had sold house, furniture, all she had, to pay the young man's
 debts, when good, kind Weiss came to her with the offer of his savings,
 together with his heart and his two strong arms; and she had accepted him
 with grateful tears, bringing him in return for his devotion a steadfast,
 virtuous affection, replete with tender esteem, if not the stormier ardors
 of a passionate love. Fortune had smiled on them; Delaherche had spoken of
 giving Weiss an interest in the business, and when children should come to
 bless their union their felicity would be complete.
 

 “Look out!” the servant said to Jean; “the stairs are steep.”
 

 He was stumbling upward as well as the intense darkness of the place would
 let him, when suddenly a door above was thrown open, a broad belt of light
 streamed out across the landing, and he heard a soft voice saying:
 

 “It is he.”
 

 “Madame Weiss,” cried the servant, “here is a soldier who has been
 inquiring for you.”
 

 There came the sound of a low, pleased laugh, and the same soft voice
 replied:
 

 “Good! good! I know who it is.” Then to the corporal, who was hesitating,
 rather diffidently, on the landing: “Come in, Monsieur Jean. Maurice has
 been here nearly two hours, and we have been wondering what detained you.”
 

 Then, in the pale sunlight that filled the room, he saw how like she was
 to Maurice, with that wonderful resemblance that often makes twins so like
 each other as to be indistinguishable. She was smaller and slighter than
 he, however; more fragile in appearance, with a rather large mouth and
 delicately molded features, surmounted by an opulence of the most
 beautiful hair imaginable, of the golden yellow of ripened grain. The
 feature where she least resembled him was her gray eyes, great calm, brave
 orbs, instinct with the spirit of the grandfather, the hero of the Grand
 Army. She used few words, was noiseless in her movements, and was so
 gentle, so cheerful, so helpfully active that where she passed her
 presence seemed to linger in the air, like a fragrant caress.
 

 “Come this way, Monsieur Jean,” she said. “Everything will soon be ready
 for you.”
 

 He stammered something inarticulately, for his emotion was such that he
 could find no word of thanks. In addition to that his eyes were closing he
 beheld her through the irresistible drowsiness that was settling on him as
 a sea-fog drifts in and settles on the land, in which she seemed floating
 in a vague, unreal way, as if her feet no longer touched the earth. Could
 it be that it was all a delightful apparition, that friendly young woman
 who smiled on him with such sweet simplicity? He fancied for a moment that
 she had touched his hand and that he had felt the pressure of hers, cool
 and firm, loyal as the clasp of an old tried friend.
 

 That was the last moment in which Jean was distinctly conscious of what
 was going on about him. They were in the dining room; bread and meat were
 set out on the table, but for the life of him he could not have raised a
 morsel to his lips. A man was there, seated on a chair. Presently he knew
 it was Weiss, whom he had seen at Mulhausen, but he had no idea what the
 man was saying with such a sober, sorrowful air, with slow and emphatic
 gestures. Maurice was already sound asleep, with the tranquillity of death
 resting on his face, on a bed that had been improvised for him beside the
 stove, and Henriette was busying herself about a sofa on which a mattress
 had been thrown; she brought in a bolster, pillow and coverings; with
 nimble, dexterous hands she spread the white sheets, snowy white, dazzling
 in their whiteness.
 

 Ah! those clean, white sheets, so long coveted, so ardently desired; Jean
 had eyes for naught save them. For six weeks he had not had his clothes
 off, had not slept in a bed. He was as impatient as a child waiting for
 some promised treat, or a lover expectant of his mistress's coming; the
 time seemed long, terribly long to him, until he could plunge into those
 cool, white depths and lose himself there. Quickly, as soon as he was
 alone, he removed his shoes and tossed his uniform across a chair, then,
 with a deep sigh of satisfaction, threw himself on the bed. He opened his
 eyes a little way for a last look about him before his final plunge into
 unconsciousness, and in the pale morning light that streamed in through
 the lofty window beheld a repetition of his former pleasant vision, only
 fainter, more aerial; a vision of Henriette entering the room on tiptoe,
 and placing on the table at his side a water-jug and glass that had been
 forgotten before. She seemed to linger there a moment, looking at the
 sleeping pair, him and her brother, with her tranquil, ineffably tender
 smile upon her lips, then faded into air, and he, between his white
 sheets, was as if he were not.
 

 Hours—or was it years? slipped by; Jean and Maurice were like dead
 men, without a dream, without consciousness of the life that was within
 them. Whether it was ten years or ten minutes, time had stood still for
 them; the overtaxed body had risen against its oppressor and annihilated
 their every faculty. They awoke simultaneously with a great start and
 looked at each other inquiringly; where were they? what had happened? how
 long had they slept? The same pale light was entering through the tall
 window. They felt as if they had been racked; joints stiffer, limbs
 wearier, mouth more hot and dry than when they had lain down; they could
 not have slept more than an hour, fortunately. It did not surprise them to
 see Weiss sitting where they had seen him before, in the same dejected
 attitude, apparently waiting for them to awake.
 

 “Fichtre!” exclaimed Jean, “we must get up and report ourselves to
 the first sergeant before noon.”
 

 He uttered a smothered cry of pain as he jumped to the floor and began to
 dress.
 

 “Before noon!” said Weiss. “Are you aware that it is seven o'clock in the
 evening? You have slept about twelve hours.”
 

 Great heavens, seven o'clock! They were thunderstruck. Jean, who by that
 time was completely dressed, would have run for it, but Maurice, still in
 bed, found he no longer had control of his legs; how were they ever to
 find their comrades? would not the army have marched away? They took Weiss
 to task for having let them sleep so long. But the accountant shook his
 head sorrowfully and said:
 

 “You have done just as well to remain in bed, for all that has been
 accomplished.”
 

 All that day, from early morning, he had been scouring Sedan and its
 environs in quest of news, and was just come in, discouraged with the
 inactivity of the troops and the inexplicable delay that had lost them the
 whole of that precious day, the 31st. The sole excuse was that the men
 were worn out and rest was an absolute necessity for them, but granting
 that, he could not see why the retreat should not have been continued
 after giving them a few hours of repose.
 

 “I do not pretend to be a judge of such matters,” he continued, “but I
 have a feeling, so strong as to be almost a conviction, that the army is
 very badly situated at Sedan. The 12th corps is at Bazeilles, where there
 was a little fighting this morning; the 1st is strung out along the
 Givonne between la Moncelle and Holly, while the 7th is encamped on the
 plateau of Floing, and the 5th, what is left of it, is crowded together
 under the ramparts of the city, on the side of the Chateau. And that is
 what alarms me, to see them all concentrated thus about the city, waiting
 for the coming of the Prussians. If I were in command I would retreat on
 Mezieres, and lose no time about it, either. I know the country; it is the
 only line of retreat that is open to us, and if we take any other course
 we shall be driven into Belgium. Come here! let me show you something.”
 

 He took Jean by the hand and led him to the window.
 

 “Tell me what you see over yonder on the crest of the hills.”
 

 Looking from the window over the ramparts, over the adjacent buildings,
 their view embraced the valley of the Meuse to the southward of Sedan.
 There was the river, winding through broad meadows; there, to the left,
 was Remilly in the background, Pont Maugis and Wadelincourt before them
 and Frenois to the right; and shutting in the landscape the ranges of
 verdant hills, Liry first, then la Marfee and la Croix Piau, with their
 dense forests. A deep tranquillity, a crystalline clearness reigned over
 the wide prospect that lay there in the mellow light of the declining day.
 

 “Do you see that moving line of black upon the hilltops, that procession
 of small black ants?”
 

 Jean stared in amazement, while Maurice, kneeling on his bed, craned his
 neck to see.
 

 “Yes, yes!” they cried. “There is a line, there is another, and another,
 and another! They are everywhere.”
 

 “Well,” continued Weiss, “those are Prussians. I have been watching them
 since morning, and they have been coming, coming, as if there were no end
 to them! You may be sure of one thing: if our troops are waiting for them,
 they have no intention of disappointing us. And not I alone, but every
 soul in the city saw them; it is only the generals who persist in being
 blind. I was talking with a general officer a little while ago; he
 shrugged his shoulders and told me that Marshal MacMahon was absolutely
 certain that he had not over seventy thousand men in his front. God grant
 he may be right! But look and see for yourselves; the ground is hid by
 them! they keep coming, ever coming, the black swarm!”
 

 At this juncture Maurice threw himself back in his bed and gave way to a
 violent fit of sobbing. Henriette came in, a smile on her face. She
 hastened to him in alarm.
 

 “What is it?”
 

 But he pushed her away. “No, no! leave me, have nothing more to do with
 me; I have never been anything but a burden to you. When I think that you
 were making yourself a drudge, a slave, while I was attending college—oh!
 to what miserable use have I turned that education! And I was near
 bringing dishonor on our name; I shudder to think where I might be now,
 had you not beggared yourself to pay for my extravagance and folly.”
 

 Her smile came back to her face, together with her serenity.
 

 “Is that all? Your sleep don't seem to have done you good, my poor friend.
 But since that is all gone and past, forget it! Are you not doing your
 duty now, like a good Frenchman? I am very proud of you, I assure you, now
 that you are a soldier.”
 

 She had turned toward Jean, as if to ask him to come to her assistance,
 and he looked at her with some surprise that she appeared to him less
 beautiful than yesterday; she was paler, thinner, now that the glamour was
 no longer in his drowsy eyes. The one striking point that remained
 unchanged was her resemblance to her brother, and yet the difference in
 their two natures was never more strongly marked than at that moment; he,
 weak and nervous as a woman, swayed by the impulse of the hour, displaying
 in his person all the fitful and emotional temperament of his nation,
 vibrating from one moment to another between the loftiest enthusiasm and
 the most abject despair; she, the patient, indomitable housewife, such an
 inconsiderable little creature in her resignation and self-effacement,
 meeting adversity with a brave face and eyes full of inexpugnable courage
 and resolution, fashioned from the stuff of which heroes are made.
 

 “Proud of me!” cried Maurice. “Ah! truly, you have great reason to be. For
 a month and more now we have been flying, like the cowards that we are!”
 

 “What of it? we are not the only ones,” said Jean with his practical
 common sense; “we do what we are told to do.”
 

 But the young man broke out more furiously than ever: “I have had enough
 of it, I tell you! Our imbecile leaders, our continual defeats, our brave
 soldiers led like sheep to the slaughter—is it not enough, seeing
 all these things, to make one weep tears of blood? We are here now in
 Sedan, caught in a trap from which there is no escape; you can see the
 Prussians closing in on us from every quarter, and certain destruction is
 staring us in the face; there is no hope, the end is come. No! I shall
 remain where I am; I may as well be shot as a deserter. Jean, do you go,
 and leave me here. No! I won't go back there; I will stay here.”
 

 He sank upon the pillow in a renewed outpour of tears. It was an utter
 breakdown of the nervous system, sweeping everything before it, one of
 those sudden lapses into hopelessness to which he was so subject, in which
 he despised himself and all the world. His sister, knowing as she did the
 best way of treating such crises, kept an unruffled face.
 

 “That would not be a nice thing to do, dear Maurice—desert your post
 in the hour of danger.”
 

 He rose impetuously to a sitting posture: “Then give me my musket! I will
 go and blow my brains out; that will be the shortest way of ending it.”
 Then, pointing with outstretched arm to Weiss, where he sat silent and
 motionless, he said: “There! that is the only sensible man I have seen;
 yes, he is the only one who saw things as they were. You remember what he
 said to me, Jean, at Mulhausen, a month ago?”
 

 “It is true,” the corporal assented; “the gentleman said we should be
 beaten.”
 

 And the scene rose again before their mind's eye, that night of anxious
 vigil, the agonized suspense, the prescience of the disaster at
 Froeschwiller hanging in the sultry heavy air, while the Alsatian told his
 prophetic fears; Germany in readiness, with the best of arms and the best
 of leaders, rising to a man in a grand outburst of patriotism; France
 dazed, a century behind the age, debauched, and a prey to intestine
 disorder, having neither commanders, men, nor arms to enable her to cope
 with her powerful adversary. How quickly the horrible prediction had
 proved itself true!
 

 Weiss raised his trembling hands. Profound sorrow was depicted on his
 kind, honest face, with its red hair and beard and its great prominent
 blue eyes.
 

 “Ah!” he murmured, “I take no credit to myself for being right. I don't
 claim to be wiser than others, but it was all so clear, when one only knew
 the true condition of affairs! But if we are to be beaten we shall first
 have the pleasure of killing some of those Prussians of perdition. There
 is that comfort for us; I believe that many of us are to leave their bones
 there, and I hope there will be plenty of Prussians to keep them company;
 I would like to see the ground down there in the valley heaped with dead
 Prussians!” He arose and pointed down the valley of the Meuse. Fire
 flashed from his myopic eyes, which had exempted him from service with the
 army. “A thousand thunders! I would fight, yes, I would, if they would
 have me. I don't know whether it is seeing them assume the airs of masters
 in my country—in this country where once the Cossacks did such
 mischief; but whenever I think of their being here, of their entering our
 houses, I am seized with an uncontrollable desire to cut a dozen of their
 throats. Ah! if it were not for my eyes, if they would take me, I would
 go!” Then, after a moment's silence: “And besides; who can tell?”
 

 It was the hope that sprang eternal, even in the breast of the least
 confident, of the possibility of victory, and Maurice, ashamed by this
 time of his tears, listened and caught at the pleasing speculation. Was it
 not true that only the day before there had been a rumor that Bazaine was
 at Verdun? Truly, it was time that Fortune should work a miracle for that
 France whose glories she had so long protected. Henriette, with an
 imperceptible smile on her lips, silently left the room, and was not the
 least bit surprised when she returned to find her brother up and dressed,
 and ready to go back to his duty. She insisted, however, that he and Jean
 should take some nourishment first. They seated themselves at the table,
 but the morsels choked them; their stomachs, weakened by their heavy
 slumber, revolted at the food. Like a prudent old campaigner Jean cut a
 loaf in two halves and placed one in Maurice's sack, the other in his own.
 It was growing dark, it behooved them to be going. Henriette, who was
 standing at the window watching the Prussian troops incessantly defiling
 on distant la Marfee, the swarming legions of black ants that were
 gradually being swallowed up in the gathering shadows, involuntarily
 murmured:
 

 “Oh, war! what a dreadful thing it is!”
 

 Maurice, seeing an opportunity to retort her sermon to him, immediately
 took her up:
 

 “How is this, little sister? you are anxious to have people fight, and you
 speak disrespectfully of war!”
 

 She turned and faced him, valiantly as ever: “It is true; I abhor it,
 because it is an abomination and an injustice. It may be simply because I
 am a woman, but the thought of such butchery sickens me. Why cannot
 nations adjust their differences without shedding blood?”
 

 Jean, the good fellow, seconded her with a nod of the head, and nothing to
 him, too, seemed easier—to him, the unlettered man—than to
 come together and settle matters after a fair, honest talk; but Maurice,
 mindful of his scientific theories, reflected on the necessity of war—war,
 which is itself existence, the universal law. Was it not poor, pitiful man
 who conceived the idea of justice and peace, while impassive nature revels
 in continual slaughter?
 

 “That is all very fine!” he cried. “Yes, centuries hence, if it shall come
 to pass that then all the nations shall be merged in one; centuries hence
 man may look forward to the coming of that golden age; and even in that
 case would not the end of war be the end of humanity? I was a fool but
 now; we must go and fight, since it is nature's law.” He smiled and
 repeated his brother-in-law's expression: “And besides, who can tell?”
 

 He saw things now through the mirage of his vivid self-delusion, they came
 to his vision distorted through the lens of his diseased nervous
 sensibility.
 

 “By the way,” he continued cheerfully, “what do you hear of our cousin
 Gunther? You know we have not seen a German yet, so you can't look to me
 to give you any foreign news.”
 

 The question was addressed to his brother-in-law, who had relapsed into a
 thoughtful silence and answered by a motion of his hand, expressive of his
 ignorance.
 

 “Cousin Gunther?” said Henriette, “Why, he belongs to the Vth corps and is
 with the Crown Prince's army; I read it in one of the newspapers, I don't
 remember which. Is that army in this neighborhood?”
 

 Weiss repeated his gesture, which was imitated by the two soldiers, who
 could not be supposed to know what enemies were in front of them when
 their generals did not know. Rising to his feet, the master of the house
 at last made use of articulate speech.
 

 “Come along; I will go with you. I learned this afternoon where the
 106th's camp is situated.” He told his wife that she need not expect to
 see him again that night, as he would sleep at Bazeilles, where they had
 recently bought and furnished a little place to serve them as a residence
 during the hot months. It was near a dyehouse that belonged to M.
 Delaherche. The accountant's mind was ill at ease in relation to certain
 stores that he had placed in the cellar—a cask of wine and a couple
 of sacks of potatoes; the house would certainly be visited by marauders if
 it was left unprotected, he said, while by occupying it that night he
 would doubtless save it from pillage. His wife watched him closely while
 he was speaking.
 

 “You need not be alarmed,” he added, with a smile; “I harbor no darker
 design than the protection of our property, and I pledge my word that if
 the village is attacked, or if there is any appearance of danger, I will
 come home at once.”
 

 “Well, then, go,” she said. “But remember, if you are not back in good
 season you will see me out there looking for you.”
 

 Henriette went with them to the door, where she embraced Maurice tenderly
 and gave Jean a warm clasp of the hand.
 

 “I intrust my brother to your care once more. He has told me of your
 kindness to him, and I love you for it.”
 

 He was too flustered to do more than return the pressure of the small,
 firm hand. His first impression returned to him again, and he beheld
 Henriette in the light in which she had first appeared to him, with her
 bright hair of the hue of ripe golden grain, so alert, so sunny, so
 unselfish, that her presence seemed to pervade the air like a caress.
 

 Once they were outside they found the same gloomy and forbidding Sedan
 that had greeted their eyes that morning. Twilight with its shadows had
 invaded the narrow streets, sidewalk and carriage-way alike were filled
 with a confused, surging throng. Most of the shops were closed, the houses
 seemed to be dead or sleeping, while out of doors the crowd was so dense
 that men trod on one another. With some little difficulty, however, they
 succeeded in reaching the Place de l'Hotel de Ville, where they
 encountered M. Delaherche, intent on picking up the latest news and seeing
 what was to be seen. He at once came up and greeted them, apparently
 delighted to meet Maurice, to whom he said that he had just returned from
 accompanying Captain Beaudoin over to Floing, where the regiment was
 posted, and he became, if that were possible, even more gracious than ever
 upon learning that Weiss proposed to pass the night at Bazeilles, where he
 himself, he declared, had just been telling the captain that he intended
 to take a bed, in order to see how things were looking at the dyehouse.
 

 “We'll go together and be company for each other, Weiss. But first let's
 go as far as the Sous-Prefecture; we may be able to catch a glimpse of the
 Emperor.”
 

 Ever since he had been so near having the famous conversation with him at
 Baybel his mind had been full of Napoleon III.; he was not satisfied until
 he had induced the two soldiers to accompany him. The Place de la
 Sous-Prefecture was comparatively empty; a few men were standing about in
 groups, engaged in whispered conversation, while occasionally an officer
 hurried by, haggard and careworn. The bright hues of the foliage were
 beginning to fade and grow dim in the melancholy, thick-gathering shades
 of night; the hoarse murmur of the Meuse was heard as its current poured
 onward beneath the houses to the right. Among the whisperers it was
 related how the Emperor—who with the greatest difficulty had been
 prevailed on to leave Carignan the night before about eleven o'clock—when
 entreated to push on to Mezieres had refused point-blank to abandon the
 post of danger and take a step that would prove so demoralizing to the
 troops. Others asserted that he was no longer in the city, that he had
 fled, leaving behind him a dummy emperor, one of his officers dressed in
 his uniform, a man whose startling resemblance to his imperial master had
 often puzzled the army. Others again declared, and called upon their honor
 to substantiate their story, that they had seen the army wagons containing
 the imperial treasure, one hundred millions, all in brand-new twenty-franc
 pieces, drive into the courtyard of the Prefecture. This convoy was, in
 fact, neither more nor less than the vehicles for the personal use of the
 Emperor and his suite, the char a banc, the two caleches,
 the twelve baggage and supply wagons, which had almost excited a riot in
 the villages through which they had passed—Courcelles, le Chene,
 Raucourt; assuming in men's imagination the dimensions of a huge train
 that had blocked the road and arrested the march of armies, and which now,
 shorn of their glory, execrated by all, had come in shame and disgrace to
 hide themselves among the sous-prefect's lilac bushes.
 

 While Delaherche was raising himself on tiptoe and trying to peer through
 the windows of the rez-de-chaussee, an old woman at his side, some
 poor day-worker of the neighborhood, with shapeless form and hands
 calloused and distorted by many years of toil, was mumbling between her
 teeth:
 

 “An emperor—I should like to see one once—just once—so I
 could say I had seen him.”
 

 Suddenly Delaherche exclaimed, seizing Maurice by the arm:
 

 “See, there he is! at the window, to the left. I had a good view of him
 yesterday; I can't be mistaken. There, he has just raised the curtain;
 see, that pale face, close to the glass.”
 

 The old woman had overheard him and stood staring with wide-open mouth and
 eyes, for there, full in the window, was an apparition that resembled a
 corpse more than a living being; its eyes were lifeless, its features
 distorted; even the mustache had assumed a ghastly whiteness in that final
 agony. The old woman was dumfounded; forthwith she turned her back and
 marched off with a look of supreme contempt.
 

 “That thing an emperor! a likely story.”
 

 A zouave was standing near, one of those fugitive soldiers who were in no
 haste to rejoin their commands. Brandishing his chassepot and
 expectorating threats and maledictions, he said to his companion:
 

 “Wait! see me put a bullet in his head!”
 

 Delaherche remonstrated angrily, but by that time the Emperor had
 disappeared. The hoarse murmur of the Meuse continued uninterruptedly; a
 wailing lament, inexpressibly mournful, seemed to pass above them through
 the air, where the darkness was gathering intensity. Other sounds rose in
 the distance, like the hollow muttering of the rising storm; were they the
 “March! march!” that terrible order from Paris that had driven that
 ill-starred man onward day by day, dragging behind him along the roads of
 his defeat the irony of his imperial escort, until now he was brought face
 to face with the ruin he had foreseen and come forth to meet? What
 multitudes of brave men were to lay down their lives for his mistakes, and
 how complete the wreck, in all his being, of that sick man, that
 sentimental dreamer, awaiting in gloomy silence the fulfillment of his
 destiny!
 

 Weiss and Delaherche accompanied the two soldiers to the plateau of
 Floing, where the 7th corps camps were.
 

 “Adieu!” said Maurice as he embraced his brother-in-law.
 

 “No, no; not adieu, the deuce! Au revoir!” the manufacturer gayly
 cried.
 

 Jean's instinct led him at once to their regiment, the tents of which were
 pitched behind the cemetery, where the ground of the plateau begins to
 fall away. It was nearly dark, but there was sufficient light yet
 remaining in the sky to enable them to distinguish the black huddle of
 roofs above the city, and further in the distance Balan and Bazeilles,
 lying in the broad meadows that stretch away to the range of hills between
 Remilly and Frenois, while to the right was the dusky wood of la Garenne,
 and to the left the broad bosom of the Meuse had the dull gleam of frosted
 silver in the dying daylight. Maurice surveyed the broad landscape that
 was momentarily fading in the descending shadows.
 

 “Ah, here is the corporal!” said Chouteau. “I wonder if he has been
 looking after our rations!”
 

 The camp was astir with life and bustle. All day the men had been coming
 in, singly and in little groups, and the crowd and confusion were such
 that the officers made no pretense of punishing or even reprimanding them;
 they accepted thankfully those who were so kind as to return and asked no
 questions. Captain Beaudoin had made his appearance only a short time
 before, and it was about two o'clock when Lieutenant Rochas had brought in
 his collection of stragglers, about one-third of the company strength. Now
 the ranks were nearly full once more. Some of the men were drunk, others
 had not been able to secure even a morsel of bread and were sinking from
 inanition; again there had been no distribution of rations. Loubet,
 however, had discovered some cabbages in a neighboring garden, and cooked
 them after a fashion, but there was no salt or lard; the empty stomachs
 continued to assert their claims.
 

 “Come, now, corporal, you are a knowing old file,” Chouteau tauntingly
 continued, “what have you got for us? Oh, it's not for myself I care;
 Loubet and I had a good breakfast; a lady gave it us. You were not at
 distribution, then?”
 

 Jean beheld a circle of expectant eyes bent on him; the squad had been
 waiting for him with anxiety, Pache and Lapoulle in particular, luckless
 dogs, who had found nothing they could appropriate; they all relied on
 him, who, as they expressed it, could get bread out of a stone. And the
 corporal's conscience smote him for having abandoned his men; he took pity
 on them and divided among them half the bread that he had in his sack.
 

 “Name o' God! Name o' God!” grunted Lapoulle as he contentedly munched the
 dry bread; it was all he could find to say; while Pache repeated a Pater
 and an Ave under his breath to make sure that Heaven should not
 forget to send him his breakfast in the morning.
 

 of half-crazed soldiers who were pushing their way down from the Faubourg
 de la Cassine; he lost sight of the colonel, and abandoned his design of
 going to witness the raising of the white flag. He certainly would not be
 allowed to enter the citadel, and then again he had heard it reported that
 shells were falling on the college, and a new terror filled his mind; his
 factory might have been burned since he left it. All his feverish
 agitation returned to him and he started off on a run; the rapid motion
 was a relief to him. But the streets were blocked by groups of men, at
 every crossing he was delayed by some new obstacle. It was only when he
 reached the Rue Maqua and beheld the monumental facade of his house
 intact, no smoke or sign of fire about it, that his anxiety was allayed,
 and he heaved a deep sigh of satisfaction. He entered, and from the
 doorway shouted to his mother and wife:
 

 “It is all right! they are hoisting the white flag; the cannonade won't
 last much longer.”
 

 He said nothing more, for the appearance presented by the ambulance was
 truly horrifying.
 

 In the vast drying-room, the wide door of which was standing open, not
 only was every bed occupied, but there was no more room upon the litter
 that had been shaken down on the floor at the end of the apartment. They
 were commencing to strew straw in the spaces between the beds, the wounded
 were crowded together so closely that they were in contact. Already there
 were more than two hundred patients there, and more were arriving
 constantly; through the lofty windows the pitiless white daylight streamed
 in upon that aggregation of suffering humanity. Now and then an unguarded
 movement elicited an involuntary cry of anguish. The death-rattle rose on
 the warm, damp air. Down the room a low, mournful wail, almost a lullaby,
 went on and ceased not. And all about was silence, intense, profound, the
 stolid resignation of despair, the solemn stillness of the death-chamber,
 broken only by the tread and whispers of the attendants. Rents in
 tattered, shell-torn uniforms disclosed gaping wounds, some of which had
 received a hasty dressing on the battlefield, while others were still raw
 and bleeding. There were feet, still incased in their coarse shoes,
 crushed into a mass like jelly; from knees and elbows, that were as if
 they had been smashed by a hammer, depended inert limbs. There were broken
 hands, and fingers almost severed, ready to drop, retained only by a strip
 of skin. Most numerous among the casualties were the fractures; the poor
 arms and legs, red and swollen, throbbed intolerably and were heavy as
 lead. But the most dangerous hurts were those in the abdomen, chest, and
 head. There were yawning fissures that laid open the entire flank, the
 knotted viscera were drawn into great hard lumps beneath the tight-drawn
 skin, while as the effect of certain wounds the patient frothed at the
 mouth and writhed like an epileptic. Here and there were cases where the
 lungs had been penetrated, the puncture now so minute as to permit no
 escape of blood, again a wide, deep orifice through which the red tide of
 life escaped in torrents; and the internal hemorrhages, those that were
 hid from sight, were the most terrible in their effects, prostrating their
 victim like a flash, making him black in the face and delirious. And
 finally the head, more than any other portion of the frame, gave evidence
 of hard treatment; a broken jaw, the mouth a pulp of teeth and bleeding
 tongue, an eye torn from its socket and exposed upon the cheek, a cloven
 skull that showed the palpitating brain beneath. Those in whose case the
 bullet had touched the brain or spinal marrow were already as dead men,
 sunk in the lethargy of coma, while the fractures and other less serious
 cases tossed restlessly on their pallets and beseechingly called for water
 to quench their thirst.
 

 Leaving the large room and passing out into the courtyard, the shed where
 the operations were going on presented another scene of horror. In the
 rush and hurry that had continued unabated since morning it was impossible
 to operate on every case that was brought in, so their attention had been
 confined to those urgent cases that imperatively demanded it. Whenever
 Bouroche's rapid judgment told him that amputation was necessary, he
 proceeded at once to perform it. In the same way he lost not a moment's
 time in probing the wound and extracting the projectile whenever it had
 lodged in some locality where it might do further mischief, as in the
 muscles of the neck, the region of the arm pit, the thigh joint, the
 ligaments of the knee and elbow. Severed arteries, too, had to be tied
 without delay. Other wounds were merely dressed by one of the hospital
 stewards under his direction and left to await developments. He had
 already with his own hand performed four amputations, the only rest that
 he allowed himself being to attend to some minor cases in the intervals
 between them, and was beginning to feel fatigue. There were but two
 tables, his own and another, presided over by one of his assistants; a
 sheet had been hung between them, to isolate the patients from each other.
 Although the sponge was kept constantly at work the tables were always
 red, and the buckets that were emptied over a bed of daisies a few steps
 away, the clear water in which a single tumbler of blood sufficed to
 redden, seemed to be buckets of unmixed blood, torrents of blood,
 inundating the gentle flowers of the parterre. Although the room was
 thoroughly ventilated a nauseating smell arose from the tables and their
 horrid burdens, mingled with the sweetly insipid odor of chloroform.
 

 Delaherche, naturally a soft-hearted man, was in a quiver of compassionate
 emotion at the spectacle that lay before his eyes, when his attention was
 attracted by a landau that drove up to the door. It was a private
 carriage, but doubtless the ambulance attendants had found none other
 ready to their hand and had crowded their patients into it. There were
 eight of them, sitting on one another's knees, and as the last man
 alighted the manufacturer recognized Captain Beaudoin, and gave utterance
 to a cry of terror and surprise.
 

 “Ah, my poor friend! Wait, I will call my mother and my wife.”
 

 They came running up, leaving the bandages to be rolled by servants. The
 attendants had already raised the captain and brought him into the room,
 and were about to lay him down upon a pile of straw when Delaherche
 noticed, lying on a bed, a soldier whose ashy face and staring eyes
 exhibited no sign of life.
 

 “Look, is he not dead, that man?”
 

 “That's so!” replied the attendant. “He may as well make room for someone
 else!”
 

 He and one of his mates took the body by the arms and legs and carried it
 off to the morgue that had been extemporized behind the lilac bushes. A
 dozen corpses were already there in a row, stiff and stark, some drawn out
 to their full length as if in an attempt to rid themselves of the agony
 that racked them, others curled and twisted in every attitude of
 suffering. Some seemed to have left the world with a sneer on their faces,
 their eyes retroverted till naught was visible but the whites, the
 grinning lips parted over the glistening teeth, while in others, with
 faces unspeakably sorrowful, big tears still stood on the cheeks. One, a
 mere boy, short and slight, half whose face had been shot away by a
 cannon-ball, had his two hands clasped convulsively above his heart, and
 in them a woman's photograph, one of those pale, blurred pictures that are
 made in the quarters of the poor, bedabbled with his blood. And at the
 feet of the dead had been thrown in a promiscuous pile the amputated arms
 and legs, the refuse of the knife and saw of the operating table, just as
 the butcher sweeps into a corner of his shop the offal, the worthless odds
 and ends of flesh and bone.
 

 Gilberte shuddered as she looked on Captain Beaudoin. Good God! how pale
 he was, stretched out on his mattress, his face so white beneath the
 encrusting grime! And the thought that but a few short hours before he had
 held her in his arms, radiant in all his manly strength and beauty, sent a
 chill of terror to her heart. She kneeled beside him.
 

 “What a terrible misfortune, my friend! But it won't amount to anything,
 will it?” And she drew her handkerchief from her pocket and began
 mechanically to wipe his face, for she could not bear to look at it thus
 soiled with powder, sweat, and clay. It seemed to her, too, that she would
 be helping him by cleansing him a little. “Will it? it is only your leg
 that is hurt; it won't amount to anything.”
 

 The captain made an effort to rouse himself from his semi-conscious state,
 and opened his eyes. He recognized his friends and greeted them with a
 faint smile.
 

 “Yes, it is only the leg. I was not even aware of being hit; I thought I
 had made a misstep and fallen—” He spoke with great difficulty. “Oh!
 I am so thirsty!”
 

 Mme. Delaherche, who was standing at the other side of the mattress,
 looking down compassionately on the young man, hastily left the room. She
 returned with a glass and a carafe of water into which a little cognac had
 been poured, and when the captain had greedily swallowed the contents of
 the glass, she distributed what remained in the carafe among the occupants
 of the adjacent beds, who begged with trembling outstretched hands and
 tearful voices for a drop. A zouave, for whom there was none left, sobbed
 like a child in his disappointment.
 

 Delaherche was meantime trying to gain the major's ear to see if he could
 not prevail on him to take up the captain's case out of its regular turn.
 Bouroche came into the room just then, with his blood-stained apron and
 lion's mane hanging in confusion about his perspiring face, and the men
 raised their heads as he passed and endeavored to stop him, all clamoring
 at once for recognition and immediate attention: “This way, major! It's my
 turn, major!” Faltering words of entreaty went up to him, trembling hands
 clutched at his garments, but he, wrapped up in the work that lay before
 him and puffing with his laborious exertions, continued to plan and
 calculate and listened to none of them. He communed with himself aloud,
 counting them over with his finger and classifying them, assigning them
 their numbers; this one first, then that one, then that other fellow; one,
 two, three; the jaw, the arm, then the thigh; while the assistant who
 accompanied him on his round made himself all ears in his effort to
 memorize his directions.
 

 “Major,” said Delaherche, plucking him by the sleeve, “there is an officer
 over here, Captain Beaudoin—”
 

 Bouroche interrupted him. “What, Beaudoin here! Ah, the poor devil!” And
 he crossed over at once to the side of the wounded man. A single glance,
 however, must have sufficed to show him that the case was a bad one, for
 he added in the same breath, without even stooping to examine the injured
 member: “Good! I will have them bring him to me at once, just as soon as I
 am through with the operation that is now in hand.”
 

 And he went back to the shed, followed by Delaherche, who would not lose
 sight of him for fear lest he might forget his promise.
 

 The business that lay before him now was the rescision of a shoulder-joint
 in accordance with Lisfranc's method, which surgeons never fail to speak
 of as a “very pretty” operation, something neat and expeditious, barely
 occupying forty seconds in the performance. The patient was subjected to
 the influence of chloroform, while an assistant grasped the shoulder with
 both hands, the fingers under the armpit, the thumbs on top. Bouroche,
 brandishing the long, keen knife, cried: “Raise him!” seized the deltoid
 with his left hand and with a swift movement of the right cut through the
 flesh of the arm and severed the muscle; then, with a deft rearward cut,
 he disarticulated the joint at a single stroke, and presto! the arm fell
 on the table, taken off in three motions. The assistant slipped his thumbs
 over the brachial artery in such manner as to close it. “Let him down!”
 Bouroche could not restrain a little pleased laugh as he proceeded to
 secure the artery, for he had done it in thirty-five seconds. All that was
 left to do now was to bring a flap of skin down over the wound and stitch
 it, in appearance something like a flat epaulette. It was not only
 “pretty,” but exciting, on account of the danger, for a man will pump all
 the blood out of his body in two minutes through the brachial, to say
 nothing of the risk there is in bringing a patient to a sitting posture
 when under the influence of anaesthetics.
 

 Delaherche was white as a ghost; a thrill of horror ran down his back. He
 would have turned and fled, but time was not given him; the arm was
 already off. The soldier was a new recruit, a sturdy peasant lad; on
 emerging from his state of coma he beheld a hospital attendant carrying
 away the amputated limb to conceal it behind the lilacs. Giving a quick
 downward glance at his shoulder, he saw the bleeding stump and knew what
 had been done, whereon he became furiously angry.
 

 “Ah, nom de Dieu! what have you been doing to me? It is a shame!”
 

 Bouroche was too done up to make him an immediate answer, but presently,
 in his fatherly way:
 

 “I acted for the best; I didn't want to see you kick the bucket, my boy.
 Besides, I asked you, and you told me to go ahead.”
 

 “I told you to go ahead! I did? How could I know what I was saying!” His
 anger subsided and he began to weep scalding tears. “What is going to
 become of me now?”
 

 They carried him away and laid him on the straw, and gave the table and
 its covering a thorough cleansing; and the buckets of blood-red water that
 they threw out across the grass plot gave to the pale daisies a still
 deeper hue of crimson.
 

 When Delaherche had in some degree recovered his equanimity he was
 astonished to notice that the bombardment was still going on. Why had it
 not been silenced? Rose's tablecloth must have been hoisted over the
 citadel by that time, and yet it seemed as if the fire of the Prussian
 batteries was more rapid and furious than ever. The uproar was such that
 one could not hear his own voice; the sustained vibration tried the
 stoutest nerves. On both operators and patients the effect could not but
 be most unfavorable of those incessant detonations that seemed to
 penetrate the inmost recesses of one's being. The entire hospital was in a
 state of feverish alarm and apprehension.
 

 “I supposed it was all over; what can they mean by keeping it up?”
 exclaimed Delaherche, who was nervously listening, expecting each shot
 would be the last.
 

 Returning to Bouroche to remind him of his promise and conduct him to the
 captain, he was astonished to find him seated on a bundle of straw before
 two pails of iced water, into which he had plunged both his arms, bared to
 the shoulder. The major, weary and disheartened, overwhelmed by a
 sensation of deepest melancholy and dejection, had reached one of those
 terrible moments when the practitioner becomes conscious of his own
 impotency; he had exhausted his strength, physical and moral, and taken
 this means to restore it. And yet he was not a weakling; he was steady of
 hand and firm of heart; but the inexorable question had presented itself
 to him: “What is the use?” The feeling that he could accomplish so little,
 that so much must be left undone, had suddenly paralyzed him. What was the
 use? since Death, in spite of his utmost effort, would always be
 victorious. Two attendants came in, bearing Captain Beaudoin on a
 stretcher.
 

 “Major,” Delaherche ventured to say, “here is the captain.”
 

 Bouroche opened his eyes, withdrew his arms from their cold bath, shook
 and dried them on the straw. Then, rising to his feet:
 

 “Ah, yes; the next one—Well, well, the day's work is not yet done.”
 And he shook the tawny locks upon his lion's head, rejuvenated and
 refreshed, restored to himself once more by the invincible habit of duty
 and the stern discipline of his profession.
 

 “Good! just above the right ankle,” said Bouroche, with unusual garrulity,
 intended to quiet the nerves of the patient. “You displayed wisdom in
 selecting the location of your wound; one is not much the worse for a hurt
 in that quarter. Now we'll just take a little look at it.”
 

 But Beaudoin's persistently lethargic condition evidently alarmed him. He
 inspected the contrivance that had been applied by the field attendant to
 check the flow of blood, which was simply a cord passed around the leg
 outside the trousers and twisted tight with the assistance of a bayonet
 sheath, with a growling request to be informed what infernal ignoramus had
 done that. Then suddenly he saw how matters were and was silent; while
 they were bringing him in from the field in the overcrowded landau the
 improvised tourniquet had become loosened and slipped down, thus giving
 rise to an extensive hemorrhage. He relieved his feelings by storming at
 the hospital steward who was assisting him.
 

 “You confounded snail, cut! Are you going to keep me here all day?”
 

 The attendant cut away the trousers and drawers, then the shoe and sock,
 disclosing to view the leg and foot in their pale nudity, stained with
 blood. Just over the ankle was a frightful laceration, into which the
 splinter of the bursting shell had driven a piece of the red cloth of the
 trousers. The muscle protruded from the lips of the gaping orifice, a roll
 of whitish, mangled tissue.
 

 Gilberte had to support herself against one of the uprights of the shed.
 Ah! that flesh, that poor flesh that was so white; now all torn and maimed
 and bleeding! Despite the horror and terror of the sight she could not
 turn away her eyes.
 

 “Confound it!” Bouroche exclaimed, “they have made a nice mess here!”
 

 He felt the foot and found it cold; the pulse, if any, was so feeble as to
 be undistinguishable. His face was very grave, and he pursed his lips in a
 way that was habitual with him when he had a more than usually serious
 case to deal with.
 

 “Confound it,” he repeated, “I don't like the looks of that foot!”
 

 The captain, whom his anxiety had finally aroused from his semi-somnolent
 state, asked:
 

 “What were you saying, major?”
 

 Bouroche's tactics, whenever an amputation became necessary, were never to
 appeal directly to the patient for the customary authorization. He
 preferred to have the patient accede to it voluntarily.
 

 “I was saying that I don't like the looks of that foot,” he murmured, as
 if thinking aloud. “I am afraid we shan't be able to save it.”
 

 In a tone of alarm Beaudoin rejoined: “Come, major, there is no use
 beating about the bush. What is your opinion?”
 

 “My opinion is that you are a brave man, captain, and that you are going
 to let me do what the necessity of the case demands.”
 

 To Captain Beaudoin it seemed as if a sort of reddish vapor arose before
 his eyes through which he saw things obscurely. He understood. But
 notwithstanding the intolerable fear that appeared to be clutching at his
 throat, he replied, unaffectedly and bravely:
 

 “Do as you think best, major.”
 

 The preparations did not consume much time. The assistant had saturated a
 cloth with chloroform and was holding it in readiness; it was at once
 applied to the patient's nostrils. Then, just at the moment that the brief
 struggle set in that precedes anaesthesia, two attendants raised the
 captain and placed him on the mattress upon his back, in such a position
 that the legs should be free; one of them retained his grasp on the left
 limb, holding it flexed, while an assistant, seizing the right, clasped it
 tightly with both his hands in the region of the groin in order to
 compress the arteries.
 

 Gilberte, when she saw Bouroche approach the victim with the glittering
 steel, could endure no more.
 

 “Oh, don't! oh, don't! it is too horrible!”
 

 And she would have fallen had it not been that Mme. Delaherche put forth
 her arm to sustain her.
 

 “But why do you stay here?”
 

 Both the women remained, however. They averted their eyes, not wishing to
 see the rest; motionless and trembling they stood locked in each other's
 arms, notwithstanding the little love there was between them.
 

 At no time during the day had the artillery thundered more loudly than
 now. It was three o'clock, and Delaherche declared angrily that he gave it
 up—he could not understand it. There could be no doubt about it now,
 the Prussian batteries, instead of slackening their fire, were extending
 it. Why? What had happened? It was as if all the forces of the nether
 regions had been unchained; the earth shook, the heavens were on fire. The
 ring of flame-belching mouths of bronze that encircled Sedan, the eight
 hundred guns of the German armies, that were served with such activity and
 raised such an uproar, were expending their thunders on the adjacent
 fields; had that concentric fire been focused upon the city, had the
 batteries on those commanding heights once begun to play upon Sedan, it
 would have been reduced to ashes and pulverized into dust in less than
 fifteen minutes. But now the projectiles were again commencing to fall
 upon the houses, the crash that told of ruin and destruction was heard
 more frequently. One exploded in the Rue des Voyards, another grazed the
 tall chimney of the factory, and the bricks and mortar came tumbling to
 the ground directly in front of the shed where the surgeons were at work.
 Bouroche looked up and grumbled:
 

 “Are they trying to finish our wounded for us? Really, this racket is
 intolerable.”
 

 In the meantime an attendant had seized the captain's leg, and the major,
 with a swift circular motion of his hand, made an incision in the skin
 below the knee and some two inches below the spot where he intended to saw
 the bone; then, still employing the same thin-bladed knife, that he did
 not change in order to get on more rapidly, he loosened the skin on the
 superior side of the incision and turned it back, much as one would peel
 an orange. But just as he was on the point of dividing the muscles a
 hospital steward came up and whispered in his ear:
 

 “Number two has just slipped his cable.”
 

 The major did not hear, owing to the fearful uproar.
 

 “Speak up, can't you! My ear drums are broken with their d——-d
 cannon.”
 

 “Number two has just slipped his cable.”
 

 “Who is that, number two?”
 

 “The arm, you know.”
 

 “Ah, very good! Well, then, you can bring me number three, the jaw.”
 

 And with wonderful dexterity, never changing his position, he cut through
 the muscles clean down to the bone with a single motion of his wrist. He
 laid bare the tibia and fibula, introduced between them an implement to
 keep them in position, drew the saw across them once, and they were
 sundered. And the foot remained in the hands of the attendant who was
 holding it.
 

 The flow of blood had been small, thanks to the pressure maintained by the
 assistant higher up the leg, at the thigh. The ligature of the three
 arteries was quickly accomplished, but the major shook his head, and when
 the assistant had removed his fingers he examined the stump, murmuring,
 certain that the patient could not hear as yet:
 

 “It looks bad; there's no blood coming from the arterioles.”
 

 And he completed his diagnosis of the case by an expressive gesture:
 Another poor fellow who was soon to answer the great roll-call! while on
 his perspiring face was again seen that expression of weariness and utter
 dejection, that hopeless, unanswerable: “What is the use?” since out of
 every ten cases that they assumed the terrible responsibility of operating
 on they did not succeed in saving four. He wiped his forehead, and set to
 work to draw down the flap of skin and put in the three sutures that were
 to hold it in place.
 

 Delaherche having told Gilberte that the operation was completed, she
 turned her gaze once more upon the table; she caught a glimpse of the
 captain's foot, however, as the attendant was carrying it away to the
 place behind the lilacs. The charnel house there continued to receive
 fresh occupants; two more corpses had recently been brought in and added
 to the ghastly array, one with blackened lips still parted wide as if
 rending the air with shrieks of anguish, the other, his form so contorted
 and contracted in the convulsions of the last agony that he was like a
 stunted, malformed boy. Unfortunately, there was beginning to be a
 scarcity of room in the little secluded corner, and the human debris had
 commenced to overflow and invade the adjacent alley. The attendant
 hesitated a moment, in doubt what to do with the captain's foot, then
 finally concluded to throw it on the general pile.
 

 “Well, captain, that's over with,” the major said to Beaudoin when he
 regained consciousness. “You'll be all right now.”
 

 But the captain did not show the cheeriness that follows a successful
 operation. He opened his eyes and made an attempt to raise himself, then
 fell back on his pillow, murmuring wearily, in a faint voice:
 

 “Thanks, major. I'm glad it's over.”
 

 He was conscious of the pain, however, when the alcohol of the dressing
 touched the raw flesh. He flinched a little, complaining that they were
 burning him. And just as they were bringing up the stretcher preparatory
 to carrying him back into the other room the factory was shaken to its
 foundations by a most terrific explosion; a shell had burst directly in
 the rear of the shed, in the small courtyard where the pump was situated.
 The glass in the windows was shattered into fragments, and a dense cloud
 of smoke came pouring into the ambulance. The wounded men, stricken with
 panic terror, arose from their bed of straw; all were clamoring with
 affright; all wished to fly at once.
 

 Delaherche rushed from the building in consternation to see what damage
 had been done. Did they mean to burn his house down over his head? What
 did it all mean? Why did they open fire again when the Emperor had ordered
 that it should cease?
 

 “Thunder and lightning! Stir yourselves, will you!” Bouroche shouted to
 his staff, who were standing about with pallid faces, transfixed by
 terror. “Wash off the table; go and bring me in number three!”
 

 They cleansed the table; and once more the crimson contents of the buckets
 were hurled across the grass plot upon the bed of daisies, which was now a
 sodden, blood-soaked mat of flowers and verdure. And Bouroche, to relieve
 the tedium until the attendants should bring him “number three,” applied
 himself to probing for a musket-ball, which, having first broken the
 patient's lower jaw, had lodged in the root of the tongue. The blood
 flowed freely and collected on his fingers in glutinous masses.
 

 Captain Beaudoin was again resting on his mattress in the large room.
 Gilberte and Mme. Delaherche had followed the stretcher when he was
 carried from the operating table, and even Delaherche, notwithstanding his
 anxiety, came in for a moment's chat.
 

 “Lie here and rest a few minutes, Captain. We will have a room prepared
 for you, and you shall be our guest.”
 

 But the wounded man shook off his lethargy and for a moment had command of
 his faculties.
 

 “No, it is not worth while; I feel that I am going to die.”
 

 And he looked at them with wide eyes, filled with the horror of death.
 

 “Oh, Captain! why do you talk like that?” murmured Gilberte, with a
 shiver, while she forced a smile to her lips. “You will be quite well a
 month hence.”
 

 He shook his head mournfully, and in the room was conscious of no presence
 save hers; on all his face was expressed his unutterable yearning for
 life, his bitter, almost craven regret that he was to be snatched away so
 young, leaving so many joys behind untasted.
 

 “I am going to die, I am going to die. Oh! 'tis horrible—”
 

 Then suddenly he became conscious of his torn, soiled uniform and the
 grime upon his hands, and it made him feel uncomfortable to be in the
 company of women in such a state. It shamed him to show such weakness, and
 his desire to look and be the gentleman to the last restored to him his
 manhood. When he spoke again it was in a tone almost of cheerfulness.
 

 “If I have got to die, though, I would rather it should be with clean
 hands. I should count it a great kindness, madame, if you would moisten a
 napkin and let me have it.”
 

 Gilberte sped away and quickly returned with the napkin, with which she
 herself cleansed the hands of the dying man. Thenceforth, desirous of
 quitting the scene with dignity, he displayed much firmness. Delaherche
 did what he could to cheer him, and assisted his wife in the small
 attentions she offered for his comfort. Old Mme. Delaherche, too, in
 presence of the man whose hours were numbered, felt her enmity subsiding.
 She would be silent, she who knew all and had sworn to impart her
 knowledge to her son. What would it avail to excite discord in the
 household, since death would soon obliterate all trace of the wrong?
 

 The end came very soon. Captain Beaudoin, whose strength was ebbing
 rapidly, relapsed into his comatose condition, and a cold sweat broke out
 and stood in beads upon his neck and forehead. He opened his eyes again,
 and began to feebly grope about him with his stiffening fingers, as if
 feeling for a covering that was not there, pulling at it with a gentle,
 continuous movement, as if to draw it up around his shoulders.
 

 “It is cold—Oh! it is so cold.”
 

 And so he passed from life, peacefully, without a struggle; and on his
 wasted, tranquil face rested an expression of unspeakable melancholy.
 

 Delaherche saw to it that the remains, instead of being borne away and
 placed among the common dead, were deposited in one of the outbuildings of
 the factory. He endeavored to prevail on Gilberte, who was tearful and
 disconsolate, to retire to her apartment, but she declared that to be
 alone now would be more than her nerves could stand, and begged to be
 allowed to remain with her mother-in-law in the ambulance, where the noise
 and movement would be a distraction to her. She was seen presently running
 to carry a drink of water to a chasseur d'Afrique whom his fever had made
 delirious, and she assisted a hospital steward to dress the hand of a
 little recruit, a lad of twenty, who had had his thumb shot away and come
 in on foot from the battlefield; and as he was jolly and amusing, treating
 his wound with all the levity and nonchalance of the Parisian rollicker,
 she was soon laughing and joking as merrily as he.
 

 While the captain lay dying the cannonade seemed, if that were possible,
 to have increased in violence; another shell had landed in the garden,
 shattering one of the old elms. Terror-stricken men came running in to say
 that all Sedan was in danger of destruction; a great fire had broken out
 in the Faubourg de la Cassine. If the bombardment should continue with
 such fury for any length of time there would be nothing left of the city.
 

 “It can't be; I am going to see about it!” Delaherche exclaimed, violently
 excited.
 

 “Where are you going, pray?” asked Bouroche.
 

 “Why, to the Sous-Prefecture, to see what the Emperor means by fooling us
 in this way, with his talk of hoisting the white flag.”
 

 For some few seconds the major stood as if petrified at the idea of defeat
 and capitulation, which presented itself to him then for the first time in
 the midst of his impotent efforts to save the lives of the poor maimed
 creatures they were bringing in to him from the field. Rage and grief were
 in his voice as he shouted:
 

 “Go to the devil, if you will! All you can do won't keep us from being
 soundly whipped!”
 

 On leaving the factory Delaherche found it no easy task to squeeze his way
 through the throng; at every instant the crowd of straggling soldiers that
 filled the streets received fresh accessions. He questioned several of the
 officers whom he encountered; not one of them had seen the white flag on
 the citadel. Finally he met a colonel, who declared that he had caught a
 momentary glimpse of it: that it had been run up and then immediately
 hauled down. That explained matters; either the Germans had not seen it,
 or seeing it appear and disappear so quickly, had inferred the distressed
 condition of the French and redoubled their fire in consequence. There was
 a story in circulation how a general officer, enraged beyond control at
 the sight of the flag, had wrested it from its bearer, broken the staff,
 and trampled it in the mud. And still the Prussian batteries continued to
 play upon the city, shells were falling upon the roofs and in the streets,
 houses were in flames; a woman had just been killed at the corner of the
 Rue Pont de Meuse and the Place Turenne.
 

 At the Sous-Prefecture Delaherche failed to find Rose at her usual station
 in the janitor's lodge. Everywhere were evidences of disorder; all the
 doors were standing open; the reign of terror had commenced. As there was
 no sentry or anyone to prevent, he went upstairs, encountering on the way
 only a few scared-looking men, none of whom made any offer to stop him. He
 had reached the first story and was hesitating what to do next when he saw
 the young girl approaching him.
 

 “Oh, M. Delaherche! isn't this dreadful! Here, quick! this way, if you
 would like to see the Emperor.”
 

 On the left of the corridor a door stood ajar, and through the narrow
 opening a glimpse could be had of the sovereign, who had resumed his
 weary, anguished tramp between the fireplace and the window. Back and
 forth he shuffled with heavy, dragging steps, and ceased not, despite his
 unendurable suffering. An aide-de-camp had just entered the room—it
 was he who had failed to close the door behind him—and Delaherche
 heard the Emperor ask him in a sorrowfully reproachful voice:
 

 “What is the reason of this continued firing, sir, after I gave orders to
 hoist the white flag?”
 

 The torture to him had become greater than he could bear, that
 never-ceasing cannonade, that seemed to grow more furious with every
 minute. Every time he approached the window it pierced him to the heart.
 More spilling of blood, more useless squandering of human life! At every
 moment the piles of corpses were rising higher on the battlefield, and his
 was the responsibility. The compassionate instincts that entered so
 largely into his nature revolted at it, and more than ten times already he
 had asked that question of those who approached him.
 

 “I gave orders to raise the white flag; tell me, why do they continue
 firing?”
 

 The aide-de-camp made answer in a voice so low that Delaherche failed to
 catch its purport. The Emperor, moreover, seemed not to pause to listen,
 drawn by some irresistible attraction to that window at which, each time
 he approached it, he was greeted by that terrible salvo of artillery that
 rent and tore his being. His pallor was greater even than it had been
 before; his poor, pinched, wan face, on which were still visible traces of
 the rouge that had been applied that morning, bore witness to his anguish.
 

 At that moment a short, quick-motioned man in dust-soiled uniform, whom
 Delaherche recognized as General Lebrun, hurriedly crossed the corridor
 and pushed open the door, without waiting to be announced. And scarcely
 was he in the room when again was heard the Emperor's so oft repeated
 question.
 

 “Why do they continue to fire, General, when I have given orders to hoist
 the white flag?”
 

 The aide-de-camp left the apartment, shutting the door behind him, and
 Delaherche never knew what was the general's answer. The vision had faded
 from his sight.
 

 “Ah!” said Rose, “things are going badly; I can see that clearly enough by
 all those gentlemen's faces. It is bad for my tablecloth, too; I am afraid
 I shall never see it again; somebody told me it had been torn in pieces.
 But it is for the Emperor that I feel most sorry in all this business, for
 he is in a great deal worse condition than the marshal; he would be much
 better off in his bed than in that room, where he is wearing himself out
 with his everlasting walking.”
 

 She spoke with much feeling, and on her pretty pink and white face there
 was an expression of sincere pity, but Delaherche, whose Bonapartist ardor
 had somehow cooled considerably during the last two days, said to himself
 that she was a little fool. He nevertheless remained chatting with her a
 moment in the hall below while waiting for General Lebrun to take his
 departure, and when that officer appeared and left the building he
 followed him.
 

 General Lebrun had explained to the Emperor that if it was thought best to
 apply for an armistice, etiquette demanded that a letter to that effect,
 signed by the commander-in-chief of the French forces, should be
 dispatched to the German commander-in-chief. He had also offered to write
 the letter, go in search of General de Wimpffen, and obtain his signature
 to it. He left the Sous-Prefecture with the letter in his pocket, but
 apprehensive he might not succeed in finding de Wimpffen, entirely
 ignorant as he was of the general's whereabouts on the field of battle.
 Within the ramparts of Sedan, moreover, the crowd was so dense that he was
 compelled to walk his horse, which enabled Delaherche to keep him in sight
 until he reached the Minil gate.
 

 Once outside upon the road, however, General Lebrun struck into a gallop,
 and when near Balan had the good fortune to fall in with the chief. Only a
 few minutes previous to this the latter had written to the Emperor: “Sire,
 come and put yourself at the head of your troops; they will force a
 passage through the enemy's lines for you, or perish in the attempt;”
 therefore he flew into a furious passion at the mere mention of the word
 armistice. No, no! he would sign nothing, he would fight it out! This was
 about half-past three o'clock, and it was shortly afterward that occurred
 the gallant, but mad attempt, the last serious effort of the day, to
 pierce the Bavarian lines and regain possession of Bazeilles. In order to
 put heart into the troops a ruse was resorted to: in the streets of Sedan
 and in the fields outside the walls the shout was raised: “Bazaine is
 coming up! Bazaine is at hand!” Ever since morning many had allowed
 themselves to be deluded by that hope; each time that the Germans opened
 fire with a fresh battery it was confidently asserted to be the guns of
 the army of Metz. In the neighborhood of twelve hundred men were
 collected, soldiers of all arms, from every corps, and the little column
 bravely advanced into the storm of missiles that swept the road, at double
 time. It was a splendid spectacle of heroism and endurance while it
 lasted; the numerous casualties did not check the ardor of the survivors,
 nearly five hundred yards were traversed with a courage and nerve that
 seemed almost like madness; but soon there were great gaps in the ranks,
 the bravest began to fall back. What could they do against overwhelming
 numbers? It was a mad attempt, anyway; the desperate effort of a commander
 who could not bring himself to acknowledge that he was defeated. And it
 ended by General de Wimpffen finding himself and General Lebrun alone
 together on the Bazeilles road, which they had to make up their mind to
 abandon to the enemy, for good and all. All that remained for them to do
 was to retreat and seek security under the walls of Sedan.
 

 Upon losing sight of the general at the Minil gate Delaherche had hurried
 back to the factory at the best speed he was capable of, impelled by an
 irresistible longing to have another look from his observatory at what was
 going on in the distance. Just as he reached his door, however, his
 progress was arrested a moment by encountering Colonel de Vineuil, who,
 with his blood-stained boot, was being brought in for treatment in a
 condition of semi-consciousness, upon a bed of straw that had been
 prepared for him on the floor of a market-gardener's wagon. The colonel
 had persisted in his efforts to collect the scattered fragments of his
 regiment until he dropped from his horse. He was immediately carried
 upstairs and put to bed in a room on the first floor, and Bouroche, who
 was summoned at once, finding the injury not of a serious character, had
 only to apply a dressing to the wound, from which he first extracted some
 bits of the leather of the boot. The worthy doctor was wrought up to a
 high pitch of excitement; he exclaimed, as he went downstairs, that he
 would rather cut off one of his own legs than continue working in that
 unsatisfactory, slovenly way, without a tithe of either the assistants or
 the appliances that he ought to have. Below in the ambulance, indeed, they
 no longer knew where to bestow the cases that were brought them, and had
 been obliged to have recourse to the lawn, where they laid them on the
 grass. There were already two long rows of them, exposed beneath the
 shrieking shells, filling the air with their dismal plaints while waiting
 for his ministrations. The number of cases brought in since noon exceeded
 four hundred, and in response to Bouroche's repeated appeals for
 assistance he had been sent one young doctor from the city. Good as was
 his will, he was unequal to the task; he probed, sliced, sawed, sewed like
 a man frantic, and was reduced to despair to see his work continually
 accumulating before him. Gilberte, satiated with sights of horror, unable
 longer to endure the sad spectacle of blood and tears, remained upstairs
 with her uncle, the colonel, leaving to Mme. Delaherche the care of
 moistening fevered lips and wiping the cold sweat from the brow of the
 dying.
 

 Rapidly climbing the stairs to his terrace, Delaherche endeavored to form
 some idea for himself of how matters stood. The city had suffered less
 injury than was generally supposed; there was one great conflagration,
 however, over in the Faubourg de la Cassine, from which dense volumes of
 smoke were rising. Fort Palatinat had discontinued its fire, doubtless
 because the ammunition was all expended; the guns mounted on the Porte de
 Paris alone continued to make themselves heard at infrequent intervals.
 But something that he beheld presently had greater interest for his eyes
 than all beside; they had run up the white flag on the citadel again, but
 it must be that it was invisible from the battlefield, for there was no
 perceptible slackening of the fire. The Balan road was concealed from his
 vision by the neighboring roofs; he was unable to make out what the troops
 were doing in that direction. Applying his eye to the telescope, however,
 which remained as he had left it, directed on la Marfee, he again beheld
 the cluster of officers that he had seen in that same place about midday.
 The master of them all, that miniature toy-soldier in lead, half finger
 high, in whom he had thought to recognize the King of Prussia, was there
 still, erect in his plain, dark uniform before the other officers, who, in
 their showy trappings, were for the most part reclining carelessly on the
 grass. Among them were officers from foreign lands, aides-de-camp,
 generals, high officials, princes; all of them with field glasses in their
 hands, with which, since early morning, they had been watching every phase
 of the death-struggle of the army of Chalons, as if they were at the play.
 And the direful drama was drawing to its end.
 

 From among the trees that clothed the summit of la Marfee King William had
 just witnessed the junction of his armies. It was an accomplished fact;
 the third army, under the leadership of his son, the Crown Prince,
 advancing by the way of Saint-Menges and Fleigneux, had secured possession
 of the plateau of Illy, while the fourth, commanded by the Crown Prince of
 Saxony, turning the wood of la Garenne and, coming up through Givonne and
 Daigny, had also reached its appointed rendezvous. There, too, the XIth
 and Vth corps had joined hands with the XIIth corps and the Guards. The
 gallant but ineffectual charge of Margueritte's division in its supreme
 effort to break through the hostile lines at the very moment when the
 circle was being rounded out had elicited from the king the exclamation:
 “Ah, the brave fellows!” Now the great movement, inexorable as fate, the
 details of which had been arranged with such mathematical precision, was
 complete, the jaws of the vise had closed, and stretching on his either
 hand far in the distance, a mighty wall of adamant surrounding the army of
 the French, were the countless men and guns that called him master. At the
 north the contracting lines maintained a constantly increasing pressure on
 the vanquished, forcing them back upon Sedan under the merciless fire of
 the batteries that lined the horizon in an array without a break. Toward
 the south, at Bazeilles, where the conflict had ceased to rage and the
 scene was one of mournful desolation, great clouds of smoke were rising
 from the ruins of what had once been happy homes, while the Bavarians, now
 masters of Balan, had advanced their batteries to within three hundred
 yards of the city gates. And the other batteries, those posted on the left
 bank at Pont Maugis, Noyers, Frenois, Wadelincourt, completing the
 impenetrable rampart of flame and bringing it around to the sovereign's
 feet on his right, that had been spouting fire uninterruptedly for nearly
 twelve hours, now thundered more loudly still.
 

 But King William, to give his tired eyes a moment's rest, dropped his
 glass to his side and continued his observations with unassisted vision.
 The sun was slanting downward to the woods on his left, about to set in a
 sky where there was not a cloud, and the golden light that lay upon the
 landscape was so transcendently clear and limpid that the most
 insignificant objects stood out with startling distinctness. He could
 almost count the houses in Sedan, whose windows flashed back the level
 rays of the departing day-star, and the ramparts and fortifications,
 outlined in black against the eastern sky, had an unwonted aspect of
 frowning massiveness. Then, scattered among the fields to right and left,
 were the pretty, smiling villages, reminding one of the toy villages that
 come packed in boxes for the little ones; to the west Donchery, seated at
 the border of her broad plain; Douzy and Carignan to the east, among the
 meadows. Shutting in the picture to the north was the forest of the
 Ardennes, an ocean of sunlit verdure, while the Meuse, loitering with
 sluggish current through the plain with many a bend and curve, was like a
 stream of purest molten gold in that caressing light. And seen from that
 height, with the sun's parting kiss resting on it, the horrible
 battlefield, with its blood and smoke, became an exquisite and highly
 finished miniature; the dead horsemen and disemboweled steeds on the
 plateau of Floing were so many splashes of bright color; on the right, in
 the direction of Givonne, those minute black specks that whirled and
 eddied with such apparent lack of aim, like motes dancing in the sunshine,
 were the retreating fragments of the beaten army; while on the left a
 Bavarian battery on the peninsula of Iges, its guns the size of matches,
 might have been taken for some mechanical toy as it performed its
 evolutions with clockwork regularity. The victory was crushing, exceeding
 all that the victor could have desired or hoped, and the King felt no
 remorse in presence of all those corpses, of those thousands of men that
 were as the dust upon the roads of that broad valley where,
 notwithstanding the burning of Bazeilles, the slaughter of Illy, the
 anguish of Sedan, impassive nature yet could don her gayest robe and put
 on her brightest smile as the perfect day faded into the tranquil evening.
 

 But suddenly Delaherche descried a French officer climbing the steep path
 up the flank of la Marfee; he was a general, wearing a blue tunic, mounted
 on a black horse, and preceded by a hussar bearing a white flag. It was
 General Reille, whom the Emperor had entrusted with this communication for
 the King of Prussia: “My brother, as it has been denied me to die at the
 head of my army, all that is left me is to surrender my sword to Your
 Majesty. I am Your Majesty's affectionate brother, Napoleon.” Desiring to
 arrest the butchery and being no longer master, the Emperor yielded
 himself a prisoner, in the hope to placate the conqueror by the sacrifice.
 And Delaherche saw General Reille rein up his charger and dismount at ten
 paces from the King, then advance and deliver his letter; he was unarmed
 and merely carried a riding whip. The sun was setting in a flood of rosy
 light; the King seated himself on a chair in the midst of a grassy open
 space, and resting his hand on the back of another chair that was held in
 place by a secretary, replied that he accepted the sword and would await
 the appearance of an officer empowered to settle the terms of the
 capitulation.
 

 
 
 

 As when the ice breaks up and the great cakes come crashing, grinding down
 upon the bosom of the swollen stream, carrying away all before them, so
 now, from every position about Sedan that had been wrested from the
 French, from Floing and the plateau of Illy, from the wood of la Garenne,
 the valley of la Givonne and the Bazeilles road, the stampede commenced; a
 mad torrent of horses, guns, and affrighted men came pouring toward the
 city. It was a most unfortunate inspiration that brought the army under
 the walls of that fortified place. There was too much in the way of
 temptation there; the shelter that it afforded the skulker and the
 deserter, the assurance of safety that even the bravest beheld behind its
 ramparts, entailed widespread panic and demoralization. Down there behind
 those protecting walls, so everyone imagined, was safety from that
 terrible artillery that had been blazing without intermission for near
 twelve hours; duty, manhood, reason were all lost sight of; the man
 disappeared and was succeeded by the brute, and their fierce instinct sent
 them racing wildly for shelter, seeking a place where they might hide
 their head and lie down and sleep.
 

 When Maurice, bathing Jean's face with cool water behind the shelter of
 their bit of wall, saw his friend open his eyes once more, he uttered an
 exclamation of delight.
 

 “Ah, poor old chap, I was beginning to fear you were done for! And don't
 think I say it to find fault, but really you are not so light as you were
 when you were a boy.”
 

 It seemed to Jean, in his still dazed condition, that he was awaking from
 some unpleasant dream. Then his recollection returned to him slowly, and
 two big tears rolled down his cheeks. To think that little Maurice, so
 frail and slender, whom he had loved and petted like a child, should have
 found strength to lug him all that distance!
 

 “Let's see what damage your knowledge-box has sustained.”
 

 The wound was not serious; the bullet had plowed its way through the scalp
 and considerable blood had flowed. The hair, which was now matted with the
 coagulated gore, had served to stanch the current, therefore Maurice
 refrained from applying water to the hurt, so as not to cause it to bleed
 afresh.
 

 “There, you look a little more like a civilized being, now that you have a
 clean face on you. Let's see if I can find something for you to wear on
 your head.” And picking up the kepi of a soldier who lay dead not
 far away, he tenderly adjusted it on his comrade. “It fits you to a T. Now
 if you can only walk everyone will say we are a very good-looking couple.”
 

 Jean got on his legs and gave his head a shake to assure himself it was
 secure. It seemed a little heavier than usual, that was all; he thought he
 should get along well enough. A great wave of tenderness swept through his
 simple soul; he caught Maurice in his arms and hugged him to his bosom,
 while all he could find to say was:
 

 “Ah! dear boy, dear boy!”
 

 But the Prussians were drawing near: it would not answer to loiter behind
 the wall. Already Lieutenant Rochas, with what few men were left him, was
 retreating, guarding the flag, which the sous-lieutenant still carried
 under his arm, rolled around the staff. Lapoulle's great height enabled
 him to fire an occasional shot at the advancing enemy over the coping of
 the wall, while Pache had slung his chassepot across his shoulder by the
 strap, doubtless considering that he had done a fair day's work and it was
 time to eat and sleep. Maurice and Jean, stooping until they were bent
 almost double, hastened to rejoin them. There was no scarcity of muskets
 and ammunition; all they had to do was stoop and pick them up. They
 equipped themselves afresh, having left everything behind, knapsacks
 included, when one lugged the other out of danger on his shoulders. The
 wall extended to the wood of la Garenne, and the little band, believing
 that now their safety was assured, made a rush for the protection afforded
 by some farm buildings, whence they readily gained the shelter of the
 trees.
 

 “Ah!” said Rochas, drawing a long breath, “we will remain here a moment
 and get our wind before we resume the offensive.” No adversity could shake
 his unwavering faith.
 

 They had not advanced many steps before all felt that they were entering
 the valley of death, but it was useless to think of retracing their steps;
 their only line of retreat lay through the wood, and cross it they must,
 at every hazard. At that time, instead of la Garenne, its more fitting
 name would have been the wood of despair and death; the Prussians, knowing
 that the French troops were retiring in that direction, were riddling it
 with artillery and musketry. Its shattered branches tossed and groaned as
 if enduring the scourging of a mighty tempest. The shells hewed down the
 stalwart trees, the bullets brought the leaves fluttering to the earth in
 showers; wailing voices seemed to issue from the cleft trunks, sobs
 accompanied the little twigs as they fell bleeding from the parent stem.
 It might have been taken for the agony of some vast multitude, held there
 in chains and unable to flee under the pelting of that pitiless iron hail;
 the shrieks, the terror of thousands of creatures rooted to the ground.
 Never was anguish so poignant as of that bombarded forest.
 

 Maurice and Jean, who by this time had caught up with their companions,
 were greatly alarmed. The wood where they then were was a growth of large
 trees, and there was no obstacle to their running, but the bullets came
 whistling about their ears from every direction, making it impossible for
 them to avail themselves of the shelter of the trunks. Two men were
 killed, one of them struck in the back, the other in front. A venerable
 oak, directly in Maurice's path, had its trunk shattered by a shell, and
 sank, with the stately grace of a mailed paladin, carrying down all before
 it, and even as the young man was leaping back the top of a gigantic ash
 on his left, struck by another shell, came crashing to the ground like
 some tall cathedral spire. Where could they fly? whither bend their steps?
 Everywhere the branches were falling; it was as one who should endeavor to
 fly from some vast edifice menaced with destruction, only to find himself
 in each room he enters in succession confronted with crumbling walls and
 ceilings. And when, in order to escape being crushed by the big trees,
 they took refuge in a thicket of bushes, Jean came near being killed by a
 projectile, only it fortunately failed to explode. They could no longer
 make any progress now on account of the dense growth of the shrubbery; the
 supple branches caught them around the shoulders, the rank, tough grass
 held them by the ankles, impenetrable walls of brambles rose before them
 and blocked their way, while all the time the foliage was fluttering down
 about them, clipped by the gigantic scythe that was mowing down the wood.
 Another man was struck dead beside them by a bullet in the forehead, and
 he retained his erect position, caught in some vines between two small
 birch trees. Twenty times, while they were prisoners in that thicket, did
 they feel death hovering over them.
 

 “Holy Virgin!” said Maurice, “we shall never get out of this alive.”
 

 His face was ashy pale, he was shivering again with terror; and Jean,
 always so brave, who had cheered and comforted him that morning, he, also,
 was very white and felt a strange, chill sensation creeping down his
 spine. It was fear, horrible, contagious, irresistible fear. Again they
 were conscious of a consuming thirst, an intolerable dryness of the mouth,
 a contraction of the throat, painful as if someone were choking them.
 These symptoms were accompanied by nausea and qualms at the pit of the
 stomach, while maleficent goblins kept puncturing their aguish, trembling
 legs with needles. Another of the physical effects of their fear was that
 in the congested condition of the blood vessels of the retina they beheld
 thousands upon thousands of small black specks flitting past them, as if
 it had been possible to distinguish the flying bullets.
 

 “Confound the luck!” Jean stammered. “It is not worth speaking of, but
 it's vexatious all the same, to be here getting one's head broken for
 other folks, when those other folks are at home, smoking their pipe in
 comfort.”
 

 “Yes, that's so,” Maurice replied, with a wild look. “Why should it be I
 rather than someone else?”
 

 It was the revolt of the individual Ego, the unaltruistic refusal of the
 one to make himself a sacrifice for the benefit of the species.
 

 “And then again,” Jean continued, “if a fellow could but know the rights
 of the matter; if he could be sure that any good was to come from it all.”
 Then turning his head and glancing at the western sky: “Anyway, I wish
 that blamed sun would hurry up and go to roost. Perhaps they'll stop
 fighting when it's dark.”
 

 With no distinct idea of what o'clock it was and no means of measuring the
 flight of time, he had long been watching the tardy declination of the
 fiery disk, which seemed to him to have ceased to move, hanging there in
 the heavens over the woods of the left bank. And this was not owing to any
 lack of courage on his part; it was simply the overmastering, ever
 increasing desire, amounting to an imperious necessity, to be relieved
 from the screaming and whistling of those projectiles, to run away
 somewhere and find a hole where he might hide his head and lose himself in
 oblivion. Were it not for the feeling of shame that is implanted in men's
 breasts and keeps them from showing the white feather before their
 comrades, every one of them would lose his head and run, in spite of
 himself, like the veriest poltroon.
 

 Maurice and Jean, meanwhile, were becoming somewhat more accustomed to
 their surroundings, and even when their terror was at its highest there
 came to them a sort of exalted self-unconsciousness that had in it
 something of bravery. They finally reached a point when they did not even
 hasten their steps as they made their way through the accursed wood. The
 horror of the bombardment was even greater than it had been previously
 among that race of sylvan denizens, killed at their post, struck down on
 every hand, like gigantic, faithful sentries. In the delicious twilight
 that reigned, golden-green, beneath their umbrageous branches, among the
 mysterious recesses of romantic, moss-carpeted retreats, Death showed his
 ill-favored, grinning face. The solitary fountains were contaminated; men
 fell dead in distant nooks whose depths had hitherto been trod by none
 save wandering lovers. A bullet pierced a man's chest; he had time to
 utter the one word: “hit!” and fell forward on his face, stone dead. Upon
 the lips of another, who had both legs broken by a shell, the gay laugh
 remained; unconscious of his hurt, he supposed he had tripped over a root.
 Others, injured mortally, would run on for some yards, jesting and
 conversing, until suddenly they went down like a log in the supreme
 convulsion. The severest wounds were hardly felt at the moment they were
 received; it was only at a later period that the terrible suffering
 commenced, venting itself in shrieks and hot tears.
 

 Ah, that accursed wood, that wood of slaughter and despair, where, amid
 the sobbing of the expiring trees, arose by degrees and swelled the
 agonized clamor of wounded men. Maurice and Jean saw a zouave, nearly
 disemboweled, propped against the trunk of an oak, who kept up a most
 terrific howling, without a moment's intermission. A little way beyond
 another man was actually being slowly roasted; his clothing had taken fire
 and the flames had run up and caught his beard, while he, paralyzed by a
 shot that had broken his back, was silently weeping scalding tears. Then
 there was a captain, who, one arm torn from its socket and his flank laid
 open to the thigh, was writhing on the ground in agony unspeakable,
 beseeching, in heartrending accents, the by-passers to end his suffering.
 There were others, and others, and others still, whose torments may not be
 described, strewing the grass-grown paths in such numbers that the utmost
 caution was required to avoid treading them under foot. But the dead and
 wounded had ceased to count; the comrade who fell by the way was abandoned
 to his fate, forgotten as if he had never been. No one turned to look
 behind. It was his destiny, poor devil! Next it would be someone else,
 themselves, perhaps.
 
 thud of a hoof upon the earthen floor. The window, which had a southern
 aspect, let in a flood of cheerful sunlight; all the view it afforded was
 a bit of hillside and a wheat field, edged by a little wood. And this
 mysterious chamber was so well hidden from prying eyes that never a one in
 all the world would have suspected its existence.
 

 As it was to be her kingdom, Henriette constituted herself lawmaker from
 the beginning. The regulation was that no one save she and the doctor
 should have access to Jean; this in order to avert suspicion. Silvine,
 even, was never to set foot in the room unless by direction. Early each
 morning the two women came in and put things to rights, and after that,
 all the long day, the door was as impenetrable as if it had been a wall of
 stone. And thus it was that Jean found himself suddenly secluded from the
 world, after many weeks of tumultuous activity, seeing no face save that
 of the gentle woman whose footfall on the floor gave back no sound. She
 appeared to him, as he had beheld her for the first time down yonder in
 Sedan, like an apparition, with her somewhat large mouth, her delicate,
 small features, her hair the hue of ripened grain, hovering about his
 bedside and ministering to his wants with an air of infinite goodness.
 

 The patient's fever was so violent during the first few days that
 Henriette scarce ever left him. Doctor Dalichamp dropped in every morning
 on his way to the hospital and examined and dressed the wound. As the ball
 had passed out, after breaking the tibia, he was surprised that the case
 presented no better aspect; he feared there was a splinter of the bone
 remaining there that he had not succeeded in finding with the probe, and
 that might make resection necessary. He mentioned the matter to Jean, but
 the young man could not endure the thought of an operation that would
 leave him with one leg shorter than the other and lame him permanently.
 No, no! he would rather die than be a cripple for life. So the good
 doctor, leaving the wound to develop further symptoms, confined himself
 for the present to applying a dressing of lint saturated with sweet oil
 and phenic acid having first inserted a drain—an India rubber tube—to
 carry off the pus. He frankly told his patient, however, that unless he
 submitted to an operation he must not hope to have the use of his limb for
 a very long time. Still, after the second week, the fever subsided and the
 young man's general condition was improved, so long as he could be content
 to rest quiet in his bed.
 

 Then Jean's and Henriette's relations began to be established on a more
 systematic basis. Fixed habits commenced to prevail; it seemed to them
 that they had never lived otherwise—that they were to go on living
 forever in that way. All the hours and moments that she did not devote to
 the ambulance were spent with him; she saw to it that he had his food and
 drink at proper intervals. She assisted him to turn in bed with a strength
 of wrist that no one, seeing her slender arms, would have supposed was in
 her. At times they would converse; but as a general thing, especially in
 the earlier days, they had not much to say. They never seemed to tire of
 each other's company, though. On the whole it was a very pleasant life
 they led in that calm, restful atmosphere, he with the horrible scenes of
 the battlefield still fresh in his memory, she in her widow's weeds, her
 heart bruised and bleeding with the great loss she had sustained. At first
 he had experienced a sensation of embarrassment, for he felt she was his
 superior, almost a lady, indeed, while he had never been aught more than a
 common soldier and a peasant. He could barely read and write. When finally
 he came to see that she affected no airs of superiority, but treated him
 on the footing of an equal, his confidence returned to him in a measure
 and he showed himself in his true colors, as a man of intelligence by
 reason of his sound, unpretentious common sense. Besides, he was surprised
 at times to think he could note a change was gradually coming over him; it
 seemed to him that his mind was less torpid than it had been, that it was
 clearer and more active, that he had novel ideas in his head, and more of
 them; could it be that the abominable life he had been leading for the
 last two months, his horrible sufferings, physical and moral, had exerted
 a refining influence on him? But that which assisted him most to overcome
 his shyness was to find that she was really not so very much wiser than
 he. She was but a little child when, at her mother's death, she became the
 household drudge, with her three men to care for, as she herself expressed
 it—her grandfather, her father, and her brother—and she had
 not had the time to lay in a large stock of learning. She could read and
 write, could spell words that were not too long, and “do sums,” if they
 were not too intricate; and that was the extent of her acquirement. And if
 she continued to intimidate him still, if he considered her far and away
 the superior of all other women upon earth, it was because he knew the
 ineffable tenderness, the goodness of heart, the unflinching courage, that
 animated that frail little body, who went about her duties silently and
 met them as if they had been pleasures.
 

 They had in Maurice a subject of conversation that was of common interest
 to them both and of which they never wearied. It was to Maurice's friend,
 his brother, to whom she was devoting herself thus tenderly, the brave,
 kind man, so ready with his aid in time of trouble, who she felt had made
 her so many times his debtor. She was full to overflowing with a sentiment
 of deepest gratitude and affection, that went on widening and deepening as
 she came to know him better and recognize his sterling qualities of head
 and heart, and he, whom she was tending like a little child, was actuated
 by such grateful sentiments that he would have liked to kiss her hands
 each time she gave him a cup of bouillon. Day by day did this bond of
 tender sympathy draw them nearer to each other in that profound solitude
 amid which they lived, harassed by an anxiety that they shared in common.
 When he had utterly exhausted his recollections of the dismal march from
 Rheims to Sedan, to the particulars of which she never seemed to tire of
 listening, the same question always rose to their lips: what was Maurice
 doing then? why did he not write? Could it be that the blockade of Paris
 was already complete, and was that the reason why they received no news?
 They had as yet had but one letter from him, written at Rouen, three days
 after his leaving them, in which he briefly stated that he had reached
 that city on his way to Paris, after a long and devious journey. And then
 for a week there had been no further word; the silence had remained
 unbroken.
 

 In the morning, after Doctor Dalichamp had attended to his patient, he
 liked to sit a while and chat, putting his cares aside for the moment.
 Sometimes he also returned at evening and made a longer visit, and it was
 in this way that they learned what was going on in the great world outside
 their peaceful solitude and the terrible calamities that were desolating
 their country. He was their only source of intelligence; his heart, which
 beat with patriotic ardor, overflowed with rage and grief at every fresh
 defeat, and thus it was that his sole topic of conversation was the
 victorious progress of the Prussians, who, since Sedan, had spread
 themselves over France like the waves of some black ocean. Each day
 brought its own tidings of disaster, and resting disconsolately on one of
 the two chairs that stood by the bedside, he would tell in mournful tones
 and with trembling gestures of the increasing gravity of the situation.
 Oftentimes he came with his pockets stuffed with Belgian newspapers, which
 he would leave behind him when he went away. And thus the echoes of
 defeat, days, weeks, after the event, reverberated in that quiet room,
 serving to unite yet more closely in community of sorrow the two poor
 sufferers who were shut within its walls.
 

 It was from some of those old newspapers that Henriette read to Jean the
 occurrences at Metz, the Titanic struggle that was three times renewed,
 separated on each occasion by a day's interval. The story was already five
 weeks old, but it was new to him, and he listened with a bleeding heart to
 the repetition of the miserable narrative of defeat to which he was not a
 stranger. In the deathly stillness of the room the incidents of the woeful
 tale unfolded themselves as Henriette, with the sing-song enunciation of a
 schoolgirl, picked out her words and sentences. When, after Froeschwiller
 and Spickeren, the 1st corps, routed and broken into fragments, had swept
 away with it the 5th, the other corps stationed along the frontier en
 echelon from Metz to Bitche, first wavering, then retreating in their
 consternation at those reverses, had ultimately concentrated before the
 intrenched camp on the right bank of the Moselle. But what waste of
 precious time was there, when they should not have lost a moment in
 retreating on Paris, a movement that was presently to be attended with
 such difficulty! The Emperor had been compelled to turn over the supreme
 command to Marshal Bazaine, to whom everyone looked with confidence for a
 victory. Then, on the 14th[*] came the affair of Borny, when the army was
 attacked at the moment when it was at last about to cross the stream,
 having to sustain the onset of two German armies: Steinmetz's, which was
 encamped in observation in front of the intrenched camp, and Prince
 Frederick Charles's, which had passed the river higher up and come down
 along the left bank in order to bar the French from access to their
 country; Borny, where the firing did not begin until it was three o'clock;
 Borny, that barren victory, at the end of which the French remained
 masters of their positions, but which left them astride the Moselle, tied
 hand and foot, while the turning movement of the second German army was
 being successfully accomplished. After that, on the 16th, was the battle
 of Rezonville; all our corps were at last across the stream, although,
 owing to the confusion that prevailed at the junction of the Mars-la-Tour
 and Etain roads, which the Prussians had gained possession of early in the
 morning by a brilliant movement of their cavalry and artillery, the 3d and
 4th corps were hindered in their march and unable to get up; a slow,
 dragging, confused battle, which, up to two o'clock, Bazaine, with only a
 handful of men opposed to him, should have won, but which he wound up by
 losing, thanks to his inexplicable fear of being cut off from Metz; a
 battle of immense extent, spreading over leagues of hill and plain, where
 the French, attacked in front and flank, seemed willing to do almost
 anything except advance, affording the enemy time to concentrate and to
 all appearances co-operating with them to ensure the success of the
 Prussian plan, which was to force their withdrawal to the other side of
 the river. And on the 18th, after their retirement to the intrenched camp,
 Saint-Privat was fought, the culmination of the gigantic struggle, where
 the line of battle extended more than eight miles in length, two hundred
 thousand Germans with seven hundred guns arrayed against a hundred and
 twenty thousand French with but five hundred guns, the Germans facing
 toward Germany, the French toward France, as if invaders and invaded had
 inverted their roles in the singular tactical movements that had been
 going on; after two o'clock the conflict was most sanguinary, the Prussian
 Guard being repulsed with tremendous slaughter and Bazaine, with a left
 wing that withstood the onsets of the enemy like a wall of adamant, for a
 long time victorious, up to the moment, at the approach of evening, when
 the weaker right wing was compelled by the terrific losses it had
 sustained to abandon Saint-Privat, involving in its rout the remainder of
 the army, which, defeated and driven back under the walls of Metz, was
 thenceforth to be imprisoned in a circle of flame and iron.
 

 [*] August.—TR.
 

 As Henriette pursued her reading Jean momentarily interrupted her to say:
 

 “Ah, well! and to think that we fellows, after leaving Rheims, were
 looking for Bazaine! They were always telling us he was coming; now I can
 see why he never came!”
 

 The marshal's despatch, dated the 19th, after the battle of Saint-Privat,
 in which he spoke of resuming his retrograde movement by way of Montmedy,
 that despatch which had for its effect the advance of the army of Chalons,
 would seem to have been nothing more than the report of a defeated
 general, desirous to present matters under their most favorable aspect,
 and it was not until a considerably later period, the 29th, when the
 tidings of the approach of this relieving army had reached him through the
 Prussian lines, that he attempted a final effort, on the right bank this
 time, at Noiseville, but in such a feeble, half-hearted way that on the
 1st of September, the day when the army of Chalons was annihilated at
 Sedan, the army of Metz fell back to advance no more, and became as if
 dead to France. The marshal, whose conduct up to that time may fairly be
 characterized as that of a leader of only moderate ability, neglecting his
 opportunities and failing to move when the roads were open to him, after
 that blockaded by forces greatly superior to his own, was now about to be
 seduced by alluring visions of political greatness and become a
 conspirator and a traitor.
 

 But in the papers that Doctor Dalichamp brought them Bazaine was still the
 great man and the gallant soldier, to whom France looked for her
 salvation.
 

 And Jean wanted certain passages read to him again, in order that he might
 more clearly understand how it was that while the third German army, under
 the Crown Prince of Prussia, had been leading them such a dance, and the
 first and second were besieging Metz, the latter were so strong in men and
 guns that it had been possible to form from them a fourth army, which,
 under the Crown Prince of Saxony, had done so much to decide the fortune
 of the day at Sedan. Then, having obtained the information he desired,
 resting on that bed of suffering to which his wound condemned him, he
 forced himself to hope in spite of all.
 

 “That's how it is, you see; we were not so strong as they! No one can ever
 get at the rights of such matters while the fighting is going on. Never
 mind, though; you have read the figures as the newspapers give them:
 Bazaine has a hundred and fifty thousand men with him, he has three
 hundred thousand small arms and more than five hundred pieces of
 artillery; take my word for it, he is not going to let himself be caught
 in such a scrape as we were. The fellows all say he is a tough man to deal
 with; depend on it he's fixing up a nasty dose for the enemy, and he'll
 make 'em swallow it.”
 

 Henriette nodded her head and appeared to agree with him, in order to keep
 him in a cheerful frame of mind. She could not follow those complicated
 operations of the armies, but had a presentiment of coming, inevitable
 evil. Her voice was fresh and clear; she could have gone on reading thus
 for hours; only too glad to have it in her power to relieve the tedium of
 his long day, though at times, when she came to some narrative of
 slaughter, her eyes would fill with tears that made the words upon the
 printed page a blur. She was doubtless thinking of her husband's fate, how
 he had been shot down at the foot of the wall and his body desecrated by
 the touch of the Bavarian officer's boot.
 

 “If it gives you such pain,” Jean said in surprise, “you need not read the
 battles; skip them.”
 

 But, gentle and self-sacrificing as ever, she recovered herself
 immediately.
 

 “No, no; don't mind my weakness; I assure you it is a pleasure to me.”
 

 One evening early in October, when the wind was blowing a small hurricane
 outside, she came in from the ambulance and entered the room with an
 excited air, saying:
 

 “A letter from Maurice! the doctor just gave it me.”
 

 With each succeeding morning the twain had been becoming more and more
 alarmed that the young man sent them no word, and now that for a whole
 week it had been rumored everywhere that the investment of Paris was
 complete, they were more disturbed in mind than ever, despairing of
 receiving tidings, asking themselves what could have happened him after he
 left Rouen. And now the reason of the long silence was made clear to them:
 the letter that he had addressed from Paris to Doctor Dalichamp on the
 18th, the very day that ended railway communication with Havre, had gone
 astray and had only reached them at last by a miracle, after a long and
 circuitous journey.
 

 “Ah, the dear boy!” said Jean, radiant with delight. “Read it to me,
 quick!”
 

 The wind was howling and shrieking more dismally than ever, the window of
 the apartment strained and rattled as if someone were trying to force an
 entrance. Henriette went and got the little lamp, and placing it on the
 table beside the bed applied herself to the reading of the missive, so
 close to Jean that their faces almost touched. There was a sensation of
 warmth and comfort in the peaceful room amid the roaring of the storm that
 raged without.
 

 It was a long letter of eight closely filled pages, in which Maurice first
 told how, soon after his arrival on the 16th, he had had the good fortune
 to get into a line regiment that was being recruited up to its full
 strength. Then, reverting to facts of history, he described in brief but
 vigorous terms the principal events of that month of terror: how Paris,
 recovering her sanity in a measure after the madness into which the
 disasters of Wissembourg and Froeschwiller had driven her, had comforted
 herself with hopes of future victories, had cheered herself with fresh
 illusions, such as lying stories of the army's successes, the appointment
 of Bazaine to the chief command, the levee en masse, bogus
 dispatches, which the ministers themselves read from the tribune, telling
 of hecatombs of slaughtered Prussians. And then he went on to tell how, on
 the 3d of September, the thunderbolt had a second time burst over the
 unhappy capital: all hope gone, the misinformed, abused, confiding city
 dazed by that crushing blow of destiny, the cries: “Down with the Empire!”
 that resounded at night upon the boulevards, the brief and gloomy session
 of the Chamber at which Jules Favre read the draft of the bill that
 conceded the popular demand. Then on the next day, the ever-memorable 4th
 of September, was the upheaval of all things, the second Empire swept from
 existence in atonement for its mistakes and crimes, the entire population
 of the capital in the streets, a torrent of humanity a half a million
 strong filling the Place de la Concorde and streaming onward in the bright
 sunshine of that beautiful Sabbath day to the great gates of the Corps
 Legislatif, feebly guarded by a handful of troops, who up-ended their
 muskets in the air in token of sympathy with the populace—smashing
 in the doors, swarming into the assembly chambers, whence Jules Favre,
 Gambetta and other deputies of the Left were even then on the point of
 departing to proclaim the Republic at the Hotel de Ville; while on the
 Place Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois a little wicket of the Louvre opened
 timidly and gave exit to the Empress-regent, attired in black garments and
 accompanied by a single female friend, both the women trembling with
 affright and striving to conceal themselves in the depths of the public
 cab, which went jolting with its scared inmates from the Tuileries,
 through whose apartments the mob was at that moment streaming. On the same
 day Napoleon III. left the inn at Bouillon, where he had passed his first
 night of exile, bending his way toward Wilhelmshohe.
 

 Here Jean, a thoughtful expression on his face, interrupted Henriette.
 

 “Then we have a republic now? So much the better, if it is going to help
 us whip the Prussians!”
 

 But he shook his head; he had always been taught to look distrustfully on
 republics when he was a peasant. And then, too, it did not seem to him a
 good thing that they should be of differing minds when the enemy was
 fronting them. After all, though, it was manifest there had to be a change
 of some kind, since everyone knew the Empire was rotten to the core and
 the people would have no more of it.
 

 Henriette finished the letter, which concluded with a mention of the
 approach of the German armies. On the 13th, the day when a committee of
 the Government of National Defense had established its quarters at Tours,
 their advanced guards had been seen at Lagny, to the east of Paris. On the
 14th and 15th they were at the very gates of the city, at Creteil and
 Joinville-le-Pont. On the 18th, however, the day when Maurice wrote, he
 seemed to have ceased to believe in the possibility of maintaining a
 strict blockade of Paris; he appeared to be under the influence of one of
 his hot fits of blind confidence, characterising the siege as a senseless
 and impudent enterprise that would come to an ignominious end before they
 were three weeks older, relying on the armies that the provinces would
 surely send to their relief, to say nothing of the army of Metz, that was
 already advancing by way of Verdun and Rheims. And the links of the iron
 chain that their enemies had forged for them had been riveted together; it
 encompassed Paris, and now Paris was a city shut off from all the world,
 whence no letter, no word of tidings longer came, the huge prison-house of
 two millions of living beings, who were to their neighbors as if they were
 not.
 

 Henriette was oppressed by a sense of melancholy. “Ah, merciful heaven!”
 she murmured, “how long will all this last, and shall we ever see him
 more!”
 

 A more furious blast bent the sturdy trees out-doors and made the timbers
 of the old farmhouse creak and groan. Think of the sufferings the poor
 fellows would have to endure should the winter be severe, fighting in the
 snow, without bread, without fire!
 

 “Bah!” rejoined Jean, “that's a very nice letter of his, and it's a
 comfort to have heard from him. We must not despair.”
 

 Thus, day by day, the month of October ran its course, with gray
 melancholy skies, and if ever the wind went down for a short space it was
 only to bring the clouds back in darker, heavier masses. Jean's wound was
 healing very slowly; the outflow from the drain was not the “laudable pus”
 which would have permitted the doctor to remove the appliance, and the
 patient was in a very enfeebled state, refusing, however, to be operated
 on in his dread of being left a cripple. An atmosphere of expectant
 resignation, disturbed at times by transient misgivings for which there
 was no apparent cause, pervaded the slumberous little chamber, to which
 the tidings from abroad came in vague, indeterminate shape, like the
 distorted visions of an evil dream. The hateful war, with its butcheries
 and disasters, was still raging out there in the world, in some quarter
 unknown to them, without their ever being able to learn the real course of
 events, without their being conscious of aught save the wails and groans
 that seemed to fill the air from their mangled, bleeding country. And the
 dead leaves rustled in the paths as the wind swept them before it beneath
 the gloomy sky, and over the naked fields brooded a funereal silence,
 broken only by the cawing of the crows, presage of a bitter winter.
 

 A principal subject of conversation between them at this time was the
 hospital, which Henriette never left except to come and cheer Jean with
 her company. When she came in at evening he would question her, making the
 acquaintance of each of her charges, desirous to know who would die and
 who recover; while she, whose heart and soul were in her occupation, never
 wearied, but related the occurrences of the day in their minutest details.
 

 “Ah,” she would always say, “the poor boys, the poor boys!”
 

 It was not the ambulance of the battlefield, where the blood from the
 wounded came in a fresh, bright stream, where the flesh the surgeon's
 knife cut into was firm and healthy; it was the decay and rottenness of
 the hospital, where the odor of fever and gangrene hung in the air, damp
 with the exhalations of the lingering convalescents and those who were
 dying by inches. Doctor Dalichamp had had the greatest difficulty in
 procuring the necessary beds, sheets and pillows, and every day he had to
 accomplish miracles to keep his patients alive, to obtain for them bread,
 meat and desiccated vegetables, to say nothing of bandages, compresses and
 other appliances. As the Prussian officers in charge of the military
 hospital in Sedan had refused him everything, even chloroform, he was
 accustomed to send to Belgium for what he required. And yet he had made no
 discrimination between French and Germans; he was even then caring for a
 dozen Bavarian soldiers who had been brought in there from Bazeilles.
 Those bitter adversaries who but a short time before had been trying to
 cut each other's throat now lay side by side, their passions calmed by
 suffering. And what abodes of distress and misery they were, those two
 long rooms in the old schoolhouse of Remilly, where, in the crude light
 that streamed through the tall windows, some thirty beds in each were
 arranged on either side of a narrow passage.
 

 As late even as ten days after the battle wounded men had been discovered
 in obscure corners, where they had been overlooked, and brought in for
 treatment. There were four who had crawled into a vacant house at Balan
 and remained there, without attendance, kept from starving in some way, no
 one could tell how, probably by the charity of some kind-hearted neighbor,
 and their wounds were alive with maggots; they were as dead men, their
 system poisoned by the corruption that exuded from their wounds. There was
 a purulency, that nothing could check or overcome, that hovered over the
 rows of beds and emptied them. As soon as the door was passed one's
 nostrils were assailed by the odor of mortifying flesh. From drains
 inserted in festering sores fetid matter trickled, drop by drop.
 Oftentimes it became necessary to reopen old wounds in order to extract a
 fragment of bone that had been overlooked. Then abscesses would form, to
 break out after an interval in some remote portion of the body. Their
 strength all gone, reduced to skeletons, with ashen, clayey faces, the
 miserable wretches suffered the torments of the damned. Some, so weakened
 they could scarcely draw their breath, lay all day long upon their back,
 with tight shut, darkened eyes, like corpses in which decomposition had
 already set in; while others, denied the boon of sleep, tossing in
 restless wakefulness, drenched with the cold sweat that streamed from
 every pore, raved like lunatics, as if their suffering had made them mad.
 And whether they were calm or violent, it mattered not; when the contagion
 of the fever reached them, then was the end at hand, the poison doing its
 work, flying from bed to bed, sweeping them all away in one mass of
 corruption.
 

 But worst of all was the condemned cell, the room to which were assigned
 those who were attacked by dysentery, typhus or small-pox. There were many
 cases of black small-pox. The patients writhed and shrieked in unceasing
 delirium, or sat erect in bed with the look of specters. Others had
 pneumonia and were wasting beneath the stress of their frightful cough.
 There were others again who maintained a continuous howling and were
 comforted only when their burning, throbbing wound was sprayed with cold
 water. The great hour of the day, the one that was looked forward to with
 eager expectancy, was that of the doctor's morning visit, when the beds
 were opened and aired and an opportunity was afforded their occupants to
 stretch their limbs, cramped by remaining long in one position. And it was
 the hour of dread and terror as well, for not a day passed that, as the
 doctor went his rounds, he was not pained to see on some poor devil's skin
 the bluish spots that denoted the presence of gangrene. The operation
 would be appointed for the following day, when a few more inches of the
 leg or arm would be sliced away. Often the gangrene kept mounting higher
 and higher, and amputation had to be repeated until the entire limb was
 gone.
 

 Every evening on her return Henriette answered Jean's questions in the
 same tone of compassion:
 

 “Ah, the poor boys, the poor boys!”
 

 And her particulars never varied; they were the story of the daily
 recurring torments of that earthly hell. There had been an amputation at
 the shoulder-joint, a foot had been taken off, a humerus resected; but
 would gangrene or purulent contagion be clement and spare the patient? Or
 else they had been burying some one of their inmates, most frequently a
 Frenchman, now and then a German. Scarcely a day passed but a coarse
 coffin, hastily knocked together from four pine boards, left the hospital
 at the twilight hour, accompanied by a single one of the attendants, often
 by the young woman herself, that a fellow-creature might not be laid away
 in his grave like a dog. In the little cemetery at Remilly two trenches
 had been dug, and there they slumbered, side by side, French to the right,
 Germans to the left, their enmity forgotten in their narrow bed.
 

 Jean, without ever having seen them, had come to feel an interest in
 certain among the patients. He would ask for tidings of them.
 

 “And 'Poor boy,' how is he getting on to-day?”
 

 This was a little soldier, a private in the 5th of the line, not yet
 twenty years old, who had doubtless enlisted as a volunteer. The by-name:
 “Poor boy” had been given him and had stuck because he always used the
 words in speaking of himself, and when one day he was asked the reason he
 replied that that was the name by which his mother had always called him.
 Poor boy he was, in truth, for he was dying of pleurisy brought on by a
 wound in his left side.
 

 “Ah, poor fellow,” replied Henriette, who had conceived a special fondness
 for this one of her charges, “he is no better; he coughed all the
 afternoon. It pained my heart to hear him.”
 

 “And your bear, Gutman, how about him?” pursued Jean, with a faint smile.
 “Is the doctor's report more favorable?”
 

 “Yes, he thinks he may be able to save his life. But the poor man suffers
 dreadfully.”
 

 Although they both felt the deepest compassion for him, they never spoke
 of Gutman but a smile of gentle amusement came to their lips. Almost
 immediately upon entering on her duties at the hospital the young woman
 had been shocked to recognize in that Bavarian soldier the features: big
 blue eyes, red hair and beard and massive nose, of the man who had carried
 her away in his arms the day they shot her husband at Bazeilles. He
 recognized her as well, but could not speak; a musket ball, entering at
 the back of the neck, had carried away half his tongue. For two days she
 recoiled with horror, an involuntary shudder passed through her frame,
 each time she had to approach his bed, but presently her heart began to
 melt under the imploring, very gentle looks with which he followed her
 movements in the room. Was he not the blood-splashed monster, with eyes
 ablaze with furious rage, whose memory was ever present to her mind? It
 cost her an effort to recognize him now in that submissive, uncomplaining
 creature, who bore his terrible suffering with such cheerful resignation.
 The nature of his affliction, which is not of frequent occurrence,
 enlisted for him the sympathies of the entire hospital. It was not even
 certain that his name was Gutman; he was called so because the only sound
 he succeeded in articulating was a word of two syllables that resembled
 that more than it did anything else. As regarded all other particulars
 concerning him everyone was in the dark; it was generally believed,
 however, that he was married and had children. He seemed to understand a
 few words of French, for he would answer questions that were put to him
 with an emphatic motion of the head: “Married?” yes, yes! “Children?” yes,
 yes! The interest and excitement he displayed one day that he saw some
 flour induced them to believe he might have been a miller. And that was
 all. Where was the mill, whose wheel had ceased to turn? In what distant
 Bavarian village were the wife and children now weeping their lost husband
 and father? Was he to die, nameless, unknown, in that foreign country, and
 leave his dear ones forever ignorant of his fate?
 

 “To-day,” Henriette told Jean one evening, “Gutman kissed his hand to me.
 I cannot give him a drink of water, or render him any other trifling
 service, but he manifests his gratitude by the most extravagant
 demonstrations. Don't smile; it is too terrible to be buried thus alive
 before one's time has come.”
 

 Toward the end of October Jean's condition began to improve. The doctor
 thought he might venture to remove the drain, although he still looked
 apprehensive whenever he examined the wound, which, nevertheless appeared
 to be healing as rapidly as could be expected. The convalescent was able
 to leave his bed, and spent hours at a time pacing his room or seated at
 the window, looking out on the cheerless, leaden sky. Then time began to
 hang heavy on his hands; he spoke of finding something to do, asked if he
 could not be of service on the farm. Among the secret cares that disturbed
 his mind was the question of money, for he did not suppose he could have
 lain there for six long weeks and not exhaust his little fortune of two
 hundred francs, and if Father Fouchard continued to afford him hospitality
 it must be that Henriette had been paying his board. The thought
 distressed him greatly; he did not know how to bring about an explanation
 with her, and it was with a feeling of deep satisfaction that he accepted
 the position of assistant at the farm, with the understanding that he was
 to help Silvine with the housework, while Prosper was to be continued in
 charge of the out-door labors.
 

 Notwithstanding the hardness of the times Father Fouchard could well
 afford to take on another hand, for his affairs were prospering. While the
 whole country was in the throes of dissolution and bleeding at every limb,
 he had succeeded in so extending his butchering business that he was now
 slaughtering three and even four times as many animals as he had ever done
 before. It was said that since the 31st of August he had been carrying on
 a most lucrative business with the Prussians. He who on the 30th had stood
 at his door with his cocked gun in his hand and refused to sell a crust of
 bread to the starving soldiers of the 7th corps had on the following day,
 upon the first appearance of the enemy, opened up as dealer in all kinds
 of supplies, had disinterred from his cellar immense stocks of provisions,
 had brought back his flocks and herds from the fastnesses where he had
 concealed them; and since that day he had been one of the heaviest
 purveyors of meat to the German armies, exhibiting consummate address in
 bargaining with them and in getting his money promptly for his
 merchandise. Other dealers at times suffered great inconvenience from the
 insolent arbitrariness of the victors, whereas he never sold them a sack
 of flour, a cask of wine or a quarter of beef that he did not get his pay
 for it as soon as delivered in good hard cash. It made a good deal of talk
 in Remilly; people said it was scandalous on the part of a man whom the
 war had deprived of his only son, whose grave he never visited, but left
 to be cared for by Silvine; but nevertheless they all looked up to him
 with respect as a man who was making his fortune while others, even the
 shrewdest, were having a hard time of it to keep body and soul together.
 And he, with a sly leer out of his small red eyes, would shrug his
 shoulders and growl in his bull-headed way:
 

 “Who talks of patriotism! I am more a patriot than any of them. Would you
 call it patriotism to fill those bloody Prussians' mouths gratis? What
 they get from me they have to pay for. Folks will see how it is some of
 these days!”
 

 On the second day of his employment Jean remained too long on foot, and
 the doctor's secret fears proved not to be unfounded; the wound opened,
 the leg became greatly inflamed and swollen, he was compelled to take to
 his bed again. Dalichamp suspected that the mischief was due to a spicule
 of bone that the two consecutive days of violent exercise had served to
 liberate. He explored the wound and was so fortunate as to find the
 fragment, but there was a shock attending the operation, succeeded by a
 high fever, which exhausted all Jean's strength. He had never in his life
 been reduced to a condition of such debility: his recovery promised to be
 a work of time, and faithful Henriette resumed her position as nurse and
 companion in the little chamber, where winter with icy breath now began to
 make its presence felt. It was early November, already the east wind had
 brought on its wings a smart flurry of snow, and between those four bare
 walls, on the uncarpeted floor where even the tall, gaunt old
 clothes-press seemed to shiver with discomfort, the cold was extreme. As
 there was no fireplace in the room they determined to set up a stove, of
 which the purring, droning murmur assisted to brighten their solitude a
 bit.
 

 The days wore on, monotonously, and that first week of the relapse was to
 Jean and Henriette the dreariest and saddest in all their long, unsought
 intimacy. Would their suffering never end? were they to hope for no
 surcease of misery, the danger always springing up afresh? At every moment
 their thoughts sped away to Maurice, from whom they had received no
 further word. They were told that others were getting letters, brief notes
 written on tissue paper and brought in by carrier-pigeons. Doubtless the
 bullet of some hated German had slain the messenger that, winging its way
 through the free air of heaven, was bringing them their missive of joy and
 love. Everything seemed to retire into dim obscurity, to die and be
 swallowed up in the depths of the premature winter. Intelligence of the
 war only reached them a long time after the occurrence of events, the few
 newspapers that Doctor Dalichamp still continued to supply them with were
 often a week old by the time they reached their hands. And their dejection
 was largely owing to their want of information, to what they did not know
 and yet instinctively felt to be the truth, to the prolonged death-wail
 that, spite of all, came to their ears across the frozen fields in the
 deep silence that lay upon the country.
 

 One morning the doctor came to them in a condition of deepest
 discouragement. With a trembling hand he drew from his pocket a Belgian
 newspaper and threw it on the bed, exclaiming:
 

 “Alas, my friends, poor France is murdered; Bazaine has played the
 traitor!”
 

 Jean, who had been dozing, his back supported by a couple of pillows,
 suddenly became wide-awake.
 

 “What, a traitor?”
 

 “Yes, he has surrendered Metz and the army. It is the experience of Sedan
 over again, only this time they drain us of our last drop of life-blood.”
 Then taking up the paper and reading from it: “One hundred and fifty
 thousand prisoners, one hundred and fifty-three eagles and standards, one
 hundred and forty-one field guns, seventy-six machine guns, eight hundred
 casemate and barbette guns, three hundred thousand muskets, two thousand
 military train wagons, material for eighty-five batteries—”
 

 And he went on giving further particulars: how Marshal Bazaine had been
 blockaded in Metz with the army, bound hand and foot, making no effort to
 break the wall of adamant that surrounded him; the doubtful relations that
 existed between him and Prince Frederick Charles, his indecision and
 fluctuating political combinations, his ambition to play a great role in
 history, but a role that he seemed not to have fixed upon himself; then
 all the dirty business of parleys and conferences, and the communications
 by means of lying, unsavory emissaries with Bismarck, King William and the
 Empress-regent, who in the end put her foot down and refused to negotiate
 with the enemy on the basis of a cession of territory; and, finally, the
 inevitable catastrophe, the completion of the web that destiny had been
 weaving, famine in Metz, a compulsory capitulation, officers and men, hope
 and courage gone, reduced to accept the bitter terms of the victor. France
 no longer had an army.
 

 “In God's name!” Jean ejaculated in a deep, low voice. He had not fully
 understood it all, but until then Bazaine had always been for him the
 great captain, the one man to whom they were to look for salvation. “What
 is left us to do now? What will become of them at Paris?”
 

 The doctor was just coming to the news from Paris, which was of a
 disastrous character. He called their attention to the fact that the paper
 from which he was reading was dated November 5. The surrender of Metz had
 been consummated on the 27th of October, and the tidings were not known in
 Paris until the 30th. Coming, as it did, upon the heels of the reverses
 recently sustained at Chevilly, Bagneux and la Malmaison, after the
 conflict at Bourget and the loss of that position, the intelligence had
 burst like a thunderbolt over the desperate populace, angered and
 disgusted by the feebleness and impotency of the government of National
 Defense. And thus it was that on the following day, the 31st, the city was
 threatened with a general insurrection, an immense throng of angry men, a
 mob ripe for mischief, collecting on the Place de l'Hotel de Ville, whence
 they swarmed into the halls and public offices, making prisoners the
 members of the Government, whom the National Guard rescued later in the
 day only because they feared the triumph of those incendiaries who were
 clamoring for the commune. And the Belgian journal wound up with a few
 stinging comments on the great City of Paris, thus torn by civil war when
 the enemy was at its gates. Was it not the presage of approaching
 decomposition, the puddle of blood and mire that was to engulf a world?
 

 “That's true enough!” said Jean, whose face was very white. “They've no
 business to be squabbling when the Prussians are at hand!”
 

 But Henriette, who had said nothing as yet, always making it her rule to
 hold her tongue when politics were under discussion, could not restrain a
 cry that rose from her heart. Her thoughts were ever with her brother.
 

 “Mon Dieu, I hope that Maurice, with all the foolish ideas he has
 in his head, won't let himself get mixed up in this business!”
 

 They were all silent in their distress; and it was the doctor, who was
 ardently patriotic, who resumed the conversation.
 

 “Never mind; if there are no more soldiers, others will grow. Metz has
 surrendered, Paris may surrender, even; but it don't follow from that that
 France is wiped out. Yes, the strong-box is all right, as our peasants
 say, and we will live on in spite of all.”
 

 It was clear, however, that he was hoping against hope. He spoke of the
 army that was collecting on the Loire, whose initial performances, in the
 neighborhood of Arthenay, had not been of the most promising; it would
 become seasoned and would march to the relief of Paris. His enthusiasm was
 aroused to boiling pitch by the proclamations of Gambetta, who had left
 Paris by balloon on the 7th of October and two days later established his
 headquarters at Tours, calling on every citizen to fly to arms, and
 instinct with a spirit at once so virile and so sagacious that the entire
 country gave its adhesion to the dictatorial powers assumed for the public
 safety. And was there not talk of forming another army in the North, and
 yet another in the East, of causing soldiers to spring from the ground by
 sheer force of faith? It was to be the awakening of the provinces, the
 creation of all that was wanting by exercise of indomitable will, the
 determination to continue the struggle until the last sou was spent, the
 last drop of blood shed.
 

 “Bah!” said the doctor in conclusion as he arose to go, “I have many a
 time given up a patient, and a week later found him as lively as a
 cricket.”
 

 Jean smiled. “Doctor, hurry up and make a well man of me, so I can go back
 to my post down yonder.”
 

 But those evil tidings left Henriette and him in a terribly disheartened
 state. There came another cold wave, with snow, and when the next day
 Henriette came in shivering from the hospital she told her friend that
 Gutman was dead. The intense cold had proved fatal to many among the
 wounded; it was emptying the rows of beds. The miserable man whom the loss
 of his tongue had condemned to silence had lain two days in the throes of
 death. During his last hour she had remained seated at his bedside, unable
 to resist the supplication of his pleading gaze. He seemed to be speaking
 to her with his tearful eyes, trying to tell, it may be, his real name and
 the name of the village, so far away, where a wife and little ones were
 watching for his return. And he had gone from them a stranger, known of
 none, sending her a last kiss with his uncertain, stiffening fingers, as
 if to thank her once again for all her gentle care. She was the only one
 who accompanied the remains to the cemetery, where the frozen earth, the
 unfriendly soil of the stranger's country, rattled with a dull, hollow
 sound on the pine coffin, mingled with flakes of snow.
 

 The next day, again, Henriette said upon her return at evening:
 

 “'Poor boy' is dead.” She could not keep back her tears at mention of his
 name. “If you could but have seen and heard him in his pitiful delirium!
 He kept calling me: 'Mamma! mamma!' and stretched his poor thin arms out
 to me so entreatingly that I had to take him on my lap. His suffering had
 so wasted him that he was no heavier than a boy of ten, poor fellow. And I
 held and soothed him, so that he might die in peace; yes, I held him in my
 arms, I whom he called his mother and who was but a few years older than
 himself. He wept, and I myself could not restrain my tears; you can see I
 am weeping still—” Her utterance was choked with sobs; she had to
 pause. “Before his death he murmured several times the name which he had
 given himself: 'Poor boy, poor boy!' Ah, how just the designation! poor
 boys they are indeed, some of them so young and all so brave, whom your
 hateful war maims and mangles and causes to suffer so before they are laid
 away at last in their narrow bed!”
 

 Never a day passed now but Henriette came in at night in this anguished
 state, caused by some new death, and the suffering of others had the
 effect of bringing them together even more closely still during the
 sorrowful hours that they spent, secluded from all the world, in the
 silent, tranquil chamber. And yet those hours were full of sweetness, too,
 for affection, a feeling which they believed to be a brother's and
 sister's love, had sprung up in those two hearts which little by little
 had come to know each other's worth. To him, with his observant,
 thoughtful nature, their long intimacy had proved an elevating influence,
 while she, noting his unfailing kindness of heart and evenness of temper,
 had ceased to remember that he was one of the lowly of the earth and had
 been a tiller of the soil before he became a soldier. Their understanding
 was perfect; they made a very good couple, as Silvine said with her grave
 smile. There was never the least embarrassment between them; when she
 dressed his leg the calm serenity that dwelt in the eyes of both was
 undisturbed. Always attired in black, in her widow's garments, it seemed
 almost as if she had ceased to be a woman.
 

 But during those long afternoons when Jean was left to himself he could
 not help giving way to speculation. The sentiment he experienced for his
 friend was one of boundless gratitude, a sort of religious reverence,
 which would have made him repel the idea of love as if it were a sort of
 sacrilege. And yet he told himself that had he had a wife like her, so
 gentle, so loving, so helpful, his life would have been an earthly
 paradise. His great misfortune, his unhappy marriage, the evil years he
 had spent at Rognes, his wife's tragic end, all the sad past, arose before
 him with a softened feeling of regret, with an undefined hope for the
 future, but without distinct purpose to try another effort to master
 happiness. He closed his eyes and dropped off into a doze, and then he had
 a confused vision of being at Remilly, married again and owner of a bit of
 land, sufficient to support a family of honest folks whose wants were not
 extravagant. But it was all a dream, lighter than thistle-down; he knew it
 could never, never be. He believed his heart to be capable of no emotion
 stronger than friendship, he loved Henriette as he did solely because he
 was Maurice's brother. And then that vague dream of marriage had come to
 be in some measure a comfort to him, one of those fancies of the
 imagination that we know is never to be realized and with which we fondle
 ourselves in our hours of melancholy.
 

 For her part, such thoughts had never for a moment presented themselves to
 Henriette's mind. Since the day of the horrible tragedy at Bazeilles her
 bruised heart had lain numb and lifeless in her bosom, and if consolation
 in the shape of a new affection had found its way thither, it could not be
 otherwise than without her knowledge; the latent movement of the seed
 deep-buried in the earth, which bursts its sheath and germinates, unseen
 of human eye. She failed even to perceive the pleasure it afforded her to
 remain for hours at a time by Jean's bedside, reading to him those
 newspapers that never brought them tidings save of evil. Never had her
 pulses beat more rapidly at the touch of his hand, never had she dwelt in
 dreamy rapture on the vision of the future with a longing to be loved once
 more. And yet it was in that chamber alone that she found comfort and
 oblivion. When she was there, busying herself with noiseless diligence for
 her patient's well-being, she was at peace; it seemed to her that soon her
 brother would return and all would be well, they would all lead a life of
 happiness together and never more be parted. And it appeared to her so
 natural that things should end thus that she talked of their relations
 without the slightest feeling of embarrassment, without once thinking to
 question her heart more closely, unaware that she had already made the
 chaste surrender of it.
 

 But as she was on the point of leaving for the hospital one afternoon she
 looked into the kitchen as she passed and saw there a Prussian captain and
 two other officers, and the icy terror that filled her at the sight, then,
 for the first time, opened her eyes to the deep affection she had
 conceived for Jean. It was plain that the men had heard of the wounded
 man's presence at the farm and were come to claim him; he was to be torn
 from them and led away captive to the dungeon of some dark fortress deep
 in Germany. She listened tremblingly, her heart beating tumultuously.
 

 The captain, a big, stout man, who spoke French with scarce a trace of
 foreign accent, was rating old Fouchard soundly.
 

 “Things can't go on in this way; you are not dealing squarely by us. I
 came myself to give you warning, once for all, that if the thing happens
 again I shall take other steps to remedy it; and I promise you the
 consequences will not be agreeable.”
 

 Though entirely master of all his faculties the old scamp assumed an air
 of consternation, pretending not to understand, his mouth agape, his arms
 describing frantic circles on the air.
 

 “How is that, sir, how is that?”
 

 “Oh, come, there's no use attempting to pull the wool over my eyes; you
 know perfectly well that the three beeves you sold me on Sunday last were
 rotten—yes, diseased, and rotten through and through; they must have
 been where there was infection, for they poisoned my men; there are two of
 them in such a bad way that they may be dead by this time for all I know.”
 

 Fouchard's manner was expressive of virtuous indignation. “What, my cattle
 diseased! why, there's no better meat in all the country; a sick woman
 might feed on it to build her up!” And he whined and sniveled, thumping
 himself on the chest and calling God to witness he was an honest man; he
 would cut off his right hand rather than sell bad meat. For more than
 thirty years he had been known throughout the neighborhood, and not a
 living soul could say he had ever been wronged in weight or quality. “They
 were as sound as a dollar, sir, and if your men had the belly-ache it was
 because they ate too much—unless some villain hocussed the pot—”
 

 And so he ran on, with such a flux of words and absurd theories that
 finally the captain, his patience exhausted, cut him short.
 

 “Enough! You have had your warning; see you profit by it! And there is
 another matter: we have our suspicions that all you people of this village
 give aid and comfort to the francs-tireurs of the wood of Dieulet, who
 killed another of our sentries day before yesterday. Mind what I say; be
 careful!”
 

 When the Prussians were gone Father Fouchard shrugged his shoulders with a
 contemptuous sneer. Why, yes, of course he sold them carcasses that had
 never been near the slaughter house; that was all they would ever get to
 eat from him. If a peasant had a cow die on his hands of the rinderpest,
 or if he found a dead ox lying in the ditch, was not the carrion good
 enough for those dirty Prussians? To say nothing of the pleasure there was
 in getting a big price out of them for tainted meat at which a dog would
 turn up his nose. He turned and winked slyly at Henriette, who was glad to
 have her fears dispelled, muttering triumphantly:
 

 “Say, little girl, what do you think now of the wicked people who go about
 circulating the story that I am not a patriot? Why don't they do as I do,
 eh? sell the blackguards carrion and put their money in their pocket. Not
 a patriot! why, good Heavens! I shall have killed more of them with my
 diseased cattle than many a soldier with his chassepot!”
 

 When the story reached Jean's ears, however, he was greatly disturbed. If
 the German authorities suspected that the people of Remilly were harboring
 the francs-tireurs from Dieulet wood they might at any time come and beat
 up his quarters and unearth him from his retreat. The idea that he should
 be the means of compromising his hosts or bringing trouble to Henriette
 was unendurable to him. Yielding to the young woman's entreaties, however,
 he consented to delay his departure yet for a few days, for his wound was
 very slow in healing and he was not strong enough to go away and join one
 of the regiments in the field, either in the North or on the Loire.
 

 From that time forward, up to the middle of December, the stress of their
 anxiety and mental suffering exceeded even what had gone before. The cold
 was grown to be so intense that the stove no longer sufficed to heat the
 great, barn-like room. When they looked from their window on the crust of
 snow that covered the frozen earth they thought of Maurice, entombed down
 yonder in distant Paris, that was now become a city of death and
 desolation, from which they scarcely ever received reliable intelligence.
 Ever the same questions were on their lips: what was he doing, why did he
 not let them hear from him? They dared not voice their dreadful doubts and
 fears; perhaps he was ill, or wounded; perhaps even he was dead. The
 scanty and vague tidings that continued to reach them occasionally through
 the newspapers were not calculated to reassure them. After numerous lying
 reports of successful sorties, circulated one day only to be contradicted
 the next, there was a rumor of a great victory gained by General Ducrot at
 Champigny on the 2d of December; but they speedily learned that on the
 following day the general, abandoning the positions he had won, had been
 forced to recross the Marne and send his troops into cantonments in the
 wood of Vincennes. With each new day the Parisians saw themselves
 subjected to fresh suffering and privation: famine was beginning to make
 itself felt; the authorities, having first requisitioned horned cattle,
 were now doing the same with potatoes, gas was no longer furnished to
 private houses, and soon the fiery flight of the projectiles could be
 traced as they tore through the darkness of the unlighted streets. And so
 it was that neither of them could draw a breath or eat a mouthful without
 being haunted by the image of Maurice and those two million living beings,
 imprisoned in their gigantic sepulcher.
 

 From every quarter, moreover, from the northern as well as from the
 central districts, most discouraging advices continued to arrive. In the
 north the 22d army corps, composed of gardes mobiles, depot companies from
 various regiments and such officers and men as had not been involved in
 the disasters of Sedan and Metz, had been forced to abandon Amiens and
 retreat on Arras, and on the 5th of December Rouen had also fallen into
 the hands of the enemy, after a mere pretense of resistance on the part of
 its demoralized, scanty garrison. In the center the victory of Coulmiers,
 achieved on the 3d of November by the army of the Loire, had resuscitated
 for a moment the hopes of the country: Orleans was to be reoccupied, the
 Bavarians were to be put to flight, the movement by way of Etampes was to
 culminate in the relief of Paris; but on December 5 Prince Frederick
 Charles had retaken Orleans and cut in two the army of the Loire, of which
 three corps fell back on Bourges and Vierzon, while the remaining two,
 commanded by General Chanzy, retired to Mans, fighting and falling back
 alternately for a whole week, most gallantly. The Prussians were
 everywhere, at Dijon and at Dieppe, at Vierzon as well as at Mans. And
 almost every morning came the intelligence of some fortified place that
 had capitulated, unable longer to hold out under the bombardment.
 Strasbourg had succumbed as early as the 28th of September, after standing
 forty-six days of siege and thirty-seven of shelling, her walls razed and
 her buildings riddled by more than two hundred thousand projectiles. The
 citadel of Laon had been blown into the air; Toul had surrendered; and
 following them, a melancholy catalogue, came Soissons with its hundred and
 twenty-eight pieces of artillery, Verdun, which numbered a hundred and
 thirty-six, Neufbrisach with a hundred, La Fere with seventy, Montmedy,
 sixty-five. Thionville was in flames, Phalsbourg had only opened her gates
 after a desperate resistance that lasted eighty days. It seemed as if all
 France were doomed to burn and be reduced to ruins by the never-ceasing
 cannonade.
 

 One morning that Jean manifested a fixed determination to be gone,
 Henriette seized both his hands and held them tight clasped in hers.
 

 “Ah, no! I beg you, do not go and leave me here alone. You are not strong
 enough; wait a few days yet, only a few days. I will let you go, I promise
 you I will, whenever the doctor says you are well enough to go and fight.”
 

 
 
 

 The cold was intense on that December evening. Silvine and Prosper,
 together with little Charlot, were alone in the great kitchen of the
 farmhouse, she busy with her sewing, he whittling away at a whip that he
 proposed should be more than usually ornate. It was seven o'clock; they
 had dined at six, not waiting for Father Fouchard, who they supposed had
 been detained at Raucourt, where there was a scarcity of meat, and
 Henriette, whose turn it was to watch that night at the hospital, had just
 left the house, after cautioning Silvine to be sure to replenish Jean's
 stove with coal before she went to bed.
 

 Outside a sky of inky blackness overhung the white expanse of snow. No
 sound came from the village, buried among the drifts; all that was to be
 heard in the kitchen was the scraping of Prosper's knife as he fashioned
 elaborate rosettes and lozenges on the dogwood stock. Now and then he
 stopped and cast a glance at Charlot, whose flaxen head was nodding
 drowsily. When the child fell asleep at last the silence seemed more
 profound than ever. The mother noiselessly changed the position of the
 candle that the light might not strike the eyes of her little one; then
 sitting down to her sewing again, she sank into a deep reverie. And
 Prosper, after a further period of hesitation, finally mustered up courage
 to disburden himself of what he wished to say.
 

 “Listen, Silvine; I have something to tell you. I have been watching for
 an opportunity to speak to you in private—”
 

 Alarmed by his preface, she raised her eyes and looked him in the face.
 

 “This is what it is. You'll forgive me for frightening you, but it is best
 you should be forewarned. In Remilly this morning, at the corner by the
 church, I saw Goliah; I saw him as plain as I see you sitting there. Oh,
 no! there can be no mistake; I was not dreaming!”
 

 Her face suddenly became white as death; all she was capable of uttering
 was a stifled moan:
 

 “My God! my God!”
 

 Prosper went on, in words calculated to give her least alarm, and related
 what he had learned during the day by questioning one person and another.
 No one doubted now that Goliah was a spy, that he had formerly come and
 settled in the country with the purpose of acquainting himself with its
 roads, its resources, the most insignificant details pertaining to the
 life of its inhabitants. Men reminded one another of the time when he had
 worked for Father Fouchard on his farm and of his sudden disappearance;
 they spoke of the places he had had subsequently to that over toward
 Beaumont and Raucourt. And now he was back again, holding a position of
 some sort at the military post of Sedan, its duties apparently not very
 well defined, going about from one village to another, denouncing this
 man, fining that, keeping an eye to the filling of the requisitions that
 made the peasants' lives a burden to them. That very morning he had
 frightened the people of Remilly almost out of their wits in relation to a
 delivery of flour, alleging it was short in weight and had not been
 furnished within the specified time.
 

 “You are forewarned,” said Prosper in conclusion, “and now you'll know
 what to do when he shows his face here—”
 

 She interrupted him with a terrified cry.
 

 “Do you think he will come here?”
 

 “Dame! it appears to me extremely probable he will. It would show
 great lack of curiosity if he didn't, since he knows he has a young one
 here that he has never seen. And then there's you, besides, and you're not
 so very homely but he might like to have another look at you.”
 

 She gave him an entreating glance that silenced his rude attempt at
 gallantry. Charlot, awakened by the sound of their voices, had raised his
 head. With the blinking eyes of one suddenly aroused from slumber he
 looked about the room, and recalled the words that some idle fellow of the
 village had taught him; and with the solemn gravity of a little man of
 three he announced:
 

 “Dey're loafers, de Prussians!”
 

 His mother went and caught him frantically in her arms and seated him on
 her lap. Ah! the poor little waif, at once her delight and her despair,
 whom she loved with all her soul and who brought the tears to her eyes
 every time she looked on him, flesh of her flesh, whom it wrung her heart
 to hear the urchins with whom he consorted in the street tauntingly call
 “the little Prussian!” She kissed him, as if she would have forced the
 words back into his mouth.
 

 “Who taught my darling such naughty words? It's not nice; you must not say
 them again, my loved one.”
 

 Whereon Charlot, with the persistency of childhood, laughing and
 squirming, made haste to reiterate:
 

 “Dey're dirty loafers, de Prussians!”
 

 And when his mother burst into tears he clung about her neck and also
 began to howl dismally. Mon Dieu, what new evil was in store for
 her! Was it not enough that she had lost in Honore the one single hope of
 her life, the assured promise of oblivion and future happiness? and was
 that man to appear upon the scene again to make her misery complete?
 

 “Come,” she murmured, “come along, darling, and go to bed. Mamma will kiss
 her little boy all the same, for he does not know the sorrow he causes
 her.”
 

 And she went from the room, leaving Prosper alone. The good fellow, not to
 add to her embarrassment, had averted his eyes from her face and was
 apparently devoting his entire attention to his carving.
 

 Before putting Charlot to bed it was Silvine's nightly custom to take him
 in to say good-night to Jean, with whom the youngster was on terms of
 great friendship. As she entered the room that evening, holding her candle
 before her, she beheld the convalescent seated upright in bed, his open
 eyes peering into the obscurity. What, was he not asleep? Faith, no; he
 had been ruminating on all sorts of subjects in the silence of the winter
 night; and while she was cramming the stove with coal he frolicked for a
 moment with Charlot, who rolled and tumbled on the bed like a young
 kitten. He knew Silvine's story, and had a very kindly feeling for the
 meek, courageous girl whom misfortune had tried so sorely, mourning the
 only man she had ever loved, her sole comfort that child of shame whose
 existence was a daily reproach to her. When she had replaced the lid on
 the stove, therefore, and came to the bedside to take the boy from his
 arms, he perceived by her red eyes that she had been weeping. What, had
 she been having more trouble? But she would not answer his question: some
 other day she would tell him what it was if it seemed worth the while. Mon
 Dieu! was not her life one of continual suffering now?
 

 Silvine was at last lugging Charlot away in her arms when there arose from
 the courtyard of the farm a confused sound of steps and voices. Jean
 listened in astonishment.
 

 “What is it? It can't be Father Fouchard returning, for I did not hear his
 wagon wheels.” Lying on his back in his silent chamber, with nothing to
 occupy his mind, he had become acquainted with every detail of the routine
 of home life on the farm, of which the sounds were all familiar to his
 ears. Presently he added: “Ah, I see; it is those men again, the
 francs-tireurs from Dieulet, after something to eat.”
 

 “Quick, I must be gone!” said Silvine, hurrying from the room and leaving
 him again in darkness. “I must make haste and see they get their loaves.”
 
 although they have them thrust beneath their very eyes. Ah, we
 wanted war with Prussia as badly as anyone; for a long, long time we have
 been waiting patiently for a chance to pay off old scores, but that did
 not prevent us from being on neighborly terms with the people in Baden and
 Bavaria; every one of us, almost, has friends or relatives across the
 Rhine. It was our belief that they felt like us and would not be sorry to
 humble the intolerable insolence of the Prussians. And now, after our long
 period of uncomplaining expectation, for the past two weeks we have seen
 things going from bad to worse, and it vexes and terrifies us. Since the
 declaration of war the enemy's horse have been suffered to come among us,
 terrorizing the villages, reconnoitering the country, cutting the
 telegraph wires. Baden and Bavaria are rising; immense bodies of troops
 are being concentrated in the Palatinate; information reaches us from
 every quarter, from the great fairs and markets, that our frontier is
 threatened, and when the citizens, the mayors of the communes, take the
 alarm at last and hurry off to tell your officers what they know, those
 gentlemen shrug their shoulders and reply: Those things spring from the
 imagination of cowards; there is no enemy near here. And when there is not
 an hour to lose, days and days are wasted. What are they waiting for? To
 give the whole German nation time to concentrate on the other bank of the
 river?”
 

 His words were uttered in a low, mournful, voice, as if he were reciting
 to himself a story that had long occupied his thoughts.
 

 “Ah! Germany, I know her too well; and the terrible part of the business
 is that you soldiers seem to know no more about her than you do about
 China. You must remember my cousin Gunther, Maurice, the young man, who
 came to pay me a flying visit at Sedan last spring. His mother is a sister
 of my mother, and married a Berliner; the young man is a German out and
 out; he detests everything French. He is a captain in the 5th Prussian
 corps. I accompanied him to the railway station that night, and he said to
 me in his sharp, peremptory way: 'If France declares war on us, she will
 be soundly whipped!' I can hear his words ringing in my ears yet.”
 

 Forthwith, Lieutenant Rochas, who had managed to contain himself until
 then, not without some difficulty, stepped forward in a towering rage. He
 was a tall, lean individual of about fifty, with a long, weather-beaten,
 and wrinkled face; his inordinately long nose, curved like the beak of a
 bird of prey, over a strong but well-shaped mouth, concealed by a thick,
 bristling mustache that was beginning to be touched with silver. And he
 shouted in a voice of thunder:
 

 “See here, you, sir! what yarns are those that you are retailing to
 dishearten my men?”
 

 Jean did not interfere with his opinion, but he thought that the last
 speaker was right, for he, too, while beginning to be conscious of the
 protracted delay, and the general confusion in their affairs, had never
 had the slightest doubt about that terrible thrashing they were certain to
 give the Prussians. There could be no question about the matter, for was
 not that the reason of their being there?
 

 “But I am not trying to dishearten anyone, Lieutenant,” Weiss answered in
 astonishment. “Quite the reverse; I am desirous that others should know
 what I know, because then they will be able to act with their eyes open.
 Look here! that Germany of which we were speaking—”
 

 And he went on in his clear, demonstrative way to explain the reason of
 his fears: how Prussia had increased her resources since Sadowa; how the
 national movement had placed her at the head of the other German states, a
 mighty empire in process of formation and rejuvenation, with the constant
 hope and desire for unity as the incentive to their irresistible efforts;
 the system of compulsory military service, which made them a nation of
 trained soldiers, provided with the most effective arms of modern
 invention, with generals who were masters in the art of strategy, proudly
 mindful still of the crushing defeat they had administered to Austria; the
 intelligence, the moral force that resided in that army, commanded as it
 was almost exclusively by young generals, who in turn looked up to a
 commander-in-chief who seemed destined to revolutionize the art of war,
 whose prudence and foresight were unparalleled, whose correctness of
 judgment was a thing to wonder at. And in contrast to that picture of
 Germany he pointed to France: the Empire sinking into senile decrepitude,
 sanctioned by the plebiscite, but rotten at its foundation, destroying
 liberty, and therein stifling every idea of patriotism, ready to give up
 the ghost as soon as it should cease to satisfy the unworthy appetites to
 which it had given birth; then there was the army, brave, it was true, as
 was to be expected from men of their race, and covered with Crimean and
 Italian laurels, but vitiated by the system that permitted men to purchase
 substitutes for a money consideration, abandoned to the antiquated methods
 of African routine, too confident of victory to keep abreast with the more
 perfect science of modern times; and, finally, the generals, men for the
 most part not above mediocrity, consumed by petty rivalries, some of them
 of an ignorance beyond all belief, and at their head the Emperor, an
 ailing, vacillating man, deceiving himself and everyone with whom he had
 dealings in that desperate venture on which they were embarking, into
 which they were all rushing blindfold, with no preparation worthy of the
 name, with the panic and confusion of a flock of sheep on its way to the
 shambles.
 

 Rochas stood listening, open-mouthed, and with staring eyes; his terrible
 nose dilated visibly. Then suddenly his lantern jaws parted to emit an
 obstreperous, Homeric peal of laughter.
 

 “What are you giving us there, you? what do you mean by all that silly
 lingo? Why, there is not the first word of sense in your whole harangue—it
 is too idiotic to deserve an answer. Go and tell those things to the
 recruits, but don't tell them to me; no! not to me, who have seen
 twenty-seven years of service.”
 

 And he gave himself a thump on the breast with his doubled fist. He was
 the son of a master mason who had come from Limousin to Paris, where the
 son, not taking kindly to the paternal handicraft, had enlisted at the age
 of eighteen. He had been a soldier of fortune and had carried the
 knapsack, was corporal in Africa, sergeant in the Crimea, and after
 Solferino had been made lieutenant, having devoted fifteen years of
 laborious toil and heroic bravery to obtaining that rank, and was so
 illiterate that he had no chance of ever getting his captaincy.